CHAPTER VIII.--THE GODS OF EGYPT.

|WE {154}have now completed our preliminary survey of the nature and
origin of Gods in general. We have seen how men first came to believe in
the objective existence of these powerful and invisible beings, how they
learnt to invest them with majestic attributes, and how they grew to
worship them under the various forms of mummies or boulders, stone or
wooden idols, trees or stumps, wells, rivers, and fountains. In short,
we have briefly arrived at the origin of Polytheism. We have now to
go on to our second question--How from the belief in many gods did men
progress to the belief in one single God, the creator and upholder of
all things? Our task is now to reconstruct the origin of Monotheism.

But Monotheism bases itself entirely upon the great God of the Hebrews.
To him, therefore, we must next address ourselves. Is he too resoluble,
as I hinted before, into a Sacred Stone, the monument and representative
of some prehistoric chieftain? Can we trace the origin of the Deity of
Christendom till we find him at last in a forgotten Semitic ghost of the
earliest period?

The chief Hebrew god Jahweh, when we first catch a passing glimpse of
his primitive worship by his own people, was but one among a number of
competing deities, mostly, it would appear, embodied by their votaries
in the visible form of stone or wooden pillars, and adored by a small
group of loosely-connected tribes among the mountain region in the
southwest of Syria. The confederacy among {155}whom he dwelt knew
themselves as the Sons of Israel; they regarded Jahweh as their
principal god, much as the Greeks did Zeus, or the early Teutons their
national hero Woden. But a universal tradition among them bore witness
to the fact that they had once lived in a subject condition in Egypt,
the house of bondage, and that their god Jahweh had been instrumental in
leading them thence into the rugged land they inhabited throughout
the whole historical period, between the valley of Jordan and the
Mediterranean coast. So consistent and so definite was this traditional
belief that we can hardly regard it otherwise than as enclosing a kernel
of truth; and not only do Kuenen and other Semitic scholars of the
present day admit it as genuine, but the Egyptologists also seem
generally to allow its substantial accuracy and full accord with
hieroglyphic literature. This sojourn in Egypt cannot have failed to
influence to some extent the Semitic strangers: therefore I shall begin
my quest of the Hebrew god among the Egyptian monuments. Admitting that
he was essentially in all respects a deity of the true Semitic pattern,
I think it will do us good to learn a little beforehand about the people
among whom his votaries dwelt so long, especially as the history of the
Egyptian cults affords us perhaps the best historical example of the
growth and development of a great national religion.

A peculiar interest, indeed, attaches in the history of the human mind
to the evolution of the gods of Egypt. Nowhere else in the world can
we trace so well such a continuous development from the very simplest
beginnings of religious ideas to the very highest planes of mysticism
and philosophic theology. There are savage cults, it is true, which show
us more clearly the earliest stages in the process whereby the simple
ancestral ghost passes imperceptibly into the more powerful form of a
supernatural deity: there are elevated civilised creeds which show
us more grandly in its evolved shape the final conception of a single
supreme Ruler of the Cosmos. But there is no other {156}religious system
known to us in which we can follow so readily, without a single break,
the whole evolutionary movement whereby the earlier ideas get gradually
expanded and etherealised into the later. The origin of the other great
historical religions is lost from our eyes among dim mists of fable: in
Egypt alone, of all civilised countries, does our record go back to
the remote period when the religious conception was still at the common
savage level, and follow it forward continuously to the advanced point
where it had all but achieved, in its syncretic movement, the ultimate
goal of pure monotheism.

I would wish, however, to begin my review of this singular history
by saying, once for all, that while I make no pretensions to special
Egyptological knowledge, I must nevertheless dissent on general
anthropological grounds from the attitude taken up by Mr. Le Page
Renouf in his _Lectures on the Religion of Ancient Egypt_. That learned
writer’s work, indeed, is, scientifically speaking, half a century
behind its time. It is written as though the doctrine of evolution had
never been promulgated; and every page contains glaring contradictions
of the most elementary principles of human development. Mr. Renouf
still adheres to the discredited ideas that polytheism grew out of
an antecedent monotheism; that animal-worship and other low forms of
adoration are “symbolical” in origin; and that “the sublimer
portions of the Egyptian religion are not the comparatively late result
of a process of development or elimination from the grosser.” Such
theories would of themselves be extremely improbable, even on the
fullest and best evidence; but the evidence which Mr. Renouf brings
forward to support them is of the flimsiest description. A plain survey
of the Egyptian monuments in the Nile valley, and of the known facts
about Egyptian religion, will lead any unbiassed mind, free from
the warping influence of preconception, and accustomed to wide
anthropological enquiry, to precisely opposite and more probable
conclusions. For it must be carefully borne in mind {157}that on
these subjects the specialist is the last man whose opinions should be
implicitly and unhesitatingly accepted. The religion of Egypt, like the
religion of Judæa or the religion of Hawaii, must be judged, not
in isolation, but by the analogies of other religions elsewhere; the
attempt to explain it as an unrelated phenomenon, which has already been
found so disastrous in the case of the Semitic and the Aryan cults, must
be abandoned once for all by the comparative psychologist as a hopeless
error. The key to the origin of the Egyptian faith is to be found,
not in the late philosophising glosses quoted by M. de Rougé and his
English disciple, but in the simple, unvarying, ancestral creeds of
existing African savages.

Looked at from this point of view, then--the evolutionary point of
view--nothing can be clearer than the fact that the early
Egyptian religion bases itself entirely upon two main foundations,
ancestor-worship and totemism.

I will begin with the first of these, which all analogy teaches us to
consider by far the earliest, and infinitely the most important. And I
may add that it is also, to judge by the Egyptian evidence alone, both
the element which underlies the whole religious conceptions of the Nile
valley, and likewise the element which directly accounts, as we shall
see hereafter, for all the most important gods of the national pantheon,
including Osiris, Ptah, Khem, and Amen, as well perhaps as many of
their correlative goddesses. There is not, in fact, any great ethnical
religion on earth, except possibly the Chinese, in which the basal
importance of the Dead Man is so immediately apparent as in the ancient
cult of Pharaohnic Egypt.

The Egyptian religion bases itself upon the tomb. It is impossible for
a moment to doubt that fact as one stands under the scanty shade of the
desert date-palms among the huge sun-smitten dust-heaps that represent
the streets of Thebes and Memphis. The commonest object of worship
on all the monuments of Nile is beyond doubt the Mummy: sometimes the
private mummy of an ancestor {158}or kinsman, sometimes the greater
deified mummies of immemorial antiquity, blended in the later
syncretic mysticism with the sun-god and other allegorical deities,
but represented to the very last in all ages of art--on the shattered
Rameseum at Thebes or the Ptolemaic pillars of still unshaken
Denderah--as always unmistakable and obvious mummies. If ever there was
a country where the Worship of the Dead was pushed to an extreme, that
country was distinctly and decisively Egypt.

“The oldest sculptures show us no acts of adoration or of
sacrifice,” says Mr. Loftie, “except those of worship at the shrine
of a deceased ancestor or relative.” This is fully in keeping with
what we know of the dawn of religion elsewhere, and with the immense
importance always attached to the preservation of the mummy intact
throughout the whole long course of Egyptian history. The Egyptian,
in spite of his high civilisation, remained always at the first
or corpse-preserving stage of custom as regards the dead. To him,
therefore, the life after death was far more serious than the life on
earth: he realised it so fully that he made endless preparations for it
during his days above, and built himself a tomb as an eternal mansion.
The grave was a place of abode, where the mummy was to pass the greater
part of his existence; and even in the case of private persons (like
that famous Tih whose painted sepulchre at Sakkarah every tourist to
Cairo makes a point of visiting) it was sumptuously decorated with
painting and sculpture. In the mortuary chambers or chapels attached to
the tombs, the relations of the deceased and the priests of the cemetery
celebrated on certain fixed dates various ceremonies in honour of the
dead, and offered appropriate gifts to the mummy within. &ldquo;The tables of
offerings, which no doubt formed part of the furniture of the chambers,
are depicted on the walls, covered with the gifts of meat, fruits,
bread, and wine which had to be presented in kind.” These _parentalia_
undoubtedly formed the main feature of the practical religion {159}of
early Egypt, as exhibited to us on all the monuments except the late
tomb-caves of royal personages, devoted to the worship of the equally
mummified great gods.

The Egyptian tomb was usually a survival of the cave artificially
imitated. The outer chamber, in which the ceremonies of the offertory
took place, was the only part accessible, after the interment had been
completed, to the feet of survivors. The mummy itself, concealed in its
sarcophagus, lay at the bottom of a deep pit beyond, by the end of a
corridor often containing statues or idols of the deceased. These idols,
says M. Maspero, were indefinitely multiplied, in case the mummy itself
should be accidentally destroyed, in order that the _Ka_ (the ghost or
double) might find a safe dwelling-place. Compare the numerous little
images placed upon the grave by the Coast Negroes. It was the outer
chamber, however, that sheltered the _stele_ or pillar which bore the
epitaph, as well as the altar or table for offerings, the smoke from
which was conveyed to the statues in the corridor through a small
aperture in the wall of partition. Down the well beyond, the mummy in
person reposed, in its eternal dwelling-place, free from all chance of
violation or outrage. “The greatest importance,” says Mr. Renouf,
“was attached to the permanence of the tomb, to the continuance of
the religious ceremonies, and to the prayers of passers-by.” Again,
“there is a very common formula stating that the person who raised
the tablet ‘made it as a memorial to his fathers who are in the nether
world, built up what he found was imperfect, and renewed what was found
out of repair.’” In the inscription on one of the great tombs at
Beni-Hâssan the founder says: “I made to flourish the name of my
father, and I built chapels for his _ka_ [or ghost]. I caused statues
to be conveyed to the holy dwelling, and distributed to them their
offerings in pure gifts. I instituted the officiating priest, to whom I
gave donations in land and presents. I ordered funeral offerings for
all the feasts of the nether world [which are then enumerated {160}at
considerable length]. If it happen that the priest or any other cease to
do this, may he not exist, and may his son not sit in his seat.”
All this is highly instructive from the point of view of the origin of
priesthood.

How long these early religious endowments continued to be respected is
shown by Mr. Renouf himself in one instructive passage. The kings who
built the Pyramids in the Early Empire endowed a priestly office for the
purpose of celebrating the periodical rites of offering to their ghosts
or mummies. Now, a tablet in the Louvre shows that a certain person who
lived under the Twenty-sixth Dynasty was priest of Khufu, the builder of
the Great Pyramid, who had endowed the office two thousand years before
his time. We have actually the tombs of some of his predecessors who
filled the same office immediately after Khufu’s death. So that in
this instance at least, the worship of the deceased monarch continued
for a couple of thousand years without interruption. “If in the case
of private interments,” says M. Maspero, “we find no proof of
so persistent a veneration, that is because in ordinary tombs the
ceremonies were performed not by special priests, but by the children
or descendants of the deceased person. Often, at the end of a few
generations, either through negligence, removals, ruin, or extinction of
the family, the cult was suspended, and the memory of the dead died out
altogether.”

For this reason, as everywhere else among ancestor-worshippers, immense
importance was attached by the Egyptians to the begetting of a son who
should perform the due family rites, or see that they were performed
by others after him. The duty of undertaking these rites is thoroughly
insisted upon in all the maxims or moral texts; while on the other hand,
the wish that a man may not have a son to perform them for him is the
most terrible of all ancient Egyptian imprecations. “Many centuries
after the construction of a tomb, Egyptian travellers have left a
record upon its walls of the splendour of the sacred abode, {161}of the
abundance of the materials which they found provided for the fulfilment
of the rites for the departed, and of their own repetition of the
funeral formula.” In fact, the whole practical religion of the
ordinary Egyptians, as a plain observer sees it to-day in the vast mass
of the existing monuments, consists almost exclusively in the worship of
the _ka_--the _genii, manes, or lares_ of the departed.

If even the common herd were thus carefully embalmed--if even the
lesser functionaries of the court or temple lay in expensive tombs,
daintily painted and exquisitely sculptured--it might readily be
believed that the great kings of the mighty conquering dynasties
themselves would raise for their mummies eternal habitations of special
splendour and becoming magnificence. And so they did. In Lower Egypt,
their tombs are barrows or pyramids: in Upper Egypt they are artificial
caves. The dreary desert district west of the Nile and south of Cairo
consists for many miles, all but uninterruptedly, of the cemetery of
Memphis--a vast and mouldering city of the dead--whose chief memorials
are the wonderful series of Pyramids, the desecrated tombs piled up for
the kings of the Third, Fourth, Fifth, and Sixth Dynasties. There,
under stone tumuli of enormous size,--barrows or cairns more carefully
constructed,--the Pharaohs of the Old Empire reposed, in peace in
sepulchres unmarked by any emblems of the mystic gods or sacred beasts
of later imagination. But still more significant and infinitely more
beautiful are the rock-hewn Tombs of the Kings at Thebes, belonging
to the great monarchs of the Eighteenth, Nineteenth and Twentieth
Dynasties, when the religion had assumed its full mystical development.
Those magnificent subterranean halls form in the truest and most literal
sense a real necropolis, a town of mummies, where each king was to
inhabit an eternal palace of regal splendour, decorated with a profusion
of polychromatic art, and filled with many mansions for the officers
{162}of state, still destined to attend upon their sovereign in the
nether world. Some of the mural paintings would even seem to suggest
that slaves or captives were sacrificed at the tomb, to serve their lord
in his eternal home, as his courtiers had served him in the temporal
palaces of Medinet-Hâbu or the corridors of Luxor.

M. Mariette has further shown that the huge Theban temples which skirt
in long line the edge of the desert near the Valley of Tombs were really
cenotaphs where the memory of the kings buried hard by was preserved and
worshipped. Thus the Rameseum was the _mastabah_ or mortuary chapel for
the tomb and ghost of Rameses II.; the temple of Medinet-Hâbu fulfilled
the same purpose for Rameses III.; the temple of Kurneh for Rameses I.;
and so forth throughout the whole long series of those gigantic ruins,
with their correlated group of subterranean excavations.

At any rate, it is quite impossible for any impartial person to examine
the existing monuments which line the grey desert hills of the Nile
without seeing for himself that the mummy is everywhere the central
object of worship--that the entire practical religion of the people was
based upon this all-pervading sense of the continuity of life beyond
the grave, and upon the necessity for paying due reverence and funereal
offerings to the _manes_ of ancestors. Everything in Egypt points to
this one conclusion. Even the great sacred ritual is the Book of the
Dead: and the very word by which the departed are oftenest described
means itself “the living,” from the firm belief of the people that
they were really enjoying everlasting life. _Mors janua vitae_ is the
short summing-up of Egyptian religious notions. Death was the great
beginning for which they all prepared, and the dead were the real
objects of their most assiduous oublie and private worship.

Moreover, in the tombs themselves we can trace a gradual development of
the religious sentiment from Corpse-Worship {163}to God-Worship. Thus,
in the tombs of Sakkarah, belonging to the Old Empire (Fifth Dynasty),
all those symbolical representations of the life beyond the tomb
which came in with the later mysticism are almost wholly wanting. The
quotations from (or anticipations of) the Book of the Dead are few and
short. The great gods are rarely alluded to. Again, in the grottos of
Beni-Hassan (of the Twelfth Dynasty) the paintings mostly represent
scenes from the life of the deceased, and the mystic signs and deities
are still absent. The doctrine of rewards and punishments remains as
yet comparatively in abeyance. It is only at the Tombs of the Kings at
Thebes (of the Eighteenth Dynasty) that entire chapters of the Book of
the Dead are transcribed at length, and the walls are covered with “a
whole army of grotesque and fantastic divinities.”

“But the Egyptians,” it will be objected, “had also great gods,
distinct from their ancestors--national, or local, or common gods--whose
names and figures have come down to us inscribed upon all the
monuments.” Quite true: that is to say, there are gods who are not
immediately or certainly resolvable into deified ancestors--gods
whose power and might were at last widely extended, and who became
transfigured by degrees beyond all recognition in the latest ages. But
it is by no means certain, even so, that we cannot trace these greater
gods themselves back in the last resort to deified ancestors of various
ruling families or dominant cities; and in one or two of the most
important cases the suggestions of such an origin are far from scanty.

I will take, to begin with, one typical example. There is no single god
in the Egyptian pantheon more important or more universally diffused
than Osiris. In later forms of the national religion, he is elevated
into the judge of the departed and king of the nether world: to be
“justified by Osiris,” or, as later interpreters say, “a justified
Osiris,” is the prayer of every corpse as set forth in his funeral
{164}inscription; and identification with Osiris is looked upon as the
reward of all the happy and faithful dead. Now Osiris, in every one of
his representations and modes, is simply--a Mummy. His myth, to be sure,
assumed at last immense proportions; and his relations with Isis and
Horus form the centre of an endless series of irreconcilable tales,
repeated over and over again in art and literature. If we took mythology
as our guide, instead of the monuments, we should be tempted to give him
far other origins. He is identified often with other gods, especially
with Amen; and the disentanglement of his personality in the monuments
of the newer empire, when Ra, the sun-god, got mixed up inextricably
with so many other deities, is particularly difficult. But if we neglect
these later complications of a very ancient cult, and go back to the
simplest origin of Egyptian history and religion, we shall, I think,
see that this mystic god, so often explained away by elemental symbolism
into the sun or the home of the dead, was in his first beginnings
nothing more or less than what all his pictures and statues show him to
be--a revered and worshipped Mummy, a very ancient chief or king of the
town or little district of This by Abydos.

I do not deny that in later ages Osiris became much more than this. Nor
do I deny that his name was accepted as a symbol for all the happy and
pious dead. Furthermore, we shall find at a later stage that he was
identified in the end with an annual slain Corn-God. I will even allow
that there may have been more than one original Osiris--that the word
may even at first have been generic, not specific. But I still maintain
that the evidence shows us the great and principal Osiris of all as a
Dead Chief of Abydos.

We must remember that in Egypt alone history goes back to an immense
antiquity and yet shows us already at its very beginning an advanced
civilisation and a developed picture-writing. Therefore the very oldest
known state of Egypt {165}necessarily presupposes a vast anterior era
of slow growth in concentration and culture. Before ever Upper or Lower
Egypt became united under a single crown, there must have been endless
mud-built villages and petty palm-shadowed principalities along the
bank of the Nile, each possessing its own local chief or king, and
each worshipping its own local deceased potentates. The sheikh of
the village, as we should call him nowadays, was then their nameless
Pharaoh, and the mummies of his ancestors were their gods and goddesses.
Each tribe had also its special totem, about which I shall have a little
more to say hereafter; and these totems were locally worshipped almost
as gods, and gave rise in all probability to the later Egyptian Zoolatry
and the animal-headed deities. To the very last, Egyptian religion bore
marked traces of this original tribal form; the great multiplicity of
Egyptian gods seems to be due to the adoption of so many of them, after
the unification of the country, into the national pantheon. The local
gods and local totems, however, continued to be specially worshipped
in their original sites. Thus the ithyphallic Amen-Khem was specially
worshipped at Thebes, where his figure occurs with unpleasant frequency
upon every temple; Apis was peculiarly sacred at Memphis; Pasht at
Bubastis; Anubis at Sekhem; Neith at Sais; Ra at Heliopolis; and Osiris
himself at Abydos, his ancient dwelling-place.

Even Egyptian tradition seems to preserve some dim memory of such a
state of things, for it asserts that before the time of Menes, the first
king of the First Dynasty, reputed the earliest monarch of a united
Egypt, dynasties of the gods ruled in the country. In other words, it
was recognised that the gods were originally kings of local lines
which reigned in the various provinces of the Nile valley before the
unification.

In the case of Osiris, the indications which lead us in this direction
are almost irresistible. It is all but certain that Osiris was
originally a local god of This or Thinis, a {166}village near Abydos,
where a huge mound of rubbish still marks the site of the great deity’s
resting-place. The latter town is described in the Harris papyrus as
Abud, the hand of Osiris; and in the monuments which still remain at
that site, Osiris is everywhere the chief deity represented, to whom
kings and priests present appropriate offerings. But it is a significant
fact that Menes, the founder of the united monarchy, was born at the
same place; and this suggests the probability that Osiris may have
been the most sacred and most venerated of Menes’s ancestors.
The suggestion derives further weight from the fact that Osiris
is invariably represented as a mummy, and that he wears a peculiar
head-dress or cap of office, the same as that which was used in
historical times as the crown of Upper Egypt. He also holds in his hands
the crook and scourge which are the marks of kingly office--the crook
to lead his own people like a shepherd, the scourge to punish evil-doers
and to ward off enemies. His image is therefore nothing more nor less
than the image of a Mummied King. Sometimes, too, he wears in addition
the regal ostrich plumes. Surely, naught save the blind infatuation of
mythologists could make them overlook the plain inference that Osiris
was a mummified chief of Abydos in the days before the unification of
Egypt under a single rule, and that he was worshipped by his successors
in the petty principality exactly as we know other kingly mummies were
worshipped by their family elsewhere--exactly, for example, as on the
famous Tablet of Ancestors found at Abydos itself, Sethi I. and Rameses
II. are seen offering homage to seventy-six historical kings, their
predecessors on the throne of United Egypt.

Not only, however, is Osiris represented as a king and a mummy, but we
are expressly told by Plutarch (or at least by the author of the tract
_De Osiride_ which bears his name) that the tomb of Osiris existed at
Abydos, and that the richest and most powerful of the Egyptians were
desirous of being buried in the adjacent cemetery, in order that
{167}they might lie, as it were, in the same grave with the great god
of their country. All this is perfectly comprehensible and natural if we
suppose that a Thinite dynasty first conquered the whole of Egypt; that
it extended the worship of its own local ancestor-god over the entire
country; and that in time, when this worship had assumed national
importance, the local god became the chief figure in the common
pantheon.

I had arrived at this opinion independently before I was aware that Mr.
Loftie had anticipated me in it. But in his rare and interesting _Essay
on Scarabs_ I find he has reached the same conclusions.

“The divinity of Pharaoh,” says Mr. Loftie, “was the first article
in the creed of the pyramid period, the earliest of which we know
anything. As time went on, though the king was still called divine, we
see him engaged in the worship of other gods. At last he appears as
a priest himself; and when Herodotus and the later Greek historians
visited Egypt, there was so little of this part of the old religion left
that it is not even mentioned by them as a matter of importance.” This
is quite natural, I may remark parenthetically, for as the antiquity
and grandeur of the great gods increased, the gulf between them and mere
men, even though those men were kings, their offspring, must always have
grown ever wider and wider. “I have myself no doubt whatever,” Mr.
Loftie goes on, “that the names of Osiris and of Horus are those of
ancient rulers. I think that, long before authentic history begins, Asar
and Aset his wife reigned in Egypt, probably in that wide valley of the
Upper Nile which is now the site of Girgeh and Berbé” (exactly where
I place the principality of Osiris). “Their son was Hor, or Horus,
the first king of Upper and Lower Egypt; and the ‘Hor seshoo.&rsquo; the
successors of Horus, are not obscurely mentioned by later chroniclers.
I know that this view is not shared by all students of the subject,
and much learning and ingenuity have been spent to prove that Asar,
and Aset, and Hor, and {168}Ptah, and Anep, are representations of the
powers of nature; that they do not point to ancient princes, but to
ancient principles; and that Horus and his successors are gods and were
never men. But in the oldest inscriptions we find none of that mysticism
which is shown in the sculptures from the time of the eighteenth dynasty
down to the Ptolemies and the Roman Emperors.” In short, Mr.
Loftie goes on to set forth a theory of the origin of the great gods
essentially similar to the one I am here defending.

Though a little out of place, I cannot help noting here the curious
confirmatory fact that a number of ibis mummies have been found at
Abvdos in close proximity to the mound where M. Mariette confidently
expected to discover in the rock the actual tomb of Osiris himself.
Hence we may conclude that the ibis was in all probability the totem of
Abydos or This, as the bull was of Memphis, the crocodile of the Fayoum,
the cat of Bubastis, and the baboon of Thebes. Now, the ibis-god of
Abydos is Thoth; and it is noteworthy that Thoth, as recorder, always
accompanies Osiris, in later legend, as judge of the dead: the local
mummy-god, in other words, has as his assessor the local totem-god; and
both are commonly to be seen on the monuments of Abydos, in company with
Horus, Anubis, Isis, and other (probably) local divinities.

It is quite easy to see how, with this origin, Osiris would almost
inevitably grow with time to be the King of the Dead, and supreme judge
of the nether regions. For, as the most sacred of the ancestors of the
regal line, he would naturally be the one whom the kings, in their
turn, would most seek to propitiate, and whom they would look forward
to joining in their eternal home. As the myth extended, and as mystical
interpretations began to creep in, identifications being made of the
gods with the sun or other natural energies, the original meaning of
Osiris-worship would grow gradually obscured. But to the last, Osiris
himself, in spite of all corruptions, is represented {169}as a mummy:
and even when identified with Amen, the later intrusive god, he still
wears his mummy-bandages, and still bears the crook and scourge and
sceptre of his primitive kingship.

It may be objected, however, that there were many forms of Orisis, and
many local gods who bore the same name. He was buried at Abydos, but was
also equally buried at Memphis, and at Philæ as well. The pretty little
“Temple on the Roof” at Denderah is an exquisitely elaborate chapel
to the local Osiris of that town, with chambers dedicated to the various
other Osiris-gods of the forty-two nomes of ancient Egypt. Well, that
fact runs exactly parallel with the local Madonnas and the local Apollos
of other religions: and nobody has suggested doubts as to the human
reality of the Blessed Virgin Mary because so many different Maries
exist in different sacred sites or in different cathedrals. Our Lady
of Loretto is the same as Our Lady of Lourdes. Jesus of Nazareth was
nevertheless born at Bethlehem: he was the son of Joseph, but he was
also the son of David, and the son of God. Perhaps Osiris was a common
noun: perhaps a slightly different Osiris was worshipped in various
towns of later Egypt; perhaps a local mummy-god, the ancestor of some
extinct native line, often wrongly usurped the name and prerogatives of
the great mummy-god of Abydos, especially under the influence of late
priestly mysticism. Moreover, when we come to consider the subject
of the manufacture of gods, we shall see that the body of an annual
incarnation of Osiris may have been divided and distributed among all
the nomes of Egypt. It is enough for my present purpose if I point out
in brief that ancestor-worship amply explains the rise and prevalence
of the cult of Osiris, the kingly mummy, with the associated cults of
Horus, Isis, Thoth, and the other deities of the Osirian cycle.

I may add that a gradual growth of Osiris-worship is clearly marked on
the monuments themselves. The simpler {170}stelæ and memorials of the
earliest age seldom contain the names of any god, but display votaries
making offerings at the shrine of ancestors. Similarly, the scenes
represented on the walls of tombs of early date bear no reference to the
great gods of later ages, but are merely domestic and agricultural in
character, as may be observed at Sakkarah and even to some extent also
at Beni-Hassan. Under the Sixth Dynasty, the monuments begin to make
more and more frequent mention of Osiris, who now comes to be regarded
as Judge of the Dead and Lord of the Lower World; and on a tablet of
this age in the Boulak Museum occurs for the first time the expression
afterwards so common, “justified by Osiris.” Under the Twelfth
Dynasty, legend becomes more prominent; a solar and lunar character
seems to be given by reflex to Osiris and Isis: and the name of Ra,
the sun, is added to that of many previously distinct and independent
deities. Khem, the ithyphallic god of the Thebaid, now also assumes
greater importance, as is quite natural under a line of Theban
princes: and Khem, a local mummy-god, is always represented in his
swathing-clothes, and afterwards confounded, certainly with Amen, and
probably also with the mummy-god of Abydos. But Osiris from this time
forward rises distinctly into the front rank as a deity. “To him,
rather than to the dead, the friends and family offer their sacrifices.
A court is formed for him. Thoth, the recorder [totem-god of Abydos],
Anubis the watcher, Ra the impersonation of truth, and others, assist
in judgment on the soul.” The name of the deceased is henceforth
constantly accompanied by the formula “justified by Osiris.” About
the same time the Book of the Dead in its full form came into existence,
with its developed conception of the lower world, and its complicated
arrangement of planes of purgatorial progress.

Under the Eighteenth Dynasty, the legend thickens; the identifications
of the gods become more and more intricate; Amen and Ra are sought and
found under innumerable {171}forms of other deities; and a foundation
is laid for the esoteric Monotheism or pantheistic nature-worship of
the later philosophising priesthood. It was under the Nineteenth Dynasty
that the cult of local Triads or Trinities took fullest shape, and that
the mystical interpretation of the religion of Egypt came well into the
foreground. The great Osirian myth was then more and more minutely and
mystically elaborated; and even the bull Apis, the totem-god of Memphis,
was recognised as a special incarnation of Osiris, who thus becomes,
with Amen, the mysterious summing-up of almost all the national
pantheon. At last we find the myth going off into pure mysticism, Osiris
being at once the father, brother, husband, and son of Isis, and also
the son of his own child Horus. * Sentences with an almost Athanasian
mixture of vagueness and definiteness inform us how “the son proceeds
from the father, and the father proceeds from his son”; how “Ra is
the soul of Osiris, and Osiris the soul of Ra and how Horus his child,
awakened by magical rites from his dead body, is victorious over Set,
the prince of darkness, and sits as Osiris upon the throne of the father
whom he has revived and avenged. Here as elsewhere the myth, instead of
being the explanation of the god, does nothing more than darken counsel.”

     * “Stories like the Osiris myth,” says Mr. Lang, “spring
     from no pure religious source, but embody the delusions and
     fantastic dreams of the lowest and least developed human
     fancy and human speculation.” This sentence enforces
     precisely the same idea that I have previously expressed in
     chapter ii. as to the real relations of religion and
     mythology. The myth nowhere explains the cult; it casts no
     light upon its origin or history; on the contrary, it only
     obscures and overshadows the underlying kernel of genuine
     fact.

In like manner, I believe, Ptah was originally a local mummy-god of
Memphis, and Khem of Ap, afterwards known as Chemmis.

This gradual growth of a dead and mummified village chief, however,
into a pantheistic god, strange as it may seem, is not in any way more
remarkable than the gradual growth {172}of a Galilean peasant into the
second person of an eternal and omnipotent Godhead. Nor does the myth
of the death and resurrection of Osiris (to be considered hereafter in
a later chapter) militate against the reality of his human existence
any more than the history of the death and resurrection of Jesus Christ
militates against the human existence of Jesus of Nazareth. “Gross and
crude euphemerism” may be bad; but airy and fantastic Max-mullerism
appears to me just as unphilosophical.

The difficulty of the evolution, indeed, is not at all great, if we
consider the further fact that even after the concept of godship had
been fully developed, the king still remained of like nature with the
gods, their son and descendant, a divine personage himself, differing
from them only in not having yet received eternal life, the symbol of
which they are often shown in sculpture as presenting with gracious
expressions to their favoured scion. “The ruling sovereign of
Egypt,” says Mr. Le Page Renouf, “was the living image of and
vicegerent of the sun-god. He was invested with the attributes of
divinity, and that in the earliest times of which we possess monumental
evidence.” And quite naturally, for in antique times gods had ruled
in Egypt, whose successor the king was: and the kings before Menes were
significantly known as “the successors of Horus.” As late as the
times of the Ptolemies, we saw, there were priests of Menes and other
Pharaohs of the most ancient dynasties. The pyramid kings took the title
of the Golden Horus, afterwards copied by their descendants; and from
Chafra onward the reigning monarch was known as the Son of Ra and the
Great God. Amenophis IL, during his own lifetime, is “a god good like
Ra, the sacred seed of Amen, the son whom he begot.” And on all the
monuments the king is represented of the same superhuman stature as the
gods themselves: he converses with them on equal terms; they lead him by
the hand into their inmost sanctuaries, or present him with the symbols
of royal rule and of eternal life, like friends of the family.

The {173}former guerdon bestows upon him the same rank they themselves
had held on earth; the latter advances him to share with them the
glories of the other existence. In the temple of Kurneh, Rameses I.
(then dead) receives the offerings and liturgies of his royal grandson.
Hard by, Rameses II. offers to Amen-ra, Khonso, and Rameses I., without
distinction of divinity. On the side wall, Sethi I. receives similar
divine honours from the royal hands: while in the centre chamber Sethi
himself officiates before the statue of his father placed in a shrine.
The King is thus but the Living God: the God is thus but the Dead King.

I conclude, therefore, that a large part of the greater Egyptian
gods--the national or local gods, as opposed to those worshipped by each
family in its own necropolis--were early kings, whose myths were later
expanded into legends, rationalised into nature-worship, and adorned by
priestly care with endless symbolical or esoteric fancies. But down to
the very latest age of independence, inscriptions of the god Euergetes,
and the goddess Berenice, or representations like that at Philæ, of
the god Philadelphus suckled by Isis, show that to the Egyptian mind
the gulf between humanity and divinity was very narrow, and that the
original manhood of all the deities was an idea quite familiar to
priests and people.

There was, however, another class of gods about which we can be somewhat
less certain; these are the animal-gods and animal-headed gods which
developed out of the totems of the various villages. Such bestial types,
Professor Sayce remarks, “take us back to a remote prehistoric age,
when the religious creed of Egypt,” say rather, the custom of Egypt,
“was still totemism.” But in what precise relation totemism stood to
the main line of the evolution of gods I do not feel quite so sure in my
own mind as does Mr. Herbert Spencer. It seems to me possible that the
totem may in its origin have been merely the lucky-beast or badge of a
particular tribe (like the regimental {174}goat or deer); and that from
being at first petted, domesticated, and to some extent respected on
this account, it may have grown at last, through a confusion of ideas,
to share the same sort of divine honours which were paid to the
ghosts of ancestors and the gods evolved from them. But Mr. Frazer has
suggested a better origin of totemism from the doctrine of the Separable
Soul, which is, up to date, the best explanation yet offered of this
obscure subject. Be that as it may, if the totems were only gradually
elevated into divinities, we can easily understand Mr. Renouf’s remark
that the long series of tombs of the Apis bulls at Sakkarah shows “how
immeasurably greater the devotion to the sacred animals was in the later
times than in the former.”

May I add that the _worship_ of totems, as distinct from the mere _care_
implied by Mr. Frazer’s suggestion, very probably arose from the
custom of carving the totem-animal of the deceased on the grave-stake or
grave-board? This custom is still universal among the Indian tribes of
Northwestern America.

Nevertheless, whatever be the true origin of the totem-gods, I do not
think totemism militates in any way against the general principle of
the evolution of the idea of a god from the ghost, the Dead Man, or the
deified ancestor. For only after the concept of a god had been formed
from ancestor-cult, and only after worship had been evolved from the
customary offerings to the mummy or spirit at the tomb, could any other
object by any possibility be elevated to the godhead. Nor, on the other
hand, as I have before remarked, do I feel inclined wholly to agree with
Mr. Spencer that every individual god was necessarily once a particular
Dead Man. It seems to me indubitable that after the idea of godhead had
become fully fixed in the human mind, some gods at least began to be
recognised who were directly framed either from abstract conceptions,
from natural objects, or from pure outbursts of the mythopoeic faculty.
I do not think, therefore, that the existence {175}of a certain
(relatively unimportant) class of totem-gods in Egypt or elsewhere is
necessarily inconsistent in any way with our main theory of the origin
of godhead.

Be this as it may, it is at any rate clear that totemism itself was
a very ancient and widespread institution in early Egypt. Totems are
defined by Mr. Frazer as “a class of material objects which a savage
regards with superstitious respect, believing that there exists between
him and every member of the class an intimate and altogether special
relation.&rdquo; “Observation of existing totem tribes in Africa, Australia,
and elsewhere,&rdquo; says Sir Martin Conway, “shows us that one or more
representatives of the totem are often fed or even kept alive in
captivity by the tribe.&rdquo; Mr. Frazer tells us that “amongst the
Nar-rinyeri in South Australia, men of the snake clan sometimes catch
snakes, pull out their teeth, or sew up their mouths, and keep them as
pets. In a pigeon clan of Samoa a pigeon was carefully kept and fed.
Amongst the Kalong in Java, whose totem is a red dog, each family as a
rule keeps one of these animals, which they will on no account allow to
be struck or ill-used by any one.&rdquo; In the same way, no doubt, certain
Egyptian clans kept sacred bulls, cats, crocodiles, hawks, jackals,
cobras, lizards, ibises, asps, and beetles. Mummies of most of
these sacred animals, and little images of others, are common in the
neighbourhood of certain places where they were specially worshipped.

Whether the animal-headed gods represent a later stage of the same
totem-worship, or whether they stand merely for real ancestor-gods
belonging to a particular totem-clan, and therefore represented by its
totem, is not a question easily settled. But at any rate it is clear
that many gods are the equivalents of such totem-animals, as is the case
with the hawk-headed Horus, the jackal-headed Anubis, the cow-headed
Athor, the ram-headed Knum, the cat-headed Pasht, the lion-headed
Sekhet, the ibis-headed {176}Thoth, and the kestrel-headed Khons. These
gods appear on the earlier monuments as beasts alone, not as human
forms with bestial heads. Till the Twelfth Dynasty, when a totem-god
is mentioned (which is not often), “he is represented,” says Mr.
Flinders Petrie, “by his animal.” Anubis, for example, at this
stage, is merely a jackal; and as M. Maspero puts it, “Whatever may
have been the object of worship in Thoth-Ibis, it was a bird, not a
hieroglyph, that the earliest ibis-worshippers adored.” There were
other totems, however, which were less fruitful in deities, but which
entered largely in artistic forms into the later religious symbolism.
Such were especially the asp and the sacred scarabæus, which almost
rival the sun-disk in the large part they play in the developed
religious art-language of the great temple-building dynasties. I may
add that among the other symbols of this curious emblematical
picture-writing are the Tau or _crux ansata_, by origin apparently a
combined _linga_ and _yoni_; the lotus, the sceptre, the leek, and the
crescent.

There is, however, yet a third class of divine or quasidivine beings
in the newer Egyptian Pantheon to which Mr. Andrew Lang, in his able
introduction to the _Euterpe_ of Herodotus, still allows that great
importance may be attached. These are the elemental or seemingly
elemental deities, the Nature-Gods who play so large a part in all
rationalistic or mystical mythologies. Such are no doubt Nut and Seb,
the personal heaven and earth, named as early as the inscription on the
coffin of Menkaoura of the Fourth Dynasty in the British Museum: such
perhaps (though far less certainly) are Khons, identified with the
rising sun, and Tum, regarded as the impersonation of his nightly
setting. But none of the quite obviously elemental gods, except Ra, play
any large part in the actual and practical worship of the people:
to adopt the broad distinction I have ventured to draw in our second
chapter, they are gods to talk about, not gods to adore--mythological
conceptions rather than religious beings. Their names occur {177}much in
the sacred texts, but their images are rare and their temples unknown.
It is not Nut or Seb whose figures we see carved abundantly in relief on
the grey sandstone pillars of Karnak and Luxor, painted in endless file
on the gesso-covered walls of the Tombs of the Kings, or represented by
dozens in the great collection of little bronze idols that fill so many
cabinets at the Boulak Museum. The actual objects of the highest worship
are far other than these abstract elemental conceptions: they are
Osiris, Isis, Horus, Anubis, Khem, Pasht, and Athor. The quaint or
grotesque incised figures of Nut, represented as a female form with arms
and legs extended like a living canopy over the earth, as at Denderah,
belong, I believe, almost if not quite exclusively to the Ptolemaic
period, when zodiacal and astrological conceptions had been freely
borrowed by the Egyptians from Greece and Asia. Nut and Seb, as gods,
not myths, are in short quite recent ideas in Egypt. Even sun-disk Ra,
himself, important as he becomes in the later developed creed, is hardly
so much in his origin a separate god as an adjunct or symbol of divinity
united syncretically with the various other deities. To call a king
the sun is a common piece of courtier flattery. It is as Amen-Ra or as
Osiris that the sun receives most actual worship. His name is joined
to the names of gods as to the names of kings: he is almost as much a
symbol as the Tau or the Asp; he obtains little if any adoration in his
simple form, but plenty when conjoined in a compound conception with
some more practical deity of strictly human origin. Even at the great
“Temple of the Sun” at Heliopolis, it was as the bull Men or Mnevis
that the luminary was adored: and that cult, according to Manetho, went
back as far as the totemistic times of the Second Dynasty.

To put it briefly, then, I hold that the element of nature-worship is
a late gloss or superadded factor in the Egyptian religion; that it is
always rather mythological or explanatory than religious in the strict
sense; and that it does {178}not in the least interfere with our general
inference that the real Egyptian gods as a whole were either ancestral
or totemistic in origin.

From the evidence before us, broadly considered, we may fairly
conclude, then, that the earliest cult of Egypt consisted of pure
ancestor-worship, complicated by a doubtfully religious element of
totemism, which afterwards by one means or another interwove itself
closely with the whole ghostly worship of the country. The later gods
were probably deified ancestors of the early tribal kings, sometimes
directly worshipped as mummies, and sometimes perhaps represented by
their totem-animals or later still by human figures with animal heads.
Almost every one of these great gods is localised to a particular
place--“Lord of Abydos,” “Mistress of Senem,” “President of
Thebes,” “Dweller at Hermopolis,” as would naturally be the case
if they were locally-deified princes, admitted at last into a national
pantheon. In the earliest period of which any monuments remain to us,
the ancestor-worship was purer, simpler, and freer from symbolism or
from the cult of the great gods than at any later time. With the gradual
evolution of the creed and the pantheon, however, legends and myths
increased, the syncretic tendency manifested itself everywhere,
identifications multiplied, mysticism grew rife, and an esoteric faith,
with leanings towards a vague pantheistic monotheism, endeavoured to
rationalise and to explain away the more gross and foolish portions of
the original belief. It is the refinements and glosses of this final
philosophical stage that pass current for the most part in systematic
works as the true doctrines of Egyptian religion, and that so many
modern enquirers have erroneously treated as equivalent to the earliest
product of native thought. The ideas as to the unity of God, and the
sun-myths of Horus, Isis, and Osiris, are clearly late developments or
excrescences on the original creed, and betray throughout the esoteric
spirit of priestly interpretation. To the very last, the Worship of
the Dead, and the {179} crude polytheism based upon it, were the true
religion of the ancient Egyptians, as we see it expressed in all the
monuments.

Such was the religious world into which, if we may believe the oldest
Semitic traditions, the Sons of Israel brought their God Jahweh and
their other deities from beyond the Euphrates at a very remote period of
their national history. And such, in its fuller and more mystical form,
was the religion practised and taught in Ptolemaic and Roman Egypt, at
the moment when the Christian faith was just beginning to evolve itself
round the historical nucleus of the man Christ Jesus, and him crucified.




