CHAPTER IV.--THE ORIGIN OF GODS.

|MR. {068}Herbert Spencer has traced so admirably in his _Principles of
Sociology_ the progress of development from the Ghost to the God that
I do not propose in this chapter to attempt much more than a brief
recapitulation of his main propositions, which, however, I shall
supplement with fresh examples, and adapt at the same time to the
conception of three successive stages in human ideas about the Life of
the Dead, as set forth in the preceding argument. But the hasty _resume_
which I shall give at present will be fleshed out incidentally at a
later point by consideration of several national religions.

In the earliest stage of all--the stage where the actual bodies of the
dead are preserved,--Gods as such are for the most part unknown: it is
the corpses of friends and ancestors that are worshipped and reverenced.
For example, Ellis says of the corpse of a Tahitian chief that it was
placed in a sitting posture under a protecting shed; “a small altar
was erected before it, and offerings of fruit, food, and flowers were
daily presented by the relatives, or the priest appointed to attend the
body.” (This point about the priest is of essential importance.) The
Central Americans, again, as Mr. Spencer notes, performed similar
rites before bodies dried by artificial heat. The New Guinea people,
as D’Albertis found, worship the dried mummies of their fathers
and husbands. A little higher in the scale, we get the developed
mummy-worship of Egypt and Peru, which survives even after the evolution
{069}of greater gods, from powerful kings or chieftains. Other evidence
in abundance has been adduced from Polynesia and from Africa. Wherever
the actual bodies of the dead are preserved, there also worship and
offerings are paid to them.

Often, however, as already noted, it is not the whole body but the head
alone that is specially kept and worshipped. Thus Mr. H. O. Forbes says
of the people of Buru: “The dead are buried in the forest in some
secluded spot, marked often by a _merang_ or grave-pole; over which at
certain intervals the relatives place tobacco, cigarettes, and various
offerings. When the body is decomposed, the son or nearest relative
disinters the head, wraps a new cloth about it, and places it in the
Matakau at the back of his house, or in a little hut erected for it near
the grave. It is the representative of his forefathers, whose behests he
holds in the greatest respect.”

Two points are worthy of notice in this interesting account, as giving
us an anticipatory hint of two further accessories whose evolution
we must trace hereafter; first the grave-stake, which is probably the
origin of the wooden idol; and second, the little hut erected over the
head by the side of the grave, which is undoubtedly one of the origins
of the temple or praying-house. Observe also the ceremonial wrapping of
the skull in cloth, and its oracular functions.

Similarly, Mr. Wyatt Gill, the well-known missionary, writes of a dead
baby at Boera, in New Guinea: “It will be covered with two inches of
soil, the friends watching beside the grave; but eventually the skull
and smaller bones will be preserved and worn by the mother.” And of
the Suau people he says: “Enquiring the use of several small houses,
I learned that it is to cover grave-pits. All the members of a family
at death occupy the same grave, the earth that thinly covered the last
occupant being scooped out to admit the newcomer. These graves are
shallow; the dead are buried in a sitting posture, hands folded.
{070}The earth is thrown in up to the mouth only. An earthen pot covers
the head. After a time the pot is taken off, the perfect skull removed
and cleansed--eventually to be hung up in a basket or net inside the
dwelling of the deceased over the fire, to blacken in the smoke.”
In Africa, again, the skull is frequently preserved in such a pot and
prayed to. In America, earthenware pots have been found moulded round
human skulls in mounds at New Madrid and elsewhere; the skull cannot
be removed without breaking the vessel. Indeed, this curious method of
preservation in pots seems to be very widespread; we get perhaps a vague
hint or reminiscence of its former prevalence in Europe in the story of
Isabella and the pot of basil.

The special selection and preservation of the head as an object of
worship thus noted in New Guinea and the Malay Archipelago is also still
found among many other primitive peoples. For instance, the Andamanese
widows keep the skulls of their husbands as a precious possession:
and the New Caledonians, in case of sickness or calamities, “present
offerings of food to the skulls of the departed.” Mr. Spencer quotes
several similar examples, a few of which alone I extract from his pages.

“‘In the private fetish-hut of King Adolee, at Badagry, the skull
of that monarch’s father is preserved in a clay vessel placed in the
earth.’ He ‘gently rebukes it if his success does not happen to
answer his expectations.’ Similarly among the Mandans, who place
the skulls of their dead in a circle, each wife knows the skull of her
former husband or child, ‘and there seldom passes a day that she does
not visit it, with a dish of the best cooked food.... There is scarcely
an hour in a pleasant day, but more or less of these women may be seen
sitting or lying by the skull of their child or husband--talking to it
in the most pleasant and endearing language that they can use (as
they were wont to do in former days), and seemingly getting an answer
back.’”

This {071}affectionate type of converse with the dead, almost free from
fear, is especially characteristic of the first or corpse-preserving
stage of human death-conceptions. It seldom survives where burial has
made the feeling toward the corpse a painful or loathsome one, and it is
then confined to the head alone, while the grave itself with the body it
encloses is rather shunned and dreaded.

A little above this level, Mr. Du Chaillu notes that some of his West
African followers, when going on an expedition, brought out the skulls
of their ancestors (which they religiously preserved) and scraped off
small portions of the bone, which they mixed with water and drank;
giving as a reason for this conduct that their ancestors were brave, and
that by drinking a portion of them they too became brave and fearless
like their ancestors. Here we have a simple and early case of that habit
of “eating the god” to whose universality and importance Mr. Frazer
has so forcibly called attention, and which we must examine at full in a
subsequent chapter.

Throughout the earlier and ruder phases of human evolution, this
primitive conception of ancestors or dead relatives as the chief known
objects of worship survives undiluted: and ancestor-worship remains to
this day the principal religion of the Chinese, and of several
other peoples. Gods, as such, are practically unknown in China.
Ancestor-worship also survives in many other races as one of the
main cults, even after other elements of later religion have been
superimposed upon it. In Greece and Rome, it remained to the last
an important part of domestic ritual. But in most cases, a gradual
differentiation is set up in time between various classes of ghosts or
dead persons, some ghosts being considered of more importance and power
than others; and out of these last it is that gods as a rule are finally
developed. A god, in fact, is in the beginning at least an exceptionally
powerful and friendly ghost--a ghost able to help, and from whose help
great things may reasonably be expected.

Again, {072}the rise of chieftainship and kingship has much to do with
the growth of a higher conception of godhead; a dead king of any
great power or authority is sure to be thought of in time as a god
of considerable importance. We shall trace out this idea more fully
hereafter in the religion of Egypt; for the present it must suffice to
say that the supposed power of the gods in each pantheon has regularly
increased in proportion to the increased power of kings or emperors.

When we pass from the first plane of corpse-preservation and
mummification to the second plane where burial is habitual, it might
seem at a hasty glance as though continued worship of the dead, and
their elevation into gods, would no longer be possible. For we saw
that burial is prompted by a deadly fear lest the corpse or ghost should
return to plague the living. Nevertheless, natural affection for parents
or friends, and the desire to ensure their good will and aid, make these
seemingly contrary ideas reconcilable. As a matter of fact, we find that
even when men bury or burn their dead, they continue to worship them:
while, as we shall show in the sequel, even the great stones which they
roll on top of the grave to prevent the dead from rising again become in
time altars on which sacrifices are offered to the spirit.

In these two later stages of thought with regard to the dead which
accompany burial and cremation, the gods, indeed, grow more and more
distinct from minor ghosts with an accelerated rapidity of evolution.
They grow greater in proportion to the rise of temples and hierarchies.
Furthermore, the very indefiniteness of the bodiless ghost tells in
favour of an enlarged godship. The gods are thought of as more and more
aerial and immaterial, less definitely human in form and nature; they
are clothed with mighty attributes; they assume colossal size; they are
even identified with the sun, the moon, the great powers of nature. But
they are never quite omnipotent during the polytheistic stage, because
in a pantheon they are {073}necessarily mutually limiting. Even in
the Greek and Roman civilisation, it is clear that the gods were not
commonly envisaged by ordinary minds as much more than human; for
Pisistratus dressed up a courtesan at Athens to represent Pallas Athene,
and imposed by this cheap theatrical trick upon the vulgar Athenians;
while Paul and Barnabas were taken at Lystra for Zeus and Hermes. Many
similar instances will occur at once to the classical scholar. It is
only quite late, under the influence of monotheism, that the exalted
conceptions of deity now prevalent began to form themselves in Judaism
and Christianity.

Mere domestic ancestor-worship, once more, could scarcely give us the
origin of anything more than domestic religion--the cult of the manes,
the household gods, as distinct from that of the tribal and national
deities. But kingship supplies us with the missing link. We have seen in
Mr. Duff Macdonald&rsquo;s account of the Central African god-making how the
worship of the chief’s ancestors gives rise to tribal or village gods;
and it is clear how, as chieftainship and kingship widen, national gods
of far higher types may gradually evolve from these early monarchs.
Especially must we take the time-element into account, remembering that
the earlier ancestors get at last to be individually forgotten as men,
and remain in memory only as supernatural beings. Thus kingship rapidly
reacts upon godship. If the living king himself is great, how much
greater must be the ancestor whom even the king himself fears and
worships; and how infinitely greater still that yet earlier god,
the ancestor’s ancestor, whom the ancestor himself revered and
propitiated! In some such way there grows up gradually a hierarchy of
gods, among whom the oldest, and therefore the least known, are usually
in the end the greatest of any.

The consolidation of kingdoms and empires, and the advance of the arts,
tell strongly with concurrent force in these directions; while the
invention of written language sets {074}a final seal on the godhead and
might of great early ancestors. Among very primitive tribes, indeed,
we find as a rule only very domestic and recent objects of worship.
The chief prays for the most part to his own father and his immediate
predecessors. The more ancient ancestors, as Mr. Duff Macdonald has so
well pointed out, grow rapidly into oblivion. But with more advanced
races, various agencies arise which help to keep in mind the early dead;
and in very evolved communities these agencies, reaching a high pitch
of evolution, make the recent gods or kings or ghosts seem comparatively
unimportant by the side of the very ancient and very long-worshipped
ones. More than of any other thing, it may be said of a god, _vires
acquirit eundo_. Thus, in advanced types of society, saints or gods
of recent origin assume but secondary or minor importance; while the
highest and greatest gods of all are those of the remotest antiquity,
whose human history is lost from our view in the dim mist of ages.

Three such agencies of prime importance in the transition from the mere
ghost to the fully developed god must here be mentioned. They are the
rise of temples, of idols, and, above all, of priesthoods. Each of these
we must now consider briefly but separately.

The origin of the Temple is various; but all temples may nevertheless
be reduced in the last resort either into graves of the dead, or into
places where worship is specially offered up to them. This truth,
which Mr. Herbert Spencer arrived at by examination of the reports
of travellers or historians, and worked up in connection with his
_Principles of Sociology_, was independently arrived at through quite a
different line of observation and reasoning by Mr. William Simpson,
the well-known artist of the _Illustrated London News_. Mr. Simpson has
probably visited a larger number of places of worship all over the world
than any other traveller of any generation: and he was early impressed
by the fact which forced itself upon his eyes, that almost every one of
them, where its origin could be {075}traced, turned out to be a tomb in
one form or another. He has set forth the results of his researches in
this direction in several admirable papers, all of which, but especially
the one entitled _The Worship of Death_, I can confidently recommend to
the serious attention of students of religion. They contain the largest
collection of instances in this matter ever yet made; and they show
beyond a doubt the affiliation of the very idea of a temple on the tomb
or grave of some distinguished dead person, famous for his power, his
courage, or his saintliness.

The cave is probably the first form of the Temple. Sometimes the dead
man is left in the cave which he inhabited when living; an instance
of which we have already noticed among the Veddahs of Ceylon. In other
cases, where races have outgrown the custom of cave-dwelling, the habit
of cave-burial, or rather of laying the dead in caves or in artificial
grottoes, still continues through the usual conservatism of religious
feeling. Offerings are made to the dead in all these various caves: and
here we get the beginnings of cave-temples. Such temples are at first
of course either natural or extremely rude; but they soon begin to be
decorated with rough frescoes, as is done, for example, by the South
African Bushmen. These frescoes again give rise in time by slow degrees
to such gorgeous works as those of the Tombs of the Kings at Thebes;
each of which has attached to it a magnificent temple as its
mortuary chapel. Sculpture is similarly employed on the decoration of
cave-temples; and we get the final result of such artistic ornament
in splendid cave-temples like those of Ellora. Both arts were employed
together in the beautiful and interesting Etruscan tomb-temples.

In another class of cases, the hut where the dead man lived is abandoned
at his death by his living relations, and thus becomes a rudimentary
Temple where offerings are made to him. This is the case with the
Hottentots, to take an instance at a very low grade of culture. Of a New
Guinea {076}hut-burial, Mr. Chalmers says: “The chief is buried in
the centre; a mat was spread over the grave, on which I was asked to
sit until they had a weeping.” This weeping is generally performed by
women--a touch which leads us on to Adonis and Osiris rites, and to
the Christian Pietà. Mr. Spencer has collected several other excellent
examples. Thus, the Arawaks place the corpse in a small boat and bury
it in the hut; among the Creeks, the habitation of the dead becomes his
place of interment; the Fantees likewise bury the dead person in his own
house; and the Yucatanese “as a rule abandoned the house, and left it
uninhabited after the burial.” I will not multiply quotations; it
will be better to refer the reader to Mr. Spencer’s own pages, where a
sufficient number of confirmatory examples are collected to satisfy
any but the most prejudiced critic. “As repeated supplies of food are
taken to the abandoned house,” says Mr. Spencer, “and as along with
making offerings there go other propitiatory acts, the deserted dwelling
house, turned into a mortuary house, acquires the attributes of a
temple.”

A third origin for Temples is found in the shed, hut, or shelter,
erected over the grave, either for the protection of the dead or for the
convenience of the living who bring their offerings. Thus, in parts of
New Guinea, according to Mr. Chalmers, “The natives bury their dead in
the front of their dwellings, and cover the grave with a small house, in
which the near relatives sleep for several months.”

“Where house-burial is not practised,” says Mr. Spencer, once more,
“the sheltering structure raised above the grave, or above the stage
bearing the corpse, becomes the germ of the sacred building. By some
of the New Guinea people there is a ‘roof of atap erected over’ the
burial-place. In Cook’s time the Tahitians placed the body of a dead
person upon a kind of bier supported by sticks and under a roof. So,
too, in Sumatra, where ‘a shed is built over’ the grave; and so,
too, in Tonga. Of course {077}this shed admits of enlargement and
finish. The Dyaks in some places build mausoleums like houses, 18 feet
high, ornamentally carved, containing the goods of the departed--sword,
shield, paddle, etc. When we read that the Fijians deposit the bodies of
their chiefs in small _enbures_ or temples, we may fairly conclude that
these so-called temples are simply more-developed sheltering structures.
Still more clearly did the customs of the Peruvians show that the
structure erected over the dead body develops into a temple. Acosta
tells us that &lsquo;every one of these kings Yncas left all his treasure and
revenues to entertaine the place of worshippe where his body was layed,
and there were many ministers with all their familie dedicated to his
service.’”

Note in the last touch, by anticipation, one origin of priesthood. On
the other hand, we saw in Mr. Duff Macdonald’s account of the Central
African natives that those savages do not worship at the actual grave
itself. In this case, terror of the _revenant_ seems to prevent the
usual forms of homage at the tomb of the deceased. Moreover, the ghost
being now conceived as more or less freely separable from the corpse,
it will be possible to worship it in some place remote from the dreaded
cemetery. Hence these Africans &ldquo;seek the spirit at the place where their
departed kinsman last lived among them. It is the great tree at the
verandah of the dead man’s house that is their temple: and if no tree
grow here, they erect a little shade, and there perform their simple
rites.” We have in this case yet another possible origin for certain
temples, and also, I will add by anticipation of a future chapter, for
the sacred tree, which is so common an object of pious adoration in many
countries.

Beginning with such natural caves or such humble huts, the Temple
assumes larger proportions and more beautiful decorations with the
increase of art and the growth of kingdoms. Especially, as we see in the
tomb-temples and pyramids {078}of Egypt and Peru, does it assume great
size and acquire costly ornaments when it is built by a powerful king
for himself during his own lifetime. Temple-tombs of this description
reach a high point of artistic development in such a building as the
so-called Treasury of Atreus at Mycenæ, which is really the sepulchre
of some nameless prehistoric monarch. It is admirably reconstructed in
Perrot and Chipiez.

Obviously, the importance and magnificence of the temple will react upon
the popular conception of the importance and magnificence of the god who
inhabits it. And conversely, as the gods grow greater and greater,
more art and more constructive skill will constantly be devoted to the
building and decoration of their permanent homes. Thus in Egypt the tomb
was often more carefully built and splendidly decorated than the house;
because the house was inhabited for a short time only, but the tomb for
eternity. Moreover, as kings grew more powerful, they often adorned
the temples of their ancestors with emulous pride, to show their own
greatness. In Egypt, once more, the original part of all the more
important temples is but a small dark cell, of early origin, to which
one successive king after another in later dynasties added statelier
and ever statelier antechambers or porches, so that at last the building
assumed the gigantic size and noble proportions of Karnak and Luxor.
This access of importance to the temple cannot have failed to add
correspondingly to the dignity of the god; so that, as time went on,
instead of the early kings being forgotten and no longer worshipped,
they assumed ever greater and greater importance from the magnificence
of the works in which their memory was enshrined. To the very end, the
god depends largely on his house for impressiveness. How much did not
Hellenic religion itself owe to the Parthenon and the temple of Olympian
Zeus! How much does not Christianity itself owe to Lincoln and Durham,
to Amiens and Chartres, to Milan and Pisa, to St. Mark’s and {070}St.
Peter’s! Men cannot believe that the deities worshipped in such noble
and dimly religious shrines were once human like themselves, compact of
the same bodies, parts, and passions. Yet in the last instance at least
we know the great works to be raised in honour of a single Lower Syrian
peasant.

With this brief and imperfect notice of the origin of temples, which
will indirectly be expanded in later portions of my work, I pass on from
the consideration of the sacred building itself to that of the Idol who
usually dwells within it.

Where burial prevails, and where arts are at a low stage of development,
the memory of the dead is not likely to survive beyond two or three
generations. But where mummification is the rule, there is no reason
why deceased persons should not be preserved and worshipped for an
indefinite period; and we know that in Egypt at least the cult of kings
who died in the most remote times of the Early Empire was carried on
regularly down to the days of the Ptolemies. In such a case as this,
there is absolutely no need for idols to arise; the corpse itself is the
chief object of worship. We do find accordingly that both in Egypt
and in Peru the worship of the mummy played a large part in the local
religions; though sometimes it alternated with the worship of other
holy objects, such as the image or the sacred stone, which we shall see
hereafter to have had a like origin. But in many other countries, where
bodies were less visibly and obviously preserved, the worship due to
the ghost or god was often paid to a simulacrum or idol; so much so that
“idolatry” has become in Christian parlance the common term for most
forms of worship other than monotheistic.

Now what is the origin and meaning of Idols, and how can they be
affiliated upon primitive corpse or ghost worship?

Like the temple, the Idol, I believe, has many separate origins, several
of which have been noted by Mr. Herbert Spencer, {080}while others, it
seems to me, have escaped the notice even of that profound and acute
observer.

The earliest Idols, if I may be allowed the contradictory expression,
are not idols at all--not images or representations of the dead person,
but actual bodies, preserved and mummified. These pass readily, however,
into various types of representative figures. For in the first place the
mummy itself is usually wrapped round in swathing-cloths which obscure
its features; and in the second place it is frequently enclosed in a
wooden mummy-case, which is itself most often rudely human in form, and
which has undoubtedly given rise to certain forms of idols. Thus,
the images of Amun, Khem, Osiris, and Ptah among Egyptian gods
are frequently or habitually those of a mummy in a mummy-case. But
furthermore, the mummy itself is seldom or never the entire man; the
intestines at least have been removed, or even, as in New Guinea, the
entire mass of flesh, leaving only the skin and the skeleton. The eyes,
again, are often replaced, as in Peru, by some other imitative object,
so as to keep up the lifelike appearance. Cases like these lead on to
others, where the image or idol gradually supersedes altogether the
corpse or mummy.

Mr. H. O. Forbes gives an interesting instance of such a transitional
stage in Timorlaut. “The bodies of those who die in war or by a
violent death are buried,&rdquo; he says; “and if the head has been captured
[by the enemy], a cocoanut is placed in the grave to represent the
missing member, and to deceive and satisfy his spirit.” There is
abundant evidence that such makeshift limbs or bodies amply suffice
for the use of the soul, when the actual corpse has been destroyed or
mutilated. Sometimes, indeed, the substitution of parts is deliberate
and intentional. Landa says of the Yucatanese that they cut oft the
heads of the ancient lords of Cocom when they died, and cleared them
from flesh by cooking them (very probably to eat at a sacrificial feast,
of which more hereafter); then they sawed {081}off the top of the skull,
filled in the rest of the head with cement, and, making the face as like
as possible to the original possessor, kept these images along with the
statues and the ashes. Note here the usual preservation of the head as
exceptionally sacred. In other cases, they made for their fathers wooden
statues, put in the ashes of the burnt body, and attached the skin of
the occiput taken off the corpse. These images, half mummy, half idol,
were kept in the oratories of their houses, and were greatly reverenced
and assiduously cared for. On all the festivals, food and drink were
offered to them.

Mr. Spencer has collected other interesting instances of this
transitional stage between the corpse or mummy and the mere idol. The
Mexicans, who were cremationists, used to burn a dead lord, and collect
the ashes; “and after kneading them with human blood, they made of
them an image of the deceased, which was kept in memory of him.”
Sometimes, as in Yucatan, the ashes were placed in a man-shaped
receptacle of clay, and temples or oratories were erected over them.
“In yet other cases,” says Mr. Spencer, “there is worship of the
relics, joined with the representative figure, not by inclusion, but
only by proximity.” Thus Gomara tells us that the Mexicans having
burnt the body of their deceased king, gathered up the ashes, bones,
jewels, and gold in cloths, and made a figure dressed as a man, before
which, as well as before the relics, offerings were placed. It is clear
that cremation specially lends itself to such substitution of an image
for the actual dead body. Among burying races it is the severed skull,
on the contrary, that is oftenest preserved and worshipped.

The transition from such images to small stone sarcophagi, like those
of the Etruscan tombs, is by no means a great one. These sarcophagi
contained the burnt ashes of the dead, but were covered by a lid which
usually represented the deceased, reclining, as if at a banquet, with a
beaker in his hands. The tombs in which the sarcophagi were placed were
of two types; one, the stone pyramid or {082}cone, which, says Dr. Isaac
Taylor, “is manifestly a survival of the tumulus”; the other, the
rock-cut chamber, “which is a survival of the cave.” These lordly
graves are no mere cheerless sepulchres; they are abodes for the dead,
constructed on the model of the homes of the living. They contain
furniture and pottery; and their walls are decorated with costly mural
paintings. They are also usually provided with an antechamber, where the
family could assemble at the annual feast to do homage to the spirits
of departed ancestors, who shared in the meal from their sculptured
sarcophagus lids.

At a further stage of distance from the primitive mummy-idol we come
upon the image pure and simple. The Mexicans, for example, as we have
seen, were cremationists; and when men killed in battle were missing,
they made wooden figures of them, which they honoured, and then burnt
them in place of the bodies. In somewhat the same spirit the Egyptians
used to place beside the mummy itself an image of the dead, to act as
a refuge or receptacle for the soul, “in case of the accidental
destruction of the actual body.” So the Mexicans once more, if one of
their merchants died on a journey, were accustomed to make a statue of
wood in the shape of the deceased, to which they paid all the honours
they would have done to his actual corpse before burning it. In Africa,
while a king of Congo is being embalmed, a figure is set up in the
palace to represent him, and is daily furnished with food and drink. Mr.
Spencer has collected several similar instances of idols substituted for
the bodies of the dead. The Roman _imagines_ wore masks of wax, which
preserved in like manner the features of ancestors. Perhaps the most
curious modern survival of this custom of double representations is
to be found in the effigies of our kings and queens still preserved in
Westminster Abbey.

There are two other sources of idol-worship, however, which, as it seems
to me, have hardly received sufficient attention at Mr. Spencer’s
hands. Those two are the stake which {083}marks the grave, and the
standing stone or tombstone. By far the larger number of idols, I
venture to believe, are descended from one or other of these two
originals, both of which I shall examine hereafter in far greater
detail. There is indeed no greater lacuna, I fancy, in Mr. Spencer’s
monumental work than that produced by the insufficient consideration
of these two fruitful sources of worshipful objects. I shall therefore
devote a considerable space to their consideration in subsequent
chapters; for the present it will suffice to remark that the wooden
stake seems often to form the origin or point of departure for the
carved wooden image, as well as for such ruder objects of reverence
as the cones and wooden pillars so widely reverenced among the Semitic
tribes; while the rough boulder, standing stone, or tombstone seems to
form the origin or point of departure for the stone or marble statue,
the commonest type of idol the whole world over in all advanced and
cultivated communities. Such stones were at first mere rude blocks or
unhewn masses, the descendants of those which were rolled over the grave
in primitive times in order to keep down the corpse of the dead man, and
prevent him from returning to disturb the living. But in time they grew
to be roughly dressed into slabs or squares, and finally to be decorated
with a rude representation of a human head and shoulders. From this
stage they readily progressed to that of the Greek Hermæ. We now know
that this was the early shape of most Hellenic gods and goddesses;
and we can trace their evolution onward from this point to the wholly
anthropomorphic Aphrodite or Here. The well-known figure of the Ephesian
Artemis is an intermediate case which will occur at once to every
classical reader. Starting from such shapeless beginnings, we progress
at last to the artistic and splendid bronze and marble statues of
Hellas, Etruria, and Rome, to the many-handed deities of modern India,
and to the sculptured Madonnas and Pietàs of Renaissance Italy.

Naturally, {084}as the gods grow more beautiful and more artistically
finished in workmanship, the popular idea of their power and dignity
must increase _pari passu_. In Egypt, this increase took chiefly the
form of colossal size and fine manipulation of hard granitic materials.
The so-called Memnon and the Sphinx are familiar instances of the first;
the Pashts of Syenite, the black basalt gods, so well known at the
Louvre and the British Museum, are examples of the second. In Greece,
effect was sought rather by ideal beauty, as in the Aphrodites and
Apollos, or by costliness of material, as in the chryselephantine Zeus
and the Athene of the Parthenon. But we must always remember that in
Hellas itself these glorious gods were developed in a comparatively
short space of time from the shapeless blocks or standing stones of the
ruder religion; indeed, we have still many curious intermediate forms
between the extremely grotesque and hardly human Mycenæan types, and
the exquisite imaginings of Myron or Phidias. The earliest Hellenic
idols engraved by Messrs. Perrot and Chipiez in their great work on
_Art in Primitive Greece_ do not rise in any respect superior to
the Polynesian level; while the so-called Apollos of later archaic
workmanship, rigidly erect with their arms at their sides, recall in
many respects the straight up-and-down outline of the standing stone
from which they are developed.

I should add that in an immense number of instances the rude stone image
or idol, and at a still lower grade the unwrought sacred stone, stands
as the central object under a shed or shelter, which develops by degrees
into the stately temple. The advance in both is generally more or less
parallel; though sometimes, as in historical Greece, a temple of the
noblest architecture encloses as its central and principal object of
veneration the rough unhewn stone of early barbaric worship. So even
in Christendom, great churches and cathedrals often hold as their most
precious possession some rude and antique image like {085}the sacred
Bambino of Santa Maria in Ara Cœli at Rome, or the “Black Madonnas”
which are revered by the people at so many famous Italian places of
pilgrimage.

Nor do I mean to say that every Idol is necessarily itself a funereal
relic. When once the idea of godship has been thoroughly developed,
and when men have grown accustomed to regard an image or idol as the
representative or dwelling-place of their god, it is easy to multiply
such images indefinitely. Hundreds of representations may exist of the
self-same Apollo or Aphrodite or Madonna or St. Sebastian. At the same
time, it is quite clear that for most worshippers, the divine being is
more or less actually confused with the image; a particular Artemis or
a particular Notre Dame is thought of as more powerful or more friendly
than another. I have known women in Southern Europe go to pray at the
shrine of a distant Madonna, “because she is greater than our own
Madonna.” Moreover, it is probable that in many cases images or sacred
stones once funereal in origin, and representing particular gods or
ghosts, have been swallowed up at last by other and more powerful
deities, so as to lose in the end their primitive distinctness. Thus,
there were many Baals and many Ashteroths; probably there were many
Apollos, many Artemises, many Aphrodites. It is almost certain that
there were many distinct Hermæ. The progress of research tends to
make us realise that numberless deities, once considered unique and
individual, may be resolved into a whole host of local gods, afterwards
identified with some powerful deity on the merest external resemblances
of image, name, or attribute. In Egypt at least this process of
identification and centralisation was common. Furthermore, we know
that each new religion tends to swallow up and assimilate to itself
all possible elements of older cults; just as Hebrew Jahwehism tried to
adopt the sacred stones of early Semitic heathenism by associating them
with episodes in the history of the patriarchs; and just as Christianity
has sanctified {086}such stones in its own area by using them sometimes
as the base of a cross, or by consecrating them at others with the name
of some saint or martyr.

But even more than the evolution of the Temple and the Idol, the
evolution of the Priesthood has given dignity, importance, and power
to the gods. For the priests are a class whose direct interest it is to
make the most of the greatness and majesty of the deities they tend or
worship.

Priesthood, again, has probably at least two distinct origins. The one
is quasi-royal; the other is quasiservile.

I begin with the first. We saw that the chief of an African village, as
the son and representative of the chief ghosts, who are the tribal
gods, has alone the right to approach them directly with offerings. The
inferior villager, who desires to ask anything of the gods, asks through
the chief, who is a kinsman and friend of the divine spirits, and who
therefore naturally understands their ideas and habits. Such chiefs are
thus also naturally priests. They are sacred by family; they and their
children stand in a special relation to the gods of the tribe, quite
different from the relation in which the common people stand; they are
of the blood of the deities. This type of relation is common in many
countries; the chiefs in such instances are “kings and priests, after
the order of Melchizedek.”

To put it briefly, in the earliest or domestic form of religion, the
gods of each little group or family are its own dead ancestors, and
especially (while the historic memory is still but weak) its immediate
predecessors. In this stage, the head of the household naturally
discharges the functions of priest; it is he who approaches the family
ghosts or gods on behalf of his wives, his sons, his dependants. To the
last, indeed, the father of each family retains this priestly function
as regards the more restricted family rites; he is priest of the worship
of the _lares_ and _penates_; he offers the family sacrifice to the
family gods; he reads family prayers in the Christian household. But as
{087}the tribe or nation arises, and chieftainship grows greater, it is
the ghosts or ancestors of the chiefly or kingly family who develop
most into gods; and the living chief and his kin are their natural
representatives. Thus, in most cases, the priestly office comes to be
associated with that of king or chief. Indeed, we shall see hereafter in
a subsequent chapter that many kings, being the descendants of gods, are
gods themselves; and that this union of the kingly and divine characters
has much to do with the growth of the dignity of godhead. Here, however,
I waive this point for the present; it will suffice for us to note at
the present stage of our argument that in a large number of instances
the priesthood and the kingship were inherent and hereditary in the
self-same families.

“The union of a royal title with priestly duties,” says Mr. Frazer
in _The Golden Bough_, “was common in ancient Italy and Greece.
At Rome and in other Italian cities there was a priest called the
Sacrificial King or King of the sacred rites (_Rex Sacrificulus or Rex
Sacrorum_), and his wife bore the title of Queen of the Sacred Rites.
In republican Athens, the second magistrate of the state was called the
King, and his wife the Queen; the functions of both were religious. Many
other Greek democracies had titular kings, whose duties, so far as they
are known, seem to have been priestly. At Rome the tradition was that
the Sacrificial King had been appointed after the expulsion of the kings
in order to offer the sacrifices which had been previously offered by
the kings. In Greece a similar view appears to have prevailed as to the
origin of the priestly kings. In itself the view is not improbable, and
it is borne out by the example of Sparta, the only purely Greek state
which retained the kingly form of government in historical times. For in
Sparta all state sacrifices were offered by the kings as descendants of
the god. This combination of priestly functions with royal authority is
familiar to every one. Asia Minor, for example, was the seat of
various great religious capitals, peopled by thousands of ‘Sacred
{087}slaves,&rsquo; and ruled by pontiffs who wielded at once temporal
and spiritual authority, like the popes of mediaeval Rome. Such
priest-ridden cities were Zela and Pes-sinus. Teutonic Kings, again, in
the old heathen days seem to have stood in the position and exercised
the powers of high priests. The Emperors of China offer public
sacrifices, the details of which are regulated by the ritual books. It
is needless, however, to multiply examples of what is the rule rather
than the exception in the early history of the kingship.”

We will return hereafter in another connexion to this ancient relation
of kingship with priesthood, which arises naturally from the still more
ancient relation of the king to the god.

Where priesthood originates in this particular way, little
differentiation is likely to occur between the temporal and the
ecclesiastical power. But there is a second and far more potent origin
of priesthood, less distinguished in its beginnings, yet more really
pregnant of great results in the end. For where the king is a priest,
and the descendant of the gods, as in Peru and Egypt, his immediate and
human power seems to overshadow and as it were to belittle the power of
his divine ancestors. No statue of Osiris, for example, is half so big
in size as the colossal figure of Rameses II. which lies broken in huge
pieces outside the mortuary temple of the king it commemorates, among
the ruins of Thebes. But where a separate and distinct priesthood gets
the management of sacred rites entirely into its own hands, we find the
authority of the gods often rising superior to that of the kings, who
are only their vicegerents: till at last we get Popes dictating to
emperors, and powerful monarchs doing humble penance before the costly
shrines of murdered archbishops.

The origin of independent or quasi-servile priesthood is to be found in
the institution of “temple slaves,”--the attendants told off as we
have already seen to do duty at the grave of the chief or dead warrior.
Egypt, again affords {089}us, on the domestic side, an admirable example
of the origin of such priesthoods. Over the lintel of each of the
cave-like tombs at Beni Hassan and Sakkarah is usually placed an
inscription setting forth the name and titles of its expected occupant
(for each was built during the life-time of its owner), with an
invocation praying for him propitious funeral rites, and a good
burial-place after a long and happy life. Then follows a pious hope that
the spirit may enjoy for all eternity the proper payment of funereal
offerings, a list of which is ordinarily appended, together with a
statement of the various anniversaries on which they were due. But the
point which specially concerns us here is this: Priests or servants were
appointed to see that these offerings were duly made; and the tomb was
endowed with property for the purpose both of keeping up the offerings
in question, and of providing a stipend or living-wage for the priest.
As we shall see hereafter, such priesthoods were generally made
hereditary, so as to ensure their continuance throughout all time:
and so successful were they that in many cases worship continued to be
performed for several hundred years at the tomb; so that a person
who died under the Early Empire was still being made the recipient of
funeral dues under kings of the Eighteenth and Nineteenth Dynasties.

I give this interesting historical instance at some length because it
is one of the best known, and also one of the most persistent. But
everywhere, all the world over, similar evolutions have occurred on
a shorter scale. The temple attendants, endowed for the purpose of
performing sacred rites for the ghost or god, have grown into priests,
who knew the habits of the unseen denizen of the shrine. Bit by bit,
prescriptions have arisen; customs and rituals have developed; and the
priests have become the depositaries of the divine traditions. They
alone know how to approach the god; they alone can read the hidden signs
of his pleasure or displeasure. As intermediaries between worshipper and
deity, they are themselves half sacred. {090}Without them, no votary
can rightly approach the shrine of his patron. Thus at last they rise
into-importance far above their origin; priestcraft comes into being;
and by magnifying their god, the members of the hierarchy magnify at the
same time their own office and function.

Yet another contributing cause must be briefly noted. Picture-writing
and hieroglyphics take their rise more especially in connexion with
tombs and temples. The priests in particular hold as a rule the key to
this knowledge. In ancient Egypt, to take a well-known instance, they
were the learned class; they became the learned class again under
other circumstances in mediaeval Europe. Everywhere we come upon sacred
mysteries that the priests alone know; and where hieroglyphics exist,
these mysteries, committed to writing, become the peculiar property
of the priests in a more special sense. Where writing is further
differentiated into hieratic and demotic, the gulf between laity and
priesthood grows still wider; the priests possess a special key to
knowledge, denied to the commonalty. The recognition of Sacred Books has
often the same result; of these, the priests are naturally the guardians
and exponents. I need hardly add that side by side with the increase
of architectural grandeur in the temple, and the increase of artistic
beauty and costliness in the idols or statues and pictures of the gods,
goes increase in the stateliness of the priestly robes, the priestly
surroundings, the priestly ritual. Finally, we get ceremonies of the
most dignified character, adorned with all the accessories of painting
and sculpture, of candles and flowers, of incense and music, of rich
mitres and jewelled palls,--ceremonies performed in the dim shade of
lofty temples, or mosques, or churches, in honour of god or gods of
infinite might, power, and majesty, who must yet in the last resort be
traced back to some historic or prehistoric Dead Man, or at least to
some sacred stone or stake or image, his relic and representative.

Thus, {091}by convergence of all these streams, the primitive mummy or
ghost or spirit passes gradually into a deity of unbounded glory and
greatness and sanctity. The bodiless soul, released from necessary
limits of space and time, envisaged as a god, is pictured as ever
more and more superhuman, till all memory of its origin is entirely
forgotten. But to the last, observe this curious point: all new gods
or saints or divine persons are, each as they crop up first, of
demonstrably human origin. Whenever we find a new god added from known
sources to a familiar pantheon, we find without exception that he
turns out to be--a human being. Whenever we go back to very primitive
religions, we find all men’s gods are the corpses or ghosts of their
ancestors. It is only when we take relatively advanced races with
unknown early histories that we find them worshipping a certain number
of gods who cannot be easily and immediately resolved into dead men
or spirits. Unfortunately, students of religion have oftenest paid the
closest attention to those historical religions which lie furthest away
from the primitive type, and in which at their first appearance before
us we come upon the complex idea of godhead already fully developed.
Hence they are too much inclined, like Professor Robertson Smith, and
even sometimes Mr. Frazer (whose name, however, I cannot mention in
passing without the pro-foundest respect), to regard the idea of a
godship as primordial, not derivative; and to neglect the obvious
derivation of godhead as a whole from the cult and reverence of the
deified ancestor. Yet the moment we get away from these advanced and
too overlaid historical religions to the early conceptions of simple
savages, we see at once that no gods exist for them save the ancestral
corpses or ghosts; that religion means the performance of certain rites
and offerings to these corpses or ghosts; and that higher elemental or
departmental deities are wholly wanting. Even in the great historical
religions themselves, the further back we go, and the lower down we
{092}probe, the closer do we come to the foundation-stratum of ghosts or
ancestor-gods. And where, as in Egypt, the evidence is oldest and most
complete throughout, the more do we observe how the mystic nature-gods
of the later priestly conceptions yield, as we go back age by age
in time, to the simpler and more purely human ancestral gods of the
earliest documents.

It will be our task in the succeeding chapters of this work to do even
more than this--to show that the apparently unresolvable element
in later religions, including the Hebrew god Jahweh himself, can
be similarly affiliated by no uncertain evidence upon the primitive
conception of a ghost or ancestor.




