CHAPTER VI

A Tangled Web

After fording Sweetwater River several times to throw pursuit off the
track, Buck McKee and Bud Lane entered an arroyo to rest their mounts
and hold council as to their future movements. During the flight both
had been silent; McKee was busy revolving plans for escape in his mind,
and Bud was brooding over the tragic ending of the lawless adventure
into which he had been led by his companion.  When McKee callously
informed him that the agent had been killed in the encounter, Bud was
too horrified to speak.  A dry sob arose in his throat at the thought
of his old friend lying dead, all alone, in the station.  His first
impulse was to turn back to Florence and surrender himself to the
Sheriff.  Had this entailed punishment of himself alone, he would have
done it but he still retained a blind loyalty in his associate and
principal in the crime.  Murder, it seemed, was to be expected when one
took the law in his own hands to right an injustice.  He didn't clearly
understand it.  It was his first experience with a killing.  The
heartlessness of McKee both awed and horrified him.  Evidently the
half-breed was used to such actions.  It appeared to be entirely
justified in his code.  So Bud followed in dull silence the masterful
man who had involved him in the fearful deed.

When they dismounted, however, his pent-up emotion burst forth.

"You said there would be no killing," he gasped, passing his hand
wearily across his forehead as if to wipe out the memory of the crime.

"Well, what did the old fool pull his gun for?" grumbled McKee
petulantly, as if Terrill was the aggressor in the encounter.

Bud threw himself wearily on the ground.

"I'd give the rest of my life to undo to-day's work," he groaned,
speaking more to himself than to his companion.

McKee heard him.  His anger began to arise.  If  Bud weakened detection
was certain.  Flight back to Texas must be started without delay.  If
he could strengthen the will of the boy either by promise of reward or
fear of punishment, the chances of detection would lessen as the days
passed.

"And that would be about twenty-four hours if you don't keep quiet.
Why didn't he put up his hands when I hollered?  He starts to wrastle
and pull gun, and I had to nail him."  McKee shuddered spite of his
bravado.

Pulling himself together with an apparent effort, he continued: "We'll
hold the money for a spell--not spend a cent of it till this thing
blows over--they'll never get us.  Here, we'll divide it."

"Keep it all.  I never want to touch a penny of it," said Bud
earnestly, moving along the ground to place a greater distance between
him and the murderer.

"Thanks.  But you don't git out of your part of the hold-up that easy.
Take your share, or I'll blow it into you," said McKee, pulling his
revolver.

Bud, with an effort, arose and walked over to Buck.  With clenched
fists, in agonized tones, he cried:  "Shoot, if you want to.  I wish
I'd never seen you--you dragged me into this--you made me your
accomplice in a murder."

McKee looked at him in amazement.  This phase of human character was
new to him, trained as he been on the border, where men rarely suffered
remorse and still more rarely displayed it.

"Shucks!  I killed him--you didn't have no hand in it," answered Buck.
"This ain't my first killin'.  I guess Buck McKee's pretty well known
in some sections.  I took all the chances.  I did the killin'.  You git
half.  Now, brace up and take yer medicine straight."

"But I didn't want to take the money for myself," replied Bud, as if to
soothe his conscience.  "Oh!  Buck, why didn't you let me alone?" he
continued, as the thought of his position again overwhelmed him.

Buck gasped at the shifting of the full blame upon his shoulders.

"Well, I'll be darned!" he muttered.  "You make me sick, Kid." His
voice rose in anger and disgust.  "Why, to hear you talk, one would
think you was the only one had right feelin's.  I'm goin' to take my
share and start a decent life.  I'm goin' back to Texas an' open a
saloon.  You take your half, marry your gal, and settle down right
here.  'Ole Man' Terrill's dead; nothin' will bring him back, an' you
might as well get the good o' the money. It's Slim Hoover's, anyhow.
If Jack Payson can marry your brother Dick's gal on Dick's money--fer
there's no hope o' stoppin' that now--you can cut Slim out with Polly,
on Slim's salary.  Aw, take the money!" and McKee pressed half of the
bills into Bud's lax fingers.

The young man's hand closed upon them mechanically.  A vague thought
that he might some day make restitution conspired with McKee's
insidious appeal to his hatred and jealousy to induce him to retain the
blood-money, and he thrust it within an inside pocket of his loose
waistcoat.

"Now," said McKee, thoroughly satisfied that he had involved Bud in the
crime too deeply for him to confess his share in it, "we'll shake
hands, and say 'adios.'  Slim Hoover's probably on our track by this
time, but I reckon he'll be some mixed in the trail around the mesa,
and give the job up as a bad one when he reaches the river.  I'll show
up on the Lazy K, where the whole outfit will swear I've been fer two
days, if Hoover picks on me as one of the men he's been follerin'.
You're safe.  Nobody'd put killin' anybody on to you, let alone your
ole frien' Terrill. Why, yuh ain't a man yet, Bud, though I don't it to
discurrudge yuh.  You've made a start, an' some day yuh won't think no
more'n me of killin' a feller what stan's in yer way.  I shouldn't be
so turribly surprised if Jack Payson got what's comin' to him someday.
But what have you got there, Bud?" he inquired, as he saw the young man
holding a letter he had withdrawn from the pocket into which he had put
the bills.

"Letter I got in Florence yesterday when I was too full to read it,"
said Bud.  He opened it.  "Why, it's from Polly!" he exclaimed, "it's
an invite--by God! it's an invite to Jack an' Echo's wedding!  It's
today!  That damned scoundrel has hurried the thing up for fear Dick
will get back in time to stop it! Buck McKee, I believe you're right!
I could kill Jack Payson with no more pity than I would a rattler or
Gila monster!"

At this exhibition of hatred by his companion, a new thought flashed
suddenly through the satanic mind of the half-breed.  It involved an
entire change of his plans, but the devilish daring of the conception
was irresistible.

"Say," he broke in, with seeming irrelevance, "don't Payson ride a
pacin' mare?"

"Yes," answered Bud, "what of it?"

"Oh, nothin'," said McKee; "it jus' struck me as sorter funny. PAYSON
and PACIN', don't you see."

Bud was mystified.  Had his companion gone daft?

McKee saw instantly that it would be very easy to fix the charge of
murdering the station-agent upon Payson.  The ranchman had evidently
left the station a short time before the murder, and had gone straight
south to the Sweetwater.  Unless it had become confused with their own
tracks, the trail would be a plain one, owing to the fact that it was
made by a pacing horse, and the pursuit would undoubtedly follow this.

Payson rode the only pacing horse in the Sweetwater and Bar One
outfits, and it was certain to come to light, from Terrill's receipts,
that he had been with the agent about the time of the killing.  The
motive for the robbery would be evident.  Payson was in need of three
thousand dollars to pay off the mortgage on his ranch.

McKee said to Bud:  "I've changed my mind.  I think I'll see a little
fun before I break for Texas.  I'll go with you to the weddin'."

"But you ain't got no invite," objected Bud.

"Oh, I reckon they'll take me along on yours.  I know too much fer
Payson to objeck to me too strenuous."

They rode up to Allen Hacienda shortly after Slim Hoover had arrived.
They could hear the merriment of the wedding-guests in the kitchen.
Loud laughter was punctuated by the popping of corks, and McKee, who
rode in advance of Bud, distinguished the voice of the Sheriff in
expostulation against the general raillery concentrated upon him.

The half-breed grinned wolfishly.  It was evident that the bloodhound
of the law had tracked the supposed murderer just as the real criminal
had conjectured and desired.

Polly ran out on the piazza.  She saw the man whom she regarded as her
lover's evil genius.  As he greeted her ingratiatingly: "Howdy, Miss
Polly," she replied sharply:

"You ain't got no invite to this weddin'."

"I come with my friend Bud," he explained, with an elaborate bow.

"I didn't see you, Bud," answered Polly slightly mollified, as she
crossed the door-yard to shake hands with her sweetheart. Buck offered
her his hand, but she ignored him.  McKee shrugged his shoulders, and
started for the house.

"Bud, he's some cast down because it's not his weddin'," was McKee's
parting shot at the young couple.  "I 'low I'll go in and join the
boys.  Excuse me."

"With pleasure," coldly replied the girl.

The half-breed ignored the sarcasm and, answering innocently, "Much
obliged," he entered the house.

Polly turned on Bud, displaying her resentment.  "You an' him always
kick up the devil when you're together.  What did you bring him along
fer?" she demanded.

"It's his last chance to see any fun around here; he's leavin' for
Texas," explained Bud.

"Fer how long?"

"Fer good."

"Fer our good, you mean.  There's too many of his kind comin' into this
country.  Did you hear about 'Ole Man' Terrill?"

Bud did not wait for her to explain, but nervously answered: "They told
us about it in Florence when we were coming through, We've been at the
Lazy K."

"Wasn't it dreadful?" rattled on Polly.  "Slim's here--the boys are
goin' to turn out with him after the weddin' to see if they can ketch
the feller who did the killin'."

Bud paled as he heard the news.  To conceal his distress he moved
toward the door.  Anywhere to get away from the girl to whom he feared
he would betray himself.  "I'll join 'em," he huskily answered.

Polly, however, could see no reason for his evident haste to leave her.

She felt hurt, but thought his actions were due to her scolding him for
being with McKee.

"You ain't ever ast me how I look," she inquired, seeking to detain him.

"You look fine," complimented Bud perfunctorily.

"W'en a feller ain't seen a feller in a week, seems like a feller ought
to brace up and start something," replied Polly, in an injured tone.

Bud smiled in spite of his fears.  Catching the girl in his arms, he
kissed her, and said:  "I was a-waitin' for the chance."

Polly disengaged herself from his embrace, and sighed contentedly.
"That's something like it.  What's the use of bein' engaged to a feller
if you can't have all the trimmin's that goes with it.  You look as if
you wasn't too happy."

Bud pulled himself together with an effort.  He realized that if he did
not show more interest in the girl and the wedding he might be
suspected of connection with the murder.

He trumped up an explanation of his moodiness.  "Well, what call have I
to be happy?  Ain't I lost my job?"

"Yes, but that's because you were hot-headed, gave your boss too much
lip.  But everything will come out all right.  Jack says--"

"Has that low-down liar an' thief been comin' it over you, Polly? Did
he tell you how he gave the place he promised me to Sage-brush?"

"That wasn't until you gave him slack, Bud.  I'm sure he ain't a thief;
why--"

"Thief, of course he is, an' a blacker-hearted one than the man that
killed Terrill.  Ain't he going to steal my brother Dick's girl this
very night?"

"But Dick is dead," expostulated Polly.

"Dick ain't dead; I know it--that is," he stammered, "I feel it in my
bones he ain't dead. An' Jack feels it, too; that's why he's hurried up
this weddin'."

"But your own friend, Buck McKee, saw Dick just before the 'Paches
killed him."

"But not after it.  An' Buck now thinks the Rurales may have come up in
time to save him."

"Seems to me if that's so he has had time enough since then to write,"
objected Polly, who was, nevertheless, impressed by Bud's vehemence.

"How do you know that he has not written?"

Polly could only gasp.  These accusations were coming too fast for her
to answer.

"You can't tell what a man might do in a case like that.  Perhaps
Dick's 'way in the mountains, away from the railroad, prospectin' down
in the Ghost Range, where he has been tryin' to locate the lost lode.
There's lots of reasons for his not writing to Echo. But Echo doesn't
seem to mind.  A year an' a half is enough to mend any woman's heart."

"Now, you--" began Polly, who was growing angry under the charges which
were being heaped on her two best friends by the overwrought boy.

Bud would not let her finish, but cried: "Echo never loved him. If she
did she would not be acting like she is goin' to to-night."

Rushing to Echo's defense Polly answered:  "She may or may not have
loved Dick Lane, but I know that she loves Jack Payson now with all her
heart and, even if the 'Paches did not get your brother, he's as dead
to her as if they had."

Polly was startled and confused by Bud's accusations. Accordingly, it
was a relief to her when Payson appeared on the scene.  They had been
so interested in their conversation that they did not hear him ride up
to the house.  "Hello, Polly! Hello, Bud!" were his cordial greetings,
for he was determined to ignore his former employee's hostility.  Bud
did not answer, but looked moodily on the ground.

To Eastern eyes Payson's wedding-attire would appear most incongruous.
About his waist was strapped a revolver. His riding-trousers,
close-fitting and corded, were buttoned over the calves of his legs.
Soft, highly polished leather boots reached to his knees.  His shirt
was of silk, deeply embroidered down the front and at the collar.  His
jacket gave him ample breathing-room about the chest, but tapered at
the waist and clung closely over the hips.  He wore a sombrero and a
knotted silk handkerchief.  His face was deeply sunburned, except a
spot shaped like crescent just below the hairline on the forehead,
which was protected from the sun by the hat and the shade of the brim.
A similar line of fairer skin ran around the edge of the scalp,
beginning over the ears.  His hair shaded the upper part of his neck
from the sun's rays.  When his hair was trimmed the untanned part
showed as plainly as if painted.  It is the mark of the plainsman in a
city or on a holiday.

"Well, it's about time that you got here," said Polly, with a sigh of
relief.  "Where have you been?"

"I stopped over to Sam Terrill's to see about something that I ordered
from Kansas City.  Then I had to go back to my ranch--"

Bud started guiltily.  Forgetting his determination to ignore Payson,
he asked anxiously.  "You didn't see Terrill, did you?"

"Oh, yes.  Why do you ask?"

Polly laid her hand on Payson's arm and told him briefly of the
shooting of Terrill.

"Who shot him?" he asked, when she had finished.

"They don't know--he was robbed of a pile of money--Slim Hoover's just
rode over to get a posse," she replied, looking toward the door.  At
this bit of information Payson became anxious about the plans for his
wedding.  The ceremony was uppermost in his mind at the time.

"Well, he can get one after the wedding."  Then he asked:  "Is the
minister here yet?"

Polly laughingly replied:  "You're feelin' pretty spry now, but you'll
be as meek as a baby calf in a little while.  In this section a
bridegroom is treated worse than a tenderfoot."

Payson smiled.  He knew he was in for a thorough hazing by the boys.
"That's all right.  I'll get back at you some day--when you and Bud--"

Polly interrupted him with a remark about minding his own business.

Bud avoided entering into the conversation.  He had walked toward the
door and was standing on the steps when he answered for Polly.

"Looks as if you're chances of gettin' even with us is a long way off,"
he said.  Turning, he entered the house, to join the other guests who,
by the noise, were enjoying Allen's importations from Tucson to the
bottom of every glass.

Polly looked after Bud, smiling quizzically.  "Bud's mighty hopeful,
ain't he?  Ain't you happy?"

"You bet!  Don't I look it?" cried Jack, rubbing his hands. "Never
thought I could be so happy.  A fellow doesn't get married every day in
the week."

"Not unless he lives in Chicago; I hear it's the habit there," answered
Polly.

"The sweetest girl in the Territory--" began Jack.

"You bet she is," Polly broke in.  "If you just want to keep her lovin'
and lovin' you--all you've got to do is to treat her white and play
square with her."

"Play square with her," thought Payson.  Was he playing square with
her?  He knew that he was not, but the chance of losing her was too
great for him to risk.

"For if you ain't on the level with Echo Allen, well--you might as well
crawl out of camp, that's the kind of girl she is," Polly exclaimed
loyally.



