Chapter XI


After a long journey Gud came to a place where it looked as if it needed
rain. So he sat down upon a cactus and took out his horoscope and
consulted the stars. Then he made an elliptical ring around a new moon
and hung the moon low in the sky. And Gud took a scarlet runner bean and
put it in a pot and lit a fire of cactus thorns and set the pot to boil.
When the thorns began to crackle, an arrogant savor arose from the pot,
and the vapors of it filled the sky, and through the vapors the new-made
moon shown red as the blood of saints torn by lions because of their
faith.

Gud blew his breath on the fire and it waxed hot as anger and the pot
boiled over and quenched the fire. Gud reached his hand into the pot and
drew out the bean and cut it into three halves. And the left half of the
bean he ate, and the right half of the bean he cast into Hell, but the
other half of the bean Gud planted beneath a flat stone that bore the
footprint of a hero who had passed that way when the stone was but a
drifting sand on a lonely shore.

Presently the bean half sprouted, and the sprout split the stone athwart
and rent the footprint of the hero. Gud watered the bean with tears,
because there was no rain in that place. So the bean grew and on its
stem were the leaves of the maiden-hair tree, and the tendrils by which
the bean clambered were the tendrils of the snake-feeder vine, and the
flowers that sprang from the nodules of the bean stalk were the flowers
of the wormwood tree, but they gave forth the odor of liverworts and
were of the color of faded hopes or of stale music.

Gud cut marks on the bean pole to observe the rate of growth of the bean
vine, and he found that it grew much faster than grief dies but not so
fast as jealousy is born.

And when the bean reached the top of the pole and could grow no more, it
conceived and bore a fruit that was like a ripe gourd. Four eyes grew in
the face of the fruit and a dim light shone out of the eyes. And Gud
heard the patter of tiny feet within, and presently the ghosts of three
blind mice came out of the four eyes of the fruit, one out of each of
the four eyes, for the third one came out twice.

    Oh, under the stars are things to see that fold
      Their shining webs around the hidden sun....
    When the flesh is faint and the heart grows limp and old,
      Surely the work of living is not done.

    There was a breathless stillness and the crowd
      Leaned forward, looking on and barely stirred.
    The surgeon, knife in hand, with spotted shroud,
      Cut close around the heart and said no word.

    They saw his patient die, and whispered one
      Unto another in the clinic there.
    But yet the surgeon saw strange actions done
      That streaked his head with strands of snow-white hair.

    From out the dead man's open chest there crept
      A shaggy spider shining in the light,
    That shook itself like one who having slept
      Puts vainly back the shadows of the night.

    The surgeon clutched his throat. Within his breast
      He felt a living thing twist here and there;
    A thing that stirred from out a deep unrest
      Like something moving through a drowned man's hair.

    The students only saw his hair turn white....
      But he heard tiny pulses throb and beat,
    He felt slim fingers clawing out of sight
      And hearkened to the patter of tiny feet.

    Then shrieking fell across the clinic floor
      The students pouring from their seats. Stark dead
    He must have been for he said nothing more;
      His fingers twitched and once he moved his head.

    They did not see that from his mouth there crept
      A shaggy spider shining in the light,
    That shook itself like one who having slept
      Puts vainly back the shadows of the night.

    Then sideways moved it, trembling as though cold,
      Following where the other spider ran....
    Oh, hidden away there are things that are strange and old,
      And weave strange webs in the very breast of man.




Chapter XII


And the ghosts of the three blind mice sang to Gud as if their hearts
would break. They sang of brave deeds, for they had been field mice and
they had died upon the field of honor.

And when the song was done, Gud wept again; for now he understood why it
had never rained in that place.

So he arose and stamped out the smouldering embers of the fire he had
builded, and whistled for the Underdog. And when the Underdog came he
devoured the ghosts of the three blind mice, the one after the other and
the third which came out twice, after the one. Then the Underdog licked
his chops and Gud sighed, and together they departed from that place,
very sorrowful that they had come.




