Chapter LIX


    The Gods of the Gallows ride tonight
    Their shadowy faces spotted white.
    The creature who watches through the bars
    Hears every footfall under the stars.
    The gods of the gallows need no rest--
    They ride like chieftains--twelve abreast.
    And now they have vanished, leaving hope,
    And a thing that hangs at the end of a rope.

    Under the lattice a rosebud trembles, a rosebud trembles gently....
    Under the trees the shadows fall
    In a silver pool by the garden wall;
    Then here and there among the trees
    Wind whispers rouse low litanies.
    Like tiny voices of tongueless grief
    That stir the silence of every leaf.
    And who would know that under the lattice, under the lattice window,
    Where the rosebud stirred like a startled fawn,
    Two hands are creeping up the wall,
    Two hands that are slim and white and small?
    And who can hear the lattice open, the lattice open gently?
    Now over the lip of the window sill,
    A rustle of silks, the lattice closes,
    No one has heard, the night is still,
    Save unblossomed buds of the startled roses.
    Yet were attentive ears to hearken: enemy ears to listen
    Far off, far off, where the white road bends,
    And the upturned cup of the blue sky ends,
    They might have heard a horse's hoofs
    Go clickity, clickity, clickity hack, clickity hack, clickity ...
      clickity ... clickity ... hack
    Wisely wondered why late at night
    So speedy a horseman rode its back....
    Then the echo dimmed at the edge of a wood,
    And the sound and the horse were gone for good.
    The creature who watches through the bars
    Heard every footfall under the stars.

    Beside the doorway of his cell
    Imprisoned in that iron hell,
    He taunted the guards of the King--the King's own guards they were--
    With scarlet breeches and purple coats,
    Shining buckles upon their boots.
    He taunted them with sneering jests.
    He sneered at the medals on their breasts;
    Laughed in the haughty captain's face,
    Cut short the chaplain's plea for grace,
    And hummed the popular air of the day
    When they read the sentence, and bade him pray.

    "I promised her at our final tryst,
    When our aching bodies clung and kissed,
    That come what may, no matter when
    I should see her to tell her I love her again."

    And he laughed through the bars
    In a redcoat's face,

    Then he looked through the window
    Up at the stars,
    And saw that the dawn was taking place.
    I'll be returning ere the dusk is down,
    I'll be returning....
    Wait for me!
    I'll be returning though life claims
    Allegiance under lying rames.

    This was the song he sang for her--for her this song he sang.

    So there by the pool where the rose leaves drift.
    She waited knowing the dawn was near,
    And when she saw the shadows lift
    And all the skies turn deep and clear,
    She fled to her room--he had not come.
    They dared not speak to her of him,
    Her mother, her sister--aye, any of them.
    For her face was carven out of stone
    And her little lips made moan, made moan.

    Yet late that night when the house was still
    She heard a horse ride over the hill.
    "It is he, it is he," her heart sang sweet.
    Then out of the window climbed to meet
    The lover who made her hot heart beat.
    Yes there he was with his handsome head,
    And now the same dear things he said
    As he drew close with a sweep of his arm.
    The gods of the gallows need no rest--
    They ride like chieftains twelve abreast.

    One flower touched as she fluttered by,
    Swung on its stem,
    And one bright star in the purple sky
    Shone over them.
    And what he said, it matters not,
    Nor what she said to him.
    And he stopped to listen like one who is stirred;
    His horse even hearkened, as though he heard.
    For down the road there came abreast
    Twelve men in ancient armor dressed.
    There was something strange in the way they rode;
    There was something odd in their manners.
    They did not see the lovers there,
    Nor heed the house at all,
    But they rode like mad their horses backs....
    Rode through the solid wall.
    When she had opened her frightened eyes
    What was her pitiful heart's surprise
    To find him gone
    And the yellow dawn
    A roaring flame in the new day's skies.

    And now they have vanished leaving hope,
    And a thing that hangs at the end of a rope.

    They found her there
    In a little heap
    As though she had walked
    In her lilied sleep.
    And they never knew,
    Though her mother said:
    "It's a pity, so,
    With her lover dead
    On the gallows' tree
    Three days ago...."




