Chapter XVII


As Gud was passing up through hell he saw two souls which were not being
properly punished, but were strolling about as trusties of the place.
Gud approached them and asked: "Why are you two not being properly
punished?"

The first soul made answer and said to Gud: "We need none of these
grosser punishments such as increased temperature and breathing SO_{2},
which the ancients, who imagined hell, were able, in the limits of their
scientific knowledge, to imagine. The reason that we need no such crude
material punishments is because our spiritual suffering is quite
enough."

And Gud saw that the soul spake the truth, for the face of both of these
trusty souls were lined with seamy sorrow. As Gud looked upon their
sufferings he wondered why it was they suffered so, and he asked: "In
what did you two sin one by one that you should be punished two by two?"

And the second suffering soul replied, "I sinned because I believed too
vehemently that there was no god, and my companion here, because he
believed over confidently that there was a god."

"But is it not strange," asked Gud, "that you two, who held such
opposite doctrines, should now suffer similar punishment? How do you
explain that?"

The first soul now took up the conversation with his mouth and made
answer in this wise: "We suffer now with equal suffering, I because,
believing that there was no god, found, when I died, that there was one,
and he sent me to hell. But my companion here, who believed that there
was a god, found when he died that there was none; and so he came to
hell also, as there was no place else for him to go."

For a moment Gud looked upon these suffering souls with puzzlement and
wonder, and then suddenly he began to laugh.

"Why do you laugh at our sufferings?" demanded the souls angrily.

"I am laughing at you two," said Gud, "because when you died you both
came to hell--whereas if neither of you had believed in immortality you
would not have needed to have gone anywhere."

As Gud was passing through a dismal swamp, he came to a certain cypress
tree and sat down on a knee thereof. And presently she came also and sat
down upon the other knee of the cypress tree, and they talked about the
meeting of parallel lines.

But they could not agree so Gud proposed that they cut their initials on
the bark of the cypress tree.

They did so, after which they parted. And Gud went on his way and so did
she.

But when Gud had vanished into the depths of the dismal swamp, she
turned and went back to the cypress tree and looked at the initials that
they had carved thereon. Taking the knife that Gud had left sticking in
the tree, she carved a word below the initials. Having finished the
carving, she looked up into the branches above her and behold the
foliage of the tree had withered. Then she repented for what she had
done, and in great haste, took the knife and carved yet another word.
Whereupon the tree put out fresh buds and grew again--for such is the
power of words for good or evil.

And she smiled contentedly, for hers was the last word.




Chapter XVIII


Lo, the north wind trembled and the sea of sorrow froze into beauteous
frost forms that shimmered all lacy and green like ferns waving in an
ancient breeze. And frozen frogs came out of the frost ferns, croaking
and bellowing like mad, green bulls.

The Underdog whimpered because he was afraid. So Gud bade the frogs be
quiet, and they were quiet with a great quietude, and peace reigned for
a spell or two.

After which Gud traveled on until he met a rich merchant who was riding
across an ice floe on a camel that was gaily caparisoned and had
trappings of gold and was shod with silver shoes. And the rich merchant
hailed Gud and said: "Whither goest thou on this sleek, icy desert?"

And Gud said: "I go my way rejoicing. But why is your eye so troubled?"

The merchant replied: "I go in search of a strawstack."

When his master said that, the camel stomped on the ice with his silver
shod foot and cut a round hole in the ice and kneeled down and drank his
fill of ice water.

While the camel was kneeling, the rich merchant invited Gud to mount
upon the camel. Gud did so and the camel arose and lumbered on his
slippery way.

The merchant and Gud sat in the howdah and smoked a hooka and told tales
of barter and of gain. This is one of the tales they told, and it
matters not which one told it, for it is a lie anyway.




