Chapter VIII


    The Gogs are good, the Gogs are great,
    They rule a realm of real estate.
    Their greedy little eyes are slits
    That vision beauty torn to bits,
    And when the night's aglow with stars
    They stagger through the lupinars.
    The Gogs are good, the Gogs are great
    We slave to rent their real estate;
    We toil in their behalf like fools,
    Obey their customs, creeds and rules,
    Because each intellectual hog
    Would like to be, and is a Gog!




Chapter IX


So they trudged along very happily until they met some one.

Gud was dumbfounded. "What can you be doing on this Impossible Curve?"
he cried, "for I destroyed everything and my dog has eaten nothing.
Speak up, sir, and tell me what you are before I annihilate you again."

"I am Cruickshank, the bookkeeper," replied the some one.

"Ah ha," exclaimed Gud, "and so you are another of those living things
that evolved out of the ooze and slime of that little sphere that got
the valences of its carbon atoms so dreadfully entangled!"

"I am a man," said Cruickshank, the bookkeeper.

"But," said Gud, quite exasperated, "I told you I destroyed everything."

"And so you did," agreed Cruickshank, the bookkeeper, "but do you not
recall those that escaped and floated down on the star dust to wait for
the day of judgment?"

"I certainly remember them very well," said Gud, "but I would have you
to know that this is not the day of judgment but the day after eternity,
and what is more, you did not escape on the star dust as you claim, for
I chased after that bunch and destroyed them quite utterly."

"In a way," said Cruickshank, the bookkeeper, "you did, but we saved our
souls by losing them."

"But," cried Gud, "you are not a soul, for see--" and Gud poked
Cruickshank, the bookkeeper, gingerly in the ribs--"you are a material
man with ribs and life and a liver and much orthodox and conventional
stupidity. In fact, you seem very much like Cruickshank that you always
were. How do you explain that?"

"The explanation is very simple," said Cruickshank, the bookkeeper, "and
also very important; and you would do well not to forget it or tamper
with it. I am Cruickshank the bookkeeper, just as I always have been,
because you can not change human nature. And what is more, I tell you
that if you divided all the wealth up equally it would be unequal again
before sunset."

"Mere popular fallacies," said Gud. "And now I am going to show you who
I really am. When my Underdog here barks at the moon you are going to
change into a boiled lobster with one great claw--a very red lobster, on
which your insufferable white collar will look quite ridiculous."

"But," cried Cruickshank, "you can not change human nature!"

"Yes, yes, I know," said Gud. "That is why I am doing it. Now bark,"
commanded Gud, addressing the Underdog, whose name was Fidu.

"But," said Fidu, "I do not see any moon to bark at."

"Imagine one, stupid," said Gud.

So Fidu imagined a moon to bark at, and barked at the moon he imagined;
and then he and Gud went on their way, leaving a great, red, boiled
lobster, wearing a white collar and crawling backward with one claw,
along the Impossible Curve.




Chapter X


    Now Cruickshank was a loyal worker
    Who frowned upon the average shirker,
    And in the place where Cruickshank toiled
    The wheels of work were shrewdly oiled,
    And profits had a way of rising
    Which showed the firm as enterprising.
    Through years that numbered thirty-one
    Cruickshank hated the owner's son--
    "Stool pigeon" was the name the boy
    Had given him with whoops of joy.
    In Cruickshank's breast ambition burned
    And so he lived and worked and earned,
    Robbed Paul and Peter, had no gout
    And made his family go without.
    Sly Cruickshank in his stealthy way
    Bought shares in the firm for a rainy day,
    Existing on a miser's dole
    For the hour when he would have control,
    Wander in and announce the doom
    Of the President's son in the President's room....
    So Cruickshank labored and did not shirk
    Though his poor wife died from overwork.
    But finally came the day of days....
    Sly Cruickshank asked for a lordly raise.
    When father and son had answered "No"
    Expecting old Cruickshank to go
    He shrieked the triumph of his soul:
    "You are both discharged--I'm in control----"
    The President looked at the President's son;
    And the son looked at his father's son
    In a mirror that hung on the wall nearby
    And carefully straightened his yellow tie.
    Old Cruickshank waited ill at ease
    And felt a trembling in his knees--
    The President spoke: "Why, we've just mailed
    The notice that this firm has failed."




