Chapter LXVI


And now Gud came to a place where the ether was as thick as coal tar. It
was so dark that Fidu could not even imagine a moon, and Gud could not
see any reason for existence.

Just as he had about decided that there would never be any more light,
Gud saw a wee small flicker shining in the inky void, as might an
invisible star if there never had been brighter stars to pale its flame.

Hastening on Gud and Fidu came upon the source of light and found it to
be a man with a torch in his hand who was very much occupied in
searching for something.

"Have you lost anything?" asked Gud.

"No," replied the man, "but I am looking for something."

"I shall be glad to assist you," offered Gud, "and my dog here is very
good in locating lost articles; so if you will kindly tell us what you
are looking for we will help you find it."

"I am looking," replied the man, "for creation's dawn and the end of all
things. I also wish to find the unknowable first cause and the eternal
varieties and the limits of space. I am searching for the cause of hope,
the reason for despair, the explanation of love and the excuse for
crime. I am seeking a reason for all that is, and a cause for all that
ever was and an accurate prophesy of all that ever will be. I am also
hunting for the fundamental principles, the absolute truth, the laws of
nature, the theories of science, the hypotheses of metaphysics, the
interpretations of creeds, the aims of arts and the melodies of songs
that have never been sung. And I do wish so to locate all the unknown
stars, and trace all the lost comets, and determine what kept the
heavens in order before the law of gravitation was enacted. But most of
all I want to find out why my wife thinks I am a fool to be out here
looking for these things."

"If you do not object to a little operation," said Gud, "I can find all
these things for you and show you where they all are."

Then without waiting for the man to reply, Gud caused a deep sleep to
fall upon him, and straightway Gud opened up the man's skull and took
out his brains and laid them upon a platter.

When the man awoke he looked upon his own brains and saw that they were
very much like calf's brains, except that they were more convoluted and
sutured.

"And why is this platter set before me?" demanded the man as he stood
there gazing upon his own brains.

"Because," replied Gud, "therein lies what you were looking for, and you
need search no further, for it is all there and much more besides."

"So, so," said the man, "I see it all, and now I shall go home to my
wife and find if a child has been born unto her while I have been away."

"Then," said Gud, "would you give me your torch, since you will not be
needing it longer?"

The man did so; and after he had gone, Gud took the torch and set the
darkness on fire.




Chapter LXVII


Once more Gud walked along the Impossible Curve, which had now become
more impossible than ever.

Gud was lonely, for he missed his faithful companion, the Underdog, whom
he had sold into slavery. His heart was filled with grief, and remorse
preyed upon his soul, and Gud resolved never again to be ungrateful and
never to be unkind, and to grant to all creatures their wishes and to
help them to realize their hearts' desires and make their dreams come
true.

In his sorrow and loneliness Gud walked on until his feet were sore and
he was athirst. Then he came to a flowing fountain of pure water. He
paused and kneeled at the fountain. When he had quenched his thirst, he
removed his sandals and bathed his feet in the stream that flowed from
the fountain.

Then Gud laid himself down by the fountain and fell asleep, and dreamed
that a beautiful bubble appeared on the surface of the fountain.

The bubble which Gud saw in his dream was iridescent with a great
iridescence; for the colors of the bubble were many and they were ever
changing, so that it was never twice alike.

In the iridescence of the bubble Gud saw the essence of transcendent
beauty, for its beauty was as the beauty of youth, and as the beauty of
faith, and as the beauty of love, and as the beauty of a woman, when she
is young and has faith and a longing for more love than she has found.

As Gud looked upon the beauty of the bubble, he saw that it was no
longer a bubble, for it had become a woman of flesh and blood, and hope
and love and beauty. And he saw that she looked upon him with faith and
trust. This pleased Gud, so he spoke in his dream to the woman of his
dream and said: "Who art thou and what wouldst thou of me?"

And the woman replied, "Oh, Gud, I am a searcher after mysteries that
have not been revealed and things which can not be understood. And I am
sore distressed because I have looked and have found them not."

Gud asked, "Have you looked into the mind of man?"

"I have looked into the mind of man," replied the woman, "and it is very
simple."

Again Gud asked: "Have you looked into the heart of woman?"

She replied to Gud and said: "Into the heart of woman have I also
looked, and though it is not so simple, yet do I understand it, for am I
not a woman?"

"Of a truth you are a woman, and you are very beautiful."

And she smiled upon Gud, and when she smiled, he vowed that he would
grant her all her wishes and the fulfillment of all her dreams.

But first he would know who she was, and so he spoke to her again and
said: "Of a truth, and who art thou?"

And she of the iridescent beauty, which is the beauty that is ever
changing, made answer to Gud: "Of a truth, great Gud, I am no other than
the reader of this book which two men are writing about you."

"What's this?" asked Gud, for he was much amazed, albeit not displeased,
to hear that Hersey and I were writing this book about him.

And the iridescent woman said again, "I am the reader of 'The Book of
Gud,' which Dan Spain and Harold Hersey are writing about you."

"How do you know they are writing it?"

"I know," said the woman, "because it is common gossip in the Village,
for every one there gossips about anything Hersey has a hand in."

"Where is this village?" asked Gud, "and who is this Hersey creature?"

"The Village," she replied, "where Hersey burns his wee small flame, is
South of Fourteenth Street and West of University Place, in the City of
New York, which is the Gateway to the Melting Pot of the Planet Earth in
the Solar System of the Universe."

"Which universe?" asked Gud.

"My universe," said the woman.

"It must be a nice one, but what do you wish that I should do for you?"

"What I wish," said she (who is none other than the reader of this book)
"is to find some great mystery in art or literature or in some psychic
science; and I wish that you would inspire these men to put something
into 'The Book of Gud' that no one can understand."

"I will look into the matter," said Gud. And he did.... Then he looked
again into the iridescent eyes of the ever-changing woman and said to
her: "It is useless, for I have searched the soul of that fellow Spain
and he is not an inspired writer but only a disgruntled hack who could
not possibly write anything that you could not understand."

Whereupon the woman was vexed with disappointment so that she began to
weep, and in the small compass of each tear she shed was the iridescence
of a tiny rainbow. As Gud saw her tears, that they were beautiful, his
heart overflowed with tenderness, and he said with a gentle voice: "I
will try again."

And now Gud searched the soul of Hersey. His search was not without
reward and when he returned again to the beautiful woman she ceased to
weep, for in his hand she saw that Gud held a poem. Seating himself
beside her, he read her this poem that Hersey had written in the white
heat of inspiration:




