Chapter LXIV


    There are figures in the shadow but the shadow hides the faces,
    And their silence is a subject that must flagellate the flesh.
    There are hands and arms that touch you with their lingering embraces
    Like the petals of clipped flowers still miraculously fresh.

    There are voices through the darkness 'round which darkness swiftly
      closes;
    Remembered words and phrases that are only lost in death,
    Heard within some misted twilight in a garden filled with roses
    As though our own youth whispered with its awed and hollow breath.

    There is nothing in the shadow that will satisfy our quest,
    For each shore that's undiscovered has been lined with molding wrecks,
    And if we should burst on Beauty with her healing hands of rest
    Life would bind us down in duty to some slavery of sex.

    There is something quite sardonic in the race's old ideals,
    And the struggle for their gaining is derisive as a jest....
    He who prays unto his Godhead will be wiped out as he kneels,
    While the wonders of decay will destroy all the rest.

    We are grinding in the shadow for the glory of the ages,
    Though no hope of immortality has ever come to stay;
    Yet each human soul is fretting at the bars of separate cages
    Hearing rhythms of tomorrow in the discords of today.

    All the ones who started seeking when the game was strange and new,
    See the beauty of believing lost in wonders of deceit
    There is truth in every vision, but the day is hardly through,
    Ere the night is all around us with her silence and defeat.

    There is dogma, there is duty in the urge of dead emotion
    Through the worshipped gods of yesterday the present gods exist
    Hid away among our temples for the dreams of our devotion
    The alters of the ages in their ruins still persist.

    Let the mothers bear their children for the centuries to come
    There is truth in adoration for the thing that is adored
    And if all the many answers on the lips of life are dumb
    At least the coming children may be murdered for the Lord.




Chapter LXV


After Gud had regaled himself on pork and beans he laid down under a
deadly nightshade tree and fell asleep. As he slept a worm happened
along and stepped on Gud, and Gud turned.

"Pardon," said the worm, "but I did not notice you until you turned. You
see I was very preoccupied, for I have just returned from the Diet of
Worms, which was called by the Conqueror Worm to suppress a book. As
soon as I heard that a book had been suppressed I went in search of a
copy. I found one in the Master's chamber of a deserted mansion of the
newly cultured. I carefully chewed it up and removed the fragments to my
nest, where I pieced them together again."

"What kind of book is it?" asked Gud. "I am rather fond of forbidden
books."

"It is a book of etiquette," replied the worm, "and if you will promise
me not to mark it up or tear out any choice passages, I will lend you my
copy."

So Gud sat down upon a gravel and the worm climbed a stalk of timothy
and handed Gud the book; but it was so badly patched up that he could
not read it.

"Perhaps," suggested the worm, "I should read it to you. See, this is
the table of contents. It says:

"'How to shake hands with gloves on.

"'How to introduce people who already know each other.

"'How to steal postage stamps without having a guilty conscience.

"'How to dance without knowing how.

"'How to pretend to understand relativity.

"'What to wear if you don't like spats.

"'How to tell a risque story in the presence of a minister.

"'How to get rich without making your friends envious.

"'How to catch large fish with little worms.'

"Ah," cried the worm, "that is the very line that caused the Diet of
Worms to suppress the book, for that is an allusion to the bitter truth
that worms are put on hooks to catch fish. We worms, who know that in
the end we shall conquer man himself, do not like to be reminded that in
the meanwhile man may use us for fish bait."

Gud smiled at the thought that the worms could only suppress the truth,
whereas he could change it. So he made it to be that men should no
longer put worms on hooks to catch fish, but should henceforth put fish
on hooks to catch worms. That is how came the great sport of worming;
and some of the worm tales men tell do not need to be suppressed, for
there is no truth in them.




