Chapter XXVIII


Having come a long way and being footsore and weary Gud felt that it was
time to retire. But he possessed no sleeping garments. So he caused a
deep sleep to fall upon the Underdog and then Gud lay down and slept in
his waking garments.

But the Underdog dreamed a dream and when Gud heard what the Underdog
was dreaming, he arose and drew his long knife and cut off the
Underdog's ear so that the beast could not hear what he was
dreaming--for it was the kind of dream that Underdogs should never hear,
and, if it is not deleted by the censor, this is what it was:




Chapter XXIX


    Thirteen respectable spinsters
      Of the respectable town of Murch,
    Gave a very respectable party
      For their eminent orthodox church.

    On a green and grassy pasture
      By the side of the River Runch
    They sat with the Reverend Quondam
      And partook of a dainty lunch.

    None could have said they were pretty,
      Not even those in the "know,"
    Yet no one denied in the city
      That their names were as white as the snow.

    And just at the moment of eating
      The breast of a tender chicken,
    The Reverend Quondam observed
      The grey skies overhead thicken.

    Within a neighboring farmhouse
      He betook his respectable form,
    Accompanied by all of the ladies
      In deadly fear of the storm.

    Then lightning came and the thunder
      Like the crashing of seventeen earths,
    And in that respectable party
      Occurred three premature births.




Chapter XXX


The next morning when the Underdog awoke he had an imagination that a
fly had alighted on the ear which Gud had cut off. The Underdog grieved
because he could not flop the ear which he no longer possessed and so
dislodge the fly that he imagined had alighted thereon.

This made bad blood at the breakfast table so that the Underdog growled
ungratefully over the bone of contention which Gud threw him.

All that day they walked with their eyes averted and said nothing until
they came to the place where the birds of faith roosted on the waves of
the wireless; and then they both rejoiced, for here was good game,
easily ensnared because it had faith and trust.

So Gud spoke comradely to the Underdog and the Underdog wagged
cordially. Gud built a snare out of weeping willow twigs, and the
Underdog ran round the birds and barked the birches. Presently an old
bird that was steadfast in the faith walked into the snare and Gud
reached out his hand and took the bird, and it perched upon his shoulder
and told him why love grows cold. This made Gud very happy, for he had
always wanted to know.




Chapter XXXI


    The mists that whirl in greater mists
      Around the cliffs of space
    Leave little drops of glistening water
      Upon His wrinkled face.

    Have you heard Him, as walking through
      The valleys of the night
    He paces ever back and forth,
      Silent, old and white?

    Upon some jagged piece of dust
      As high as night is high
    He watches all the tiny worlds
      Go spinning down the sky.

    Around Him are the burning stars
      That toss like little ships
    And winds blow out of dim unknowns
      Across His very lips.

    Have you heard Him amid the silence,
      Vast as a silken cloud,
    Lifting His arms with jewelled pendants,
      Cloaked in a heavy shroud?




