Chapter LI


They had not gone far until Gud was arrested. His thumb print was taken
and he was cast into jail. As he did not know how to change his thumb
print, he wished to know why he had been arrested, in order to judge
whether it would be honorable to escape. So he inquired of one of his
fellow prisoners. And the prisoner listened to Gud's story and made
answer: "You have been arrested because you drove a high-powered chariot
without being possessed of a large amount of money. The catalog of crime
which such a combination engenders is tedious and fulsome."

"But what is the remedy?" asked Gud, for he did not like to remain a
criminal.

"Money," replied the prisoner, "you should make money. If we could get
out of this place I would show you how, for I am by trade a
money-maker."

"Very well," said Gud, and he commanded the walls of the jail to fall
down, and he and the money-maker walked out over the fallen walls and
proceeded to the money-maker's den.

But Gud soon tired of the tedious process of copper engraving; and going
out for a stroll about the town he came upon the booth of a
fortune-teller.

"I wish you would tell me a fortune," said Gud, "for I am badly in need
of one."

"But for that I charge money," said the fortune-teller.

"Why?" asked Gud.

"Because, I know what is going to happen."

"So do I," said Gud.

"Liar!" cried the fortune-teller. "If you knew what was going to happen,
and had any insight whatsoever into future events, you would not be
standing idly here, for you would be in the Street."

"Thanks for the suggestion," replied Gud, "I will go there immediately."

When Gud reached the Street he found many bulls there and bears and
lambs, and men who were busy watering their stock. And Gud found there
also a private secretary who was watching the tape. And Gud said: "Why
do you watch the tape with eager eyes?"

And she answered and said to Gud: "Because I wish to know what figures
are on the tape as quickly as any one else."

"And how would you like to know more quickly?"

"Indeed," she cried, "if one could, he would soon own the earth."

"It is easy," said Gud. "All you have to do is to read these figures
before they appear instead of afterwards."

"Can you do that?"

"Why certainly! It is easy to read the future, if you know how."

And so Gud showed her how to read the future, and she showed Gud how to
cash in on the readings, and presently they owned the earth.




Chapter LII


    He loads the dice, scratches the cards,
    Hoists us up by our own petards;
    And when low music thrills the banquet halls,
    His shadow like a silent spectre falls
    In grotesque imagery upon the walls.

    A mad child left an empire's might
    The kingdom of the day and night
    And as he babbles on the palace floor,
    He listens to the silver thunder roar
    Like troubled seas upon some distant shore.

    With froth upon a sensual lip,
    He sinks in play some crowded ship.
    Then lightly in an idle mood of mirth
    As though it were a trinket of no worth
    Down starry skies he flings some living earth.

    Life's roulette table stops for him
    To any cackling vagrant whim.
    His own police are venal, full of doubt;
    Indeed the cheapest little racetrack tout
    Knows more what sportsmanship is all about.

    His gold face and his jet black hair
    The jewels his madness makes him wear.
    His laws, a madman's irony
    The moon his mask above the sea
    Some morning he will turn his vacant eyes
    And see the sun with jealous new surprise
    And on the following day it will not rise.




