The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Book of Gud
    
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The Book of Gud

Author: Milo Hastings
        Harold Hersey


        
Release date: August 22, 2010 [eBook #33501]
                Most recently updated: January 6, 2021

Language: English

Other information and formats: www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/33501

Credits: Produced by Louise Davies, Roger Taft, Mary Meehan and the
        Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net






Produced by Louise Davies, Roger Taft, Mary Meehan and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net









                            The Book of Gud

                     By Dan Spain and Harold Hersey

This etext was produced from Main Street, July 1929. Extensive research
did not uncover any evidence that the U.S. copyright on this publication
was renewed.


     _DIP INTO THIS NOVEL ANYWHERE.... It deals with a god in whom
     nobody believed, and of his adventures the day after eternity.
     For instance, try Chapter XVI._




Chapter I


One Sunday afternoon I was driving through a sparsely settled region on
the southwest slope of the Catskills. It was growing late and I was
anxious to get back to New York, but I had lost my way. In an attempt to
cut across to the Hudson River road I turned up a poorly traveled lane,
which, after ten miles of going, petered out into a mere abandoned
trail.

I kept on this for perhaps three miles further without passing a house,
and then came to a low rambling structure half hidden among a grove of
ancient overhanging trees. It was near lamp-lighting time and I was
puzzled to know whether the place was deserted or not. I turned my car
in toward the house, bumped over loose rocks--and my engine died.

A man appeared on the porch. He was lanky in build, a little stooped,
apparently about forty years of age, and was dressed in a blue flannel
shirt and a pair of corduroy trousers.

"Can you tell me how far it is to New York?" I asked.

"Yes."

"How far is it?"

"About a hundred miles as the crow flies."

"But how far is it by automobile?"

"I don't know," replied the man, who seemed to be better posted on crow
flights than auto travel.

He offered no further remarks, but stood there indifferently eyeing the
car.

Curbing my annoyance I inquired: "How do I get out to a good automobile
road?"

"The way you came in."

Realizing that I could get no information from this uncivil being, I
pushed the starter--not a sound. I got out and cranked the engine--not a
kick. I looked into my gas tank--not a drop!

"Where is the nearest gas station?" I demanded.

"I don't know--I burn kerosene," was the terse reply; and the man turned
and entered the house.

I tried to recall the last gas station I had passed, and realized it
must have been all of fifteen miles behind. It was now growing dark. I
climbed into the car to think of a way out of my awkward situation, but
all I could think of was that there were sound reasons for abandoned
farms. Then I got to wondering who this queer character was and why he
was living here.

As I had slept but little the night before, I must have dozed off, for
the next thing I knew, a voice was saying: "Supper is ready."

I got out of the car and followed the man through a dark hall into a
large, low room, at one end of which a fire was burning briskly in a
huge stone fireplace. In the center of the room was a table where we sat
down to a dinner of delicious hot biscuits and a great pot of honey.

"These biscuits are fine," I said.

"They are."

I ate another in silence. "And the honey is exquisite."

"It is."

"Do you keep bees?"

"Yes, millions of them."

"Do you keep any other stock?" I asked, thinking a glass of milk would
taste fine.

"Yes, a blind cat."

"Do you find the bees profitable?"

"No, I keep them for company."

"Why do you live in this lonesome place?"

"To avoid automobilists."

I ate three more biscuits, drowned in honey, then the silence became
unbearable. "Do you do anything else besides keep bees?"

"I read."

"That is interesting. What do you read?"

"Books."

"Ah!" I said, "perhaps you write also."

"I do."

"What do you write?"

"Books."

We finished the meal in silence, then my host arose and cleared the
table. Meanwhile I wandered about the big room and glanced at the titles
on the bookshelves. I was amazed at the catholicity of his taste. Side
by side, with Godesius was "In His Steps"; leaning against
Schopenhauer's "_Die Welt Als Wille Und Vorstellung_," was a popular
novel of the day.

Thus made to realize that my host was a person of some caliber, and
aspiring to pursue his acquaintance upon an intellectual plane, I
stepped forward, as he came through the door, and extended my hand,
saying: "My name is Harold Hersey."

"What of it?" he said, and turned to adjust a kerosene lamp. Then he
came forward and extended his hand. "I will not say I am glad to meet
you until I find out that I am."

"Your name?" I inquired.

"Dan Spain."

"That sounds like a nom de plume," I ventured.

"It is."

Feeling that there was nothing further that I could say, I pulled out my
pipe and seated myself before the fire.

Dan Spain settled into a chair nearby. "The fact that your name is
Harold Hersey means nothing to me," he remarked, "but as I presume that
you will spend the night here, I might be able to make it less
disagreeable for you if I knew your trade or occupation."

I have always been a little sensitive about revealing my profession to
strangers, because, unfortunately, some men do not regard it highly; so
I replied: "What would you judge me to be from my appearance?"

"A cigar salesman."

I hastened to controvert him. "Looks are deceiving," I said, "I am a
writer."

So I read him the following. There was a curious silence afterwards:

    _When the limpid highbrows chatter
    And their candlelights are low;
    When their purple souls are bitter
    From discussing thus and so,
    And the Lucy Stoners twitter
    In some frowsy studio;_

    _When the fat-legged mantees mutter
    And you see their eyeballs twitch;
    When the parlor wobblies hover
    Around the newly rich,
    And the men of bread-and-butter
    Get the "art-for-art's-sake" itch...._

    _Then I don't regret the making
    Of this idle verse of mine,
    And my pickling by the Poohbahs
    In their literary brine,
    Nor the gesture of a Burdash
    For not hewing to the line._

    _My humor is the laughter
    From life's tickled ribs. It's rough,
    For it's written from the raw
    Where I like to get my stuff,
    And it ought to rise in letters:
    Goodness knows it's light enough._

"It is nothing to be ashamed of," said Dan Spain, "I once worked in a
slaughter house."

"What books have you had published?" I asked after a time.

"None."

Having had a number of books published myself, I felt that I might be
of some service to this hermit scholar who had evidently not adjusted
himself to the practical exigencies of the publishing business. "It is
just possible," I suggested, "that my experiences and acquaintances
might enable me to help you get some of your work in print--that is, if
you would care to tell me what you are writing."

Dan Spain leaned over and attended the fire. After poking it to his
satisfaction, he picked up a live coal and dropped it in the bowl of his
pipe. Finally he spoke, and his words were startling enough. "Just at
present," he said, "I am writing an autobiography of God."

There was a sudden rattle at the shutter.

"What was that?" I asked nervously.

Dan Spain laughed. "Wind," he replied, "wind through the trees.
Lightning may strike us dead at any moment because of my blasphemous
ambitions. That is why I live as a hermit--should God's lightning strike
at me, there will be no complications through it hitting an innocent
bystander. You are the first person who has spent a night under this
roof with me. I am sorry to subject you to the danger, but you came
without an invitation."

"But why," I asked, "do you want to write a blasphemous book? You are
aware, I suppose, that it might be suppressed."

"In a country, the constitution of which guarantees freedom of speech
and religious liberty, I grant the possibility."

"Then why," I persisted, "do you want to write it?"

"Because," said Spain, "I am tired of tempering the wind of truth to the
lamb of stupidity. Must we so fear the anger of the childish mob, that
we dare not deprive them of their fairy tales of ghosts and gobblins,
lest they kick out the props of civilizations? Must we, who no longer
bend the knees of the mind in spook idolatry nor shake with the ague of
hell fear, pretend that science and religion have been reconciled and
mumble incantations to a metaphysical essence instead of saying to a
maternal God to open the windows of the sky and spill rain out of
heaven? I want to write a blasphemous book because the gods who throttle
human intelligence and block human progress have revealed their
vulnerable spot--for they are the gods who fear laughter."

"But surely?" I said, "all that is old stuff--Ingersoll has been dead
twenty years. Present day thinkers only smile indulgently when some
handsome faced bucolic clergyman invades a metropolitan pulpit and gets
the forgotten monkey argument into the headlines of the daily press.
Modern philosophy has reconciled religion and science and shown that
they hail from the same psychic origins."

"The dictionary has never been made a sacred book," returned Spain, "and
I cannot try men for heresy who blaspheme it. If a man wishes to
designate the emotions he experiences when gazing at the stars by the
term 'religion' I cannot prevent him. My dictionary defines religion as
'a belief in binding the spirit of man to a supernatural being' and
further includes the idea of duties and rites founded upon such belief.
If that be religion the war between religion and science can never end.
The particular battle ground may change from age to age; it may be
concerned with the mobility of the sun, the origin of species or the
immaculate conception...."

"Well what of it," I remarked, "those things are all relatively
unimportant."

"True" said Spain, "they are, but science has a job in the future that
is vastly important and religion stands in its way."

"And what is that?" I asked.

"It is the job of saving civilization from degenerating into a chaos
besides which the dark ages, medievalism would seem Bericlean by
comparison. As we are headed now we are on the road for a grand smash.
The growing complexities of civilization can only be managed by a human
breed of superior capacity, and instead of breeding a race of better men
we are letting the inborn capacity of the human species regress and
degenerate.

"Natural selection or the survival of the fittest raised us up from
brutes, and civilization stops the operation of that law which made it
possible. Blind charity preserves the rabbitries of stupidity--the
differential birth rate snuffs out the flame of innate intelligence. The
only visible salvation is systematic breeding of superior men; and
against human breeding religion stands garbed in all her mummeries,
shielding behind her wish fancies of immortality, the leering face of
the ape man returned to prowl in the ruins of all we have builded.

"The little priests of religion play in sweet innocence with their hopes
of heaven having not the least conception of the human drift. But the
high priests of religion know very well on which side their bread is
buttered. They know that spook worship thrives only in the soil of
stupidity. They will fight to the last ditch against any serious effort
to breed men for brains. Their creeds are smoothly schemed to block
intelligence in its efforts at biological perpetuation. The fable of a
ghostly paternity of the human species fits their purpose like a glove.
By inoculating the new-born human animal with a fantasy called a soul
they clothe the act of reproduction with a garb of sanctification and
endow all sexual and parental functions with rites so skillfully
ingrained into popular thought that men who renounce the more patent
absurdities of theology are still soaked in the sacramental conception
of reactionary morality whenever it touches the reproduction of the
species. So they hope to maintain our present scheme of mongrel breeding
which is fast blotting out the hard won grains of the tedious climb of
human evolution and riding us for a smash of the fabric of civilization,
because the children of the stupid cannot maintain the structure we have
wrought."

"But surely," I said, "you do not intend to propound such ponderous
biological and sociological doctrines in an autobiography of your
god--if you do so I am sure it will be very dull. I had hoped you had in
mind some readable piece of literary composition."

"So I had; I was not telling you what I intended to write. You asked me
why I wanted to write it. The god who mustn't be laughed at could make
himself very ridiculous by setting down the story of his life. He should
not be a metaphysical concept. I should prefer a nice old man with robe
and halo and whiskers--I am sure he should have whiskers."

"And just when," I asked, "would you have him born?"

"I don't know," replied Spain, "I have stalled on eternity. I find it
quite an awkward span of life to cover in a manuscript."

"Why not dodge the difficulty," I suggested, "by having your story begin
the day after eternity."

Spain turned his gaze upon me with a twinkling light in his eyes. "Young
man," he said, "No wonder you tried to drive an automobile without
gasoline--you are suffering from a touch of genius.

"I shall doubtless need aid," confessed Spain, more cordial, I felt,
than he had previously seemed.

As I caught the flame of enthusiasm in this man's conviction, my heart
warmed to him. I found myself interested in his proposed "Autobiography
of God"--interested and critical. "It might amuse you," I said, "to know
that somewhere among my own writing notes I have this item jotted down.
'A tale that should begin the day after eternity.'"

Dan Spain looked at me, his eyes twinkling, "Not half bad," he said.

And so began an exchange of suggestions, a mutual laying on the table of
the most guarded treasures of one's over-reaching ambitions to write the
impossible.

As the night wore on our wits sharpened each on the other, and before
dawn broke, Dan Spain and I both realized that we had cast in outline
form the skeleton of a most ambitious piece of writing. Then we awoke to
the fact, that we, who were acquaintances of a single session had joined
our wits to create something that could not be disentangled without its
destruction.

"And now," I said, "who is going to write this tale of the adventures of
the great god Gud?"

"We must write it together," replied Spain, "nothing else would be
honest."

There followed a period of intermittant work that strung out through
several seasons. We worked sometimes alone; at other times I spent
week-ends at Spain's hermitage, and on a few occasions I dragged the
hermit down to my quarters in Greenwich Village. As the manuscript
gathered bulk, I arranged for its typing, having always a copy made for
each of us.

During the summer of 1924, I spent most of the month of July at Spain's
hermitage and we got the book completed, though there were still many
parts of it on which we had serious differences of opinion. Taking my
draft with me, I went back to New York, where I had to attend to some
neglected editorial duties.

Spain had agreed to come down to my place on the week-end of August
thirtieth for a final effort to see if we could reconcile our
differences of opinion.

The intervening weather in the city was oppressive and I did no further
work on the manuscript. When August thirtieth arrived Spain did not show
up. I waited for him another week and then drove my car up to his
hermitage in the Catskills.

I bumped over the stones of the miserable trail and brought my car to a
halt in front of where Spain's house had stood. Before me I saw a
yawning circle of trees with the inner sides scorched and withered, and
the great gaunt stone chimney alone now rearing from a heap of ashes.

The combustion had been complete. Not a charred stick remained. All was
white ash, and well packed down, for it had rained heavily a few nights
before.

The evidence of that rain sent my mind hurtling back in review of the
weather since Spain had left New York. I remembered that one night a few
days before Spain was due to return I had found my apartment so
oppressive that I had gone to Brighton Beach. As I lay on the sands, it
must have been toward midnight, a squall had driven across the sky and
there had been a bit of a blow and a magnificent electrical display, but
only a few heavy drops of rain had fallen.

Brighton Beach was over a hundred miles from this spot in the Catskills,
and the weather in the two locations might have been wholly dissimilar.
Still it was suggestive of the worst possible fears.

I looked about for something with which I could prod into the debris.
The only thing available was a great twisted steel lightning rod that
reared up through the ashes. The result of my effort was a discovery
from which I recoiled.

For a moment I found it expedient to step away from the place. In doing
so, I unconsciously dragged the piece of lightning rod along with me.
Behind a screen of foliage I sat down weakly. Presently, my eyes
followed along that lightning rod, and I noted that one end was freshly
broken where I had bent it until it snapped in two. But the other end
had been the tip that pointed skyward above the house. This I now saw
was fused and melted in a way that no heat of a burning wood could have
possibly accomplished.

I need write but little of the duties that followed. Suffice to say,
that every paper that might have revealed more than my slight knowledge
of Spain's origin or connections had been destroyed. The county records
yielded nothing except the deed to his property purchased the year
before I met him. There was nothing for me to do but turn matters over
to the local authorities and let the law take its course.

I returned to New York and slept off the weariness the ordeal had
engendered.

Then I went to my desk and produced my draft of "The Book of Gud" and
turned slowly through it. It was all there, a complete manuscript, but
including many things on which our differences of opinion had not been
reconciled--and Dan Spain was dead!

Gradually the responsibilities of my position dawned upon me. I was
joint author of "The Book of Gud." However, my "partner in crime" was
dead. We had written much of the prose together although much of it was
by Spain alone. The verse was mine.

How helpless I felt with this gigantic task staring me in the face!

Sensing keenly the sacred trust of fidelity to the intent of a dead
author, I did not feel at liberty to make the changes in Spain's draft
that I felt should be made. Yet, if my name were to be on the jacket of
this book, I did not feel that I could possibly let some of the things
in Spain's draft pass without registering my protest. Conversely I must,
in all fairness, concede that he had felt the same about some of my
lines.

My decision on going over the work the first time was that all I could
do was to let the manuscript pass on to the world exactly as it was when
God's lightning stilled forever the pen of Dan Spain.

However, upon going over the manuscript a second time, I found my
instincts as an editor overwhelming this excellent resolution. For
several months I was torn between my conscience as a writer with its
full sense of duty to a dead author and my editorial conscience with its
fuller sense of duty to the reading public--and I did nothing with the
manuscript.

But at last a great compromising thought occurred to me. I could leave
the manuscript stand intact, but I could write a preface in which I
could explain the dreadful dilemma in which the death of my collaborator
left me, and why I do not feel, under the distressing circumstances,
that I should be held responsible for those parts of Spain's draft which
do not meet my approval. My decision has made possible the publication
of "The Book of Gud"; for otherwise I should have burned my copy also.

It is my hope that this explanation will mitigate the wrath of many
readers, for it is a beautiful fact about human nature that it rarely
holds the dead as responsible as it does the living.

I frankly confess that it has been a task to hold to this resolution,
for I have been sorely tempted to delete as well as comment on some of
Spain's text. As proof of my integrity in this matter, I have even left
in the text of the book a note addressed to me by Spain in which he has
expressed his contempt for my work in a most ungentlemanly manner.

I hold that the canons of literary ethics do not permit one to alter a
dead man's manuscript. If they did, how quickly we could enrich the
literary heritage of American children by expurgating the classics of
Europe and rewriting them in a style acceptable to the American sense of
decency.

To some very literally minded persons it may seem that the view just
expressed is not consistent with my capacity as a joint author of "The
Book of Gud." Let me therefore discount any such criticisms by
explaining that the evil effects of literature all come from its
realism. "The Book of Gud" is romantic and symbolic. There is true
beauty in symbolism because of the variety of possible interpretations.
Each reader can gain the meaning particularly adapted to himself.

The greatest art is that which can be interpreted in the most devious
ways: Witness the character of Hamlet, the enigma of Mona Lisa, the
riddle of the Book of Revelations. To me Hamlet is the personification
of a weak will in a strong mind, due to the European habit of inbreeding
royalty. Mona Lisa, I believe, reveals the patience of a great woman who
knows that she will ultimately get what she wants. The Book of
Revelation I deem to be a symbolic anticipation of the Darwinian theory
of man's descent from prehistoric animals.

In "The Book of Gud" there is great symbolism, and in symbolism there
can be nothing degrading, as each mind interprets it according to its
own intellectual and moral plane. Hence there can never be degradation
in symbolic literature, except for degraded minds.

Here then is "The Book of Gud"; and, with the exception of this preface,
I bow to the principle that death should end an author's work and so it
should remain, even as Sodom and Gomorrah, Pompeii and Herculaneum
remained as they were when fire rained down on them from Heaven.

    (Signed),

    HAROLD HERSEY.

    London, England,
    April First, 1925.




