Chapter XXXIII


    The mists that whirl in greater mists
      Around the cliffs of space
    Leave little drops of water
      Upon his wrinkled face.

    Have you heard Him, as walking through
      The valleys of the night
    He paces ever back and forth,
      Silent, old and white?

    Upon some jagged piece of dust
      As high as night is high,
    He watches all the tiny worlds
      Go spinning down the sky.

    Around Him are the burning stars
      That toss like little ships,
    The winds blow out of dim unknowns
      Across his very lips.

    Have you seen Him amid the silence,
      Vast as a silken cloud,
    Lifting His arms with jeweled pendants
      Cloaked in a heavy shroud?

    When sweeping through the open night
      Great pinions touch the face;
    Vast wings that fold the face of God
      Against the breast of space;

    We hear the hills that all one's life
      Were silent as the sun,
    Break forth in songs that waited there
      Since life had first begun.

    We reach out for the fluttering hand
      And finding it is gone,
    We know the stars that shake the sky
      Are only old and wan.

    We stand and listen and we know
      That rising through the night
    Pass all the hosts of all the years
      Death ever hides from sight.

    So much and yet so little then
      With thrust that follows thrust....
    The paltry things of paltry life
      Shrink swiftly into dust.

    We lift our hungry hands to Heaven
      For pity and in pain
    The only answer ever given
      Is that fancy and faith remain.

    Wars we wage that One might rule....
      Proud and jealous is He.
    With fire and sword we crush the fool
      Who does not bend the knee.

    Temple and palace, hovel and hut,
      Dreamer and doer of deeds,
    At least one door is never shut,
      God answers all our needs.

    He walks the crest of some far hill
      Against the setting sun,
    The presence of a mighty will
      Whose journey is never done.

    Into the night and over the dawn
      All the things that are
    Through empty voids go plunging on....
      Planet and sun and star.

    Yet He we worship died years ago
      Like some poor human clod,
    And that which wanders to and fro
      Is only the ghost of God!




Chapter XXXIV


"A bear went over the mountain," sang the child (Gud stopped to listen,
for the child had had its voice cultivated prenatally) "to see what he
could see. A row of hanging skeletons, a swinging in the wind, was all
the bear could see in front, and he could not see behind."

"See here," interrupted Gud, "you have the song mixed--what the bear saw
was the other side of the mountain."

"Awh, I know," replied the child, "that was what the preteristic old
bear saw, but I sing of the futuristic young bear."

Gud shook his head sadly. It made him feel archaic to come thus face to
face with the younger generation in art and literature. Somehow he felt
that there was something amiss in this new universe that seemed to have
arisen Phoenixlike out of the ashes of nothing.

Gud turned from the child with the prenatally cultivated mind and went
on his way sorrowfully. And as he walked he hummed softly to
himself--"The old-time creation, the old-time creation, It was good for
Unph and Godumph ... and it's good enough for me...."

"Come, come," monologued Gud--"I must not get retrospective--I destroyed
it all--ashes to ashes and dust to dust."

As Gud trudged on, trying to shake this mood of a sentimental
retrospection from him, he found the light waning and the ether about
him turning grey and grim and gruesome.

Then like an avalanche of dead ravens, sable darkness came tumbling down
upon him. But there were whitish outlines in the darkness, moving and
swaying, and there were rattlings and clanking sounds, and eery
whistlings.

Rachitic with fear Gud's knees bent beneath him and he sank down in the
blackness and shuddered in his soul.

Before him, like a great grey army marching, the skeletons of all the
mortal dead, of all the worlds and all the ages that had ever been, were
filing by.

In measured time they marched, their gaunt legbones swinging in great
sweeping strides, their backbones bending and creaking as they marched;
while the winds between the worlds whipped through empty eyes and hollow
skulls and made eery whistling sounds--and all the dry bones rattled.

So the material dead, in the empty mockery of marching, passed by Gud in
vain review.

And Gud sat shuddering and alone and watched them--for eons and epochs,
and epochs piled on eons of unmarked time.

After all the countless and infinitely innumerable swinging, swaying,
clanking, dry-boned skeletons had marched by Gud, they started around
again.

Gud knew that they were going around a second time, because he saw one
pass, bearing before his bleached and grinning fact the glow of a good
cigar.

There could be no mistake about it, for these were the bones of the only
smoker who had ever believed that tobacco was as injurious as the
non-smokers said it was!

Thus made aware that the show was being repeated on him, Gud realized
that even the most gruesome and ghoulish sights and sounds became
commonplace with repetition; and he became bored, and his fear died
within him. So he arose and walked right through the marching mass of
swinging, swaying, rattling, whistling, dry-boned skeletons, and out
into the sunlight of a new day where he found Fidu digging up a freshly
planted lawn in search of a bone he had buried on a golf course
countless eons before.

"Come, come," said Gud, "let the dead bones stay buried--the future of
eternal life is long enough without digging up the past."

Having dissuaded Fidu from his search for provender Gud offered him a
portion of his own lunch.

"Do you remember," remarked Gud to the Underdog, as they sat munching
their sandwiches, "the time I was on that little world back there--"

"Which one?" asked Fidu.

"The one I am talking about, silly--I ran into an earthquake. It shook
things up rather badly and toppled over about half the houses, killing
and maiming millions of mortals."

"What caused it?"

"I don't know, probably it was accidental--but that isn't important.
What interested me was what those poor mortals thought caused it. As I
was strolling through a town watching the relief committee at work, I
happened to see people going into a steep roofed building, which being
well constructed, had not fallen down. I joined the crowd and went in.
One of their kind was standing on a box at the far end of the building
and talking. I sat down with the others and listened to him.

"He was talking about the 'divine visitation.' For a moment I became
self-conscious, thinking my incognito had been discovered. But I soon
realized that he referred to the earthquake.

"His theory was interesting. He thought their silly little world had
been shaken up by their divinity. I knew that he was mistaken, for I
knew the chap who had that world in charge; he is a weak little god who
could not shake up a good-sized island."

"For what reason did the mortals think your friend shook them up?" asked
Fidu.

"The one who was talking had two theories about it. You see they had two
kinds of folks in that world--one bunch was called 'sinners' and one was
called 'righteous.' Plenty of both bunches were killed by the quake. But
it seemed that the fellow who was talking, wanted the sinners killed and
he was praising my friend for doing it. But his difficulty was in
explaining the death of the righteous, whom I gathered were friends of
his that had been in the habit of paying him to talk to them. There were
a good many empty stalls in the room with black cloths on them, and some
of the women in the crowd were weeping.

"Well, after the talker got through explaining that their deity had
caused the earthquake for the purpose of killing the sinners, he had to
admit that it also got a few of the righteous. He said that this was due
to the 'mysterious working of the divine purpose' or some such vagary."

"Well, what of it?" asked Fidu.

"Nothing in particular, only it struck me as funny."

"Is that all?"

"About," said Gud--"but as I left that world, I took hold of its axis
and gave it another shake."

"Did you know," said Fidu, "that the Copycat had been visiting?"

"What makes you think so?"

"Because there are five little copy kittens."

After which they journeyed on until they came to a wall. In this wall
were two doors. Before the wall stood a great multitude and they stared
at the two doors with fixed glassy eyes.

Gud turned and spoke to the multitude and said: "Why stare ye at the
doors in the wall and durst not enter?"

"Alas, Great Gud," cried the multitude, as with one voice, "we wish not
to enter the doors, but would only know which door the man entered."

"That I will find out for you," said Gud, and he stepped up and examined
the knobs of the doors. Then he turned and bowed to the multitude, and
turned yet again, and seizing the knob of one of the doors he swung it
boldly open.

And behold, there stood a man-eating tiger, contentedly licking his
chops, his belly with fat lover lined.

And Gud beckoned to the tiger which came out through the door and faced
the multitude, and on the tiger's face there was a faint fragrance of a
smile.

And the tiger bowed to the multitude, and Gud also bowed with the tiger.

And from the eyes of the multitude the glassy stare faded, and they
turned and walked away, and some spoke exultant words to the others.

"But," asked Fidu of Gud, as they again went on their journey, "how did
you know which door to open--did you smell the blood?"

"No, you hundopomorphic canine fool, I looked for finger prints on the
knobs of the doors."




