Chapter XIX


    It was a great occasion--every seat
      Was filled and jewels sparkled rich and bright--
    One almost heard each throbbing heart that beat
      As the orchestra filed in that gala night.
    The music flared in one triumphal blast,
      The leader swung his baton: the curtain rose:
    Then the soprano sang of bright skies overcast,
      And silence fell upon the watching rows.

    Just at that moment, some one in the crowd
      Saw wisps of black smoke curl around a board.
    He shouted "fire!" It was as though a shroud
      Was flung around them by a righteous Lord.

    The crowd surged forth like streams that over-flow--
      And ran amuck, insane with fear and rage....
    Just then an unknown player of the piccolo
      Upclambered o'er the footlights to the stage:

    "Hold! Hold!" he cried, and waved his piccolo;
      "Be calm! There is no danger, if you're quiet!"
    Then through the Opera House there echoed low
      Such music as would calm the greatest riot.

    They faltered, then they heeded his desire,
      Then paused to hearken with suspended breath,
    And spellbound listened through that awful fire
      Till every one of them was burned to death.




Chapter XX


And now the rich merchant pointed out upon the horizon a small speck
which was no larger than a woman's honesty. As the camel journeyed on
toward the horizon the speck grew in size until it was as large as the
hope of inheritance. And when they finally came up to it, behold it was
a strawstack!

The camel started to eat the straw, but the merchant jumped down and
belabored the beast over the head with a marlin pin--whatever that
is--and cried: "Cease, thou gluttonous, stupid beast; knowest thou not
that thou wilt impale thy parched throat?"

"Why belaborest thou the camel?" asked Gud, solicitously.

"Because, there is a needle in this strawstack, and I came from the four
corners of the earth to find it. Do you think I am going to let this
fool beast devour it?"

So Gud offered to hold the camel's halter while the rich merchant
searched the strawstack for the needle.

After the merchant had looked in all the straws but one he gave up in
despair, for he had not found the needle.

"Perseverance, dear, my lord, keeps honor bright," quoth Gud.

Greatly encouraged, the rich merchant looked into the last straw and
found the needle. In glee he shouted and held up the needle in one hand
and the last straw in the other.

"I perceive," said Gud, "that you are a prince of industry. But you are
also in a dilemma. If you try the last straw first and break the camel's
back, then how can the poor beast go through the eye of the needle?"




Chapter XXI


"Who was that fellow," asked Fidu, "who passed me just now with such a
wild, wild look in his eye?"

"That fellow," replied Gud, "was an author who just spent a week-end
with me."

"And what did you do to him?" asked Fidu. "He was as crazy as the
nebular hypothesis."

"Upon his request I criticized his book, which he insisted on reading to
me."

"But what did you say about it?" demanded Fidu, "he looked as locoed as
a lop-eared logarithm."

"I made several criticisms. I told him that his plot was choppy, and
that most of it was stale; that the work lacked sadly in originality and
there was considerable repetition. I said it was very melodramatic in
spots and that it had entirely too many murders, and that many of the
biggest murderers seemed to escape without punishment. I also told him
that it was full of sordid realism and most unhappy endings, that it was
overloaded with action, and worst of all, it utterly lacked any evidence
of a distinct moral purpose."

"Well no wonder," said Fidu, "that the poor fellow was raving; you made,
if I may say so, quite a severe criticism."

"I grant that, but his book deserved it--everything I said about it was
absolutely true."

"What did he call his book?" asked Fidu.

"He called it," replied Gud, "'An Outline of History.'"




