Chapter XXV


As Gud and the Underdog walked on their way, they passed through a dark
valley where they could hardly see in the murkiness to keep their feet
on the Impossible Curve, and so they proceeded slowly with eyes and ears
alert.

Presently Fidu stopped and cocked his ear, for his sense of hearing was
more acute than his master's. When Gud refused to stop, Fidu ran on for
a time, and then he stopped again and listened, and this time Gud
stopped and listened also, whereupon he heard from afar, the sound as of
a heavy clanking chain.

As they traveled on again the sound grew louder and was mingled with
mumbling and smothered curses. It was Fidu, as usual, who ran ahead and
found the object from whence came the mumblings of smothered curses.

When Gud drew near he saw a poor being chained to a great rock. Gud
tapped the rock with his staff and discovered from its adamantine nature
that it was the Rock of Conservatism. But he could not identify the
being who was so securely chained, thereto.

"Who are you," demanded Gud, "and why are you chained up here in this
brutal fashion?"

The being only answered with more mumbled cursings.

"If he cannot state his case," said Gud, "why should he expect me to
free him?"

"But master, there is a smaller chain across his mouth."

"So there is," observed Gud, and he reached over and severed that
smaller chain.

"I thank you," said the prisoner, "but there is little more that I can
say, for I am still chained to the Rock of Conservatism."

"Oh, very well," replied Gud, as he severed the great chain also. "And
now please tell me who you are and why you are bound here?"

The creature arose and stretched his aching bones. "I am Free Speech,"
said he, "and who are you?"

And Gud replied: "I am Gud."

"I never heard of you and what is your business?"

"I am retired. What is your business?"

"My business was talking too much until they bound me. But now that I am
again free, I intend to go on talking and saying just what I please. For
one thing I do not like that ridiculous old bath robe you wear. If you
don't care for pants, why wear anything?"

"Have you always been in the business of talking too much?" inquired
Gud.

"No," replied Free Speech, "I was once a school master but I got into
difficulty. I had a private school and both the Just and the Unjust sent
their children to my school. The Just believed that the world was flat
and the Unjust believed that the world was round--"

"Which was it?" asked Gud.

"Keep still and let me talk. The Just wanted me to teach their children
that the world was flat and the Unjust wanted me to teach their children
that the world was round. So I organized two classes in geography and
taught the children of the Just that the world was flat and the children
of the Unjust that the world was round. The Just had me arrested, but I
escaped and went into the business of talking too much and saying what I
pleased and asking all the questions I wanted to; and while I am
grateful to you for your releasing me, all you did was your duty, and I
don't feel there is any privilege of back talk coming to you; and yet
you look like you were pretty wise, and there are one or two things that
I don't know yet. For instance, has a ghost a soul or is he a soul?
Well, I see you don't know, but maybe you can tell me whether sins are
washed away by death-bed repentance, though I really don't care, for it
is not important. But I would like to know if faith will remove
mountains. I don't believe it will for when I was a small lad I went to
live with my grandmother. There was an ugly mountain back of her house
and grandmother decided to remove it by faith and she prayed all one
evening that the mountain be moved that night. The next morning she woke
up and looked out the kitchen window and said: 'I knew that old mountain
would still be there.' Which reminds me of a fellow I knew who was a
faith healer by profession, and mighty successful, too, and went all up
and down the land healing by faith and getting paid handsomely for it.
But his wife at home was an invalid: I asked her why her husband did not
heal her and she said, 'I lack faith in him.'

"Do you know why they call sleep innocent, considering the kind of
dreams people have? Or why blood is thicker than water? Or what there is
about a sphinx that makes people think it knows the answer to riddles?
Or why a greased egg won't hatch? Or whether a man in hot water is more
uncomfortable than a round peg in a square hole?"

"No," replied Gud, "I do not know any of these things and I am sorry I
unbound you."

"I knew you would be," cried Free Speech, "I could tell by your old gray
gown and those antiquated whiskers that you were a conservative and a
hide-bound Puritan, but I tell you right now that you can't stop me
talking by tying me up, and that it won't do you any good if you do. And
that Underdog of yours is no better than you are. The Underdog must be
educated by me, though he is usually so stupid that he chases after the
copycat instead of listening to me talk, and so I don't really care as
much what becomes of him as I pretend I do--and did you ever hear the
story about--"

But Gud clapped his hand over the mouth of Free Speech and called:
"Quick, Fidu, fetch me the chain."

As Fidu and Gud marched on their way it was to the sound of muttering
and mumbled curses and the clanking of a heavy chain.




