Chapter XLIII


    Who shall say that his love was not good
    For the dummy of cloth and wax and wood?
    I know that more curious things exist
    Than the love of a dreaming ventriloquist.

    He liked to perch her on his knee
    Combing her black hair lovingly,
    Then talk by the hour just as though
    She understood and ought to know.

    Her chatter merged with his and twice,
    I know, he struck her ... it wasn't nice.
    Repenting, he bought her costly things--
    Gowns, rare necklaces and rings.

    One night they found him on the floor
    Stark dead ... each year I wonder more
    Why, killing himself, he never wrote
    Of the dagger he sank in her wooden throat.




Chapter XLIV


Now the fame of Gud's wisdom was broadcast about, so that important
personages of other worlds came and laid their problems at the feet of
Gud and begged of him solutions.

Among them were two citizens of a world that was in dire distress. And
one of these citizens was a Keeper of Morals of his sphere, and the
other was the Vital Statistician.

To Gud the Statistician said: "Our world is full, so that there is no
more room for further population, and I have therefore ordered that the
issue of birth permits be curtailed."

"And in doing so," cried the Keeper of Morals, "you have ignored the law
which bade us be fruitful and multiply."

"That have I done," replied the Statistician, "because the facts have
obsoleted the law. Our world is full, and what good would it do to issue
more birth permits when there is no more room to be born into?"

"But you should make room," protested the Keeper of Morals, "by issuing
more death permits. Surely it is not as great a sin to die as it is not
to be born."

"But I insist," declared the Statistician, "that to issue more death
permits than there are people ready to sicken and die would be to
encourage suicide and murder. Do you countenance such unmoral ways of
dying?"

"Certainly not," retorted the Keeper of Morals, "suicide and murder are
crimes. We must not encourage them, but neither must we discourage
births, for we are commanded to be fruitful and multiply."

"I agree with you," said Gud, addressing himself to the Keeper of
Morals, "in your belief that it is wrong to discourage births, and also
wrong to encourage deaths--for unrestricted birth and unpremeditated
death are great moral principles and nothing must be allowed to
interfere with them."

"Exactly," replied the Keeper of Morals, "yet this Statistician is
interfering by producing his unwelcome facts. He tells us that our world
is full and that there is room in it for not a single being more."

Gud turned to the Statistician and demanded: "Is this fact that you have
produced a true fact or is it only a statistical fact?"

And the Statistician replied: "The fact is a true fact. Indeed, when we
left to come here to consult you, we were obliged to make dummies and
leave them in our places so that we would find room for ourselves when
we returned. All this I can readily prove to you, if you will come with
us and see for yourself that there is room in our world for not a single
being more."

"It is not necessary for me to go out of my way," said Gud, "to see your
world, but I will send for it." And Gud called Fidu and commanded the
Underdog to go and fetch the world from whence his visitors came.

So Fidu went and fetched that world, and brought it and laid it at the
feet of Gud.

Gud looked upon that world and saw that the fact of its fullness was a
true fact and that there was room thereon for not a single being more.
So Gud turned and said to the Keeper of Morals: "The fact of the
absolute fullness of your world is a true fact and also obvious and
incontrovertible. What do you propose to do about it?"

"Why, nothing, Your Deity," replied the Keeper of Morals, "it is not my
business to deal with facts when they interfere with morals--I merely
ignore them."

"Then," asked Gud, "why quarrel you with this Statistician? Why do you
not let him and his facts alone?"

"And that I should do gladly, if he would but let me and my morals
alone, but he is withholding the issuing of birth permits."

So Gud addressed the Statistician and said: "Why do you not let this man
and his morals alone?"

"Because," the Statistician made reply, "his morals are incompatible
with my facts, which are: First, our world is absolutely full: Second,
there can be no more births than deaths: Third, we must either issue
more death permits or cease to issue so many birth permits. That is
absolutely logic, yet this Moralist refuses to accept it."

"I certainly do," shouted the Moralist. "Away with your sinful facts and
your wicked logic! The morality of our world must be preserved at all
costs. We must not encourage murder nor suicide, nor dare we discourage
births, for that is also murder of those who would be born, and so it is
race suicide. On these moral principles I stand as on the rock of truth,
and no torrents of facts or floods of logic can dislodge me."

"You will have to admit," argued Gud, addressing the Vital Statistician,
"that the Moralist has the courage of his convictions. Therefore the
great truth of moral principle should be regarded above the smaller
truths of material facts and mental logic--and many of the inhabitants
of your world, if I know mortal nature, will agree with me."

"Sad but true," agreed the Statistician. "I am only able to hold my job
because I am under civil service and not subject to popular election.
But you, Great Gud, appear to me to be a rational being."

"Oh, yes," confessed Gud, "I am quite rational at times; but from the
nature of my position it is only right that I should uphold morality
when it clashes with rationality, as I regret to say it often does.
Because I must do this, I can see both sides of the case, which neither
of you gentlemen can. So to me the solution is very simple, and will
outrage neither morals nor reason. Murder and suicide must not be
encouraged, births must not be limited, yet your world is full.
Obviously, you must proceed to empty it. There is only one moral way to
do that. You must have a war--preferably a righteous war. That requires
a cause with two right sides. Such causes are plentiful. Any question
that can be looked at from two sides, either of which, when looked at
rightly is the right side, will serve as the cause for a righteous war.
This dispute that you gentlemen bring me will do nicely. Let the
moralists fight for their moral principles and the rationalists fight
for their facts."

"But," interrupted the Statistician, "my side would have very few
adherents; men do not fight to defend facts. We would be overwhelmed by
superior numbers and annihilated."

"Certainly," said Gud, "what more could you expect if you espouse an
unpopular cause?

"But why stand here babbling? See, your valorous enemy has already
returned to his followers and is calling them to arms. Why do you not
hasten to join your colors?"

"Thanks," replied the Statistician, "but I left a dummy in my place and
I am going to stay right here and count the stars."




