Chapter VI  A Visit to Box Five


We left M. Firmin Richard and M. Armand Moncharmin at the moment when
they were deciding "to look into that little matter of Box Five."

Leaving behind them the broad staircase which leads from the lobby
outside the managers' offices to the stage and its dependencies, they
crossed the stage, went out by the subscribers' door and entered the
house through the first little passage on the left.  Then they made
their way through the front rows of stalls and looked at Box Five on
the grand tier. They could not see it well, because it was half in
darkness and because great covers were flung over the red velvet of the
ledges of all the boxes.

They were almost alone in the huge, gloomy house; and a great silence
surrounded them.  It was the time when most of the stage-hands go out
for a drink.  The staff had left the boards for the moment, leaving a
scene half set.  A few rays of light, a wan, sinister light, that
seemed to have been stolen from an expiring luminary, fell through some
opening or other upon an old tower that raised its pasteboard
battlements on the stage; everything, in this deceptive light, adopted
a fantastic shape.  In the orchestra stalls, the drugget covering them
looked like an angry sea, whose glaucous waves had been suddenly
rendered stationary by a secret order from the storm phantom, who, as
everybody knows, is called Adamastor.  MM. Moncharmin and Richard were
the shipwrecked mariners amid this motionless turmoil of a calico sea.
They made for the left boxes, plowing their way like sailors who leave
their ship and try to struggle to the shore.  The eight great polished
columns stood up in the dusk like so many huge piles supporting the
threatening, crumbling, big-bellied cliffs whose layers were
represented by the circular, parallel, waving lines of the balconies of
the grand, first and second tiers of boxes.  At the top, right on top
of the cliff, lost in M. Lenepveu's copper ceiling, figures grinned and
grimaced, laughed and jeered at MM. Richard and Moncharmin's distress.
And yet these figures were usually very serious.  Their names were
Isis, Amphitrite, Hebe, Pandora, Psyche, Thetis, Pomona, Daphne,
Clytie, Galatea and Arethusa.  Yes, Arethusa herself and Pandora, whom
we all know by her box, looked down upon the two new managers of the
Opera, who ended by clutching at some piece of wreckage and from there
stared silently at Box Five on the grand tier.

I have said that they were distressed.  At least, I presume so.  M.
Moncharmin, in any case, admits that he was impressed.  To quote his
own words, in his Memoirs:

"This moonshine about the Opera ghost in which, since we first took
over the duties of MM. Poligny and Debienne, we had been so nicely
steeped"--Moncharmin's style is not always irreproachable--"had no
doubt ended by blinding my imaginative and also my visual faculties.
It may be that the exceptional surroundings in which we found
ourselves, in the midst of an incredible silence, impressed us to an
unusual extent.  It may be that we were the sport of a kind of
hallucination brought about by the semi-darkness of the theater and the
partial gloom that filled Box Five.  At any rate, I saw and Richard
also saw a shape in the box.  Richard said nothing, nor I either.  But
we spontaneously seized each other's hand.  We stood like that for some
minutes, without moving, with our eyes fixed on the same point; but the
figure had disappeared.  Then we went out and, in the lobby,
communicated our impressions to each other and talked about 'the
shape.'  The misfortune was that my shape was not in the least like
Richard's. I had seen a thing like a death's head resting on the ledge
of the box, whereas Richard saw the shape of an old woman who looked
like Mme. Giry.  We soon discovered that we had really been the victims
of an illusion, whereupon, without further delay and laughing like
madmen, we ran to Box Five on the grand tier, went inside and found no
shape of any kind."

Box Five is just like all the other grand tier boxes.  There is nothing
to distinguish it from any of the others.  M. Moncharmin and M.
Richard, ostensibly highly amused and laughing at each other, moved the
furniture of the box, lifted the cloths and the chairs and particularly
examined the arm-chair in which "the man's voice" used to sit.  But
they saw that it was a respectable arm-chair, with no magic about it.
Altogether, the box was the most ordinary box in the world, with its
red hangings, its chairs, its carpet and its ledge covered in red
velvet.  After, feeling the carpet in the most serious manner possible,
and discovering nothing more here or anywhere else, they went down to
the corresponding box on the pit tier below.  In Box Five on the pit
tier, which is just inside the first exit from the stalls on the left,
they found nothing worth mentioning either.

"Those people are all making fools of us!"  Firmin Richard ended by
exclaiming.  "It will be FAUST on Saturday:  let us both see the
performance from Box Five on the grand tier!"



Chapter VII  Faust and What Followed


On the Saturday morning, on reaching their office, the joint managers
found a letter from O. G. worded in these terms:

MY DEAR MANAGERS:

So it is to be war between us?

If you still care for peace, here is my ultimatum.  It consists of the
four following conditions:

1.  You must give me back my private box; and I wish it to be at my
free disposal from henceforward.

2.  The part of Margarita shall be sung this evening by Christine Daae.
Never mind about Carlotta; she will be ill.

3.  I absolutely insist upon the good and loyal services of Mme. Giry,
my box-keeper, whom you will reinstate in her functions forthwith.

4.  Let me know by a letter handed to Mme. Giry, who will see that it
reaches me, that you accept, as your predecessors did, the conditions
in my memorandum-book relating to my monthly allowance.  I will inform
you later how you are to pay it to me.

If you refuse, you will give FAUST to-night in a house with a curse
upon it.

Take my advice and be warned in time.  O. G.

"Look here, I'm getting sick of him, sick of him!" shouted Richard,
bringing his fists down on his office-table.

Just then, Mercier, the acting-manager, entered.

"Lachenel would like to see one of you gentlemen," he said.  "He says
that his business is urgent and he seems quite upset."

"Who's Lachenel?" asked Richard.

"He's your stud-groom."

"What do you mean?  My stud-groom?"

"Yes, sir," explained Mercier, "there are several grooms at the Opera
and M. Lachenel is at the head of them."

"And what does this groom do?"

"He has the chief management of the stable."

"What stable?"

"Why, yours, sir, the stable of the Opera."

"Is there a stable at the Opera?  Upon my word, I didn't know.  Where
is it?"

"In the cellars, on the Rotunda side.  It's a very important
department; we have twelve horses."

"Twelve horses!  And what for, in Heaven's name?"

"Why, we want trained horses for the processions in the Juive, The
Profeta and so on; horses 'used to the boards.'  It is the grooms'
business to teach them.  M. Lachenel is very clever at it.  He used to
manage Franconi's stables."

"Very well ... but what does he want?"

"I don't know; I never saw him in such a state."

"He can come in."

M. Lachenel came in, carrying a riding-whip, with which he struck his
right boot in an irritable manner.

"Good morning, M. Lachenel," said Richard, somewhat impressed.  "To
what do we owe the honor of your visit?"

"Mr. Manager, I have come to ask you to get rid of the whole stable."

"What, you want to get rid of our horses?"

"I'm not talking of the horses, but of the stablemen."

"How many stablemen have you, M. Lachenel?"

"Six stablemen!  That's at least two too many."

"These are 'places,'" Mercier interposed, "created and forced upon us
by the under-secretary for fine arts.  They are filled by protegees of
the government and, if I may venture to ..."

"I don't care a hang for the government!" roared Richard.  "We don't
need more than four stablemen for twelve horses."

"Eleven," said the head riding-master, correcting him.

"Twelve," repeated Richard.

"Eleven," repeated Lachenel.

"Oh, the acting-manager told me that you had twelve horses!"

"I did have twelve, but I have only eleven since Cesar was stolen."

And M. Lachenel gave himself a great smack on the boot with his whip.

"Has Cesar been stolen?" cried the acting-manager. "Cesar, the white
horse in the Profeta?"

"There are not two Cesars," said the stud-groom dryly.  "I was ten
years at Franconi's and I have seen plenty of horses in my time.  Well,
there are not two Cesars.  And he's been stolen."

"How?"

"I don't know.  Nobody knows.  That's why I have come to ask you to
sack the whole stable."

"What do your stablemen say?"

"All sorts of nonsense.  Some of them accuse the supers.  Others
pretend that it's the acting-manager's doorkeeper ..."

"My doorkeeper?  I'll answer for him as I would for myself!" protested
Mercier.

"But, after all, M. Lachenel," cried Richard, "you must have some idea."

"Yes, I have," M. Lachenel declared.  "I have an idea and I'll tell you
what it is.  There's no doubt about it in my mind." He walked up to the
two managers and whispered.  "It's the ghost who did the trick!"

Richard gave a jump.

"What, you too!  You too!"

"How do you mean, I too?  Isn't it natural, after what I saw?"

"What did you see?"

"I saw, as clearly as I now see you, a black shadow riding a white
horse that was as like Cesar as two peas!"

"And did you run after them?"

"I did and I shouted, but they were too fast for me and disappeared in
the darkness of the underground gallery."

M. Richard rose.  "That will do, M. Lachenel.  You can go ...  We will
lodge a complaint against THE GHOST."

"And sack my stable?"

"Oh, of course!  Good morning."

M. Lachenel bowed and withdrew.  Richard foamed at the mouth.

"Settle that idiot's account at once, please."

"He is a friend of the government representative's!" Mercier ventured
to say.

"And he takes his vermouth at Tortoni's with Lagrene, Scholl and
Pertuiset, the lion-hunter," added Moncharmin.  "We shall have the
whole press against us!  He'll tell the story of the ghost; and
everybody will be laughing at our expense!  We may as well be dead as
ridiculous!"

"All right, say no more about it."

At that moment the door opened.  It must have been deserted by its
usual Cerberus, for Mme. Giry entered without ceremony, holding a
