CHAPTER IX.

OF THE MATERIALS OF MOUNTAINS:--SECONDLY, SLATY CRYSTALLINES.


§ 1. It will be remembered that we said in the last chapter (§ 4) that
one of the notable characters of the whole group of the crystallines was
the incomprehensibility of the processes which have brought them to
their actual state. This however is more peculiarly true of the slaty
crystallines. It is perfectly possible, by many processes of chemistry,
to produce masses of irregular crystals which, though not of the
substance of granite, are very like it in their mode of arrangement.
But, as far as I am aware, it is impossible to produce artificially
anything resembling the structure of the slaty crystallines. And the
more I have examined the rocks themselves, the more I have felt at once
the difficulty of explaining the method of their formation, and the
growing interest of inquiries respecting that method. The facts (and I
can venture to give nothing more than facts) are briefly these:--

§ 2. The mineral called mica, described in the course of the last
chapter, is closely connected with another, differing from it in
containing a considerable quantity of magnesia. This associated mineral,
called chlorite, is of a dull greenish color, and opaque, while the mica
is, in thin plates, more or less translucent; and the chlorite is apt to
occur more in the form of a green earth, or green dust, than of finely
divided plates. The original quantity of magnesia in the rock determines
how far the mica shall give place to chlorite; and in the intermediate
conditions of rock we find a black and nearly opaque mica, containing a
good deal of magnesia, together with a chlorite, which at first seems
mixed with small plates of true mica, or is itself formed of minute
plates or spangles, and then, as the quantity of magnesia increases,
assumes its proper form of a dark green earth.

§ 3. By this appointment there is obtained a series of materials by
which the appearance of the rock may be varied to almost any extent.
From plates of brilliant white mica half a foot broad, flashing in the
sun like panes of glass, to a minute film of dark green dust hardly
traceable by the eye, an infinite range of conditions is found in the
different groups of rocks; but always under this general law, that, for
the most part, the compact crystallines present the purest and boldest
plates of mica; and the tendency to pass into slaty crystallines is
commonly accompanied by the change of the whiteness of the mica to a
dark or black color, indicating (I believe) the presence of magnesia,
and by the gradual intermingling with it of chloritic earth; or else of
a cognate mineral (differing from chlorite in containing a quantity of
lime) called hornblende.

[Illustration: FIG. 5.]

Such, at least, is eminently the case in the Alps; and in the account I
have to give of their slaty crystallines, it must be understood that in
using the word "mica" generally, I mean the more obscure conditions of
the mineral, associated with chlorite and hornblende.

§ 4. Now it is quite easy to understand how, in the compact
crystallines, the various elements of the rock, separating from each
other as they congealed from their fluid state, whether of watery
solution or fiery fusion, might arrange themselves in irregular grains
as at _a_ in Fig. 3, p. 106. Such an arrangement constantly takes place
before our eyes in volcanic rocks as they cool. But it is not at all
easy to understand how the white, hard, and comparatively heavy
substances should throw themselves into knots and bands in one definite
direction, and the delicate films of mica should undulate about and
between them, as in Fig. 5 on page 114, like rivers among islands,
pursuing, however, on the whole, a straight course across the mass of
rock. If it could be shown that such pieces of stone had been formed in
the horizontal position in which I have drawn the one in the figure, the
structure would be somewhat intelligible as the result of settlement.
But, on the contrary, the lines of such foliated rocks hardly ever are
horizontal; neither can distinct evidence be found of their at any time
having been so. The evidence, on the contrary, is often strongly in
favor of their having been formed in the highly inclined directions in
which they now occur, such as that of the piece in Fig. 7, p. 117.[45]

[Illustration: FIG. 6.]

§ 5. Such, however, is the simple fact, that when the compact pact
crystallines are about to pass into slaty crystallines, their mica
throws itself into these bands and zones, undulating around knots of the
other substances which compose the rock. Gradually the knots diminish in
size, the mica becomes more abundant and more definite in direction, and
at last the mass, when broken across the beds, assumes the appearance of
Fig. 6 on the last page.[46] Now it will be noticed that, in the lines
of that figure, no less than in Fig. 5, though more delicately, there is
a subdued, but continual expression of _undulation_. This character
belongs, more or less, to nearly the whole mass of slaty crystalline
rocks; it is one of exquisite beauty, and of the highest importance to
their picturesque forms. It is also one of as great mysteriousness as
beauty. For these two figures are selected from crystallines whose beds
are remarkably straight; in the greater number the undulation becomes
far more violent, and, in many, passes into absolute contortion. Fig. 7
is a piece of a slaty crystalline, rich in mica, from the Valley of St.
Nicolas, below Zermatt. The rock from which it was broken was thrown
into coils three or four feet across: the fragment, which is drawn of
the real size, was at one of the turns, and came away like a thick
portion of a crumpled quire of paper from the other sheets.[47]

[Illustration: FIG. 7.]


  Typical character of Slaty Crystallines.

§ 6. I might devote half a volume to a description of the fantastic and
incomprehensible arrangement of these rocks and their veins; but all
that is necessary for the general reader to know or remember, is this
broad fact of the _undulation_ of their whole substance. For there is
something, it seems to me, inexpressibly marvellous in this phenomenon,
largely looked at. It is to be remembered that these are the rocks
which, on the average, will be oftenest observed, and with the greatest
interest, by the human race. The central granites are too far removed,
the lower rocks too common, to be carefully studied; these slaty
crystallines form the noblest hills that are easily accessible, and seem
to be thus calculated especially to attract observation, and reward it.
Well, we begin to examine them; and first, we find a notable hardness in
them, and a thorough boldness of general character, which make us regard
them as very types of perfect rocks. They have nothing of the look of
dried earth about them, nothing petty or limited in the display of their
bulk. Where they are, they seem to form the world; no mere bank of a
river here, or of a lane there, peeping out among the hedges or forests:
but from the lowest valley to the highest clouds, all is theirs--one
adamantine dominion and rigid authority of rock. We yield ourselves to
the impression of their eternal, unconquerable stubbornness of strength;
their mass seems the least yielding, least to be softened, or in anywise
dealt with by external force, of all earthly substance. And, behold, as
we look farther into it, it is all touched and troubled, like waves by a
summer breeze; rippled, far more delicately than seas or lakes are
rippled; _they_ only undulate along their surfaces--this rock trembles
through its every fibre, like the chords of an Eolian harp--like the
stillest air of spring with the echoes of a child's voice. Into the
heart of all those great mountains, through every tossing of their
boundless crests, and deep beneath all their unfathomable defiles, flows
that strange quivering of their substance. Other and weaker things seem
to express their subjection to an Infinite power only by momentary
terrors: as the weeds bow down before the feverish wind, and the sound
of the going in the tops of the taller trees passes on before the
clouds, and the fitful opening of pale spaces on the dark water as if
some invisible hand were casting dust abroad upon it, gives warning of
the anger that is to come, we may well imagine that there is indeed a
fear passing upon the grass, and leaves, and waters, at the presence of
some great spirit commissioned to let the tempest loose; but the terror
passes, and their sweet rest is perpetually restored to the pastures and
the waves. Not so to the mountains. They, which at first seem
strengthened beyond the dread of any violence or change, are yet also
ordained to bear upon them the symbol of a perpetual Fear: the tremor
which fades from the soft lake and gliding river is sealed, to all
eternity, upon the rock; and while things that pass visibly from birth
to death may sometimes forget their feebleness, the mountains are made
to possess a perpetual memorial of their infancy,--that infancy which
the prophet saw in his vision: "I beheld the earth, and lo, it was
without form and void, and the heavens, and they had no light. I beheld
the mountains, and lo, they _trembled_; and all the hills _moved
lightly_."


  Serviceable characters of the Slaty Crystallines.

  1. Fitness for building with.

§ 7. Thus far may we trace the apparent typical signification of the
structure of those noble rocks. The material uses of this structure are
not less important. These substances of the higher mountains, it is
always to be remembered, were to be so hard as to enable them to be
raised into, and remain in, the most magnificent forms; and this
hardness renders it a matter of great difficulty for the peasant to
break them into such masses as are required for his daily purposes. He
is compelled in general to gather the fragments which are to form the
walls of his house or his garden from the ruins into which the mountain
suffers its ridges to be naturally broken; and if these pieces were
absolutely irregular in shape, it would be a matter of much labor and
skill to build securely with them. But the flattened arrangement of the
layers of mica always causes the rock to break into flattish fragments,
requiring hardly any pains in the placing them so as to lie securely in
a wall, and furnishing light, broad, and unflawed pieces to serve for
slates upon the roof; for fences, when set edgeways into the ground; or
for pavements, when laid flat.


  2. Stability in débris.

§ 8. Farther: whenever rocks break into utterly irregular fragments, the
masses of débris which they form are not only excessively difficult to
walk over, but the pieces touch each other in so few points, and suffer
the water to run so easily and so far through their cavities, that it
takes a long series of years to enable them either to settle themselves
firmly, or receive the smallest covering of vegetation. Where the
substance of the stone is soft, it may soon be worn down, so that the
irregular form is of less consequence. But in the hard crystallines,
unless they had a tendency to break into flattish fragments, their ruin
would remain for centuries in impassable desolation. The flat shape of
the separate pieces prevents this; it permits--almost necessitates--their
fitting into and over each other in a tolerably close mass, and thus they
become comparatively easy to the foot, less permeable to water, and
therefore retentive both of surface moisture and of the seeds of
vegetation.


  3. Security on declivities.

§ 9. There is another result of nearly equal importance as far as
regards the habitableness of the hills. When stones are thrown together
in rounded or massy blocks, like a heap of hazel nuts, small force will
sometimes disturb their balance; and when once set in motion, a
square-built and heavy fragment will thunder down even a slightly
sloping declivity, with an impetus as unlikely to be arrested as fatal
in its increase. But when stones lie flatly, as dead leaves lie, it is
not easy to tilt any one of them upon its edge, so as to set it in
motion; and when once moved, it will nearly always slide, not roll, and
be stopped by the first obstacle it encounters, catching against it by
the edge, or striking into the turf where first it falls, like a
hatchet. Were it not for the merciful ordinance that the slaty
crystallines should break into thin and flattish fragments, the frequent
falls of stones from the hill sides would render many spots among the
greater mountain chains utterly uninhabitable, which are now
comparatively secure.


  4. Tendency to form the loveliest scenery.

§ 10. Of the picturesque aspects which this mode of cleavage produces in
the mountains, and in the stones of the foreground, we shall have to
speak presently; with regard to the uses of the materials it is only
necessary to note farther that these slaty rocks are of course, by their
wilful way of breaking, rendered unfit for sculpture, and for nearly all
purposes of art; the properties which render them convenient for the
peasant in building his cottage, making them unavailable for the
architecture of more elaborate edifices. One very great advantage is
thus secured for the scenery they compose, namely, that it is rarely
broken by quarries. A single quarry will often spoil a whole Alpine
landscape; the effect of the lovely bay of the Lago Maggiore, for
instance, in which lie the Borromean Islands, is, in great part,
destroyed by the scar caused by a quarry of pink granite on its western
shore; and the valley of Chamouni itself has lost some of its loveliest
rock scenery in consequence of the unfortunate discovery that the
boulders which had fallen from its higher pinnacles, and were lying in
massy heaps among its pines, were available for stone lintels and
door-posts in the building of its new inns. But the slaty crystallines,
though sometimes containing valuable mines, are hardly ever quarried for
stone; and the scenes they compose retain, in general, little disturbed
by man, their aspect of melancholy power, or simple and noble peace. The
color of their own mass, when freshly broken, is nearly the same as that
of the compact crystallines; but it is far more varied by veins and
zones of included minerals, and contains usually more iron, which gives
a rich brown or golden color to their exposed sides, so that the
coloring of these rocks is the most glowing to be found in the mountain
world. They form also soil for vegetation more quickly, and of a more
fruitful kind than the granites, and appear, on the whole, intended to
unite every character of grandeur and of beauty, and to constitute the
loveliest as well as the noblest scenes which the earth ever unfolds to
the eyes of men.


FOOTNOTES

  [45] See again Appendix 2. Slaty Cleavage.

  [46] This is a piece of the gneiss of the Montanvert, near the
    Châlets of Blaitière dessous.

  [47] "Some idea may be formed of the nature of these incurvations by
    supposing the gneiss beds to have been in a plastic state, either
    from the action of heat or of some other unknown cause, and, while
    in this state, to have been subjected to pressure at the two
    extremities, or in some other parts, according to the nature of the
    curvatures. But even this hypothesis (though the best that has been
    thought of) will scarcely enable us to explain all the contortions
    which not merely the beds of gneiss, but likewise of mica slate and
    clay slate, and even greywacke slate, exhibit. There is a bed of
    clay slate near the ferry to Kerrera, a few miles south of Oban, in
    Argyleshire. This bed has been partly wasted away by the sea, and
    its structure exposed to view. It contains a central cylindrical
    nucleus of unknown length (but certainly considerable), round which
    six beds of clay slate are wrapt, the one within the other, so as to
    form six concentric cylinders. Now, however plastic the clay slate
    may have been, there is no kind of pressure which will account for
    this structure; the central cylinder would have required to have
    been rolled six times in succession (allowing an interval for
    solidification between each) in the plastic clay slate."--_Outlines
    of Mineralogy, Geology, &c._, by Thomas Thomson, M.D.




