CHAPTER I.

POLITICAL CATASTROPHES.

  Perishable condition of all human societies--Ancient ideas concerning
    this phenomenon--Modern theories.


The downfall of civilizations is the most striking, and, at the same
time, the most obscure of all the phenomena of history. If the sublime
grandeur of this spectacle impresses the mind with awe, the mystery in
which it is wrapped presents a boundless field for inquiry and
meditation to a reflecting mind. The study of the birth and growth of
nations is, indeed, fraught with many valuable observations: the gradual
development of human societies, their successes, conquests, and
triumphs, strike the imagination in a lively manner, and excite an ever
increasing interest. But these phenomena, however grand and interesting,
seem susceptible of an easy explanation. We consider them as the
necessary consequences of the intellectual and moral endowments of man.
Once we admit the existence of these endowments, their results will no
longer surprise us.

But we perceive that, after a period of glory and strength, all
societies formed by man begin to totter and fall; all, I said, because
there is no exception. Scattered over the surface of our globe, we see
the vestiges of preceding civilizations, many of which are known to us
only by name, or have not left behind them even that faint memorial, and
are recorded only by the mute stones in the depths of primeval
forests.[30] If we glance at our modern States, we are forced to the
conclusion that, though their date is but of yesterday, some of them
already exhibit signs of old age. The awful truth of prophetic language
about the instability of all things human, applies with equal force to
political bodies and to individuals, to nations and their civilizations.
Every association of men for social and political purposes, though
protected by the most ingenious social and political ties and
contrivances, conceals among the very elements of its life, the germ of
inevitable destruction, contracted the day it was formed. This terrible
fact is proved by the history of all ages as well as of our own. It is
owing to a natural law of death which seems to govern societies as well
as individuals; but, does this law operate alike in all cases? is it
uniform like the result it brings about, and do all civilizations perish
from the same pre-existing cause?

A superficial glance at the page of history would tempt us to answer in
the negative, for the apparent causes of the downfall of the great
empires of antiquity were very different in each case. Yet, if we pierce
below the surface, we find in this very necessity of decay, which weighs
so imperiously upon all societies without exception, the evidence of the
existence of some general, though concealed, cause, producing a natural
death, even where no external causes anticipate it by violent
destruction. We also discover that all civilizations, after a short
duration, exhibit, to the acute observer, certain intimate disturbances,
difficult to define, but whose existence is undeniable; and that these
present in all cases an analogous character. Finally, if we distinguish
the ruin of civilizations from that of States (for we sometimes see the
same culture subsist in a country under foreign domination, and survive
the destruction of the political body which gave it birth; while,
again, comparatively slight misfortunes cause it to be transformed, or
to disappear altogether), we become more and more confirmed in the idea
that this principle of death in all societies is not only a necessary
condition of their life, independent, in a great measure, of external
causes, but is also uniform in all. To fix and determine this principle,
and to trace its effects in the lives of those nations, of whom history
has left us records, has been my object and endeavor in the studies, the
results of which I now lay before the reader.

The fact that every human agglomeration, and the peculiar culture
resulting from it, is doomed to perish, was not known to the ancients.
Even in the epochs immediately preceding ours, it was not believed. The
religious spirit of Asiatic antiquity looked upon the great political
catastrophes in the same light that they did upon the sudden destruction
of an individual: as a demonstration of Divine wrath, visiting a nation
or an individual whose sins had marked them out for signal punishment,
which would serve as an example to those criminals whom the rod had as
yet spared. The Jews, misunderstanding the meaning of the promise,
believed their empire imperishable. Rome, at the very moment when the
threatening clouds lowered in the horizon of her grandeur, entertained
no doubt as to the eternity of hers.[31] But our generation has profited
by experience; and, as no one presumes to doubt that all men must die,
because all who came before us have died; so we are firmly convinced,
that the days of nations, as of individuals, however many they be, are
numbered. The wisdom of the ancients, therefore, will afford us but
little assistance in the unravelling of our subject, if we except one
fundamental maxim: that the finger of Divine Providence is always
visible in the conduct of the affairs of this world. From this solid
basis we shall not depart, accepting it in the full extent that it is
recognized by the church. It cannot be contested that no civilization
will perish without the will of God, and to apply to the mortal
condition of all societies, the sacred axiom by which the ancients
explained certain remarkable, and, in their opinion, isolated cases of
destruction, is but proclaiming a truth of the first order, of which we
must never lose sight in our researches after truths of secondary
importance. If it be further added that societies perish by their sins,
I willingly accede to it; it is but drawing a parallel between them and
individuals who also find their death, or accelerate it, by disobedience
to the laws of the Creator. So far, there is nothing contradictory to
reason, even when unassisted by Divine light; but these two truths once
admitted and duly weighed, the wisdom of the ancients, I repeat, affords
no further assistance. They did not search into the ways by which the
Divine will effected the ruin of nations; on the contrary, they were
rather inclined to consider these ways as essentially mysterious, and
above comprehension. Seized with pious terror at the aspect of the
wrecks, they easily imagined that Providence had specially interfered
thus to strike and completely destroy once powerful states. Where a
miracle is recorded by the Sacred Scriptures, I willingly submit; but
where that high testimony is wanting, as it is in the great number of
cases, we may justly consider the ancient theory as defective, and not
sufficiently enlightened. We may even conclude, that as Divine Justice
watches over nations unremittingly, and its decrees were pronounced ere
the first human society was formed, they are also enforced in a
predeterminate manner, and according to the unalterable laws of the
universe, which govern both animated nature and the inorganic world.

If we have cause to reproach the philosophers of the earlier ages, for
having contented themselves, in attempting to fathom the mystery, with
the vindication of an incontestable theological truth, but which itself
is another mystery; at least, they have not increased the difficulties
of the question by making it a theme for a maze of errors. In this
respect, they rank highly above the rationalist schools of various
epochs.

The thinkers of Athens and Rome established the doctrine, which has
retained its ground to our days, that states, nations, civilizations,
perished only through luxury, enervation, bad government, corruption of
morals, fanaticism. All these causes, either singly or combined, were
supposed to account for the downfall of civilizations. It is a necessary
consequence of this doctrine, that where neither of these causes are in
operation, no destructive agency is at work. Societies would therefore
possess this advantage over individuals, that they could die no other
but a violent death; and, to establish a body politic as durable as the
globe itself, nothing further would be necessary than to elude the
dangers which I enumerated above.

The inventors of this thesis did not perceive its bearing. They
considered it as an excellent means for illustrating the doctrine of
morality, which, as is well known, was the sole aim of their historical
writings. In their narratives of events, they were so strongly
preoccupied with showing the happy rewards of virtue, and the disastrous
results of crime and vice, that they cared little for what seemed to
furnish no illustration. This erroneous and narrow-minded system often
operated contrary to the intention of the authors, for it applied,
according to occasion, the name of virtue and vice in a very arbitrary
manner; still, to a great extent, the severe and laudable sentiment upon
which it was based, excuses it. If the genius of a Plutarch or a Tacitus
could draw from history, studied in this manner, nothing but romances
and satires, yet the romances were sublime, and the satires generous.

I wish I could be equally indulgent to the writers of the eighteenth
century, who made their own application of the same theory; but there
is, between them and their teachers, too great a difference. While the
ancients were attached to the established social system, even to a
fault, our moderns were anxious for destruction, and greedy of untried
novelties. The former exerted themselves to deduce useful lessons from
their theory; the latter have perverted it into a fearful weapon against
all rational principles of government, which they stigmatized by every
term that mankind holds in horror. To save societies from ruin, the
disciples of Voltaire would destroy religion, law, industry, commerce;
because, if we believe them, religion is fanaticism; laws, despotism;
industry and commerce, luxury and corruption.

I have not the slightest intention of entering the field of polemics; I
wished merely to direct attention to the widely diverging results of
this principle, when applied by Thucydides, or the Abbé Raynal.
Conservative in the one, cynically aggressive in the other, it is
erroneous in both.

The causes to which the downfall of nations is generally ascribed are
not the true ones, and whilst I admit that these evils may be rifest in
the last stages of dissolution of a people, I deny that they possess in
themselves sufficient strength, and so destructive an energy, as to
produce the final, irremediable catastrophe.


FOOTNOTES:

[30] A. de Humboldt, Examen Critique de l'Histoire de la Géographie du
Nouveau Continent. Paris.

[31] Amadée Thierry, _La Gaule sous l'Administration Romaine_, vol. i.
p. 244.




