CHAPTER XV.
A MORNING MEETING—THE LETTER AGAIN


The scarlet and orange light outside the malthouse did not penetrate to
its interior, which was, as usual, lighted by a rival glow of similar
hue, radiating from the hearth.

The maltster, after having lain down in his clothes for a few hours,
was now sitting beside a three-legged table, breakfasting off bread and
bacon. This was eaten on the plateless system, which is performed by
placing a slice of bread upon the table, the meat flat upon the bread,
a mustard plaster upon the meat, and a pinch of salt upon the whole,
then cutting them vertically downwards with a large pocket-knife till
wood is reached, when the severed lump is impaled on the knife,
elevated, and sent the proper way of food. The maltster’s lack of teeth
appeared not to sensibly diminish his powers as a mill. He had been
without them for so many years that toothlessness was felt less to be a
defect than hard gums an acquisition. Indeed, he seemed to approach the
grave as a hyperbolic curve approaches a line—sheering off as he got
nearer, till it was doubtful if he would ever reach it at all.

In the ashpit was a heap of potatoes roasting, and a boiling pipkin of
charred bread, called “coffee,” for the benefit of whomsoever should
call, for Warren’s was a sort of village clubhouse, there being no inn
in the place.

“I say, says I, we get a fine day, and then down comes a snapper at
night,” was a remark now suddenly heard spreading into the malthouse
from the door, which had been opened the previous moment, and the form
of Henery Fray advanced to the fire, stamping the snow from his boots
when about half-way there. The speech and entry had not seemed to be at
all an abrupt beginning to the maltster, introductory matter being
often omitted in this neighbourhood, both from word and deed, and the
maltster having the same latitude allowed him, did not hurry to reply.
He picked up a fragment of cheese, by pecking upon it with his knife,
as a butcher picks up skewers.

Henery appeared in a drab kerseymere great-coat, buttoned over his
smock-frock, the white skirts of the latter being visible to the
distance of about a foot below the coat-tails, which, when you got used
to the style of dress, looked natural enough, and even ornamental—it
certainly was comfortable.

Matthew Moon, Joseph Poorgrass, and other carters and waggoners
followed at his heels, with great lanterns dangling from their hands,
which showed that they had just come from the cart-horse stables, where
they had been busily engaged since four o’clock that morning.

“And how is she getting on without a baily?” the maltster inquired.

Henery shook his head, and smiled one of the bitter smiles, dragging
all the flesh of his forehead into a corrugated heap in the centre.

“She’ll rue it—surely, surely!” he said “Benjy Pennyways were not a
true man or an honest baily—as big a betrayer as Judas Iscariot
himself. But to think she can manage alone!” He allowed his head to
swing laterally three or four times in silence. “Never in all my
creeping up—never!”

This was recognized by all as the conclusion of some gloomy speech
which had been expressed in thought alone during the shake of the head;
Henery meanwhile retained several marks of despair upon his face, to
imply that they would be required for use again directly he should go
on speaking.

“All will be ruined, and ourselves too, or there’s no meat in
gentlemen’s houses!” said Mark Clark in the manner of a man ready to
burst all links of habit.

“A headstrong maid, that’s what she is—and won’t listen to no advice at
all. Pride and vanity have ruined many a cobbler’s dog. Dear, dear,
when I think of it, I sorrows like a man in travel!”

“True, Henery, you do, I’ve heard ye,” said Joseph Poorgrass, in a
voice of thorough attestation, and with a wire-drawn smile of misery.

“’Twould do a martel man no harm to have what’s under her bonnet,” said
Billy Smallbury, who had just entered, bearing his one tooth before
him. “She can spaik real language, and must have some sense somewhere.
Do ye conceive me?”

“I do, I do; but no baily—I deserved that place,” wailed Henery,
signifying wasted genius by gazing blankly at visions of a high destiny
apparently visible to him on Billy Smallbury’s smock-frock. “There,
’twas to be, I suppose. Your lot is your lot, and Scripture is nothing;
for if you do good you don’t get rewarded according to your works, but
are cheated in some mean way out of your recompense.”

“No, no; I don’t agree with’ee there,” said Mark Clark, decisively.
God’s a perfect gentleman in that respect.”

“Good works good pay, so to speak it,” attested Joseph Poorgrass.

A short pause ensued, and as a sort of _entr’acte_ Henery turned and
blew out the lanterns, which the increase of daylight rendered no
longer necessary even in the malthouse, with its one pane of glass.

“I wonder what a farmer-woman can want with a harpsichord, dulcimer,
pianner, or whatever ’tis they d’call it,” said the maltster. “Liddy
saith she’ve a new one.”

“Got a pianner?”

“Ay. Seems her old uncle’s things were not good enough for her. She’ve
bought all but everything new. There’s heavy chairs for the stout, weak
and wiry ones for the slender; great watches, getting on to the size of
clocks, to stand upon the chimbley-piece.”

“Pictures, for the most part wonderful frames.”

“Long horse-hair settles for the drunk, with horse-hair pillows at each
end.”

“Looking-glasses for the pretty.”

“Lying books for the wicked.”

A firm loud tread was now heard stamping outside; the door was opened
about six inches, and somebody on the other side exclaimed,—

“Neighbours, have ye got room for a few new-born lambs?”

“Ay, sure, shepherd,” said the conclave.

The door was flung back till it kicked the wall and trembled from top
to bottom with the blow. Mr. Oak appeared in the entry with a steaming
face, hay-bands wound about his ankles to keep out the snow, a leather
strap round his waist outside the smock-frock, and looking altogether
an epitome of the world’s health and vigour. Four lambs hung in various
embarrassing attitudes over his shoulders, and the dog George, whom
Gabriel had contrived to fetch from Norcombe, stalked solemnly behind.

“Well, Shepherd Oak, and how’s lambing this year, if I may say it?”
inquired Joseph Poorgrass.

“Terrible trying,” said Oak. “I’ve been wet through twice a-day, either
in snow or rain, this last fortnight. Cainy and I haven’t tined our
eyes to-night.”

“A good few twins, too, I hear, so to speak it?”

“Too many by half. Yes; ’tis a very queer lambing this year. We sha’n’t
have done by Lady Day.”

“And last year ’twer all over by Sexagessamine Sunday,” Joseph
remarked.

“Bring on the rest, Cain,” said Gabriel, “and then run back to the
ewes. I’ll follow you soon.”

Cainy Ball—a cheery-faced young lad, with a small circular orifice by
way of mouth, advanced and deposited two others, and retired as he was
bidden. Oak lowered the lambs from their unnatural elevation, wrapped
them in hay, and placed them round the fire.

“We’ve no lambing-hut here, as I used to have at Norcombe,” said
Gabriel, “and ’tis such a plague to bring the weakly ones to a house.
If ’twasn’t for your place here, malster, I don’t know what I should
do! this keen weather. And how is it with you to-day, malster?”

“Oh, neither sick nor sorry, shepherd, but no younger.”

“Ay—I understand.”

“Sit down, Shepherd Oak,” continued the ancient man of malt. “And how
was the old place at Norcombe, when ye went for your dog? I should like
to see the old familiar spot; but faith, I shouldn’t know a soul there
now.”

“I suppose you wouldn’t. ’Tis altered very much.”

“Is it true that Dicky Hill’s wooden cider-house is pulled down?”

“O yes—years ago, and Dicky’s cottage just above it.”

“Well, to be sure!,

“Yes; and Tompkins’s old apple-tree is rooted that used to bear two
hogsheads of cider with its own apples, and no help from other trees.”

“Rooted?—you don’t say it! Ah! stirring times we live in—stirring
times.”

“And you can mind the old well that used to be in the middle of the
place? That’s turned into a solid iron pump with a large stone trough,
and all complete.”

“Dear, dear—how the face of nations alter, and what great revolutions
we live to see now-a-days! Yes—and ’tis the same here. They’ve been
talking but now of the mis’ess’s strange doings.”

“What have you been saying about her?” inquired Oak, sharply turning to
the rest, and getting very warm.

“These middle-aged men have been pulling her over the coals for pride
and vanity,” said Mark Clark; “but I say, let her have rope enough.
Bless her pretty face—shouldn’t I like to do so—upon her cherry lips!”
The gallant Mark Clark here made a peculiar and well-known sound with
his own.

“Mark,” said Gabriel, sternly, “now you mind this: none of that
dalliance-talk—that philandering way—that dandle-smack-and-coddle style
of yours—about Miss Everdene. I don’t allow it. Do you hear?”

“With all my heart, as the old woman said,” replied Mr. Clark,
heartily.

“I suppose you’ve been speaking against her?” said Oak, turning to
Joseph Poorgrass with a very grim look.

“No, no—not a word I—’tis a real joyful thing that she’s no worse,
that’s what I say,” said Joseph, trembling and blushing with terror.
“Matthew just said——”

“Matthew Moon, what have you been saying?” asked Oak.

“I? Why ye know I wouldn’t harm a worm—no, not one underground worm?”
said Matthew Moon, looking very uneasy.

“Well, somebody has—and look here, neighbours.” Gabriel, though one of
the quietest and most gentle men on earth, rose to the occasion, with
martial promptness and vigour. “That’s my fist.” Here he placed his
fist, rather smaller in size than a common loaf, in the mathematical
centre of the maltster’s little table, and with it gave a bump or two
thereon, as if to ensure that their eyes all thoroughly took in the
idea of fistiness before he went further. “Now—the first man in the
parish that I hear prophesying bad of our mistress, why”—(here the fist
was raised and let fall, as Thor might have done with his hammer in
assaying it)—“he’ll smell and taste that—or I’m a Dutchman.”

All earnestly expressed by their features that their minds did not
wander to Holland for a moment on account of this statement, well
knowing it was but a powerful form of speech; but were deploring the
difference which gave rise to the figure; and Mark Clark cried “Hear,
hear; as the undertaker said.” The dog George looked up at the same
time after the shepherd’s menace, and though he understood English but
imperfectly, began to growl.

“Now, don’t ye take on so, shepherd, and sit down!” said Henery, with a
deprecating peacefulness equal to anything of the kind in Christianity.

“We hear that ye be a extraordinary good and clever man, shepherd,”
said Joseph Poorgrass with considerable anxiety from behind the
maltster’s bedstead whither he had retired for safety. “’Tis a great
thing to be clever, I’m sure,” he added, making small movements
associated with states of mind rather than body; “we wish we were,
don’t we, neighbours?”

“Ay, that we do, sure,” said Matthew Moon, with a small anxious laugh
towards Oak, to show how very friendly disposed he was likewise.

“Who’s been telling you I’m clever?” said Oak.

“’Tis blowed about from pillar to post quite common,” said Matthew. “We
hear that ye can tell the time as well by the stars as we can by the
sun and moon, shepherd.”

“Yes, I can do a little that way,” said Gabriel, as a man of medium
sentiments on the subject.

“And that ye can make sun-dials, and prent folks’ names upon their
waggons almost like copper-plate, with beautiful flourishes, and great
long tails. A excellent fine thing for ye to be such a clever man,
shepherd. Joseph Poorgrass used to prent to Farmer James Everdene’s
waggons before you came, and ’a could never mind which way to turn the
J’s and E’s—could ye, Joseph?” Joseph shook his head to express how
absolute was the fact that he couldn’t. “And so you used to do ’em the
wrong way, like this, didn’t ye, Joseph?” Matthew marked on the dusty
floor with his whip-handle

[Illustration: J A M E S]

“And how Farmer James would cuss, and call thee a fool, wouldn’t he,
Joseph, when ’a seed his name looking so inside-out-like?” continued
Matthew Moon, with feeling.

“Ay—’a would,” said Joseph, meekly. “But, you see, I wasn’t so much to
blame, for them J’s and E’s be such trying sons o’ dogs for the memory
to mind whether they face backward or forward; and I always had such a
forgetful memory, too.”

“’Tis a bad afiction for ye, Jospeh Poorgrass—being such a man of
calamity in other ways.”

“Well, ’tis; but a happy Providence ordered that it should be no worse,
and I feel my thanks. As to shepherd, there, I’m sure mis’ess ought to
have made ye her baily—such a fitting man for’t as you be.”

“I don’t mind owning that I expected it,” said Oak, frankly.” Indeed, I
hoped for the place. At the same time, Miss Everdene has a right to be
her own baily if she chooses—and to keep me down to be a common
shepherd only.” Oak drew a slow breath, looked sadly into the bright
ashpit, and seemed lost in thoughts not of the most hopeful hue.

The genial warmth of the fire now began to stimulate the nearly
lifeless lambs to bleat and move their limbs briskly upon the hay, and
to recognize for the first time the fact that they were born. Their
noise increased to a chorus of baas, upon which Oak pulled the milk-can
from before the fire, and taking a small teapot from the pocket of his
smock-frock, filled it with milk, and taught those of the helpless
creatures which were not to be restored to their dams how to drink from
the spout—a trick they acquired with astonishing aptitude.

“And she don’t even let ye have the skins of the dead lambs, I hear?”
resumed Joseph Poorgrass, his eyes lingering on the operations of Oak
with the necessary melancholy.

“I don’t have them,” said Gabriel.

“Ye be very badly used, shepherd,” hazarded Joseph again, in the hope
of getting Oak as an ally in lamentation after all. “I think she’s took
against ye—that I do.”

“Oh no—not at all,” replied Gabriel, hastily, and a sigh escaped him,
which the deprivation of lamb skins could hardly have caused.

Before any further remark had been added a shade darkened the door, and
Boldwood entered the malthouse, bestowing upon each a nod, of a quality
between friendliness and condescension.

“Ah! Oak, I thought you were here,” he said. “I met the mail-cart ten
minutes ago, and a letter was put into my hand, which I opened without
reading the address. I believe it is yours. You must excuse the
accident please.”

“O yes—not a bit of difference, Mr. Boldwood—not a bit,” said Gabriel,
readily. He had not a correspondent on earth, nor was there a possible
