CHAPTER XVII.
ADVENTURES BY THE SHORE


Troy wandered along towards the west. A composite feeling, made up of
disgust with the, to him, humdrum tedium of a farmer’s life, gloomily
images of her who lay in the churchyard, remorse, and a general
aversion to his wife’s society, impelled him to seek a home in any
place on earth save Weatherbury. The sad accessories of Fanny’s end
confronted him as vivid pictures which threatened to be indelible, and
made life in Bathsheba’s house intolerable. At three in the afternoon
he found himself at the foot of a slope more than a mile in length,
which ran to the ridge of a range of hills lying parallel with the
shore, and forming a monotonous barrier between the basin of cultivated
country inland and the wilder scenery of the coast. Up the hill
stretched a road perfectly straight and perfectly white, the two sides
approaching each other in a gradual taper till they met the sky at the
top about two miles off. Throughout the length of this narrow and
irksome inclined plane not a sign of life was visible on this garish
afternoon. Troy toiled up the road with a languor and depression
greater than any he had experienced for many a day and year before. The
air was warm and muggy, and the top seemed to recede as he approached.

At last he reached the summit, and a new and novel prospect burst upon
him with an effect almost like that of the Pacific upon Balboa’s gaze.
The broad steely sea, marked only by faint lines, which had a semblance
of being etched thereon to a degree not deep enough to disturb its
general evenness, stretched the whole width of his front and round to
the left, where, near the town and port of Budmouth, the sun bristled
down upon it, and banished all colour, to substitute in its place a
clear oily polish. Nothing moved in sky, land, or sea, except a frill
of milkwhite foam along the nearer angles of the shore, shreds of which
licked the contiguous stones like tongues.

He descended and came to a small basin of sea enclosed by the cliffs.
Troy’s nature freshened within him; he thought he would rest and bathe
here before going farther. He undressed and plunged in. Inside the cove
the water was uninteresting to a swimmer, being smooth as a pond, and
to get a little of the ocean swell, Troy presently swam between the two
projecting spurs of rock which formed the pillars of Hercules to this
miniature Mediterranean. Unfortunately for Troy a current unknown to
him existed outside, which, unimportant to craft of any burden, was
awkward for a swimmer who might be taken in it unawares. Troy found
himself carried to the left and then round in a swoop out to sea.

He now recollected the place and its sinister character. Many bathers
had there prayed for a dry death from time to time, and, like Gonzalo
also, had been unanswered; and Troy began to deem it possible that he
might be added to their number. Not a boat of any kind was at present
within sight, but far in the distance Budmouth lay upon the sea, as it
were quietly regarding his efforts, and beside the town the harbour
showed its position by a dim meshwork of ropes and spars. After
well-nigh exhausting himself in attempts to get back to the mouth of
the cove, in his weakness swimming several inches deeper than was his
wont, keeping up his breathing entirely by his nostrils, turning upon
his back a dozen times over, swimming _en papillon_ and so on, Troy
resolved as a last resource to tread water at a slight incline, and so
endeavour to reach the shore at any point, merely giving himself a
gentle impetus inwards whilst carried on in the general direction of
the tide. This, necessarily a slow process, he found to be not
altogether so difficult, and though there was no choice of a
landing-place—the objects on shore passing by him in a sad and slow
procession—he perceptibly approached the extremity of a spit of land
yet further to the left, now well defined against the sunny portion of
the horizon. While the swimmer’s eyes were fixed upon the spit as his
only means of salvation on this side of the Unknown, a moving object
broke the outline of the extremity, and immediately a ship’s boat
appeared, manned with several sailor lads, her bows towards the sea.

All Troy’s vigour spasmodically revived to prolong the struggle yet a
little further. Swimming with his right arm, he held up his left to
hail them, splashing upon the waves, and shouting with all his might.
From the position of the setting sun his white form was distinctly
visible upon the now deep-hued bosom of the sea to the east of the
boat, and the men saw him at once. Backing their oars and putting the
boat about, they pulled towards him with a will, and in five or six
minutes from the time of his first halloo, two of the sailors hauled
him in over the stern.

They formed part of a brig’s crew, and had come ashore for sand.
Lending him what little clothing they could spare among them as a
slight protection against the rapidly cooling air, they agreed to land
him in the morning; and without further delay, for it was growing late,
they made again towards the roadstead where their vessel lay.

And now night drooped slowly upon the wide watery levels in front; and
at no great distance from them, where the shore-line curved round, and
formed a long riband of shade upon the horizon, a series of points of
yellow light began to start into existence, denoting the spot to be the
site of Budmouth, where the lamps were being lighted along the parade.
The cluck of their oars was the only sound of any distinctness upon the
sea, and as they laboured amid the thickening shades the lamp-lights
grew larger, each appearing to send a flaming sword deep down into the
waves before it, until there arose, among other dim shapes of the kind,
the form of the vessel for which they were bound.




CHAPTER XVIII.
DOUBTS ARISE—DOUBTS VANISH


Bathsheba underwent the enlargement of her husband’s absence from hours
to days with a slight feeling of surprise, and a slight feeling of
relief; yet neither sensation rose at any time far above the level
commonly designated as indifference. She belonged to him: the
certainties of that position were so well defined, and the reasonable
probabilities of its issue so bounded, that she could not speculate on
contingencies. Taking no further interest in herself as a splendid
woman, she acquired the indifferent feelings of an outsider in
contemplating her probable fate as a singular wretch; for Bathsheba
drew herself and her future in colours that no reality could exceed for
darkness. Her original vigorous pride of youth had sickened, and with
it had declined all her anxieties about coming years, since anxiety
recognizes a better and a worse alternative, and Bathsheba had made up
her mind that alternatives on any noteworthy scale had ceased for her.
Soon, or later—and that not very late—her husband would be home again.
And then the days of their tenancy of the Upper Farm would be numbered.
There had originally been shown by the agent to the estate some
distrust of Bathsheba’s tenure as James Everdene’s successor, on the
score of her sex, and her youth, and her beauty; but the peculiar
nature of her uncle’s will, his own frequent testimony before his death
to her cleverness in such a pursuit, and her vigorous marshalling of
the numerous flocks and herds which came suddenly into her hands before
negotiations were concluded, had won confidence in her powers, and no
further objections had been raised. She had latterly been in great
doubt as to what the legal effects of her marriage would be upon her
position; but no notice had been taken as yet of her change of name,
and only one point was clear—that in the event of her own or her
husband’s inability to meet the agent at the forthcoming January
rent-day, very little consideration would be shown, and, for that
matter, very little would be deserved. Once out of the farm, the
approach of poverty would be sure.

Hence Bathsheba lived in a perception that her purposes were broken
off. She was not a woman who could hope on without good materials for
the process, differing thus from the less far-sighted and energetic,
though more petted ones of the sex, with whom hope goes on as a sort of
clockwork which the merest food and shelter are sufficient to wind up;
and perceiving clearly that her mistake had been a fatal one, she
accepted her position, and waited coldly for the end.

The first Saturday after Troy’s departure she went to Casterbridge
alone, a journey she had not before taken since her marriage. On this
Saturday Bathsheba was passing slowly on foot through the crowd of
rural business-men gathered as usual in front of the market-house, who
were as usual gazed upon by the burghers with feelings that those
healthy lives were dearly paid for by the lack of possible
aldermanship, when a man, who had apparently been following her, said
some words to another on her left hand. Bathsheba’s ears were keen as
those of any wild animal, and she distinctly heard what the speaker
said, though her back was towards him

“I am looking for Mrs. Troy. Is that she there?”

“Yes; that’s the young lady, I believe,” said the the person addressed.

“I have some awkward news to break to her. Her husband is drowned.”

As if endowed with the spirit of prophecy, Bathsheba gasped out, “Oh,
it is not true; it cannot be true!” Then she said and heard no more.
The ice of self-command which had latterly gathered over her was
broken, and the currents burst forth again, and overwhelmed her. A
darkness came into her eyes, and she fell.

But not to the ground. A gloomy man, who had been observing her from
under the portico of the old corn-exchange when she passed through the
group without, stepped quickly to her side at the moment of her
exclamation, and caught her in his arms as she sank down.

“What is it?” said Boldwood, looking up at the bringer of the big news,
as he supported her.

“Her husband was drowned this week while bathing in Carrow Cove. A
coastguardsman found his clothes, and brought them into Budmouth
yesterday.”

Thereupon a strange fire lighted up Boldwood’s eye, and his face
flushed with the suppressed excitement of an unutterable thought.
Everybody’s glance was now centred upon him and the unconscious
Bathsheba. He lifted her bodily off the ground, and smoothed down the
folds of her dress as a child might have taken a storm-beaten bird and
arranged its ruffled plumes, and bore her along the pavement to the
Three Choughs Inn. Here he passed with her under the archway into a
private room; and by the time he had deposited—so lothly—the precious
burden upon a sofa, Bathsheba had opened her eyes, and remembering all
that had occurred, murmured, “I want to go home!”

Boldwood left the room. He stood for a moment in the passage to recover
his senses. The experience had been too much for his consciousness to
keep up with, and now that he had grasped it it had gone again. For
those few heavenly, golden moments she had been in his arms. What did
it matter about her not knowing it? She had been close to his breast;
he had been close to hers.

He started onward again, and sending a woman to her, went out to
ascertain all the facts of the case. These appeared to be limited to
what he had already heard. He then ordered her horse to be put into the
gig, and when all was ready returned to inform her. He found that,
though still pale and unwell, she had in the meantime sent for the
Budmouth man who brought the tidings, and learnt from him all there was
to know.

Being hardly in a condition to drive home as she had driven to town,
Boldwood, with every delicacy of manner and feeling, offered to get her
a driver, or to give her a seat in his phaeton, which was more
comfortable than her own conveyance. These proposals Bathsheba gently
declined, and the farmer at once departed. About half an hour later she
invigorated herself by an effort, and took her seat and the reins as
usual—in external appearance much as if nothing had happened. She went
out of the town by a tortuous back street, and drove slowly along,
unconscious of the road and the scene. The first shades of evening were
showing themselves when Bathsheba reached home, when, silently
alighting and leaving the horse in the hands of the boy, she proceeded
at once upstairs. Liddy met her on the landing. The news had preceded
Bathsheba to Weatherbury by half an hour, and Liddy looked inquiringly
into her mistress’s face. Bathsheba had nothing to say.

She entered her bedroom and sat by the window, and thought and thought
till night enveloped her, and the extreme lines only of her shape were
visible. Somebody came to the door, knocked, and opened it.

“Well, what is it, Liddy?” she said.

“I was thinking there must be something got for you to wear,” said
Liddy, with hesitation.

“What do you mean?”

“Mourning.”

“No, no, no,” said Bathsheba, hurriedly.

“But I suppose there must be something done for poor——”

“Not at present, I think. It is not necessary.”

“Why not, ma’am?”

“Because he’s still alive.”

“How do you know that?” said Liddy, amazed.

“I don’t know it. But wouldn’t it have been different, or shouldn’t I
have heard more, or wouldn’t they have found him, Liddy?—or—I don’t
know how it is, but death would have been different from how this is. I
am full of a feeling that he is still alive!”

 Bathsheba remained firm in this opinion till Monday, when two
 circumstances conjoined to shake it. The first was a short paragraph
 in the local newspaper, which, beyond making by a methodizing pen
 formidable presumptive evidence of Troy’s death by drowning, contained
 the important testimony of a young Mr. Barker, M.D., of Budmouth, who
 spoke to being an eye-witness of the accident, in a letter to the
 editor. In this he stated that he was passing over the cliff on the
 remoter side of the cove just as the sun was setting. At that time he
 saw a bather carried along in the current outside the mouth of the
 cove, and guessed in an instant that there was but a poor chance for
 him unless he should be possessed of unusual muscular powers. He
 drifted behind a projection of the coast, and Mr. Barker followed
 along the shore in the same direction. But by the time that he could
 reach an elevation sufficiently great to command a view of the sea
 beyond, dusk had set in, and nothing further was to be seen.

[Illustration: HE SAW A BATHER CARRIED ALONG IN THE CURRENT.]

The other circumstance was the arrival of his clothes, when it became
necessary for her to examine and identify them—though this had
virtually been done long before by those who inspected the letters in
his pockets. It was so evident to her in the midst of her agitation
that Troy had undressed in the full conviction of dressing again almost
immediately, that the notion that anything but death could have
prevented him was never entertained.

Then Bathsheba said to herself that others were assured in their
opinion, and why should not she be? A strange reflection occurred to
her, causing her face to flush. Troy had left her, and followed Fanny
into another world. Had he done this intentionally, yet contrived to
make his death appear like an accident? Oddly enough, this thought of
how the apparent might differ from the real—made vivid by her bygone
jealousy of Fanny, and the remorse he had shown that night—blinded her
to the perception of any other possible difference, less tragic, but to
herself far more terrible.

When alone late that evening beside a small fire, and much calmed down,
Bathsheba took Troy’s watch into her hand, which had been restored to
her with the rest of the articles belonging to him. She opened the case
as he had opened it before her a week ago. There was the little coil of
pale hair which had been as the fuze to this great explosion.

“He was hers and she was his, and they are gone together,” she said. “I
am nothing to either of them, and why should I keep her hair?” She took
it in her hand, and held it over the fire. “No—I’ll not burn it—I’ll
keep it in memory of her, poor thing!” she added, snatching back her
hand.




