letter coming to him whose contents the whole parish would not have
been welcome to peruse.

Oak stepped aside, and read the following in an unknown hand:—

“DEAR FRIEND,—I do not know your name, but I think these few lines will
reach you, which I write to thank you for your kindness to me the night
I left Weatherbury in a reckless way. I also return the money I owe
you, which you will excuse my not keeping as a gift. All has ended
well, and I am happy to say I am going to be married to the young man
who has courted me for some time—Sergeant Troy, of the 11th Dragoon
Guards, now quartered in Melchester. He would, I know, object to my
having received anything except as a loan, being a man of great
respectability and high honour—indeed, a nobleman by blood.

“I should be much obliged to you if you would keep the contents of this
letter a secret for the present, dear friend. We mean to surprise
Weatherbury by coming there soon as husband and wife, though I blush to
state it to one nearly a stranger. The sergeant grew up in Weatherbury.
Thanking you again for your kindness,

“I am, your sincere well-wisher,
“FANNY ROBIN.”


“Have you read it, Mr. Boldwood?” said Gabriel; “if not, you had better
do so. I know you are interested in Fanny Robin.”

Boldwood read the letter and looked grieved.

“Fanny—poor Fanny! the end she is so confident of has not yet come, she
should remember—and may never come.”

“What sort of a man is this Sergeant Troy?” said Gabriel.

“H’m—I’m afraid not one to build much hope upon in such a case as
this,” the farmer murmured, “though he’s a clever fellow, and up to
everything. A slight romance attaches to him, too. His mother was a
French governess, and it seems that a secret attachment existed between
her and the late Lord Severn. Soon after she was married to a poor
medical man, and while money was forthcoming all went on well.
Unfortunately for her boy, his best friends died; and he got then a
situation as second clerk at a lawyer’s in Casterbridge. He stayed
there for some time, and might have worked himself into a dignified
position of some sort had he not indulged in the wild freak of
enlisting. I have much doubt if ever little Fanny will surprise us in
the way she mentions—very much doubt A silly girl!—silly girl!”

The door was hurriedly burst open again, and in came running Cainy Ball
out of breath, his mouth red and open, like the bell of a penny
trumpet, and coughing with noisy vigour and great distension of face.

“Now, Cain Ball,” said Oak, sternly, “why will you run so fast and lose
your breath so? I’m always telling you of it.”

“Oh—I—A puff of mee breath—went—the wrong way, please, Mister Oak, and
made me cough—hok—hok!”

“Well—what have you come for?”

“I’ve run to tell ye,” said the junior-shepherd, supporting his
exhausted youthful frame against the doorpost,” that you must come
directly. Two more ewes have twinned—that’s what’s the matter, Shepherd
Oak.”

“Oh, that’s it,” said Oak, jumping up, and dimissing for the present
his thoughts on poor Fanny. “You are a good boy to run and tell me,
Cain, and you shall smell a large plum-pudding some day as a treat.
But, before we go, Cainy, bring the tarpot, and we’ll mark this lot and
have done with ’em.”

Oak took from his illimitable pockets a marking iron, dipped it into
the pot, and imprinted on the buttocks of the infant sheep the initials
of her he delighted to muse on—“B. E.,” which signified to all the
region round that henceforth the lambs belonged to farmer Bathsheba
Everdene, and to no one else.

“Now, Cainy, shoulder your two, and off. Good morning, Mr. Boldwood.”
The shepherd lifted the sixteen large legs and four small bodies he had
himself brought, and vanished with them in the direction of the lambing
field hard by—their frames being now in a sleek and hopeful state,
pleasantly contrasting with their death’s-door plight of half-an-hour
before.

Boldwood followed him a little way up the field, hesitated, and turned
back. He followed him again with a last resolve, annihilating return.
On approaching the nook in which the fold was constructed, the farmer
drew out his pocket-book, unfastened it, and allowed it to lie open on
his hand. A letter was revealed—Bathsheba’s.

“I was going to ask you, Oak,” he said, with unreal carelessness, “if
you know whose writing this is?”

Oak glanced into the book, and replied instantly, with a flushed face,
“Miss Everdene’s.”

Oak had coloured simply at the consciousness of sounding her name. He
now felt a strangely distressing qualm from a new thought. The letter
could of course be no other than anonymous, or the inquiry would not
have been necessary.

Boldwood mistook his confusion: sensitive persons are always ready with
their “Is it I?” in preference to objective reasoning.

“The question was perfectly fair,” he returned—and there was something
incongruous in the serious earnestness with which he applied himself to
an argument on a valentine. “You know it is always expected that privy
inquiries will be made: that’s where the—fun lies.” If the word “fun”
had been “torture,” it could not have been uttered with a more
constrained and restless countenance than was Boldwood’s then.

Soon parting from Gabriel, the lonely and reserved man returned to his
house to breakfast—feeling twinges of shame and regret at having so far
exposed his mood by those fevered questions to a stranger. He again
placed the letter on the mantelpiece, and sat down to think of the
circumstances attending it by the light of Gabriel’s information.




