CHAPTER II.

THE PROCESS OF DEATH.

 Constitution of organisms.—Partial lives.—Collective life.—The
 rôle of apparatus.—Death by lesion of the major apparatus.—The
 vital tripod.—Solidarity of the anatomical elements.—Humoral
 solidarity.—Nervous solidarity.—Independence and subordination of the
 anatomical elements.


_Partial Lives._ _Collective Life._—With the exception of the
physiologist, no one, neither he who is ignorant nor he who is
intellectual, nor even the doctor, troubles his head about the life
or the death of the element, although this is the basis, the real
foundation, of the activity manifested by the social body and by its
different organs. The life of the individual, of the animal, depends
on these elementary partial lives just as the existence of the State
depends upon that of its citizens. To the physiologist, the organism
is a federation of cellular elements unified by close association.
Goethe compared them to a “multitude”; Kant to a “nation”; and others
have likened them to a populous city the anatomical elements of which
are the citizens, and which possesses an individuality of its own. So
that the activity of the federated organism may be discussed in each
of its parts, and then it is _elementary life_, or in its totality,
and then it is _general life_. Paracelsus and Bordeu had a glimpse
of this truth when they considered a life appropriate to each part
(_vita propria_) and a collective life, the life of the whole (_vita
communis_). In the same way we must distinguish the _elementary death_,
which is the cessation of the vital phenomena in the isolated cell,
from the _general death_, which is the disappearance of the phenomena
which characterised the collectivity, the totality, the federation, the
nation, the city, the whole in so far as it is a unit.

These comparisons enable us to understand how general life depends on
the partial lives of each anatomical citizen. If all die, the nation,
the federation, the total being clearly ceases to exist. This city
has an enormous population—there are thirty trillion cellules in the
body of man; it is peopled with absolutely sedentary citizens, each
of which has its fixed place, which it never leaves, and in which
it lives and dies. It must possess a system of more or less perfect
arrangements to secure the material life of each inhabitant. All have
analogous requirements: they feed very much the same; they breathe in
the same way; each in fact has its profession, industry, talents, and
aptitudes by which it contributes to social life, and on which, in its
turn, it depends. But the process of alimentation is the same for all.
They must have water, nitrogenous materials and analogous ternaries;
the same mineral substances, and the same vital gas, oxygen. It is no
less necessary that the wastes and the egesta, very much alike in every
respect, should be carried off and borne away in discharges arranged so
as to free the whole system from the inconvenience, the unhealthiness,
and the danger of these residues.

_Secondary Organization in Organs._—That is why, as we said above, the
secondary organizations of the economy exist:—the digestive apparatus
which prepares the food and enables it to pass into the blood, into the
lymph, and finally into the liquid medium which bathes each cell and
constitutes its real medium; the respiratory apparatus which imports
the oxygen and exports the gaseous excrement, carbonic acid; the heart
and the circulatory system which distributes through the system the
internal medium, suitably purified and recuperated. The organization
is dominated by the necessities of cellular life. This is the law of
the city, to which Claude Bernard has given the name of the _law of the
constitution of organisms_.

_Death by Lesion of the Major Organs. Vital Tripod._—Thus we understand
what life is, and at the same time what is the death of a complex
living being. The city perishes if its more or less complicated
mechanisms which look after its revictualling and its discharge are
seriously affected at any point. The different groups may survive for
a more or less lengthy period, but progressively deprived of the means
of food or of discharge, they are finally involved in the general
ruin. If the heart stops, there is a universal famine; if the lungs
are seriously injured, we are asphyxiated; if the principal organ of
discharge, the kidney, ceases to perform its allotted task, there is a
general poisoning by the used-up and toxic materials retained in the
blood.

We understand how the integrity of the major organs,—the heart, the
lungs, the kidney,—is indispensable to the maintenance of existence. We
understand that their lesion, by a series of successive repercussions,
involves universal death. We always die, said the doctors of old,
because of the failure of one of these three organs, the heart, the
lungs, or the brain. Life, they said in their inaccurate language,
depends upon these as upon three supports. Hence the idea of the _vital
tripod_. But it is not only this trio of organs which maintain the
organism; the kidney and the liver are no less important. In different
degrees each part exercises its action on the rest. Life is based in
reality on the immense multitude of living cells associated for the
formation of the body; on the thirty trillion anatomical elements,
each part is more or less necessary to all the rest, according as the
bond of solidarity is drawn more or less closely in the organism under
consideration.

_Death and the Brain._—There are indeed more noble elements charged
with higher functions than the rest. These are the nervous elements.
Those of the brain preside over the higher functions of animality,
sensibility, voluntary movement, and the exercise of the intellect. The
rest of the nervous system forms an instrument of centralization which
establishes the relations of the parts one with the other and secures
their solidarity. When the brain is stricken and its functions cease,
man has lost the consciousness of his existence. Life seems to have
disappeared. We say of a man in this plight that he no longer lives,
thus confusing general life with the cerebral life which is its highest
manifestation. But the man or the animal without a brain lives what may
be called a vegetative life. The human anencephalic foetus lives for
some time, just as the foetus which is properly formed. Observation
always shows that this existence of the other parts of the body cannot
be sustained indefinitely in the absence of that of the brain. By a
series of impulses due to the solidarity of the grouping of the parts,
the injury received by the brain affects by repercussion the other
organs, and leads in the long run to the arrest of elementary life in
all the anatomical elements. The death of the whole is then complete.

Doctors have therefore a two-fold reason for saying that the brain
may cause death. The death of the brain suppresses the highest
manifestation of life, and, in the second place, by a more or less
remote counter stroke, it suppresses life in all the rest of the system.

_Death is a Process._—Besides, the fact is general. The death of one
part always involves the death of the rest—_i.e._, universal death. A
living organism cannot be at the same time alive and a cemetery. The
corpses cannot exist side by side with the living elements. The dead
contaminates the living, or in some other way involves it in its ruin.
Death is propagated; it is a progressive phenomenon which begins at one
point and gradually is extended to the whole. It has a beginning and a
duration. In other words, the death of a complex organism is a process.
And further, the end of a simple organism, of a protozoan, of a cell,
is itself a process infinitely more shortened.

The very perfection of the organism is therefore the cause of its
fragility. It is the degree of solidarity of the parts one with another
which involves the one set in the catastrophe of the rest, just as in
a delicate piece of mechanism the derangement of a wheel brings nearer
and nearer the total breakdown. The important parts, the lungs, the
heart, the brain, suffer no serious alteration without the reflex being
felt throughout. But there are also wheels less evident, the integrity
of which is scarcely less necessary.

_The Solidarity of the Anatomical Elements._—The cause of the mortal
process—_i.e._, of the extension and the propagation of an initial
destruction—is therefore to be found in the solidarity of the parts
of the organism. The closer it is the greater do the chances of
destruction become, for the accident which has happened to one will by
repercussions affect the others.

Now the solidarity of the parts of the organism may be carried out in
two ways; there is a _humoral solidarity_ and a _nervous solidarity_.

_Humoral Solidarity._—Humoral solidarity is realized by the mixture
of humours. All the liquids of the organism which have lodged in the
interstices of the elements and which soak the tissues, are in contact
and in relation of exchange one with another, and through the permeable
wall of the small vessels they are in relation with the blood and the
lymph.

All the liquid atmospheres which surround the cells and form their
ambient medium have intercommunication. A change having taken place in
one cellular group, and therefore in the corresponding liquid, modifies
the medium of the further or nearer groups, and therefore these groups
themselves.

_Nervous Solidarity._—But the real instrument of the solidarity of the
part is the nervous system. Thanks to it in the living machine the
component activities of the cellular multitude restrain and control
one another. Nervous solidarity makes of the complex being not a mob
of cells, but a connected system, an individual in which the parts are
subordinated to the whole and the whole to the parts; in which the
social organism has its rights just as the individual has his rights.
The whole secret of the vital functional activity of the complex
being is contained in these two factors:—the independence and the
subordination of the elementary lives. General life is the harmony of
the elementary lives, their symphony.

_Independence and Subordination of the Anatomical Elements._—The
independence of the anatomical elements results from the fact that
they are the real depositaries of the vital properties, the really
active components. On the other hand the subordination of the parts
to the whole is the very condition of the preservation of form in
animals and plants. The architecture which is characteristic of
them, the morphological plan which they realize in their evolutive
development which they are ever preserving and repairing, form a
striking proof of this. This dependence in no way contradicts the
autonomy of the elements. For when with Claude Bernard and Virchow
we study the circumstances we see that the element accommodates
itself to the organic plan without violence to its nature. It behaves
in its natural place as it would behave elsewhere, if elsewhere it
were to meet around it the same liquid medium which at once is a
stimulant and a food. This at least is the conclusion we may draw from
experiments on transplanting, or on animal and vegetable grafting.
Neither the neighbouring elements, nor the whole system act on it at
a distance by a kind of mysterious induction, according to the ideas
of the vitalists, in order to regulate the activity of the element.
They contribute solely to the composition of the liquid atmosphere
which bathes it. They intervene in order to provide it with a
certain environment whose very characteristic physical and chemical
constitution regulates its activity. This constitution may be some day
imitated by the devices of experiment. When that result is achieved
the anatomical element will live in isolation exactly as it lives in
the organic association, and the mysterious bond which causes its
solidarity with the rest of the economy will become intelligible. In
fact, we may defer more or less the maturity of this prophecy, but
there is no doubt that we are daily nearing its fulfilment.

The general life of the complex being is therefore the more or less
perfect synergy, the _ordered process_ of elementary lives. General
death is the destruction of these partial lives. The nervous system,
the instrument of this harmony of the parts, represents the social
bond. It keeps most of the partial elements under its sway, and is
thus the intermediary of their relations. The closer this dependence,
the higher the development of the nervous apparatus, and the better,
also, is assured the universal solidarity and therefore the unity of
the organism. Cellular federation assumes the characteristic of a
unique individuality in proportion to the development of this nervous
centralization. With an ideal perfect nervous system the correlation
of the parts would also attain perfection. As Cuvier said: “None could
experience change without a change in the rest.”

But no animal possesses this extreme solidarity of the parts of the
living economy. It is a philosopher’s dream. It is the dream of Kant,
to whom the perfect organism would be “a teleological system,” a system
of reciprocal ends and means, a sum total of parts each existing for
and by the rest, for and by the whole. An organism so completely
connected would be unlikely to live. In fact, living organisms show
a little more freedom in the interplay of their parts. Their nervous
apparatus fortunately does not attain this imaginary perfection; their
unity is not so rigorous. The idea of individuality, of individual
existence, is therefore not absolute but relative. There are all
degrees of it according to the development of the nervous system. What
the man in the street and the doctor himself understand by death is the
situation created by the stopping of the general wheels, the brain, the
heart, and the lungs. If the breath leaves no trace on the glass held
to the mouth, if the beating of the heart is no longer perceptible by
the hand which touches or the ear which listens, if the movement and
the reaction of sensitiveness have ceased to be manifest, these signs
make us conclude that it is death. But this conclusion, as we have said
before, is a prognostic rather than a judgment of fact. It expresses
the belief that the subject will certainly die, and not that it is from
this moment dead. To the physiologist the subject is only on the way to
die. The process has started. The only real death is when the universal
death of all the elements has been consummated.




