CHAPTER IV.

THE APPARENT PERENNITY OF COMPLEX INDIVIDUALS.

 Millenary trees—Plants with a definite rhizome—Vegetables
 reproduced by cuttings—Animal colonies—Destruction due to extrinsic
 causes—Difficulty of interpretation.


Popular opinion teaches us that living beings have only a transient
existence, and as a poet has said: “Life is but a flash between two
dark nights.” But, on the other hand, simple observation shows us, or
appears to show us, beings whose duration of existence is far longer,
and practically illimitable.

_Millenary Trees._—We know of trees of venerable antiquity. Among these
patriarchs of the vegetable world there is a chestnut tree on Mount
Etna which is ten centuries old, and an ivy in Scotland which is said
to be thirty centuries old. Trees of 5000 years old are not absolutely
unknown. We may mention among those of that age the famous dragon
tree[21] at Orotava, in the island of Teneriffe. Two other examples are
known in California—the pseudo-cedar, or _Tascodium_, at Sacramento,
and a _Sequoïa gigantea_. We know that the olive tree may live 700
years. There are cedars 800 years old and oaks of the age of 1,500
years.

 [21] Lately destroyed in a storm. [Tr.]

_Plants with a Rhizome._—Vegetable species of almost unlimited
duration of life are known to botanists. Such, for instance, are plants
with a definite rhizome, such as colchicum. Autumnal colchicum has a
subterranean root, the bulb of which pushes out every year fresh axes
for a new bloom; and as each of these new axes stretches out an almost
constant length, a botanist once set himself the singular problem of
discovering how long it would take such a foot, if suitably directed,
to travel round the world.

_Vegetables Reproduced by Cuttings._—Vegetables reproduced by slips
furnish another example of living beings of indefinite duration. The
weeping willows which adorn the banks of sheets of water in the parks
and gardens throughout the whole of Europe have sprung, directly or
indirectly, from slips of the first _Salix Babylonica_ introduced to
the West. May it not be said that they are the permanent fragments of
that one and the same willow?

_Animal Colonies._—These examples, as well as those furnished to
zoologists by the consideration of the polypi which have produced by
their slow growth the reefs, or _atolls_, of the Polynesian seas,
do not, however, prove the perennity of living beings. The argument
is valueless, for it is founded upon a confusion. It turns on the
difficulty that biologists experience in defining the individual. The
oak and the polypus are not simple individuals, but associations of
individuals, or, to use Hegel’s expression, the nations of which we see
the successive generations. We give to this succession of generations
a unique existence, and our reasoning comes to this, that we confer on
each present citizen of this social body the antiquity which belongs to
the whole.

_Destruction of the Social Individual due to Extrinsic Causes._—As
for the destruction, the death of this social individual, of this
hundred-year-old tree, it seems indeed that there is no ground for
considering it a natural necessity. We find the sufficient reason of
its usual end in the repercussion on the individual of external and
contingent circumstances. The cause of the death of a tree, of an oak
many centuries old, is to be found in the ambient conditions, and not
in some internal condition. Cold and heat, damp and dryness, the weight
of the snow, the mechanical action of the rain, of hail, of winds
unchained, of lightning; the ravages of insects and parasites—these are
what really work its ruin. And further, the new branches, appearing
every year and increasing the load the trunk has to bear, increase the
pressure of the parts, and make more difficult the motion of the sap.
But for these obstacles, external, so to speak, to the vegetable being
itself, it would continue indefinitely to bloom, to fructify, and as
each spring returned to show fresh buds.

_Difficulty of Interpretation._—In this as in all other examples we
must know the nature of the beings that we see lasting on and braving
the centuries. Is it the individual? Is it the species? Is it a living
being, properly so called, having its unity and its individuality,
or is it a series of generations succeeding one another in time and
extending in space? In a word, the question is one of knowing if we
have to do with a real tree or with a genealogical tree. We are just
as uncertain when we deal with animals. What is the being that lasts
on—a series of generations or an individual? This doubt forbids us to
draw any conclusion from the observation of complex beings. We must
therefore return from them to the _elementary being_; and we must
examine it from the point of view of perennity or of vital decay. Let
us then ask the questions that we have already examined with reference
to animals high in organization and to man himself. Is the death of the
cell an inevitable characteristic? Are there any cells, protophytes,
protozoa, which are immortal?




CHAPTER V.

THE IMMORTALITY OF THE PROTOZOA.

 Impossibility of life without evolution—Law of increase and
 division—Immortality of the protozoa—Death, a phenomenon of adaptation
 which has appeared in the course of the ages—The infusoria—The
 death of the infusoria—Two kinds of reproduction—The caryogamic
 rejuvenescence of Maupas—Calkins on rejuvenescence—Causes of
 senescence—Impossibility of life without evolution.


We take into account, _a priori_, the conditions that must be fulfilled
by the monocellular being in order to escape the inevitability of
evolution, of the succession of ages, of old age, and of death. It must
be able indefinitely to maintain itself in a normal régime, without
changing, without increasing, maintaining its constant morphological
and chemical composition, in an environment vast enough for it to
be unaltered by the borrowings or the spendings resulting from its
nutrition—_i.e._, it must remain constant in the presence of the
constant being. We might conceive of a nutrition perfect enough, of
exchanges exact enough, and regular enough, for the state of things to
be indefinitely maintained. This would be absolute permanence realized
in the vital mobility.

_The Law of Growth and Division._—This model of a perfect and
invariable machine does not exist in nature. Life is incompatible with
the absolute permanence of the dimensions and the forms of the living
organism.

In a word, it is a rigorous law of living nature that the cell can
neither live indefinitely without growth, nor grow indefinitely without
division.

Why is this so? Why is there this impossibility of a regular régime in
which the cell would be maintained in magnitude without diminution or
increase? Why has nutrition as a necessary consequence the growth of
the element? This is what we do not positively know.

Things are so. It is an irreducible fact, peculiar to the protoplasm, a
characteristic of the living matter of the cell. It is the fundamental
basis of the property of generation. That is all we can say about it.
Real living beings have therefore inevitably an evolution. They are not
unchangeable. In its simple form this evolution consists in the fact
that the cell grows, divides, and diminishes by this division, begins
the upward march which ends in a new division. And so on.

_Immortality of the Protozoa._—It may happen, and it does happen
in fact, that this series of acts is repeated indefinitely at any
rate unless an accidental cause should interrupt it. The animal thus
describes an indefinite curve, constituted by a series of indentations,
the highest point of which corresponds to the maximum of size, and the
lowest point to the diminution which succeeds the division. This state
of things has no inevitable end if the medium does not change. The
being is immortal.

In fact, the compound beings of a single cell, protophytes and
protozoa, the algae and the unicellular mushrooms, at the minimum stage
of differentiation, escape the necessity of death. They have not, as
Weismann remarks, the real immortality of the gods of mythology, who
were invulnerable. On the contrary, they are infinitely vulnerable,
fragile, and perishable; myriads die every moment. But their death is
not inevitable. They succumb to accidents, never to old age.

Imagine one of these beings placed in a culture medium favourable to
the full exercise of its activities, and, moreover, wide enough in
its extent to be unaffected by the infinitely small quantities of
material which the animal may take from it or expel into it. Suppose,
for example, it is an infusorian in an ocean. In this invariable medium
the being lives, increases, and grows continually. When it has reached
the limits of a size fixed by its specific law, it divides into two
parts, which are indistinguishable the one from the other. It leaves
one of its halves to colonize in its neighbourhood, and it begins its
evolution as before. There is no reason why the fact should not be
repeated indefinitely, since nothing is changed, either in the medium
or in the animal.

To sum up. The phenomena which take place in the cell of the protozoan
do not behave as a cause of check. The medium allows the organism
to revictual and to discharge itself in such a way and with such
perfection that the animal is always living in a regular régime, and,
with the exception of its growth and later on of its division, there is
nothing changed in it.

_Death a Phenomenon of Adaptation—It appeared in the Course of the
Ages._—This immortality belongs in principle to all the protista which
are reproduced by simple and equal division. If it be remarked that
these rudimentary organisms endowed with perennity are the first living
forms which have shown themselves on the surface of the globe, and
that they have no doubt preceded many others—the multicellular, for
instance, which are liable, on the contrary, to decay—the conclusion
is obvious:—Life has long existed without death. Death has been a
phenomenon of adaptation which has appeared in the course of the ages
in consequence of the evolution of species.

_The Death of Infusoria._—We may ask ourselves at what moment in the
history of the globe, at what period of the evolution of its fauna,
this novelty, death, made its appearance. The celebrated experiments of
Maupas on the senescence of the infusoria seem to authorize us to give
a precise answer to this question. By means of these experiments we are
led to believe that death must have appeared at the same time as sexual
reproduction. Death became possible when this process of generation was
established, not in all its plenitude, but in its humblest beginnings,
under the rudimentary forms of unequal division and of conjugation.
This happened when the infusoria began to people the waters.

_The Two Modes of Multiplication._—Infusoria are, in fact, capable of
multiplication by simple division. It is true to say that in addition
to this resource, the only one which interests us here, because it
is the only one which confers immortality, they possess another.
They present and exercise under certain circumstances a second mode
of reproduction, caryogamic conjugation. It is a rather complicated
process in its detail, but it is definitively summed up as the
temporary pairing of two individuals, which are otherwise very much
alike, and which cannot be distinguished as male and female. They
become closely united on one of their faces; they reciprocally exchange
a semi-nucleus which passes into the conjoint individual; and then
they separate. But infusoria can be prevented from this conjunction by
regularly isolating them immediately after their birth. Then they grow,
and are constrained after a lapse of time to divide according to the
first method.

Maupas has shown that the infusoria could not accommodate themselves
to this régime indefinitely; they could not go on dividing for ever.
After a certain number of divisions they show signs of degeneration
and of evident decay. The size diminishes, the nuclear organs become
atrophied, all the activities fail, and the infusorian perishes.
It succumbs to this kind of senile atrophy unless it is given an
opportunity of conjugation with another infusorian in the same plight.
In this act it then derives new strength, it grows larger, attains its
proper size, and builds up its organs once more. Conjugation gives it
life, youth, and immortality.

_Alimentary Rejuvenescence._—Recent observations due to Mr. G. N.
Calkins, an American biologist, and confirmed by other investigators,
have shown that this method of rejuvenescence is not the only one,
and is not even the most efficacious. Conjugation has no mysterious,
specific virtue. The infusoria need not be married in order to be
rejuvenated. It is sufficient to improve their food. In the case of
the “tailed” paramecium we may substitute beef broth and phosphates
for conjugation. Calkins observed 665 consecutive generations without
blemish, without exhaustion, and without any sign of old age. Plenty of
food and simple drugs have successfully resisted senility and the train
of atrophic degenerations which it involves.

_Causes of Senescence._—As for the causes of senescence which have
been remedied with such success, they are not exactly known. Calkins
thinks that senescence results from the progressive losses to the
organism of some substance essential to life. Conjugation or intensive
alimentation would act by building up again this necessary compound.
G. Loisel believes on the contrary that it is a matter of the
progressive accumulation of toxic products due to a kind of alimentary
auto-intoxication.




