CHAPTER VI.

LETHALITY OF THE METAZOA AND OF DIFFERENTIATED CELLS.

 Evolution and death of metazoa.—Possible rejuvenescence of the
 differentiated cells by the conditions of the medium.—Conditions of
 the medium for immortal cells.—The immortal elements of metazoa.—The
 element in accidental and remediable death.—Somatic cells and sexual
 cells.


_Evolution and Death of Metazoa._—We have seen that the infusoria
are no longer animals in which material exchanges take place with
sufficient perfection, and in which cellular division, the consequence
of growth, is produced with sufficient precision and equality for
life to be carried on indefinitely in a perfect equilibrium in the
appropriate medium without alteration or check. _A fortiori_ we no
longer find the perfect regularity of nutritive exchange in the classes
above them. In a word, starting from this inferior group, there are
no animated beings in the state of existence which Le Dantec calls
“condition Iº of manifested life?” Living matter, instead of being
continually kept identical in conditions of identical media, is
modified in the course of existence. It becomes dependent on time. It
describes a declining trajectory; it experiences evolution, decay,
and death. Thus the fundamental condition of invariable youth and of
immortality fails in all metazoa. The vital wastes accumulate in all
through the insufficiency or the imperfection of nutritive absorption
or of excretion. Life decays; the organism progressively alters, and
thus is constituted that state of decrepitude by atrophy or chemical
modification which we call senescence, and which ends in death. To sum
up, old age and death may be attributed to cellular differentiation.

_Possible Alimentary Rejuvenescence of the Differentiated
Cells—Conditions of Medium._—We must add, however—as the teaching
of experiments in general and in particular as the teaching of the
experiments of Loeb and of Calkins—that a slight change of the
environment, made at the right time, is capable of re-establishing
equilibrium and of completely rejuvenating the infusorian. Senescence
has not in this case a definitive any more than an intrinsic character;
a modification in the composition of the alimentary medium will
successfully resist it. If we are allowed to generalize this result, it
may be said that senescence, the declining trajectory, the evolution
step by step down to death, are not for the cells considered in
isolation an inevitable and essentially inherent in the organism, and
a rigorous consequence of life itself. They preserve an accidental
character. In senescence and death there is no really natural, internal
cause, inexorable, and irremediable, as was claimed in the past by J.
Müller, and more recently by Cohnheim in Germany and Sedgwick Minot in
America.

_Conditions of the Medium for Immortal Cells._—As for the cells which
are less differentiated, the protophytes and the protozoa situated
one degree lower in the scale than the infusoria, we must admit the
possibility of that perfect and continuous equilibrium which would
save them from senile decrepitude. And it is quite understood that
this privilege remains subordinated to the perfect constancy of the
appropriate medium. If the latter changes, the equilibrium is broken,
the small insensible perturbations of nutrition accumulate, vital
activity decays, and in sole consequence of the imperfection of the
extrinsic conditions or of the medium, the living being finds itself
once more dragged down to decay and to death.

_Immortal Elements of the Metazoa._—All the preceding facts and
considerations refer to isolated cells, to monocellular beings.
But, and this is what makes these truths so interesting, they may
be extended to all cells grouped in collectivity—i.e., to all the
animals and living beings that we know. In the complicated edifice
of the organism, the anatomical elements, at any rate the least
differentiated, would have a continual brevet of immortality. Generally
speaking, this would be the case for the egg, for the sexual elements,
and perhaps, too, for the white globules of the blood, the leucocytes.
And, further, around each of these elements must be realized the
invariably perfect medium which is the necessary condition. This does
not take place.

_Elements in Accidental and Remediable Death._—As for the other
elements, they are like the infusoria, but without the resource of
conjugation. The ambient medium becomes exhausted and intoxicated
around each cell, in consequence of the accidents which happen to the
other cells. Each therefore undergoes progressive decay, and finally
they perish—the decay and destruction being perhaps in principle
accidental, but, in fact, they are the rule.

The different anatomical elements of the organism are more or less
sensitive to those perturbations which cause senescence, necrobiosis,
and death. There are some more fragile and more exposed. Some are more
resisting, and finally, there are some which are really immortal. We
have just said that the sexual cell, the ovum, is one. It follows that
the metazoan, man for instance, cannot entirely die. Let us consider
one of these beings. Its ancestors, so to speak, have not entirely
disappeared; each has left the fertile egg, the surviving element from
which has issued the being of which we speak; and when it in its turn
has developed, part of that ovum has been placed in reserve for a new
generation. The death of the elements is not therefore universal. The
metazoan is divided from the beginning into two parts. On the one
hand are the cells destined to form the body, _somatic_ cells. They
will die. On the other hand are the _reproductive_, or _germinal_, or
_sexual_ cells, capable of living indefinitely.

_Somatic and Sexual Cells._—In this sense we may say with Weismann
that there are two things in the animal and in man—the one mortal,
the _soma_ the body, the other immortal, the _germen_. These germinal
cells, as in the case of the protozoa we mentioned above, possess a
conditional immortality. They are imperishable, but on the contrary,
are fragile and vulnerable. Millions of ova are destroyed and are
disappearing every moment. They may die by accident, but never of old
age.

We now understand that if the protistae are immortal, it is because
these living beings, reduced to a single cell, accumulate in it the
compound characters of the somatic cell and germinal cell, and enjoy
the privilege which is attached to the latter.




