CHAPTER VI.

NUTRITION IN THE LIVING BEING AND IN THE CRYSTAL.

 Assimilation and growth in the crystal.—Methods of growth
 in the crystal and in the living being; intussusception;
 apposition.—Secondary and unimportant character of the process of
 intussusception.


I have already stated (Chap. VI. p. 209) that nutrition may be
considered as the most characteristic and essential property of living
beings. Such beings are in a state of continual exchange with the
surrounding medium. They assimilate and dissimilate. By assimilation
the substance of their being increases at the expense of the
surrounding alimentary material, which is rendered similar to that of
the being itself.

_Assimilation and Growth in the Crystal._—There exists in the crystal
a property analogous to nutrition, a kind of nutrility, which is
the rudiment of this fundamental property of living beings. The
development of a crystal starts from a primitive nucleus, the germ
of the crystalline individual that we will presently compare to
the ovum or embryo of a plant or an animal. Placed in a suitable
culture-medium—_i.e._, in a solution of the substance—this germ
develops. It assimilates the matter in solution, incorporates the
particles of it, and increases, preserving at the same time its form,
reproducing its specific type or a variety of it. Its growth proceeds
without interruption. The crystalline individual may attain quite a
large size if we know how to nourish it properly—we might say, to
fatten it. Very frequently, at a given time, a new particle of the
crystal serves in its turn as a primitive nucleus, and becomes the
point of departure for a new crystal engrafted upon the first.

Taken from its mother liquor, placed where it cannot be nourished,
the crystal, arrested in its growth, falls into a condition of rest
not without analogy to that of a seed or of a reviviscent animal. Its
evolution is resumed with the return of favourable conditions—the bath
of soluble matter.

The crystal is in a relation of continual exchange with the surrounding
medium which feeds it. These exchanges are regulated by the state of
this medium, or, more exactly, by the state of the liquid stratum
which is in immediate contact with the crystals. It loses or it gains
in substance if, for example, this layer becomes heated or cooled
more rapidly than the crystal. In a general way, it assimilates or
dissimilates according as its immediate environment is saturated or
diluted. Here, then, we have a kind of mobile equilibrium, comparable,
in some measure, to that of the living being.

_Methods of Growth of the Crystal and of the Living Being.
Intussusception. Apposition._—In truth, there seems to be a complete
opposition between the crystal and the living being as regards
their manner of nutrition and growth. In the one case the method
is intussusception; in the other it is apposition. The crystalline
individual is all surface. Its mass is impenetrable to the nutritive
materials. Since only the surface is accessible, the incorporation of
similar particles is possible only by external juxtaposition, and the
edifice increases only because a new layer of stones has been added to
those which were there before. On the contrary, the body of an animal
is a mass essentially penetrable. The cellular elements that compose
it have more or less rounded and flexible forms. Their contact is by
no means perfect. They have neither the stiffness nor the precision
of adjustment that the crystalline particles have. Liquids and gases
can insinuate themselves from without and circulate within the meshes
of this loose construction. Assimilation can therefore take place
throughout its whole depth, and the edifice increases because each
stone is itself increasing.

_The Secondary and Commonplace Character of the Process of
Intussusception._—The apparent opposition of these two processes is
doubtless diminished if we compare the simple mineral individual
with the elementary living unit, the crystalline particle with the
protoplasmic mass of a cell. Without carrying analysis so far as
this, it is yet easy to see that apposition and intussusception are
mechanical means that living beings employ at one and the same time and
combine according to their necessities. The hard parts of the internal
and external skeleton increase both by interposition and superposition,
at once. It is by the last method that bones increase in diameter,
and the shells of molluscs, the scales of reptiles and fishes, and
the testae of many radiate animals are formed. In these organs, as in
crystals, life and nutrition occur at the surface.

Apposition and intussusception are then secondary, mechanical
arrangements having relation to the physical characters of the
body—solidity in the crystal, semi-fluidity in the cellular protoplasm.
If we compare the inorganic liquid matter with the semi-fluid organized
matter, we recognize that the addition of substance takes place in
the same manner in each—_i.e._, by interposition. If we add a soluble
salt to a fluid, the molecules of the salt separate themselves and
interpose themselves between those of the fluid. There is, therefore,
nothing especially mysterious or particularly vital about the process
of intussusception. Applied to fluid protoplasm, it is merely the
diffusion that ordinarily occurs in mixed liquids.




CHAPTER VII.

GENERATION IN BRUTE BODIES AND LIVING BODIES. SPONTANEOUS GENERATION.

 Protoplasm a substance which continues—Case of the
 crystal—Characteristics of generation in the living being—Property of
 growth—Supposed to be confined to the living being—Fertilization of
 micro-organisms—Fertilization of crystals—Sterilization of crystalline
 and living media—Spontaneous generation of crystals—Metastable and
 labile zones—Glycerine crystals—Possible extinction of a crystalline
 species—Conclusion.


We have not yet exhausted the analogies between a crystal and the
living being. The possession of a specific form, the tendency to
re-establish it by redisintegration and the existence of a kind of
nutrition are not sufficient to constitute complete similarity. It
still lacks a fundamental character, that of generation. Chauffard
some time ago, in an attack which he made upon the physiological ideas
of his day, aptly exhibited this weak point. “Let us disregard,”
he said, “those interesting facts relative to the acquisition of a
typical form—facts that are common to the mineral world as well as
to living beings. It is none the less true that the crystalline type
is in no way derived from other pre-existing types, and that nothing
in crystallization recalls the actions of ascendants and the laws of
heredity.”

This gap has since been filled. The work of Gernez, of Violette, of
Lecoq de Boisbaudran, the experiments of Ostwald and of Tammann, the
observations of Crookes and of Armstrong—all this series of researches,
so lucidly summarized by M. Leo Errera in his essays in botanical
philosophy, had for their result the establishment of an unsuspected
relation between the processes of crystallization and those of
generation in animals and plants.

_Protoplasm is a Substance which Continues. The Case of the
Crystal._—Under present conditions a living being of any kind springs
from another living being similar to itself.

Its protoplasm is always a continuation of the protoplasm of an
ancestor. It is an atavic substance of which we do not see the
beginning; we only see it continue. The anatomical element comes from a
preceding anatomical element, and the higher animal itself comes from
a pre-existing cell of the material organism, the ovum. The ladder of
filiation reaches back indefinitely into the past.

We shall see that there is something analogous to this in certain
crystals. They are born of a preceding individual; they may be
considered as the posterity of the antecedent crystal. If we speak of
the matter of a crystal as the matter of a living being is spoken of,
in cases of this kind we would say that the crystalline substance is an
atavic substance of which we see only the continuation, as in the case
of protoplasm.

_Characters of Generation in the Living Being._—Growth of the living
substance, and consequently of the being itself, is the fundamental
law of vitality. Generation is the necessary consequence of growth (p.
210).

Living elements or cells cannot subsist indefinitely without increasing
and multiplying. The time must come when the cell divides, either
directly or indirectly; and then, instead of one cell, there are
two. This is the method of generation for the anatomical element.
In a complex individual it is a more or less restricted part of the
organism, usually a simple sexual cell, that takes on the formation
of the new being, and assures the perpetuity of the protoplasm, and
therefore of the species.

_Property of Growth. Its Supposed Restriction to Living Beings._—At
first it would appear that nothing like this occurs in inanimate
nature. The physical machine, if we furnish it matter and energy, could
go on working indefinitely, without being compelled to increase and
reproduce. Here, then, there is an entirely new condition peculiar to
the organized being, a property well adapted, it would seem—and this
time without any possible doubt—for separating living matter from brute
matter. It is not so.

It would not be impossible to imagine a system of chemical bodies
organized like the animal or vegetable economy, so that a destruction
would be compensated for by a growth. The only thing impossible is to
suppose, with M. le Dantec, a destruction that would at the same time
be an analysis. And an additional perplexity occurs when he supposes
that in the successive acts exchanges of material may occur.

There is no necessity for making this impossible chemistry a
characteristic of the living being. The chemistry of the living being
is general chemistry. Lavoisier and Berthelot enforced this view. We
should not lose sight of the teachings of the masters.

Let us return to generation, properly so called, and find in it the
characteristics of brute bodies and of crystals.

_The Sowing of Micro-organisms._—When a microbiologist wishes to
propagate a species of micro-organisms, he places in a culture medium
a few individuals (one is all that is actually necessary), and soon
observes their rapid multiplication. Usually, if only the ordinary
microbes in atmospheric dust are wanted, the operator need not trouble
to charge the culture; if the culture tube remains open and the medium
is suitably chosen, some germ of a common species will fall in and the
liquid will become colonized. This has the appearance of spontaneous
generation.

_The Sowing of Crystals._—Concentrated solutions of various substances,
supersaturated solutions of sodium magnesium sulphate, and sodium
chlorate are also wonderful culture media for certain mineral organic
units—certain crystalline germs. Ch. Dufour, experimenting with water
cooled below 0° C., its point of solidification; Ostwald, with salol
kept below 39°.5, its point of fusion; Tammann, with betol, which
melts at 96°; and, before them, Gernez, with melted phosphorus and
sulphur—all these physicists have shown that liquids in superfusion are
also media specially appropriate for the culture and propagation of
certain kinds of crystalline individuals.

Some of these facts have become classic. Lowitz showed in 1785 that a
solution of sodium sulphate could be concentrated by evaporation so
as to contain more salt than was conformable with the temperature,
without, however, depositing the excess. But if a solid fragment, a
crystal of salt, is thrown into the liquor, the whole of the excess
immediately passes into the state of a crystallized mass. The first
crystal has engendered a second similar to itself; the latter has
engendered a third, and so on from one to the other. If we compare
this phenomenon with that of the rapid multiplication of a species of
microbes in a suitable culture medium, no difference will be perceived.
Or perhaps we may note one unimportant difference—the rapidity of
the propagation of the crystalline germs as opposed to the relative
slowness of the generation of the micro-organisms.

Again, the propagation of crystallization in a supersaturated
or superfused liquid may be delayed by appropriate devices. The
crystalline individual gives birth, then, to another individual that
conforms to its own type, or even to varieties of that type when such
exist. Into the right branch of a U tube filled with sulphur in a state
of superfusion Gernez dropped octahedric crystals of sulphur, and into
the left branch prismatic crystals. On either side were produced new
crystals conforming to the type that had been sown.

_Sterilization of Crystalline Media and Living Media._—Ostwald varied
these experiments by using salol. He melted the substance by heating
it above 39∙5°C.; then, protecting it from crystals of any kind, he
let the solution stand in a closed tube. The salol remained liquid
indefinitely—until it was touched with a platinum wire that had been
in contact with solid salol—_i.e._, until a crystalline germ was
introduced. But if the platinum wire has been previously sterilized by
passing it, as the bacteriologists do, through a flame, it can then be
introduced into the liquor with impunity.

_The Dimensions of Crystalline Germs Comparable to those of
Microbes._—We may dilute the solid salol with inert powder—lactin,
for example—dilute the first mixture with a second, the second with a
third, and so on; then, throwing into the solution of surfused salol
a tenth of a milligram from one of these various mixtures, we find
that the production of crystals will not take place if the fragment
thrown in weighs less than a millionth of a milligram, or measures
less than ten thousandths of a millimetre in length. It would seem,
then, that these are the dimensions of the crystalline particle or
crystallographic molecule of salol. In the same way Ostwald satisfied
himself that the crystalline germ of hyposulphite of soda weighs
about a thousand-millionth of a milligram, and measures a thousandth
of a millimetre; that of chlorate of soda weighs a ten-millionth of
a milligram. These dimensions are entirely comparable with those of
microbes.

All these phenomena have been studied with a detail into which it
is impossible to enter here, and which clearly shows more and more
intimate analogies between the formation of crystals and the generation
of micro-organisms.

_Extension and Propagation of Crystallization. Optimum Temperature
of Incubation._—Crystallization which has commenced around a germ is
propagated more or less rapidly, and ends by invading the whole of the
liquor.

The rapidity of this movement of extension depends upon the conditions
of the medium, especially upon its temperature. This is shown very
well by Tammann’s experiments with betol. This body, the salicylic
ester of naphthol, fuses at 96° C. If it is melted in tubes sealed
at a temperature of 100° C., it may be cooled to lower and lower
temperatures—to + 70°, to + 25°, to + 10°, to-5° without solidifying.
Let us suppose that by some combination of circumstances a few centres
of crystallization—that is to say, of crystalline germs—have appeared
in the solution. Solidification will extend slowly at the ordinary
temperature, at 20° to 25° and thereabouts. On the other hand, it will
be propagated with great rapidity if the liquor is kept at about 70°.
This point—70°—is the thermal optimum for the propagation of germs.
It is the most favourable temperature for what may be called their
incubation. As soon as the germs find themselves in a liquor at 70°
they increase, multiply, and show that they are in the best conditions
for growth.

_Spontaneous Generation of Crystals. Optimum Temperature for the
Appearance of Germs._—If we consider various supersaturated solutions
or liquids in superfusion, we shall soon discover that they can be
arranged in two categories. Some remain indefinitely liquid under
given conditions unless a crystalline germ is introduced into them.
Others solidify spontaneously without artificial intervention, and such
crystallization may even be propagated very rapidly under determinate
conditions. This implies that these are conditions favouring the
spontaneous appearance of germs.

This distinction between substances of crystalline generation by
filiation and substances of spontaneous crystalline generation is not
specific. The same substance may present the two methods of generation
according to the conditions in which it is placed. Betol furnishes a
good example of this. Liquefy it at 100° in a sealed tube and keep
it by means of a stove above 30°, and it will remain liquid almost
indefinitely. On the other hand, lower its temperature and leave it
for one or two minutes at 10°, and germs will appear in the liquor;
prolong the exposure to this degree of heat and the number of these
spontaneously appearing germs, appearing in isolation, will rapidly
increase. On the other hand, you will observe that propagation by
filiation—that is to say, by extension from one to another—is almost
absent. The temperature of 10° is not favourable to that method of
generation; and we have just seen, in fact, that it is at a temperature
of about 70° that extension of crystallization from one to another
is best accomplished. The temperature of 70° was the optimum for
propagation by filiation. Inversely, the temperature of 10° is the
optimum for spontaneous generation. Above and below this optimum the
action is slower. We may count the centres of crystallization, which
slowly extend further and further, as in a microbic culture one counts
the colonies corresponding to the germs primitively formed. To sum
up, if there is an optimum for the formation of crystals, there is a
different optimum for their rapid extension.

_The Metastable and Labile Zones._—This phenomena is general. There
is for each substance a set of conditions (temperature, degree of
concentration, volume of the solution) in which the crystalline
individuals can be produced only by germs or by filiation. This is what
occurs for betol above the temperature of 30°. The body is then in what
Ostwald has called a _metastable_ zone. There is, however, for the same
body another set of circumstances more or less complete, in which its
gems appear simultaneously. This is what happens for betol at about the
temperature of 10°. These circumstances are those of the _labile zone_
or zone of spontaneous generation.

_Crystals of Glycerine._—We may go a step further. Let us suppose, with
L. Errera, that we have a liquid in a state of metastable equilibrium,
whose labile equilibrium is as yet unknown. This is what actually
occurs for a very widely known body, glycerine. We do not know under
what conditions glycerine crystallizes spontaneously. If we cool it,
it becomes viscous; we cannot obtain its crystals in that way. It was
not found in crystals until 1867. In that year, in a cask sent from
Vienna to London during winter, crystallised glycerine was found,
and Crookes showed these crystals to the Chemical Society of London.
What circumstances had determined their formation? We knew not then,
and we know not now. It may be observed that this case of spontaneous
generation of the crystals of glycerine has not remained the solitary
instance. M. Henninger has noted the accidental formation of glycerine
crystals in a manufactory in St. Denis.

It may be remarked that this crystalline species appeared, as living
species may have done, at a given moment in an environment in which a
favourable chance combined the necessary conditions for its production.
It is also quite comparable to the creation of a living species;
for having once appeared we have been able to perpetuate it. The
crystalline individuals of 1867 have had a posterity. They have been
sown in glycerine in a state of superfusion, and there they reproduced
themselves. These generations have been sufficiently numerous to
spread the species throughout a great part of Europe. M. Hoogewerf
showed a great flask full to the Dutch biologists who met at Utrecht
in 1891. M. L. Errera presented others in June 1899, to the Society of
Medical and Natural Sciences at Brussels. To-day the great manufactory
of Sarg & Co., of Vienna, is engaged in their production on a large
scale for industrial purposes.

Thus we are able to study this crystalline species of glycerine and to
determine with precision the conditions of its continued existence. It
has been shown that it does not resist a temperature of 18°, so that
if precautions were not taken to preserve it, a single summer would
suffice to annihilate all the crystalline individuals existing on the
surface of the globe, and thus the species would be extinguished.

_Possible Extinction of a Crystalline Species._—As these crystals
melt at 18°, this temperature represents the point of fusion of solid
glycerine or the point of solidification of liquid glycerine. But the
liquor does not solidify at all if its temperature falls below 18° C.,
as we well know, for it is at that temperature we use it. Nor does it
solidify at zero, nor even at 18° below zero; at 20°, for instance, it
merely thickens and becomes pasty. We only know glycerine, then, in a
state of superfusion, a fact which chemists have not learned without
amazement. Under these conditions, so analogous to the appearance of
a living species, to its unlimited propagation and to its extinction,
the mineral world offers a quite faithful counterpart to the animal
world. The living body illustrates here the history of the brute body
and facilitates its exposition. Inversely, the brute body in its
turn throws remarkable light on the subject of the living body, and
on one of the most serious problems relative to its origin, that of
spontaneous generation.

_Conclusion._—These facts lead to one conclusion. Until the concourse
of propitious circumstances favourable to their spontaneous generation
was brought about, crystals were obtained only by filiation. Until the
discovery of electro-magnetism, magnets were made only by filiation,
by means of the simple or double application of a pre-existing magnet.
Before the discovery which fable attributes to Prometheus, every new
fire was produced only by means of a spark from a pre-existing fire.
We are at the same historical stage as regards the living world,
and that is why, up to the present, there has never been formed a
single particle of living matter except by filiation, except by the
intervention of a pre-existing living organism.




