BOOK V.

SENESCENCE AND DEATH.

 Chap. I. The different points of view from which death may
 be regarded.—Chap. II. Constitution of the organisms—Partial
 death—Collective death.—Chap. III. Physical and chemical
 characteristics of cellular death—Necrobiosis.— Chap. IV. Apparent
 perennity of complex individuals.—Chap. V. Immortality of the protozoa
 and of slightly differentiated cells.


We grow old and we die. We see the beings which surround us grow old
and disappear. At first we see no exceptions to this inexorable law,
and we consider it as a universal and inevitable law of nature. But
is this generalization well founded? Is it true that no being can
escape the cruel fate of old age and death, to which we and all the
representatives of the higher animality are exposed? Or, on the other
hand, are any beings immortal? Biology answers that, in fact, some
beings are immortal. There are beings to whose life no law assigns a
limit, and they are the simplest, the least differentiated and the
least perfect. Death thus appears to be a singular privilege attached
to organic superiority, the ransom paid for a masterly complexity.
Above these elementary, monocellular, undifferentiated beings,
which are protected from mortality, we find others, higher in their
organization, which are exposed to it, but with whom death seems but
an accident, avoidable in principle if not in fact. The anatomical
elements of this higher animal are a case in point. Flourens once tried
to persuade us that the threshold of old age might be made to recede
considerably, and there are biologists in the present day who give us
some glimpse of a kind of vague immortality. We may, therefore, ask our
readers to follow us in our examination of these re-opened if not novel
questions, and we shall explain the views of contemporary physiology as
to the nature of death, its causes, its mechanisms, and its signs.




CHAPTER I.

VARIOUS WAYS OF REGARDING DEATH.

 Different meanings of the word death—Physiological distinction between
 elementary and general death—Non-scientific opinions—The ordinary
 point of view—Medical point of view.—The signs of death are prognostic
 signs.


_Different Meanings of the Word Death._—An English philosopher has
asserted that the word we translate by “cause” has no less than
sixty-four different meanings in Plato and forty-eight in Aristotle.
The word “death” has not so many meanings in modern languages, but
still it has many. Sometimes it indicates an action which is taking
place, the action of dying, and sometimes a state, the state which
succeeds the action of dying. The phenomena it connotes are in the eyes
of many biologists quite different, according as we watch them in an
animal of complex organization, or on the other hand, in monocellular
beings, protozoa and protophytes.

_Physiological Distinction between Elementary Death and General
Death._—We distinguish the death of the anatomical elements,
_elementary death_, from the death of the individual regarded as
a whole, _general death_. Hence we recognize an _apparent death_,
which is an incomplete and temporary suspension of the phenomena of
vitality, and a _real death_, which is a final and total arrest of
these phenomena. When we consider it in its essential nature (assumed,
but not known) we look on it as the _contrary of life_, as did the
Encyclopædia, Cuvier, and Bichat; or we regard it with others either as
the consequence of life, or simply as the end of life.

_Non-scientific Opinions._—What is death to those outside the realm of
science? First of all we find the consoling solution given by those
who believe death to be the commencement of another life. We next find
ourselves involved in a confused medley, an infinite diversity of
philosophical doubt and superstition. “A leap into the unknown,” says
one. “Dreamless and unconscious night,” says another. And again, “A
sleep which knows no waking.” Or, with Horace, “the eternal exile,” or
with Seneca, annihilation. _Post mortem nihil; ipsaque mors nihil._

The idea which is constantly supervening in the midst of this conflict
of opinion is that of the _breaking up_ of the elements, the union
of which forms the living being. It has, as we shall see, a real
foundation which may perhaps receive the support of science. We shall
not find that the best way of defining death is to say that it consists
of the “dissolution of the society formed by the anatomical elements,
or again, in the dissolution of the consciousness that the individual
possesses of himself—_i.e._, of the existence of this society.” It is
the rupture of the social bond. The old idea of dispersion is a variant
of the same notion. But the ancients evidently could not understand,
as we do, the nature of these elements which are associated to form
the living being, and which are liberated or dispersed by death.
We, as biologists, can see microscopical organic unity with a real
objective existence. The ancients were thinking of spiritual elements,
of principles, of entities. To the Romans, who may be said to have held
that there are three souls, death was produced by their separation
from the body. The first, the breath, the _spiritus_, mounting towards
celestial regions (_astra petit_); the second, the _shade_, regaining
on the surface of the earth and wandering around the tombs; the third,
the _manes_, descending to the lower regions. The belief of the Hindoos
was slightly different. The body returned to the earth, the breath to
the winds, the fire of the glance to the sun, and the ethereal soul to
the world of the pure. Such were the ideas of mortal dispersion formed
by ancient humanity.

Modern science takes a more objective point of view. It asks by
what facts, by what observable events death is indicated. Generally
speaking, we may say that these facts interrupt an interior state of
things which was life and to which they put an end. Thus death is
defined by life. It is the cessation of the events and of the phenomena
which characterize life. We must, therefore, know what life is to
understand the meaning of death. How wise was Confucius when he said to
his disciple, Li-Kou:—“If we do not know life, how can we know death?”
According to biology there are two kinds of death because there are two
kinds of life; elementary life and death correspond just as general
life and death do, and this is where scientific opinion diverges from
commonly received opinion.

What cares the man who reasons as most human beings do, about this life
of the anatomical elements of his body, the existence and the silent
activity of which are in no way revealed to him. What does their death
matter to him? To him there is but one poignant question, that of being
separated or not being separated from the society of his fellows. Death
is no longer to feel, no longer to think; it is the assurance that one
will never feel, one will never think again. Sleep, dreamless sleep,
is already in our eyes a kind of transient death; but, when we fall
asleep we are sure of waking again. There is no awaking from the sleep
of death. But that is not all. Man knows that death, this dreamless
sleep that knows no waking, will be followed by the dissolution of his
body. And what a dissolution will there be for the body, the object
of his continual care! Remember the description of Cuvier—the flesh
that passes from green to blue and from blue to black, the part which
flows away in putrid venom, the other part which evaporates in foul
emanations, and finally, the few ashes that remain, the tiny pinch of
minerals, saline or earthy, which are all that is left of that once
animated masterpiece.

_The Popular View._—To the man afraid of death it seems, in the
presence of so great a catastrophe, that the patient analysis of the
physiologist scrupulously noting the succession of phenomena and
explaining their sequence is uninteresting. He will only attach the
slightest importance to knowing that vestiges of vitality remain in
this or that part of his body, if they do not re-establish in every
part the _status quo ante_. He cares not to hear that a certain time
after the formal declaration of his death his nails and his hair will
continue to grow, that his muscles will still have the useless faculty
of contraction, that every organ, every tissue, every element, will
oppose a more or less prolonged resistance to the invasion of death.

_Medical View._—It is, however, these very facts and details, this
why and wherefore, which interest the physiologist. The state of
mind of the doctor in this respect, again, is different. When, for
instance, the doctor declares that such and such a person is dead,
he is really making not so much a statement of fact as a prediction.
How many elements are still living and will be capable of new birth
in this corpse that he has before his eyes? That is not what he asks
himself, nor is it what we should ask of him. He knows, besides, that
all these partial survivals will be extinguished and will never find
the conditions necessary to reviviscence, and that the organization
will never be restored to its primal activity; and this is what he
affirms. The fear of premature burial which haunts so many imaginations
is the fear of an error in the prediction. It is to avoid this that
practical medicine has devoted so much of its attention to the
discovery of a _certain_—and early—sign of death. By this we understand
the discovery of a _certain prognostic sign of general death_. We want
a prognostic sign enabling us to assert that the life of the brain is
now extinguished and will never be reanimated. And yet there are in
that organism many elements which are still alive. Many others even
may be born anew if we could give them suitable conditions which they
no longer meet with in the animal machine now thrown out of gear.
What finer example could we give than the experiment of Kuliabko, the
Russian physiologist, who kept a man’s heart working and beating for
eighteen hours after the official verification of his death.




