CHAPTER III.

PHYSICAL AND CHEMICAL CHARACTERS OF CELLULAR DEATH. NECROBIOSIS.
GROWING OLD.

 Characteristic of elementary life—Changes produced by death in the
 composition and the death of the cell—Schlemm; Loew; Bokorny; Pflüger;
 A. Gautier; Duclaux—The processive character of death—Accidental
 death—Necrobiosis—Atrophy—Degeneration—So-called natural
 death—Senescence—Metchnikoff’s theory of senescence—Objections.


Elementary death is nothing but the suppression in the anatomical
elements of all the phenomena of vitality.

_Characteristics of Elementary Life._—The characteristic features of
elementary life have been sufficiently fixed by science. First of
all, there is _morphological unity_. All the living elements have
an identical morphological composition. That is to say that life is
only accomplished and sustained in all its fulness in organic units
possessing the anatomical constitution of the cell, with its cytoplasm
and its nucleus, constituted on the classical type. In the second
place, there is _chemical unity_. The constituent matter, the matter of
which the cell is built up, diverges but little from a chemical type—a
proteid complex, with a hexonic nucleus, and from a physical model
which is an emulsion of granulous, immiscible liquids, of different
viscosities. The third character consists in the possession of a
_specific form_ acquired, preserved, and repaired by the element.
The fourth character, and perhaps the most essential of all, is _the
property of growth_ or _nutrition_ with its consequence, namely, a
relation of exchanges with the external medium, exchanges in which
oxygen plays considerable part. Finally, there is a last property,
that of _reproduction_, which in a certain measure is a necessary
consequence of the preceding,—_i.e._, of growth.

These five vital characters of the elements are most in evidence
in cells living in isolation, in microscopical beings formed of a
single cell, protophytes and protozoa. But we find them also in
the associations formed by the cells among one another—_i.e._, in
ordinary plants and animals, multicellular complexes, called for this
reason metaphytes and metazoa. Free or associated, the anatomical
elements behave in the same way—feed, grow, breathe, digest in the
same manner. As a matter of fact, the grouping of the cells, the
relations, proximity and contiguity, which they assume, introduce
some variants into the expression of the common phenomena; but these
slight differences cannot disguise the essential community of the vital
processes.

The majority of physiologists, following Claude Bernard, admit as
valent and convincing the proof that the illustrious experimenter
furnished of this unity of the vital processes. There are, however, a
few voices crying in the wilderness. M. Le Dantec is one. In his new
theory of life he amplifies and exalts the differences which exist
between the elementary life of the proteids and the associated life of
the metazoa. In them he can see nothing but contrasts and deviations.

If this is elementary life, let us ask what is _elementary
death_—_i.e._, the death of the cell. And in this connection let us
ask the questions which we have to examine in the case of animals high
in organization, and of man himself. What are the characteristics
of elementary death? When the cell dies, is its death preceded by a
growing old or senescence? What are the preliminary signs and the
acknowledged symptoms?

_Changes Produced by Death._—The state of death is only truly realized
when the fundamental properties of living matter enumerated above have
entirely disappeared. We must follow step by step this disappearance in
all the anatomical elements of the metazoan.

Now the properties of the cell are connected with the physical and
chemical organization of living matter. For them to disappear entirely,
this organization must be destroyed as far as all that is essential in
it is concerned. We cannot admit with the vitalists that there is any
material difference between the dead and the living, and that only an
immaterial principle which has escaped into the air distinguishes the
corpse from the animated being. In fact, the external configuration may
be almost preserved, and the corpse may bear the aspect and the forms
of the preceding state. But this appearance is deceptive. Something in
reality has changed. The structure, the chemical composition of the
living substance, have undergone essential changes. What are these
changes?

_Physical Changes._—Certain physiologists have endeavoured to determine
them. Klemm, a botanist, pointed out in 1895 the physical changes
which characterize the death of vegetable cells—loss of turgescence,
fragmentation of the protoplasm, the formation of granules, and the
appearance of vacuoles.

_Chemical Changes._—O. Loew and Bokorny laid great stress in 1886 and
1896 on the chemical changes. The living protoplasm according to them
is an unstable proteid compound. A slight change would detach from the
albuminoid molecule a nucleus with the function of aldehyde, and at the
same time would transform an amido-group into an amido-group. This
would suffice for the transition of the protoplasm from the living to
the dead state. This theory is based on the fact that the compounds
which exercise a toxic action on the living cell, without acting
chemically on the dead albumin, are easily fixed by the aldehydes; and
on the fact that many of them, which attack simultaneously the living
albuminoids and the dead albumin, easily combine with the amido-group.

E. Pflüger, a celebrated German scientist, has considered living matter
as an albumin spontaneously decomposable, the essential nucleus of
which is formed by cyanogen. Its active instability would be due to the
penetration into the molecule of the oxygen which fixes on the carbon
and separates it from the nitrogen. Armand Gautier has not confirmed
this view. Duclaux (1898) has stated that the difference between the
living and the dead albumin would be of a stereochemical order.

_Progressive Character of Death. Accidental Death._—We have seen that
in general the disappearance of the characteristics of vitality is not
instantaneous, at least in the natural course of things, in complex
organisms. It is the end of a more or less rapid process. But death
is not instantaneous in the isolated anatomical element any more than
it is in the protozoan or protophyte. We must have recourse to very
violent devices of destruction to kill the cell at a blow, to leave
absolutely nothing of its organization existing. The protoplasm of
yeast when violently crushed by Büchner still possessed the power of
secreting soluble ferments. A powerful action, a very high temperature,
is necessary to obtain the result. _A fortiori_, the difficulty
increases in the case of complex organisms, all of whose living
elements cannot be attacked at the same moment by the destructive
cause. A mechanical action, capable of destroying at one blow all the
living parts of a complex being, of an animal, of a plant, must be of
almost inconceivable power. The blow of a Nasmyth hammer would not be
strong enough.

The chemical alteration produced by a very toxic substance distributed
throughout the blood, and thus brought into contact with each element,
would produce a disorganization which, however rapid it were, could not
be called instantaneous. And the same holds good of physical agents.

But these are not the processes of nature under normal circumstances.
They are accidents or devices. We shall leave on one side their
consideration and we shall only deal here with the natural processes of
the organism.

Imagine it placed in a medium appropriate to its needs and following
out without intervening complications the evolution assigned to it by
its constitution. Experiment tells us that this natural evolution in
every case known to us ends in death. Death supervenes sooner or later.
For beings higher in organization, which we can bring into closer
and closer resemblance to man, we find that they die of disease,
by accident, or of old age. And as disease is an accident, we may
naturally ask if what we call old age is not also a disease.

However that may be, the mortal process, being never instantaneous, has
a duration, a beginning, a development, an end—in a word, a history.
It constitutes an intermediary phase between perfect life and certain
death.

_Necrobiosis._ _Atrophy._ _Degeneration._—The process according to
the circumstances may be shortened or prolonged. When death is the
result of violence events are precipitated. The physical and chemical
transformations of the living matter constitute a kind of acute
alteration called by Schultze and Virchow _necrobiosis_. According
to the pathologists, there are two kinds of _necrobiosis_:—that by
_destruction_, by _simple atrophy_, which causes the anatomical
elements to disappear gradually without undergoing appreciable
modifications; and _necrobiosis by degeneration_, which transforms the
protoplasm into fatty matter into calcareous matter, into granulations
(fatty degeneration, calcification, granulous degeneration). There is
no disagreement as to the causes of this necrobiosis. They are always
accidental; they originate in external circumstances:—the insufficiency
of the alimentary materials, of water, of oxygen; the presence in the
medium of real poisons destroying the organized matter; the violent
intervention of physical agents, heat, electricity; the reflex on the
composition of the cellular atmosphere of a violent attack on some
essential organ, the heart, the lungs, the kidneys.

_Senescence._ _Old Age._—In a second category we must place the
mortal processes, slow in their movement, in which we cannot see the
intervention of clearly accidental and abnormal disturbing agents.
Death appears to be the termination of a breaking-up proceeding by
insensible degrees in consequence of the progressive accumulation
of very small inappreciable perturbations. This slow breaking up
is adequately expressed by the term—growing old, or senescence.
The alterations by which it is betrayed in the cell are especially
_atrophic_, but they are also accompanied, however, by different
forms of degeneration. An extremely important question arises on this
subject, and that is whether the phenomena of senility have their cause
in the cell itself, if they are inevitably found in its organization,
and therefore if old age and death are natural and necessary phenomena.
Or, on the other hand, should we consider them as due to a progressive
alteration of the medium, the character of which would be accidental
although frequent or habitual? This, in a word, is the problem which
has so often engaged the attention of philosophical biologists. Are old
age and death natural and inevitable phenomena?

The recent experiments of Loeb and Calkins, and all similar
observations, tend to attribute to the phenomenon of growing old the
character of a remediable accident. But the remedy has not been found,
and the animal finally succumbs to these slow transformations of its
anatomical elements. We then say that it _dies of old age_.

_Metchnikoff’s Theory of Senescence. Objections._—Metchnikoff has
proposed a theory of the mechanism of this general senescence. The
elements of the conjunctive tissue, phagocytes, macrophages, which
exist everywhere around the specialized and higher anatomical elements
would destroy and devour them as soon as their vitality diminishes,
and would take their place. In the brain, for example, it would be the
phagocytes which, attacking the nervous cellules, would disorganize the
higher elements, incapable of defending themselves. This substitution
of the conjunctive tissue, which only possesses vegetative properties
of a low order, for the nervous tissues, which possesses very high
vegetative properties, results in an evident breaking-up. The gross
element of violent and energetic vitality stifles the refined and
higher element.

This expulsion is a very real fact. It constitutes what is called
senile sclerosis. But the active _rôle_ attributed to it by Metchnikoff
in the process of degeneration is not so certain. An expert observer
in the microscopic study of the nervous system, M. Marinesco, does not
accept this interpretation as far as the senescence of the elements of
the brain is concerned. Diminution of the cell, the decrease in the
number of its stainable granulations, chromatolysis, the formation of
inert, pigmented substances—all these phenomena which characterize the
breaking-up of the cerebral cells would be accomplished, according to
this observer, without the intervention of the conjunctive elements,
the phagocytes.

The characteristic of extensive and progressive process presented
by death necessitates in a complex organism, which is a prey to it,
the existence side by side of living and dead cells. Similarly, in
the organism which is growing old, there are young elements and
elements of every age side by side with senile elements. As long as
the disorganization of the last has not gone too far, they may be
rejuvenated. All we have to do is to restore to them an appropriate
ambient medium. The whole question is one of knowing and being able
to realize, for this or that part which we wish to reanimate and to
rejuvenate, the very special or very delicate conditions that this
medium must fulfil. As we have said, success is attained in this
respect as far as the heart is concerned, and this is why we are able
to reanimate and to revive the heart of a dead man. It is hoped that
ideas along these lines will extend with the progress of physiology.

After this sketch of the conditions and of the varieties of cellular
death we must return to the essential problem which is engaging the
curiosity of biologists and philosophers. Is death unavoidable,
inevitable? Is it the necessary consequence of life itself, the
inevitable issue, the inevitable end?

There are two ways of endeavouring to solve this question of the
inevitability of death. The first is to examine popular observation,
practised, so to speak, unintelligently and without special
precautions. The second is to analyze everything we know relative to
the conditions of elementary life.




