PART II.

ONTOLOGY--OF SINGULARS.




A.--_COSMOGENY_.


a. REST, CENTRE.

209. Through light duplicity originates in the æther, by virtue
of which the æther divides into central and peripheric æther. The
peripheric necessarily rotates around the central. Every part of the
æther is a sphere; the æther therefore is separated by the light into
infinitely numerous central and peripheric spheres. Creation is an
endless position of centres. The primary centre is inventive.

210. There cannot be therefore only a single central mass; otherwise
the universe would be a finite.

211. The central spheres are characterized by absoluteness, the
peripheric, however, by finiteness, division; the former are something
in themselves, but the latter are so only by opposition; yet the two
could not be without each other.

212. Every central body must be surrounded by several peripheric
bodies. The peripheric spheres rotate around the central, the images of
the primary centre. A Whole, consisting of a central body and several
peripheric bodies, is called _solar system_.

213. Chaos is not conceivable, without being at the same time solar
system. The solar systems are nothing specially created, but have been
given with chaos or with light, are indeed only the æther separated by
light. The primary matter appearing as light must appear at the same
time as sun and planet. Primary act, sun and planet are of one kind,
and differ only in this, that the former is posited individually in the
latter, while in itself it is non-posited.

214. There is no general central body, no central sun, about which all
suns and planets gravitate. The essence of the æther consists in its
complete dissipation. There exists only an infinity of solar systems,
which taken together form the central body. All solar systems pursue a
course to and fro through each other, like the blood-globules in the
vessels. The general central body is only inventive. That the general
central body may be dark (that it must be, if present, from its being
invisible) is an assertion which betrays an ignorance of the essence of
light. A dark central body is an absurdity.


b. MOTION, LINE.

215. Sun and planet, as individual spheres, have also their own
individual gravity. The æther therefore must exist otherwise than in
the universal sphere. The next change of the æther is _condensation_,
more intense gravity, because it becomes more individual, centre
and periphery approximate more closely to each other. The heavenly
bodies must contain more matter, more æther in an equal space than the
terrestrial globe.

216. The heavenly bodies have obtained their matter nowhere else than
out of the primary matter, the æther; they are condensed æther. The
heavenly bodies of a solar system have derived their mass out of the
æther, which is found within the confines of this solar system. The
matter of the heavenly bodies was thus previous to its coagulation
strewn in the space of the solar system, and has been by so much the
rarer, as the space of the solar system is larger than the volume of
all the planets together with the sun. It admits therefore of being
calculated how much rarer the æther is than e. g. water.

217. The æther is therefore not absolutely imponderable, but only so in
relation to the heavenly bodies. Light and heat are therefore ponderose
substances, though they are not ponderable.

218. The separation of the æther into central and peripheric mass has
happened according to the laws of light, and thus according to the
centroperipheric primary antagonism. As a consequence of this, only
_one_ central body can originate in a solar system; the mass of the
periphery can, however, divide into several, and must divide into as
many as the light has moments of operation; of this we shall speak for
the first time in treating of colours.

219. The matter of the periphery can be condensed by light into no
other form than that of a _hollow_ globe around the sun. The planets
are originally concentric _hollow globes_, in the midst of which the
sun is formed. There are several hollow globes, because the light has
several points of contraction at certain distances from the sun.

220. The number of hollow planetary globes is a definite one, and it is
not an arbitrary matter how many of them originate.

221. The matter of such a hollow globe of æther is still, however,
rarer by so much than the present planetary mass, as that of our earth
would be rarer if it were to form a hollow globe around the sun, about
as thick only as from the earth to the moon.

222. This hollow globe rotates with the sun, because the whole globe
of æther, which fills out the space of the subsequent solar system,
rotates; therefore everything necessarily tends in one direction.

223. These hollow planetary globes, on account of the rarity of their
mass, their rotation, and the greater tension of light, could not
subsist in the equatorial plane of the solar system, but coagulate
together in equatorial rings about the centre of the whole system. The
planetary foetuses are only _solar rings_, which rotate with the sun.

224. If the whole coagulated æther of the solar system be so small in
quantity, that when extended around the sun in a planetary track or
course, it still does not become solid; so also can the orbitar ring
not persist, but it contracts itself through light, rotation and
the peculiar excited gravity into a _globe_. This globe continues to
rotate, as it did when under the conditions of orbitar ring, of hollow
globe and as æther; i. e. it pursues a course around the sun. The
peripheric globe travels necessarily in the same plane in which the sun
rotates. This is therefore called the zodiac. This globe rotates also
around its own axis and virtually in the same direction, according to
which it performs its course or the sun rotates. A globe coursing and
rotating around the sun in its equatorial plane and in its direction is
called _planet_.

225. At the first aggregation of the mass of the planetary ring into
a planetary globe, the latter was still very much extended, the
earth extending beyond the moon. The mass was thus gaseous. What
happened in the great globe of æther, of which the sun has become
the centre, happens also here. An opposition of centre to periphery
again originates; and a subordinate sun and new orbitar rings are
formed. If the mass of the planetary equatorial ring be only small and
consequently rare, it rolls into a globe and together with this into
_moons_.

226. If it be much, consequently so dense, that it coheres, it remains
stationary, and is _Saturn's ring_.

227. This is the genesis of the planetary system, but everything has
become, and remained as it became, at one stroke. The moon can never
have existed as an orbitar ring around the earth in time, or else it
had been solid. Being once solid, it can no more coagulate into a
globe. Still less, however, have the planets originated from conjoined
moons. From whence then have the moons come? The solar system has not
arisen mechanically, but dynamically; it has not become what it is by
being projected or hurled from the hand of God, nor by impulses and
aberrations; but by polarization according to eternal laws, according
to the laws of light.

228. As a necessary number of planetary productions exists, so also is
their magnitude, distance and velocity a determinate one. No planet,
whatever its situation, has attained that by chance. Were the earth
larger, it must also have occupied some other place, and have had
another velocity, another density of mass, &c.

229. The coagulating matter of æther must collect into a larger mass
in the centre than in the periphery. The centre will exist everywhere,
and the periphery comes only to its behalf as if it were a scaffold
or prop only to existence. The sun can only be the principle of the
determination of the planets by the preponderance of its mass. Our sun
comprises above 700 planetary systems in itself.

230. Sun and planet are mutually conditionated; both have originated
at the same time, the former as the positive pole, the latter as the
negative, as the necessary counterpoint, or the one as 0, the other
as ±. The hypothesis, which surmises that the planets have come from
another solar system, is not maturely considered. For how have they
there originated? Such explanations are mere child's play. Sun and
planet are in idea but _one_ piece, only _one_ line with two different
extremities. The same act which polarizes the sun polarizes also
the planets out of chaos. One and the same æther that has become
positive, is called sun, when negative, it is called planet. Both
are only a single globe of æther, the centre of which is called sun,
the periphery, planet. The latter belongs to the sun, like a stone
though detached from, belongs to, the earth; its rotation is therefore
similar, but retarded.


c. FORM

231. The sun cannot be in the absolute middle of the solar system,
on account of its antagonism with the planets, which would likewise
become the centre. The collective mass of the planets is the secession
of the sun from the centre. The situation of the sun or the degree of
its excentricity bears relation to the polar force of the planets. The
form, under which the solar system really exists, cannot therefore be
the sphere, but the ellipse, i. e. the duplicity of the centre.

232. The sphere is only the type of the universe, of the æther,
but not of the solar system nor the Finite. No Finite is absolutely
spherical. As the real universe can only exist in a bicentral
condition, so is there in this respect also no universal central
body. It is there, but under the form of bicentrality, as sun and
planet. God only is monocentral. The world is the bicentral God, God
the monocentral world, which is the same with monas and dyas. The
primary polarity, the dyas, the radiality, the light establishes
itself in nature as bicentrality, which is the cosmogenic expression
for self-manifestation or self-consciousness. Self-consciousness is a
living ellipse.

233. The bicentrality determines the distance of the planets from the
sun. If the sun as the active pole be strong or energetic, the planets
will occupy a remote situation; if it be feeble or weak, one that is
near. The strength of the polar energy depends, however, upon the
quantity of the mass. Were the mass of the sun less, all the planets
would range nearer to it; were it greater, they would be all driven
further off, as electricity repels the pith-balls of elder-wood; more
than this the planets are not towards the sun, but even less. The
energy of the solar polarization depends not merely upon its magnitude,
but also upon the velocity of rotation, which harmonizes with the
former; the latter, however, depends upon the original velocity of
rotation of the æther. The velocity of the rotation of æther being
assumed as definite, that of the sun must be definite also, and with
this everything accords.

234. The circumvolution of the planets around the sun is a _polar_
process of _attraction_ and _repulsion_, by virtue of the primary law
in the solar system, by virtue of the light. The planet then can only
be repelled in the neighbourhood of the sun from the sun, when it has
the _same_ solar pole in itself, when it has become positive; and can
only attract it at a distance from the sun, when it has received the
opposite pole to the sun, or has become negative.

235. This is only conceivable in that the planet, while it draws
nearer to the sun, extinguishes in itself by its _own_ power the
negative pole, and produces on the contrary the positive pole, or
becomes a sun; and that, as it removes itself from the sun, it again
extinguishes the positive solar pole, and generates the negative
planetary pole within itself. This substantial production of
alternating poles upon the planet takes place through the diversity
of its surface as water and land, through the oblique position
of its axis, whereby summer and winter are produced, through the
processes, or through the life that is upon it, through the processes
of decomposition and combination effected by water, through the
revival and death of vegetation, and even the white colour of snow.
The planet discharges its pole in the neighbourhood of the sun, like
a cork pellet, and reloads of itself at a distance from the sun;
and thus oscillates to and fro, like the hammer in an electrical
bell. The course of the planets takes place with the greatest ease.
It is everywhere no force of weight, of impulse, but of the easiest
self-motion. The planet revolves by its own force to and from the sun,
like the blood circulates to and from the heart.

236. The planet cannot, however, be diverted from its course, because
the other heavenly bodies, probably the comets, do not act mechanically
but only polarly upon it. By means of this polarity they maintain
themselves always at a distance, even as the sun keeps itself at a
distance from the planets. In addition to this, the polar tension
between the comet and the sun is stronger than between the comet and
the planets. The perturbations of the planets depend upon their polar
relations to each other. Although the planets have a centrifugal
tendency, they are not thrown by a prodigious mechanical force in
the direction of the tangent, and then drawn back by an attractive
force of the sun, that has no import or meaning; but they course in
a playful manner round the sun. A theory of attraction of this kind
has no physical sense. Such an attraction is a _Qualitas occulta_, an
angel which flies before the planets. It does not create the world by
impulses and strokes, but only by vivification.

237. Were the planet dead, it could not be attracted or repelled by
the sun; it would have from the very beginning always maintained a
similar pole in itself, and it could therefore only move in a circular
manner around the sun. The circular motion or course around the sun is
not generally conditioned by the polarity of the planets, but depends
upon the primary rotation. Proportionably to the mutual interchange
of polar operation between the sun and planet, the latter would only
approach the sun in the line of the apsides, and thus remove from it;
but by the primary rotation it is conducted around it. The elliptical
path is consequently the result of rotation and of the polar or linear
interchange of operation between the two heavenly bodies.

238. The moon would keep a wholly circular path around the sun, if it
were not disturbed by the earth, were it not through the difference of
the earth's poles to passively retain also different polarities; for
the moon is in itself dead.

239. The moon is not attracted more forcibly by the earth than the sun;
and therefore it remains not by the earth. The sun exercises more polar
action, more photal action upon it than the earth, and yet it falls not
into the sun, for the very same reason that the earth itself does not
fall in. The moon is forsooth to be regarded as itself a planet with a
definite charge of electricity, which is always equably maintained by
light; as such it rotates circularly about the sun. But it rotates in
the same path wherein the earth rotates; therefore the latter operates
upon it and draws it in its strange serpentine line around the sun.

240. The more living a planet is, by so much the more excentric is its
path, because it enters into great opposition with the light.

241. If polarization by light be the cause of the attraction and
repulsion of the planets from the sun, so is it also the cause of the
distance of the planetary masses generally. The individual distance
of the several planets is determined by the energy of their own polar
excitation. Planets, which possess a strong polar energy, must range
further than the others from the sun. This polar energy is, however,
dependent upon the magnitude and density of the mass, upon the level
state or unevenness of the surface, upon the capacity for heat, upon
the quantity of water, upon the position of the axis in regard to
the path, upon the possible processes of vegetation; it is thus not
to be determined. Before vegetation was upon the earth, there were
other processes, e. g. the aqueous precipitations, that changed the
polarity; so that the path might formerly have been different to what
it subsequently was or is now.

242. Planets are consequently those bodies which possess in themselves
a peculiar degree of polarity and a substantial change of the same,
whereby their individual distance and the nature of their paths are
determined.


COMETS.

243. The comets are heavenly bodies, devoid of a persistent grade of
polarity, and without any substantial change in the same. They obtain
their polarity solely from the sun, like the cork-pellet from the
electrical machine. The comet is therefore repelled as far from the sun
as there is still an action between it and the polarity that has been
imparted to the comet.

244. At the point where all antagonism between comet and sun ceases,
the former must remain stationary, and resolve itself again into æther.
This is the case with those comets that never return. These comets are
temporal coagulations of æther by light, and thus continued creation.

245. The æther coagulates where the light, already polarized in part by
the operations of other heavenly bodies, encounters it. This depends
upon fortuitous constellations.

246. These comets originate like the planets; they are æther condensed
in the form of an orbitar ring. This dissevered _orbitar ring_ is the
_tail_, which is only a more gaseous æther, through which, or even
through the nucleus itself, the stars are seen. The tail follows the
comet not really but only ideally. Around the nucleus, so far as it is
prolonged, the light concentrates the æther. New æther is constantly
emitting light, while that which was before illuminating as tail again
becomes dark and again sinks into a state of indifference. The tail
is only an optical spectrum. For how can the tail be really a part of
the comet, since it is always turned backwards from the sun, since it
therefore follows and precedes the nucleus? The nucleus is only the
lamp which kindles the æther surrounding it for some time. The light
suffers a modification through the nucleus; it therefore polarizes
only the æther behind it. The tail is the evident example of what is
antecedent in the origin of the heavenly bodies. It is the heavenly
body conceived in the act of becoming, but unto which polarization is
wanting; it cannot therefore concentrate itself, but again dissolves
when the nucleus is gone. Every heavenly body is a mass of æther in the
world-space, which is materialized by light, and separated out of its
indifference into difference, into more solid masses. Finally, the tail
becomes dense æther, a nucleus.

247. These comets are thus true meteors; as they originate, so
originate the globes of fire, by polarization occurring in the
atmosphere, or even too above the limits of the atmosphere.

248. Meteoric stones are terrestrial comets. The opinion that they come
from the moon has no foundation. There is probably as little metal as
water upon the moon.

249. Returning comets are probably polarized by two suns.

250. A comet can never come into collision with a planet; the fear of
such an event is equally absurd with the hypothesis, that a comet had
produced the deluge or displaced the earth's axis.

251. Two planets also can never come into mutual collision, not
even those that have been recently discovered, although their paths
intersect each other.

252. The planets are returning comets, which, however, before they have
come to the second sun, have produced within themselves the opposite
pole to the sun. What happens to the comets through the influence of
the second sun, the planets effect of themselves.




B.--_STÖCHIOGENY._


CONDENSATION.

253. Through its separation into polar masses the æther becomes
_condensed_, heavy and material.

254. This condensation is the result of the _fixation_ of a definite
pole on a definite mass of æther. The essence of the æther consists in
its having no fixed pole, but that all the poles oscillate to and fro
with the greatest facility from one particle of æther to the other.
This is what is meant by indifference, by equivalency of poles; no part
of the æther differs from another, because none retains permanently a
definite pole, but each of them all the poles. The formation of the
heavenly bodies is none other than an union of poles to a definite mass
of æther.

255. A mass of æther with a fixed pole is a dense matter; such a
mass of æther I call _terrestrial_ matter, but the æther itself the
_cosmic_. Sun and planet must be terrestrial matters, for the essence
of both consists in the difference of their poles.

256. The cause of the fixation of poles resides in light.

257. The heavenly bodies go to ruin by removal of the fixation of the
pole abiding on the mass, substratum or substance, not by mechanical
demolition. The destruction of the heavenly bodies is a retrogression
of their mass into æther by means of fire. Heat does not drive the
bodies, after the manner of a wedge, from each other, but only
suppresses their polarity, and then the atoms must withdraw from
each other. Heat depends only on the destruction of poles, _not_ upon
extension. The heavenly bodies are ruined in the same way that they
have originated, namely, through the primary act in its retrogression.

258. It is only the pole, no other concealed property, which maintains
the being of the mass. The mass is not a terrestrial mass subsisting
simply by its own rest. Nothing material is the cause of the form
of matter, but the Spiritual. Matter has therefore no quality, no
consistence of itself, but is nothing, is æther. Mass cannot supplant
mass, nor mechanism destroy anything material. The destruction must
proceed from within.

259. The fixation of poles in the substance is the _impenetrability_
of matter. It is only the spirit in matter which renders this
impenetrable, not the mass itself.

260. The æther is penetrable, and therefore also _penetrating_. Heat is
penetrating; light, as æther in a state of tension, is only partially
penetrating.

261. All the diversity of matter depends upon the fixation of poles in
the substance. For there is no diversity in the universe without poles,
without binary division. The substance always remains the same, it is
only the poles that change. The substance is the Indestructible, the
Persistent, the æther, the nothing.

262. The fixation is the perquisite, but the necessary one, of the
substance. The diversity of things resides only in the perquisite. In
the substance all are alike. There is only _one_ substance, only _one_
essence.


 ELEMENTAL BODIES. (_How many kinds of Æther-condensations may exist?_)

263. The æther has three forms, and can therefore condense itself after
a ternary manner, or in other words, there can be only three kinds of
fixations of poles.

264. The condensations of the several forms of æther must be simple
matters or _Elemental bodies_, as they are called.

265. There can therefore be only three simple bodies, a body of gravity
= 0, one of light = +, and one of heat =-.

266. If the heat of the æther becomes fixed, the rarest, most mobile
and lightest body must originate. The body of heat is _Hydrogen_.

267. If the light of the æther becomes fixed, a less dense, and thus
a less heavy matter, must originate, and one whose atoms are moveable
against each other. The body of light must be the most active in
nature; it must determine the changes of all other elemental bodies.
The body of light is _Oxygen_.

268. If the gravity of the æther become fixed, the greatest
condensation must originate. The densest matter is necessarily the
heaviest. The dense matter must be immoveable in its atoms, i. e.
endowed with form. The body of gravity is _Carbon_ (as basis of the
metals).

269. Besides these 3 elemental bodies, hydrogen, oxygen and carbon,
there can be no other simple bodies. All other bodies must be only
different degrees of fixation of the above-mentioned bodies, or
combinations of the same. Different degrees of carbon are without doubt
the metals. Different degrees of oxygen are probably chlorine, iodine,
bromine. Different degrees of hydrogen are probably sulphur. Nitrogen
is probably peroxydised hydrogen, or an oxyd of hydrogen; this is
indicated by its medium weight, and its perfectly azotic character.


ELEMENTS.

270. Simple bodies cannot exist for themselves, for there can nowhere
be an æther, which merely belongs to gravity, or merely to light or to
heat.

271. An elemental body is never a Total, but invariably a Polar, a
something not whole, properly a half or rather but a third essence, a
fraction. One-sidedness is therefore the character of the elemental
body.

272. One pole is nowhere produced, but all are invariably present
together. The terrestrial matter completed must therefore consist of
the three primary bodies, but occurring in diverse proportions. As
light and heat can never subsist without the substance of the æther, so
also can no body of light and no body of heat subsist per se without
the body of gravity or carbon, and vice versâ. The general materials of
nature are therefore combinations of the three primary bodies.

273. The æther is the totality of the primary bodies in equal
proportion, where thus no pole is fixed, but all are comprehended in
fixation, i. e. in constant change.

274. All other general matters must be also combinations of the three
primary bodies, but with different fixation, or in unequal proportion.
There can consequently be only four general matters.

275. The first general matters are called _Elements_. There are only
four elements, one general and three particular.

  1. Element, Fire.
  2. - - - -  Heat.
  3. - - - -  Light.
  4. - - - -  Gravity.

276. Each element is a total representation of the æther.

277. An element is not that which is chemically inseparable, but it is
only the _Whole_, which has first originated. But the elemental bodies
are chemically non-decomposible, because they are already separate,
being moieties or fractions.

278. The heat element is the hydrogen element--_Air._

279. The light element is the oxygen element--_Water._

280. The gravity element is the carbon element--_Earth._

281. In each element, beside the basic or combustible elemental body,
there is also oxygen; for they are verily naught else than the æther
fixed by light, æther that has become heavy by means of light.


AIR.

282. The first condensation of the æther must be that which corresponds
to its condition as heat. This element, as being that in which the
atoms have no connexion, must be therefore the lightest and rarest. In
this element the poles must be fixed in the least degree, and therefore
change with the slightest operation. This element is therefore moveable
in all directions, is the most unstable, and in form most similar to
the æther.

283. Active freedom from form predominates in it, i. e. its atoms are
constantly striving to withdraw from each other, or the mass to extend.
This endeavour is called elasticity. Elasticity is none other than the
endeavour to become a greatest or interminable globe. The terrestrial
matter, with this striving towards an universal globe, is called _gas_.

284. The formless internally moveable element, constantly extending
itself and changing its pole, is the _Air_.

285. The air is the first terrestrial element, the first degree of
ætherial condensation associated with the feeblest fixation of poles,
the constant change of which is manifested in its electric relations.
It corresponds in every respect, in mobility, extension, general
penetration, &c., to heat. The air consists of a preponderance of the
body of heat or hydrogen (oxydulated as nitrogen in the proportion of
79 by volume), and of a fair quantity of the body of light or oxygen
(21); also of a very small amount of the body of gravity or carbon, as
evidenced in the carbonic acid.

286. The air is a maximum of air, a medium of water, and a minimum of
earth.

287. As heat is not merely indifferent æther, nor merely its motion or
extension, but is the æther moved by the polarity of light, so is the
hydrogen gas in the air not in a pure state, but converted by oxygen
into nitrogen. The air is in every respect therefore an element that
has undergone combustion, an oxyd of hydrogen and carbon.

288. The oxygen is that which is everywhere active, exciting, moving,
and vivifying everything; it is the light in the Terrestrial. The
nitrogen is inert, as it were mortified, and therefore mortifying
or causing death; the former the +, the latter the-. The greatest
activity among all terrestrial elements resides in the air, since all
polarizations issue from it.

289. The changes in the air are accompanied by constant changes of
temperature, for they are verily in themselves nothing else than
changes of caloric-æther.

290. All subsequent elements must originate from or be condensations of
air, even as this has arisen out of, and been a condensation of, the
æther.

291. Condensations, however, are fixations of poles; the other elements
differ therefore only from air by having other poles fixed in them.

292. Since the poles are at the same time fixed more internally on
these elements, they can no longer have the gaseous form.

293. They must on this account contain more bulk and be therefore
heavier.


WATER.

294. If the polarity of light becomes fixed in a certain quantity of
the mass of æther, or the oxygen of the air obtains the preponderance,
a less changing element originates possessing a more definite
character, and the atoms of which adhere more strongly to each other
than those of air.

295. This element has, in addition to the gaseous effort towards a
general globe or periphery, the effort at the same time also to a
centre, or to an individual globe. It is therefore neither elastic
or gaseous. The effort of a mass to a _special_ and _general_ globe
is a conflict betwixt form and want of form. This effort is called
_fluidity_.

296. The fluid element must contain a preponderance of oxygen (85), and
less hydrogen (15). There is also some carbon present in it. The carbon
of water is to be sought in the slime of the sea, for the sea, and not
fresh water, is the primary water.

297. The fluid element oxygen is the _Water_. Water in large as well
as in small quantities, seeks to represent the globe, namely, to
form drops. It possesses therefore the effort unto form, while it is
always relapsing into formlessness. This oscillation between form
and formlessness is the conception of fluidity, which is therefore
essentially different from that of gasidity; it might be said that the
latter were the arithmetic or constant change of numbers; but that
fluidity were the combination of arithmetic with geometry.

298. If the essence of water consists in the contest between form
and formlessness, it must thus seek to produce fluidity everywhere.
Liquefaction is, however, called solution, namely, globules are formed,
both on a large and small scale. The function of water is therefore
solution. It dissolves the air, (imbibes it) like the earth.

299. Water is more difficult to analyze than air, because its poles are
more fixed.

300. In the analysis of water, the body of heat emerges in a pure state
as hydrogen, because the antagonism here subsists in an abrupt manner;
in the air it is constantly changing. Hydrogen is therefore nitrogen
wholly deoxydised.

301. If water is the oxygen-element, so is it the light-element or
condensed light-æther; thus it is as little something absolutely new as
the air.

302. Terrestrial life originates out of water, as does the cosmic life
out of light. All form originates from water; for it is the general
fluid, or that which strives towards form. Without water, there would
be no life, no Solid and no Organic.


EARTH.

303. If the gravity of æther condenses itself, or the action of gravity
be fixed in a quantity of æther, there originates immobility of the
atoms, i. e. an effort upon their part towards a single direction,
namely, simply towards the centre. The effort towards a single
direction or towards the centre, is cohesion or rigidity.

304. The mass with fixed gravity is carbon. If therefore the carbonic
acid of air, or the carbon of water, obtain the preponderance over the
other elemental bodies, there thus originates the rigid centripetal
element.

305. The heavy, rigid, carbon-element is the _Earth_. The earth is
neither gaseous nor fluid. The earth contains a preponderance of
carbon, with a tolerable quantity of oxygen, and a slight amount of
hydrogen and nitrogen. The earth is an oxyd of carbon.

306. If fire is indicated by + 0-, the air then corresponds to the-,
the water to +, the earth to the 0. The earth is therefore the
Identical, water the Indifferent, air the Different; or the first the
centre, the second the radius, the last the periphery of the general
globe or of fire. The earth is naught but an accumulation of points. If
radii occur in it, it happens only because all points have not place in
the middle point.

307. The capacity for analysis of the elements comports with the serial
order of their origin. The air is most easily analysed, the water with
difficulty, the earth scarcely or not at all. The æther is occupied in
eternal analysis, and therefore appears only when it is momentarily
polarized unto light or heat, i. e. obtains the disposition to fixation.

308. If air represent arithmetic, so does earth the geometry or
universality of forms. Water is the synthesis of both, the algebra;
æther the analysis.

309. The geometrical figures of the earthy are called crystals; the

geometry of the earth is Crystallography.

310. In the creation the three primary ideas attained only by degrees
to reality. First of all the trias becomes real in the air, then the
dyas in water, and lastly the monas in the earth. The creation of the
elements is none other than a representation of the three divine ideas
in a finite sphere. Creation is a process of formation of the nothing.

311. Creation ceases with the production of the fixed or stable form;
for all ideas have parted from each other, and settled down into the
most Individual, with which separation all further formation of new
matters necessarily ceases. Creation is a constant analysis of the
æther, of air, and finally, of water.

312. The element that is correspondent to gravity necessarily
occupies the centre upon the planet. It is surrounded by the element
corresponding to light, the water, like the centre is by the radii;
both are enveloped by the heat-element or air, which forms the
periphery of the globe, the integument of the planet.

313. The forms of the elements are the following; water is spherical
in its greatest as well as least parts; for it is the point merging
out of itself, and can therefore nowhere acquire form. The earth is
everywhere nothing but point; it is therefore concrete, and every
part self-subsistent or individual, while in water no part subsists
for itself, but at every opportunity is confluent with the other, and
therefore arrives nowhere at individuality. Finally, air is the eternal
flight of the smallest parts to the periphery. In the earth the Finite
or Singular is for itself; in the water it is so only through the
Whole; in the air it is not indeed for itself, but is there only the
Whole without individualized parts.

314. The world is twofold, an ætherial and a terrestrial; both are
transcripts or copies of each other, and both ultimately of God. The
terrestrial world has originated out of the æther; it is therefore
further removed from God than the æther; this is the discharged,
purified Terrestrial.

315. God is a threefold Trinity; at first the Eternal, then the
Ætherial, and finally the Terrestrial, where it is completely divided.

316. The holy primary number is 3; the second is 9. The æther is 1 in
3; the other elements are simply the 3 of the æther, together 4. 2 × 3,
however, or 6, lies at the bottom of this 4. The symbolic numbers are
consequently 1, 3, 4, 6, 9, which fundamentally are one and the same,
but in different combinations. With this, however, all formation does
not yet terminate; to the 4 elements is added the vegetable and animal
kingdom. The number of the days of creation is 6.




C.--_STÖCHIOLOGY._


FUNCTIONS OF THE ELEMENTS.


1. _Functions of the Æther._

317. The spiritual activity of æther manifests itself as a _process of
combustion_, which appears as fire. The combination of the substance
with light and heat is fire; the elements have therefore originated
by a process of combustion. All matter has undergone combustion, and
indeed æther has been submitted to the same process. The process of
fixation of the æther or the process of condensation, is consequently a
process of combustion.

318. Each heavenly body has originally burnt, was nothing but fire;
the Vulcanic has preceded the Neptunian agency. It was, however, the
primary process of combustion, through which the at present combustible
matters first originated. The present volcanoes must not be regarded as
synonymous with the primary combustion. There it was not Vesuvii that
burnt, but æther.

319. What has not been burnt upon the planet, is again reduced.
A something that has not originally suffered combustion is a
contradiction. The metal is therefore not the Original, as for
obvious reasons also, the solid cannot proceed directly out of the
æther, without having been first gaseous and fluid. The processes of
combustion upon the planet are all secondary, are imitations of the
primary combustion in matter, in the elements. Fire consists of the
combinations of the three activities, gravity, light, and heat, which
are now to be separately considered.


a. GRAVITY.

320. The functions of gravity are exhibited principally in the motion
of the heavenly bodies, and are so completely unfolded in works upon
Physics and Astronomy, that they may here be passed over in silence.


b. LIGHT.

321. The æther and the terrestrial matter are correlative, like Higher
and Lower, unity and multiplicity, and therefore stand in the same
antagonism with each other, as the air with the two inferior elements.
The æther is constantly seeking to convert the matter into itself, to
render it indifferent by depolarization, this, however, to condense it.
Matter is only condensed æther. This condensation proceeds, however,
from the polarization of light, and it is consequently the activity of
light by which the æther hardens into matter.

322. The activity of the æther or the light dies or becomes obscured in
matter. The next obscuration of light, or its immediate transition into
matter is the polar primary body, _oxygen_. Oxygen is the corporeal
light. It is the spirit of light to posit every thing with an internal
polarity, to convert everything into oxygen, to render everywhere free
the oxygen pole; for the process of fixation can only happen through
activity = light, and fixation is a production of primary bodies.

323. Light is the manifestation of positive tension, of the tension
of oxygen. When this reaches its maximum, light issues forth. This is
evident upon the planet. Every generation of the Similar takes place
through the similar principles; the cosmic generation of light must
be therefore imparted also by positive tension, by that of oxygen. No
reference has been here made to the negative relation of oxygen in
electrical tension; it does not come under the denomination.

324. The sun is the body of oxygen, the _water_ in the world-space; the
planet, however, is the basic body, the earth in world-space. The æther
is diffused between the two as the air of heaven. The sun appears to
have only the density of water; for it is four times less dense than
the earth, and is thus pretty nearly in the condition of water.

325. The sun must be water, even because it is a body of oxygen. It
must be denser than water, because it is in the centre, is central
water.

326. It gives out light only, because it is water; for as such it is in
eternal motion.

327. The solar water is moved by the planets, like ebb and flow. At
every point of the sun opposite to which a planet stands, there is
flow; there the illumination is stronger, in other situations weaker.
There must be several seas of light upon the sun, as many as there are
planets placed opposite to it. There is nowhere a perfectly quiescent
point in the sun; therefore it is nowhere wholly solid.

328. The shining is an ebb and flow of the sun. Query Do not the spots
and flashes of the sun depend upon this? The ebb and flow also of the
sea gives out light; every motion in water shines. The sun does not
simply shine by external motion, but because it is by this motion
polarized unto the Innermost. It is a true gelatinous animal, a body
trembling through its whole mass, and thereupon phosphorescent.

329. The sun is not inhabited. It has no firm ground.

330. The contest of the primary principles of the elemental bodies upon
the planet appears as light.

331. Light is now more closely characterized. It is no longer merely
the tension of æther generally, but tension of material elemental
bodies. Thereby the light has been torn from heaven and given to
the earth. Light has a chemical relation, and admits therefore of
comparison with terrestrial matters.

332. Through light the negative, its opposite or the basic, pole has
been evoked in matter. The sun is self-posited as oxygen against the
planet as Azotic or phlogiston; hydrogen and carbon. Light therefore
deoxydises the bodies; it converts them into itself, into a polar
principle. Acids placed in the light become deoxydised; nitric acid,
muriate of silver. Oxygen is developed in light out of water. In like
manner the constituent parts of the air continue separated only through
light.


INFLEXION.

333. The light tends from the sun to the earth, not merely because
the polarization in accordance with its nature streams forth from the
centre to the periphery, because the light is radiality; but because
the earth is the basic pole of the sun. It is thus polarity, and not
simply the straight line, which light obeys. Light tends to the centre
of the earth, because between this and the sun the tension oscillates.
The line of tension is only between the two centres.

334. In whatever direction light may fall upon the earth, it must
strive towards the middle point. Those bodies that have in themselves
the earthy nature, attract the light, not by virtue of an hidden
quality, but out of the antagonism with the sun; now it may proceed
either from greater density or from true basic import.

335. Rays of light, which pass close to the earth, as rays of tension
between the sun and another star, become, from the polarity of the
earth being stronger than that of the star, diverted from their
straight direction and drawn towards the middle point. This diversion
of light from its direct course is called _Inflexion_.

336. It is chiefly basic bodies that inflect the light towards
themselves. No such body has an infinite shadow. In other respects, all
bodies inflect because they are much denser than light.


TRANSLUCENCY AND REFRACTION.

337. Light, as an Ætherial, permeates matter, and must on that very
account pass toward the middle point of the earth, because it is
virtually none other than the tension of both middle points, the earth
and the sun. Originally therefore the light must have gone through the
earth.

338. This permeation is not, however, mechanical but dynamic, and is
indeed necessarily a propagation of the tension of æther through the
matter.

339. Matter is susceptible of the same polarization of which the æther
is susceptible, because it is on no account different from the æther;
the polarization only takes place more slowly.

340. The transmission of light is called _Translucency_.

341. The æther is transparent, because it is everywhere the propagation
of the tension of light, because it is itself, or becomes, light
everywhere. Bodies can also be transparent, only in so far as they
are the light itself, i. e. in so far as the same polarization can
be excited in them which is constantly excited in æther by the sun.
But this is not only possible, but necessary; for matter is surely
the æther itself, only condensed. The polarity æther must therefore
be capable also of being excited in the condensed æther, although in
a much less degree. The transparency of matter is a tension of æther
continually ringing through matter. The whole universe originally was
transparent; it has only originated through tension of light.

342. Matter is a tension of light that has become central. This
continuous tension of light in matter in relation to the centre, and
thus with curvation, is called _Refraction_.

343. All transparent bodies must refract light. The bodies are,
however, denser than the æther; therefore the light, which passes from
a rarer into a denser medium, must be refracted towards the centre
(plummet of incidence), and in the reverse case turned from it.

344. Materiality is not the only determinant of refraction, but also
the density of the element, the earth refracting light more than water,
and this more than air.

345. The density also is not the only determinant, but the quality
also of the matter; the Basic or Planetary must refract more than the
Oxygenic or Solar.

346. As translucency is not a dead transmission of light, but a
continued propagation of tension; so must it be viewed as a process
of light in matter, but one excited from without. Translucency is a
_co-illumination_, like the concord of equally attuned instruments.

347. Co-illuminating bodies are thus analogous still to the æther.
If there are non-transparent bodies, they can only be found in the
earth-element, which, being furthest removed from the æther, has
perfected itself independently, and they must indeed be wholly
deoxydised.

348. The co-illumination of bodies or their transparency is an
effort of deoxydation. Bodies that cannot at all be deoxydised are
non-transparent.


REFLEXION.

349. Transparency belongs only to those bodies which have in themselves
a twofold character. It will be shown that the metals are absolutely
identical matters, and therefore non-transparent. The metals are the
only non-transparent bodies. Metaleity = non-transparency.

350. The light falls upon a non-transparent only through a transparent
body, and thus one in which the tension of light propagates
itself. This co-illumination of the matter placed in front of the
non-transparent body cannot cease to co-illuminate; the tension must
thus abide in it, and turn back from the non-transparent body, in a
straight direction if the tension fell direct upon it, at a certain
angle, if obliquely. This phenomenon is called _Reflexion_.

351. Reflexion is no repulsion of light, but only its tension continued
into the medium, in which the tension has been.

352. A non-transparent body indicates nothing for the tension of light
but the limit of the co-illuminating matter; it does not at all operate
itself upon the light, it is as it were a void space.

353. Transparent bodies also reflect partly, because they are only
relative æther, because they only co-illuminate, are not themselves
tensed; or because the basis in all is the metal. Every other medium
is, however, an æther differently fixed; in every one therefore the
tension has been changed; every medium is thus a limit for the tension,
and therefore the transparent bodies also reflect. Since the tension
becomes altered, when it passes into another medium, it always remains
by preference in the neutral medium; therefore reflexion originates
also by the air, when the light passes out of glass very obliquely into
it.


_Operation of the terrestrial Elements upon Light._

DECOMPOSITION OF LIGHT--COLOURS.

354. It results from all this, that light cannot enter unchanged into
mutual operation with matter. The tension of æther changes itself in
matter. This change of light through the influence of matter is a
debilitation of the tension of æther and lastly its complete cessation.
There can be therefore no absolutely transparent matter; the æther only
is this absolutely transparent matter. The denser a material is, by so
much the more will it be capable of suppressing in itself the tension
of light. The most transparent bodies must also become with a greater
density adiaphanous or opaque, because the Metallic increases in them.

355. This suppression or expiration of the tension of light in bodies
has received, as likewise proceeding from the mechanical theory of
light, the name of _absorption_. The absorption is not a mechanical
adherence of the particles of light in the pores of bodies. There are
no pores for light, and this requires none.

356. The absorption or _decrescence_ of light is a retrogression
of light into the indifference of æther, into _darkness_. Light in
conflict with matter does not continue light, but becomes a mean
condition between light and darkness.

357. The substratum of light, the æther, has two extreme conditions,
and only two, the tensed and the non-tensed; the one is the _light_,
the other the _dark_. Between the two, however, are the mediate
conditions of _twilight_ or "clare-obscure." The light æther emits
rays, the dark does not; the mediate conditions are half the two.
The light condition is the clear unsullied light, the absolute
translucency; the darkness is the absolute want of translucency; the
mediate members are offuscated light, mediate tensions of æther.

358. The mean tension of æther, or light mingled with darkness,
is called _Colour_. Colour is a finite, fixed light, the actual
transmission of light into matter.

359. No matter can be uncoloured. An uncoloured matter is a nonentity.

360. Since matter is rigidified light, even so must it be posited in
reference to colour, like light. Pure light materially substantiated or
posited is _White_. The untensed æther materially posited is _Black_.

361. The mediate tensions of æther, or the mixture of Light and Dark,
are mean conditions of White and Black, mixtures of the two extremes
or androgynisms of White and Black. If we do not call White and Black
colours, colours are then partial positions of light in matter, or in
the dark.

362. Colour originates only in the _confinity_ of Light and Dark, or in
the limit between White and Black. They are therefore microscopic.

363. Darkness is the cause of colours.

364. There is nothing visible but colour, but the coloured matter.
The Non-corporeal itself is invisible. Darkness is the cause of all
visibility. Were there no darkness, there would be no world for the
eye. Colours are only illuminated darkness.

365. In the limit between Light and Dark there is neither White nor
Black, but their possible mediate conditions, or the proper colours,
the material tensions of æther. If the shadow-line of light be viewed
under a magnifying glass, colours will be seen to reside in it. They
are invisible only before on account of their minuteness. The prism and
the lens do nothing else than magnify the shadow-line of light. They
only show the colours that already exist therein, but do not create
them.

366. There is properly only _one_ colour between White and Black;
it is the transmission of light into matter generally. If we look
through a prism with the refracting angle presented downwards, at an
horizontal fissure in the shutter of a dark chamber, the red colour
is then exhibited upon the upper and lower borders of the spectrum
so formed within the eye; thus, in both instances, where the Dark is
above and the White beneath, as also where the latter is above and
the former beneath, as on the inferior border of the opening. Upon
the lower border of the upper Red, and thus in the Clare, Yellow
appears, which is consequently a mixture of Red and White, as seen
through the thinner part of the prism. Yellow is thus brighter Red.
Upon the upper border of the lower Red, thus also in the Clare, Blue
appears, which is consequently a mixture also of Red and White, but
the latter seen through the thicker part of the prism. Blue is thus
offuscated Red. If Yellow and Blue be mixed, Green then originates.
There can be therefore only four colours, whereof the Red is a mixture
of Black and White, Yellow of Red and White, Blue of Red and Black,
Green of Blue and Yellow. The first three are simple or mixed colours,
the last a compound colour or a medley. These colours are parallel
to the gradations in nature, or the latter are none other than the
materializations of colours or the gradations of light. All other
colours must be contained in the Red; it must serve as the basis
or groundwork of all; it must be the noblest, most total, fullest
and purest colour. This colour is the first position of the æther
as matter, and thus of _fire_. _Fire-colour_ is the first-born, the
noblest, highest, fullest, purest; it is the ætherial, cosmic colour.
In fire the light is offuscated by gravity, and thereby coloured.

367. The light is not, however, perfected by its position as fire, but
is posited also terrestrially. There are therefore terrestrial colours
also.

368. There can be only three terrestrial colours, neither more nor
less; for there are only three different material or offuscated
positions of light.

369. The first terrestrial offuscation of light is the _air_. The
colour of the air is thus second in the rank of colours. As the
fire-colour plays the chief part in the cosmic and in all colours, so
does the air-colour among the terrestrial. It is the highest colour of
the planet.

370. The second offuscation of light is water. The colour of water is
the third colour.

371. The third offuscation of light is the earth; and this colour is
the last, the most ignoble. The colours part into two series, the
cosmic or solar, and the terrestrial or planetary. The cosmic is the
Red. The first terrestrial is Blue. The second is Green. The third
is Yellow. Red alone is worth as much as all the three others taken
together. It is the identification of all numbers. Green is merely
their synthesis, the terrestrial, finite totality.

372. The genesis of colours is thus the genesis of the elements, or
that of matter. It cannot be otherwise; for the becoming of matter is
verily an offuscation of light, a coloration. Colour agrees essentially
with the elements, and is itself nothing different from element. Fire
is in its essence red, as being the impartient of light and heat; air
is in its essence nothing else than the blue æther by virtue of its
being gaseous; water is the green æther, earth the yellow. If the æther
is tensed, it then becomes red or fire; if it attains its blue stage,
it becomes air; at the green stage, water, upon the yellow, earth.

373. The elements are only gradations of light, colours. They have
therefore been formed according to the laws of light; for colours are
without doubt the legitimate developments of light.

374. Red, as being the solar or fire-colour, ranks parallel with
oxygen; the more powerful indeed the combustion, the more powerful is
the oxydation, and by so much redder the flame. Matters also become red
through oxydation. The Red vanishes lastly into White, and thus the
highest oxydation is white.

375. The next interchange of Red is with Blue; it becomes red
by oxydation, this again blue by desoxydation, but by excessive
alkalization and terrification, yellow. It is Red that imparts
oxydation, Blue that resolves it and reduces the poles to indifference.

376. From the same cause Red warms, but Blue on the contrary does not.
The calefaction given out in prismatic spectra of colours is an impure
work, in which refractions, diversions and convergences of light, as
well as demi-foci, cooperate.

377. The sun in the firmament may be viewed as the bright opening in
the darkened chamber. Colours are therefore nothing but images of the
sun in darkness, self-manifestations of the sun in dark matter. A point
of light thrown into darkness is colour. This is the case around the
sun, which is therefore surrounded by a hollow globe of colours, by
its own refulgence. The rainbow is a ring around the sun consisting of
infinite positions of the solar spectra in darkness.

378. The symbolical doctrine of the colours is correct according to
the philosophy of nature. _Red_ is fire, love--Father. _Blue_ is air,
truth and belief--Son. _Green_ is water, formation, hope--Ghost. These
are the three cardinal virtues. _Yellow_ is earth, the Immoveable,
Inexorable, falsity the only vice--Satan. There are three virtues,
but only one vice. A result obtained by Physio-philosophy, whereof
Pneumato-philosophy as yet augurs nothing.


COLOURS AND PLANETS.

379. Every condensation of æther by light is consequently a production
of colour, and inversely, every production of colour is a condensation
of the æther. The laws of coloration run parallel with those of
materialization, or, what is more, are the same. The planets are thus
produced according to the laws which light exercises in the production
of colours.

380. There are as many productions of heavenly bodies as there are of
colours, and thus there are four.

381. The sun is the incorporation of Red or fire, the planets are that
of the three terrestrial colours. The comets belong to the kingdom of
darkness.

382. The planets are only suns reflected in darkness as in a mirror;
they have originally been hollow globes of colour, then orbitar
rings of colour (solar rainbows), then points of colour. The planets
are coagulated colours, for they are coagulated light. At that very
distance from the sun, where light begins to grow dim, where, to speak
in the Newtonian sense, it begins to refract, there planetary mass
originates. The mass of the planet thus coagulates together around the
sun, but not in an uniform manner like a mass of pulp, but in pauses of
colours, exactly like a rainbow.

383. These planetary chromatic arcs or bows of colour are related to
the sun like the three terrestrial colours to the cosmic, or as the
three terrestrial elements to fire. _Three_ planetary productions
must have thus formed around the sun, because the light condenses,
materializes itself in three moments. Therefore the planets range
themselves in groups at three great distances. To the _first_
production belong Mercury, Venus, the Earth, Mars, Vesta, Juno, Ceres
and Pallas. They are the first digression from Red, the Yellow; the
Earthy preponderates in them. They are all placed close together. To
the _second_ production belong Jupiter and Saturn; water rules them,
and fluctuates visibly upon them; they are the Green. They range
at a great distance from the former group. To the _third_ and most
remote productions belongs Uranus; it is the Blue, in which the air
preponderates. It again ranges at a great distance from the former
group. The comets are naught but æther, which is about to become air.

384. The production of the earth-planets or of the first group is
dispersed into so many as it is on account of the proximity of the sun,
on account of the energy of the rays of light, as well as the import of
the Earthy, which exists essentially under many forms. The planetary
rings have been arranged like scales behind each other, like clouds
through electrical pauses; but these repeat themselves more rapidly, in
the neighbourhood of the sun.


c. HEAT.

385. While the æther falls into a state of tension or shines, it is
thrown into motion. This motion of æther manifests itself as the
conatus or effort to extension. The extension, however, considered as a
world-phenomenon, is _Heat_.

386. Light, when it operates upon terrestrial matter, excites this to
special polarization, whereby the Ætherial that is in it is set in
motion, i. e. heat is generated.

387. Light never moves directly the mass itself, but only the Ætherial
that is in it. Through this motion of the æther it becomes separated
from matter; and this separation is manifested as _free_ heat.

388. Heat is not matter itself any more than light is, but it is only
the act of motion in the primary matter. In heat, as well as in light,
there certainly resides a material substratum; yet this substratum does
not give out heat and light; but the _motion_ only of the substratum
gives out heat, and the _tension_ only of the substratum light. There
is no body of heat; hydrogen is the body of heat, just as oxygen may be
called the body of fire.

389. Heat is real space; into it all forms have been resolved, as all
materiality has been resolved into gravity, and all activity, all
polarity into light. Heat is the universal form, consequently the want
of form.

390. Light properly develops heat out of matter through separation of
the fixed poles from the substance, whereby the latter again passes
over into æther.

391. The development of heat in a body is not an extrusion of a matter
adherent, and as it were foreign, to it; but an ascent of the matter
itself into heat. The matter does not develop, or give out heat, but
_becomes_ heat, namely æther.

392. The loss which a body sustains by the radiation of heat is as
slight as the æther is subtile or rare; thus it is infinitely small,
where the æther is infinitely light. We cannot speak of the loss of
matter, while it is hot; although a true loss is present, if the point
in question be philosophically regarded, it can come, however, as
little under consideration as the weight of the æther.

393. The fusion of bodies is a diminution of the fixity of their poles,
their further evaporation, and thus an approximation to indifference or
the apolarity of æther. Heat is the actual retrogression of matter into
æther; light is only the efficient of this transition.

394. As heat becomes originally excited, so must it be always
excited; two causes for one effect are impossible. The excitation of
heat by oxydation takes place in the same way as by light, namely
by polarization and separation therefore of the Indifferent. The
generation of heat by chemical processes is based upon the same
principle. Lastly, the generation also of heat by compression and
simple _friction_ is wholly similar to that which is caused by
light. In every case they are only polar, and by no means mechanical
operations upon matter, whereby the fixity of the poles becomes changed.

395. It is not a change of cohesion, which the friction mechanically
effects, but the act is purely dynamical. The essence of friction
consists in the constant renewal of polar change, because thereby an
infinite number of projecting points or apices are alternately brought
into contact. There is verily no smooth body.

396. Heat is the transition of light unto darkness; for it is
indifferent æther, only moved. Colours are thus also a conflict of
light with heat, and out of this conflict issues the most beautiful,
the highest colour, the Red of fire. In fire, the contest between light
and darkness has risen to the highest pitch; the æther therefore is
also moved to the greatest degree, becomes hot. If the indifference
becomes the maximum, the vital tension then relaxes, the fire is
extinguished; finally motion ceases, it is cold and dark.

397. In matter also light and heat operate against each other. Light
deoxydizes, heat oxydizes. If light appears to oxydize, it is only by
evoking heat.

398. Heat is the function of expansion for matter. Every body has a
definite degree or amount of expansion, therefore a definite fixity of
æther; this æther is _latent_ heat.

399. Heat operates spherically in matter or in all directions, not in
the linear direction like light. The propagation of heat can only take
place slowly, because it is not a polar action, but only the result of
such an one, only motion. Heat does not penetrate bodies mechanically,
but dynamically like light, yet without decomposing them, as light does.

400. Heat is related as indifferent æther to the matter as to a Polar.
This relation imparts the _process of conduction_. Light, however, is
itself polar and disturbs matter, while it passes through it.

401. With the exception of their cohesion matters are not directly
changed by heat.

402. During every process of decomposition, during every process of
light heat must be produced, but not light also during every process of
heat.

403. Dense materials must conduct heat because they are most opposed to
it. It is only the formed element therefore that can possess capacity
for conducting heat.

404. Absence of form is the character of isolators of heat, form that
of the conductors, apart from every remaining quality. Solid bodies,
which easily pass into the formless condition are isolators.

405. The densest bodies among the solids must be the best conductors.
Regard may be first paid to the nature of their constituent parts in
the sequel of the present section of this work.

406. The conduction of heat is a continuous excitation from one part
striving against or resisting the other; the earths (as metals) are the
best conductors.

407. Matters, which are images of heat, do not conduct, because
they enter only as minimum into conflict with it, and while they
expand at once convert themselves into the same. Such is the air.
The Heterogeneous only conducts. The heat expands in the air only by
continuous motion of the aerial particles. The air is an isolator.
Water ranks in the middle between air and earth.

408. With respect also to conduction, light is opposed to heat. Light
is conducted by those very bodies, which isolate heat, and isolated,
not admitted to permeate or absorbed, by those which conduct heat. The
air conducts light, isolates heat; the metal, the earth conducts heat,
isolates light; water holds a mediate relation towards the two, yet
towards light that of a conductor, because it is deoxydizable.

409. The conduction of light is likewise a process of deoxydation,
or a disintegration of matter. By the conduction of light the bodies
are chemically analysed, and finally resolve themselves into their
principles; such after all is the case with every glass and crystal.
As the process of conduction of light may be called a process of
deoxydation, so also may it be called a process of the generation of
colour. The conduction is an offuscation of light, a colouring; the
deoxydation is a solution of the material bonds, an elevation unto
colour.


2. _Functions of the Air._


ELECTRICITY.

410. The air is the slightest combination of the primary bodies,
and stands in opposition with the two other elements, as more solid
combustions. In this antagonism the air lays claim upon the other
elements to analyse them; these, however, upon the air, to combine, and
undergo more vivid combustion.

411. This antagonism is on a large scale an antagonism of periphery and
centre, like the primary antagonism, by which planets and suns have
withdrawn from each other. The tension of air with the other elements
is called _Electricity_. The centroperipheric antagonism between
the sun and the planet, between light and colour, represented in an
elementary manner is electricity.

412. Sun and planet are electrically related to each other, and
the circumrotation of the latter may be viewed as conditioned by
the change of electrical poles. Colours also are only electrical
productions. Light itself is similar to an electrical tension of the
æther.

413. Electricity is an action of the periphery or limit and thus of the
surface of the globe. The surface of the globe is, however, everywhere
+-without centre. The principles of electricity are therefore eternally
separated without having a middle point, as occurs in magnetism. The
electrical poles live in eternal animosity, because they have no point
of union. Such is then the essence of electricity. Electricity is
therefore only a function of surfaces without any line. It clings only
to the upper surface of the bodies, and does not penetrate into their
thickness. It is only the tension of the surfaces of bodies against
each other, of the apices of divided radii.

414. The air is the periphery, the _limit_ or boundary of the earth.
Electricity is therefore the spirit of air. It is in its most active
state in that stratum of air which is in contact with the earth,
because there the limits are situated. Upon this lightning depends.

415. Electricity, as an aerial function, is terrestrial heat. Both are
therefore conducted by the same rigid linear bodies and isolated by the
same. The isolation of electricity coalesces with absence of form, or
with the transition of denser bodies into air.

416. Electricity is an antagonism between air on the one side and water
and earth upon the other. By these therefore two kinds of operation are
posited in the air.

417. While electricity is the tension of air with the other elements,
it is also the tension of the principles themselves of air. Electricity
is a twofold character appertaining to the two principles of air. The
tension of æther and of substance, thus the tension of fire repeated
upon the two elementary bodies of air, is electricity. Electricity
exists under two forms, as the electricity of the substance or body
of fire, and as that of the planet. These two conditions are perhaps
incorrectly named + E and-E, or positive and negative electricity.

418. The + E is the more energetic, active in itself, polar; it is
the electricity of fire represented in oxygen. The-E is the weaker,
that which has only been evoked, the basic; it is the electricity of
the planet represented in nitrogen, hydrogen, carbon, sulphur. It may
be said that-E is related to + E as planet is to sun, as periphery
to centre. The sun is + E, the planet-E, the one the electricity of
oxygen, the other of hydrogen.

419. These electrical conditions must always be changing in the air,
according as the slightest influence is brought to bear upon them from
without. The air consists in this change of electrical poles. Were
the poles not to change, the air would be a solid element. The earth
is an air with _fixed_ electricity, the water with extinguished or
neutralized electricity.

420. The twofold character of the aerial principles is increased by
every polarizing action from without, and therefore principally by the
surface of the earth, which consists of two elements. Were there no
surface to the earth, were simply air present, then there would be no
electrical change of poles. The surface of the earth itself, however,
produces no change of poles in the air, for it remains always neutral;
but it becomes unequal or polar from the change wrought upon it by
water and earth, by light, by heating and by chemical processes.

421. The air also changes the electricities while it roams over the
earth. This wandering motion is a contact of differently polarized
tracts of the earth. Every mountain, valley, and river, every meadow is
differently polarized; from each the air derives another electricity.
Through this ceaseless alternation of polar exchange, its activity
becomes so elevated that at last the electricity makes its appearance
in a manner cognizable by the senses. The production of electricity by
_friction_ admits of a similar explanation. Friction is in miniature,
what the sweeping of air is over the earth. Were the earth quite level,
and composed of homogeneous matter, the air would not become electric
by motion.

422. All terrestrial electricity has been evoked by a change of poles
analogous to friction. Through light nothing foreign is posited in the
air, any more than by friction, and by both the electricity is attained
in a similar dynamical manner.

423. The elements of the air, polarized to the highest degree by
electricity, must combine, and this combination is the process of
combustion. The final result of electrical tension is combustion
of air. It is only, however, the two primary bodies that undergo
combustion; the two constituent parts of the air must, therefore, be
driven by electricity to their last extreme, even to the most perfect
element of fire and the basic or terrestrial substance. The internal
combination of both these primary or elemental bodies, or the product
of this aerial combustion is next of all _water_. The termination of
electrical tension in the air is rain. All rain is the extinguished
function, the dying spirit of air. The two hostile principles are
reconciled in water. Water accompanies every process of combustion.

424. By electricity the air was separated into the two inferior
elements, into water and earth. At present, where the whole water and
the whole earth has been precipitated from air, rain is certainly as a
rule only water condensed and held in solution in the air.

425. The nitrogen gas is the residue of the primary rain. After the air
has become sea by the combination of oxygen and hydrogen, it no longer
creates water out of its own bulk, but now rederives it from the sea,
and still but imitates its primary process in rain.

426. Were there merely solid land upon the planet, the oxygen pole
would be evoked in the air, and the latter would be precipitated wholly
as water. Were there merely water or sea upon the planet, the nitrogen
pole would be evoked, and the air be wholly precipitated as earth. But
since the two elements are constantly and alternately operating upon
the air, so must at one time water, at another earth, be generated and
precipitated from it. The earths in the act of falling down, or in
precipitation, are the meteoric stones. They are only the after-births
of the primary decomposition of air.

427. It can indeed be none other than carbonic acid, which is converted
by decomposition into meteoric stones, or at least into the metals and
earths which they contain. Sulphur must be regarded as the melting
down of carbon and hydrogen. In the upper lighter regions of the air
carburetted hydrogen gas may very well be present, and condense itself
into meteoric stones.

428. The condensation must take place by means of electricity. The
greater condensation or solidification, as well as the calefaction,
results indeed first through the fall.

429. Their bursting is only conceivable when some hydrogen gas is in
the meteoric stone, which gas, when submitted to the highest degree of
heat, becomes finally fulminating gas and bursts the stone.

430. Meteoric stones are children of our planet, and not of the
world-space. They are the antagonism of the water-formation or of rain.

431. The falling stars are simply indeed condensed carbon or hydrogen
gas, but which by reason of its small mass does not become solid. It
is probably converted only into sulphur. Thus falling stars would
be the other halves of meteoric stones; the latter consisting of a
preponderance of carbon, being therefore earths and metals; the former
of a preponderance of hydrogen, being therefore carburetted hydrogen
or sulphur. A greater number of meteoric stones must fall over the sea
than over the solid land.


3. _Function of the Water._


SOLUTION.

432. The function of water is necessarily homologous with the process
of combustion, because the main bulk or proportion of water is oxygen.
In conformity with its spiritual activity does water seek to convert
the two other elements into water, to impart to them its form, to
fluidize them. This happens with the air when it has been absorbed;
but upon the earth also the water exercises the same action.

433. The function of water is the formation of globes or the _Process
of Solution_; it directs itself chiefly against the solid; for the
solid element is the redintegrant factor of water. Solution is a
positing of the solid under the internal polar form, but the poles of
which have not yet separated. Every solid _formation_ has come out of
water, as water has out of air; every new formation must also return
out of water, by fluidization, by relaxation of the poles. By solution,
solid matters are again reduced to their primary condition, and are
then capable of reassuming new fixities. The process of solution is a
process of becoming water, not by agglutination, but by liberations of
fixity; a _Solution_ in the strongest sense of the term.

434. No process of solution is conceivable without oxydation. The
dissolved body, while it obtains the aqueous nature, is taken up in
the sense of oxygen. No solution occurs without oxygen, as well as no
combustion is possible without water. The solvent character of water is
based upon the preponderance of the oxygen over the hydrogen.

435. During every solution the two principles of water enter into
a state of tension with each other, as the two aerial principles
do in electricity. This tension is established by that which is to
undergo solution; for everything so circumstanced is polar towards
water. During every solution the oxygen is elevated in its pole, and
the hydrogen likewise. If the solution be very heterogeneous, they
separate, the water is decomposed. In the pure process of solution the
water simply abides in a state of tension; if each aqueous principle is
actually and independently self-evolved, chemistry then originates; but
of this we shall discourse in the sequel. The process of solution may
be characterized as the equilibrium of the process of tension between
the object that is to undergo solution and the solvent, and between the
two principles of the latter, whereby separation is not thus attained.
As electricity finally strikes out into the process of combustion, so
does that of solution into the chemical.

436. Solution is in essence like electricity. Solution is an electrical
tension between oxygen and carbon; electricity is a process of solution
between oxygen and nitrogen, a process of tension without separation of
principles. Air and water are in a state of constant tension towards
each other; and hence therefore result the constant evaporation and the
clouds.

437. What lightning is in the air, namely formation of water, that is
chemistry in water. The salt in the sea is what the clouds are in the
air. Two electrical clouds are what two salts are in the water. Rain is
the imitation of the creation of water. Precipitation of salt is the
imitation of the creation of earth.


4. _Functions of the Earth._


CRYSTALLIZATION.

438. The earth-element is the highest result of combustion in creation,
the highest fixation of æther. The earth is the æther represented as
centre in the Material, or it is the identification of all polar binary
division in the Terrestrial, independently of oxydation; therefore its
parts are motionless, be they dust or compact masses. The earth is the
corporeal gravity, the substance as a perfectly simple position without
emergence out of itself, the 0, the terrestrial monas. The earth is
consequently the heaviest and densest element, and is that which must
include the middle point of our own and every planet.

439. In the middle of the planet there is only earth, and nothing else;
the middle is not hollow, does not contain any central fire as has been
imagined, nor air, and the science of Geogeny will show that no metal
also could be contained in the interior of the earth.

440. In the air both material principles are only associated with each
other, in water they are mixed, but in the earth identified, blended
together.

441. The earth is to the other elements what the sun is to the planets,
namely, the basis, the centre and that the mathematical as well as
the dynamic centre. That this is the part played by the earth-element
is proved not only by its character, but also by its volume. The
earth-element exceeds the other elements in mass as much as the sun
does the planets; the water is only the vascular system in the flesh of
the earth-element; while the air is only the expression of the limit or
in other words its integument.

442. Everything therefore that now occurs upon the planet develops
itself out of the earth, the water and the air being only the
auxiliaries of generation. The Earthy is developed in the water by
the air. As creation has been closed with the earth, so may the solid
materials, which are now and then found upon the planet apart from the
earth, not be products of the first creation, but only developments of
the planet when created and cosmically completed.

443. The earth as material gravity is solid. It has, however,
originated out of the fluid, therefore by a process of cohesion; this
is called the _Process of Crystallization_.

444. The process of crystallization is perfectly equivalent to the
process of fixation of the æther, and is only the termination of
the same. As light at any spot in the world-space creates a central
point, the nucleus of a comet, around which more of the mass of
æther is constantly accumulating till it finally coagulates into
the solid condition; so does the process of crystallization evoke
some particular spot, point or nucleus in the water, wherein the
crystallizing forces are excited, which attract the mass that is
susceptible of fixation and fashion it into a crystal. The process of
crystallization is a process of fixation, and with it also is furnished
the theory of crystallization. The process of crystallization is a
process of polarization, and one indeed that proceeds from a centre;
or, properly speaking, the point, from which the polarizing process
emerges in a fluidity that is fixable or in other words susceptible of
crystallization, becomes a central point, a middle point and virtually
the middle point of the crystal.

445. The process of polarization does not originate absolutely in
the fluid, any more than light has the power of concentrating or
crystallizing itself in any given part of the æther; but by an external
determination. This is a granule, a projecting point in the vessel
or in the hollow of the earth, in which the crystals originate. The
crystal never begins in the middle of the fluid, but only on its walls
or on the surface. The point of polarization or of crystallization has
been granted; now this is polar towards the fluid, and works therefore
by polarizing upon it, and through this water also passes over into the
crystal, forming what is called water of crystallization.

446. This polarization of the fluid passes in every direction; for
every polar point is polar all around. Thus a spherical portion of
the fluid is polarized round about the point. The fixable parts are
spheroidally attracted and gather together from all sides around the
point. For were the polarization not to traverse the whole mass, but
only according to individual lines, the crystal must then indeed be
jagged or indented.

447. In this manner the crystal would have been a globe, from the
fixable particles lying together in distinct points, after the manner
of pulp. But this is impossible, because the point of starting or
departure is differently polarized to the fluidity, being negative
according to observation. Every polar process does not operate in
continuity, so that one end of the line should be purely positive,
the other, however, purely negative; but every polar line is an
infinity of poles, where, however, at one end the positive character
only, at the other the negative preponderates. Such a line is e. g.
as follows, +-+-+-, which begins with + and ends with-; it therefore
has a preponderance of + at one end, of-at the other, and yet is both
everywhere. By this infinity of polar change the fixable particles
range themselves behind each other, while they separate from each
other to an infinitely minute degree; these parts polarized behind
each other are lines or fibres. Every crystal must accordingly consist
of fibres; none possesses an homogeneous or pultaceous structure.

448. In the crystal one principal direction of polarization originates,
which is effected by the antagonism of the point of crystallization
with the fluid mass. It gives the direction of the crystal and its
energy gives the length. This principal line consists of two poles
that recede from each other, and these determine the two ends of the
crystal, which are always similar, provided no mechanical obstacle be
interposed.

449. From each of the mutually seceding poles lines of polarization
issue at definite angles, which (like elliptical radii on the
periphery) meet at the sides of the newly produced crystal. Then again
between these radii tension arises, so that the fibres become lamellæ.
The main line between the two mutually seceding poles is the central
line or _polar axis_ of the crystal; the angular lines which determine
the position of the lamellæ, are the _polar radii_. The polar radii
determine the _nucleus_ of the crystal and are therefore nuclear lines;
the polar axis determines the whole of the crystal, is the crystal,
the central-line, and determines the form in general, or what has been
called the secondary form.

450. Since all polar activities operate only in a straight line, there
can thus be no globular crystal. Water is only susceptible of assuming
the globular form upon a large as well as a small scale, because there
are no fixed poles in it. The nucleus does not originate previous to
the secondary form; since it is verily impossible for the polar rays to
originate without a polar axis.

451. There are no actual degradations in the genesis of the crystal;
they are only a mathematical expression for the finished form of the
crystal.

452. The number of possible or actual nuclei is definite. They are
based upon the combination of the laws of the globe with those of the
polarity.

453. The simplest angular body must be circumscribed by at least four
surfaces, and thus be a tetrahedron.

454. The fundamental nucleus of crystals is, however, the double
tetrahedron or the hexahedron, namely the trilateral double-pyramid;
for radii do not proceed simply from the point of commencement, but
also from the extremities of the axis. When the superior and inferior
radii meet, they must form a double-tetrahedron. The disposition to
this form has been implanted in all crystals. If the nucleus becomes no
such hexahedron, the aberration from, still admits of being referred
to, the hexahedron.

455. There is no prismatic nucleus. The columns and parallelopiped
nuclei are only mutilations.

456. The tetrahedron is also only a mutilated nucleus. To the essence
of a nucleus belong two tetrahedra, with their bases joined to each
other.

457. The six-sided double-pyramid is a duplication of the hexahedron.
The octahedric nuclei, are things intermediate between the three-and
six-sided interruptions of the natural type, like quadrinumeral or
tetrapetalous corollæ in flowers.

458. Columns originate only between the two tetrahedra, without doubt
owing to deficiency in bulk.

459. If the three-sided double-pyramid be the primary form of crystals,
so must the six-sided column with trilateral terminal pyramids be
the ultimate form. The rhomboidal-dodecahedron is therefore the most
perfect crystal. It is the most perfect representation of the globe in
the angular form.

460. The crystal can not commence with the nucleus and then for the
first time continue to grow or even _change_ into the perfected
crystal, because it becomes only crystal in the conflict of the linear
and spherical action. As little as the sun can be produced without
the planet, or vice versâ, so little can a nucleus subsist without
what is called the external shell or crust. The nucleus is in fact
determined by the shell of the crystal, namely by the polar axis. But
inversely also the shell is determined by the nucleus, by the polar
radii. A nucleus alone would be called a centre of a circle without
circumference. Microscopic crystals therefore have at once the same
perfected form as the largest in size. A crystal is an entire heavenly
body; it is determined by central forces, which have, however, been
roused and conducted by dualizing forces, forces of light. Everywhere
do we meet with the same laws of the fixation of æther, upon a small as
well as large scale.

461. Every solid matter and thus the Terrestrial generally, is
crystallized upon a small as well as large scale. There cannot be an
atom that were not crystallized, not arranged according to central and
polar forces. Every crystal is therefore, and especially by reason
of the infinity of the subordinate poles, crystallized again upon an
infinitely small scale, or in other words it consists of infinitely
numerous crystals. Every lamella or every particle of the lamella of
a crystal consists again of crystals. These are what are called the
_integral parts_, properly integral forms of the crystal. They are all
probably hexahedra. The metals usually form but very small crystals,
probably because the atoms are too heavy and cannot therefore be
attracted from any distance.

462. Crystallography has been incorrectly made the principle of
division in Mineralogy. A single character can never become a principle
of division. If also it were actually true, that the form is always
disposed according to the Interior, yet the form could never be the
principle of division, but the Interior itself. The form is only the
sign, but not the spirit, the essence of the mass.




D.--_KINGDOMS OF NATURE._


INDIVIDUALS.

463. All the matters that have hitherto originated have done so only
in a _general_ not a _particular_ manner. They are constituent parts
of the universe, in which as yet no distinctions reside. So soon as
distinctions occur in the elements, they cease to be general matters,
and become particular or individual things. The sum of the individuals
is the Kingdoms of Nature.

464. The kingdoms of nature are the repetition of the world upon the
planet. This repetition in consciousness is Natural History.

465. Acts of the world repeated upon the planet are combinations of the
elements. Creation, which has hitherto advanced, now retrogrades, and
thus by the combinations of general elements that have been already
created.

466. Combinations of the elements, in accordance with the laws of the
world, are upon the finite planet particular or individual bodies. The
kingdoms of nature are the totality of particular bodies.

467. That which is not a Particular belongs not to the kingdoms of
nature, and thus also does not come within the province of Natural
History, but of Physics.

468. The earth-element lies at the basis of all the combinations of the
elements. These combinations are therefore ascensions or retrogressions
in creation. Only three such combinations are therefore possible, viz.
1. Of the earth with water, or air, or fire--binary combination. 2. Of
the earth with water and air, without fire--ternary combination. 3. Of
the earth with water, air, and fire--quaternary combination.

469. Out of the binary combination the quiescent bodies originate, for
they are only a part of the planet--_Minerals_, _Earths_.

470. Out of the ternary combination originate bodies that are
internally moved, for they are a whole planet in Particulars--_Plants_.

471. Out of the quaternary combination particular bodies, moved
throughout and rotating around themselves, originate; for they are
representations of the whole universe--_Animals_. Individual bodies
that are moved internally are called organic.

472. There can be therefore only _three_ Kingdoms of Nature. The
first consists simply of individualities, because it is not the equal
proportion of all the elements. The two other kingdoms, however, are
combinations of the individualities of the earth-element with two or
three elements, and are thus equivalent to the planet or to the whole
universe. The organic bodies are thus combinations of the Singular with
the Whole, and supply the third part of the Philosophy of Nature, the
Organology.




FIRST KINGDOM.

MINERAL OR EARTH KINGDOM.


473. Uni-or bin-elementary terrestrial bodies are minerals or earths;
their development is Mineralogy in the general sense of that term.
The earths regarded individually gives us the science of _Mineralogy_
proper; combined to form a whole, that of _Geology_.


I.--_MINERALOGY._

474. Mineralogy teaches us the development of the earth-element.

475. The earth-element does not exist universally, but only in
particular bodies or individuals. There is no general earth, but it is
either silicious earth or common salt, sulphur or iron, and so on.

476. The earth-element or the earth can only sustain changes, which are
permanent or abiding; for in it alone fixation has become formation, in
which the atoms do not move, or whereby at least a constant individual
character of body, or one that is chemical, becomes apparent. The
changes undergone by the other three elements are not constant, because
of the atoms ceaselessly moving and balancing themselves. They do not
exist individually, but only universally. There is only _one_ water,
_one_ air, and only _one_ fire; there are therefore no igneous, aerial,
and aqueous individuals.

477. The changes of the earth-element can only take place upon its
fundamental or characteristic body, thus on carbon.

478. Nothing can, however, change of itself. All change must proceed
from external influence. All things can be changed therefore by such
influences only as are already antecedent to or _before_ them. The two
other bodies, however, are prior to carbon; before the earth-element
only the three other elements.

479. The earth can therefore be changed in only two ways; either the
carbon by the other elemental bodies, or the total earth-element by the
other elements.

480. The changes wrought by the influence of these bodies are, however,
only partial or fractional changes. Therefore partial or chemical
diversities only originate, and with them other different bodies or
degrees of such. The changes effected by the elements are, however,
total changes, which bear not only reference to the carbon, but to all
the constituent parts of the earth-element.

481. Total changes or different conditions of the earth-element are
called _Minerals_, or earths.

482. The _genesis_ of minerals, thus their collective character, as
differently posited fixations of earth, determines the classes, orders,
and genera.

483. The _genus_ is the product of a genetic moment, and is therefore
always a definite, chemical mixture, which alone consequently expresses
the essential character. Hitherto there has been no definition of
mineral genera.

484. _Species_ of minerals are successive developments of the genetic
moment, thus stöchiometric subdivisions of the genetic mixture, e. g.
the different degrees of oxydation of nitrogen, in the oxyde, binoxyde
gases and nitric acid. Hitherto it was not known what a mineral species
might be; Physio-philosophy has been the first to introduce clearness
to these conceptions.

485. A stöchiometric mixture in the earth-element is an individual.

486. Individuals only are the object of natural history, and thus
neither water, air, nor fire. This also was not known previous to
Physio-philosophy; it is, however, gradually acknowledged also by
empirics.

487. The crystalline form is merely an external character for the
species, and therefore the same nuclei may occur in the different
orders.

488. Kinds or _varieties_ are different conditions of cohesion. They
are therefore not determined by the form of the secondary crystal,
since the aberration of forms results only from a stoppage upon their
part half way or from the quantitative energy of the polar radii or
polar axes.

489. While æther, air, and water, as being general matters, do not
belong to the mineral system, what have been called artificial salts
must on the contrary be admitted therein, because they are no works of
art. The chemist only brings bodies together which do not come together
accidentally in nature. It is a true misapprehension of nature's
products if those substances only, that adhere to the earth, are
recognized as such; surely this definition is perfectly ridiculous.

490. Two kinds or modes of division are possible, a _chemical_, and a
genetic or philosophical.

491. The chemical principle of division of the earth are the elemental
bodies. The philosophical or naturo-historical principles of division
are the elements.

492. In reference to the chemical bodies four combinations only are
possible. 1. Carbon, represented as perfectly pure, may be regarded
as _Metal_. 2. Carbon united with hydrogen, is manifested in the
_Inflammables_. 3. Carbon with oxygen makes its appearance in the
_Earths_. 4. Carbon with oxygen and hydrogen in the _Salts_. According
to this view, the classes would succeed each other thus:--

  1. Ores.
  2. Inflammables.
  3. Earths.
  4. Salts.

Now, as the earths here intervene between the Inflammables and salts,
it is at once seen that the series is incorrect; for the earths form by
far the largest mass, and must therefore constitute the groundwork or
basis of Mineralogy, and thus stand at the commencement. If all metals,
Inflammables and salts were to be deducted, the globe of the earth
would still lose but little of its magnitude.

493. This chemical division admits thus of no strict arrangement, since
what are called minerals follow each other unnaturally. Meantime the
chemical view admits also of a philosophical treatment and amelioration
of the serial order. It may be said that the earth consists of much
carbon, little oxygen and very little hydrogen, without any other
element. Salt, of little carbon, much oxygen and little hydrogen,
together with water. The Inflammables of little carbon and oxygen, much
hydrogen, besides air. Ore, of much carbon, little hydrogen, and still
less oxygen with fire. As the fire or the æther is imponderable, so do
the three elemental bodies appear blended together into one apparently
simple body, with which gravity, light as lustre, heat as spirit and
the conduction of heat, are only spiritually combined.

494. But this view leads directly to the _genetic_ division, as the
only true one, to that, namely, which has been based upon the mutual
influence of all the elements. It is itself the ultimate cause or
foundation of chemical division.

495. There can accordingly, as there are only four elements, be only
four kinds of minerals. The Earthy either continues unchanged, or it is
changed by water, air and fire.

496. When the _earth-element_ originates or separates itself from the
water, in order to free itself from all the properties of the latter
as well as from those of the air and fire, and to become stiff and
solid, the remaining elements exert an incessant influence upon it, and
draw a portion of it into their circle, i. e. they confer upon it their
properties.

  a. The Earth-element can be changed by fire             Fire-minerals.
  b. Or changed by air                                    Air-minerals.
  c. Or changed by water                                  Water-minerals.
  d. Or lastly, it is severed wholly and substantially }  Earth-minerals.
      free                                             }

497. Through the influx of _fire_ upon the formation of the Earthy
it becomes an identical, homogeneous mass, in which the possibility
resides, as in the æther itself, of undergoing all changes. This
developmental stage of the earth-element is represented by the _metal_.
The homogeneous mass of the metal can become earthy by oxydation,
aqueous or saline by acidification, aerial or combustible by being
hydrogenized.

498. The metal is unanalysable, as is the æther, although it consists
of three forms. The metal is easily restored or brought back from its
combinations.

499. Besides, however, the identical, homogeneous or simple character,
the metal has still also the three characters of fire or of the æther.
It is therefore a triplicity in identity.

a. In so far as _gravity_ is represented in it, it has the identical
or homogeneous mass already indicated, and is heavier than all other
bodies. It is central mass. It must be regarded as pure carbon. Metal
and the body of gravity are one.

b. In so far as light is represented in it, it has the peculiar lustre,
which stands again also in intimate connexion with the homogeneous
mass. The usual colour of metals is white, the colour of unsullied
light. The lustre is properly a self-illumination, and thereupon
depends their repulsion of light, or opacity. Metals are therefore
adiaphanous or opaque, because they are noncombustible by light. As
soon as they become decomposible, namely oxydes, they become also
transparent. The metals are the only opaque bodies, because they alone
are non-decomposible. All matters become only opaque by admixture with
metal, or in so far as the metallic body resides at the bottom of all.
The visibility of the world is based upon its metallic character.
Without metal we would see nothing.

c. In so far as _heat_ is represented in metal is it extensible,
fusible and fluidifiable. Metal is water that has become dense.

500. In so far as the _air_ has acted upon the Earthy during its
origin, it has imparted to it electrical and combustible properties;
the metal has combined with hydrogen, has become an Inflammable, as in
sulphur or pit-coal. Sulphur may be regarded as the intimate fusion
of hydrogen with metal; coal as a combination of the same probably
elicited by means of oxygen. Inflammables are idioelectric and
combustible, because they are rigidified air. That matter belongs only
to the Inflammables, which, being once kindled in exposure to the air,
continues to burn of _itself_. The Inflammables are volatile, since
they undergo combustion, i. e. they take on the condition of their
antetype, the air. They have from metal the opacity and the colours,
but they do not preserve the lustre or self-illumination. They become
transparent simply by crystallization or oxydation.

501. With the generation of the Earthy _water_ imparts also to a
portion of the same its properties, dissolubility and transparency.
To the metal and hydrogen oxygen is next added. An hydrated Earthy
originates. The Aqueo-earthy is fluid in water; it is _salt_. Salt
changes its form in the readiest manner, because it is the metatype or
likeness of water; and hence its susceptibility to crystallization. It
is not combustible by itself, because it is essentially an oxyde and
hydroid. Salt is a metal or Inflammable that has undergone combustion,
and can therefore never be simple.

502. Now that part of the earth-element, which remains after the
salt, the Inflammable and the metal have been separated, is plainly
the _Earthy_ or the _earth_. It has therefore no aqueous properties,
is not soluble; it has no aerial properties, is not electric and
combustible; has no metallic properties, is not heavy, nor opaque and
glittering, not fusible and malleable or extensible. The pure Earthy is
always fixed or firm, and therefore figurate. The Earthy is a metal,
with which the oxygen has been intimately melted down; for it is the
identification of all elements.

503. The Earthy is the principal mass, because it represents the
earth-element itself. Salt, Inflammable and metal are only subordinate
masses, because they are only displacements of the earth-element by the
other elements. Therefore a small part only of the Earthy has become
salt, a yet smaller Inflammable, and the smallest, metal.

504. Although the metal is simple, it can by no means correspond, as
might otherwise appear, to the earth-element; for every element is
a totality of elemental bodies, and therefore those minerals, which
represent the pure earth-element, must be compound, without, however,
exhibiting the characters of the other elements. This is found only in
the earths.

505. There are, accordingly, in a genetic point of view, four, and only
four, mineral classes. They originate in an ascending direction, from
the earth-element by water and air up to fire. The Classes are--

    I. Earth-minerals  Earths.
   II. Water-   "      Salts.
  III. Air-     "      Inflammables.
   IV. Fire-    "      Ores.

a. _Earths_ are those minerals, which admit of being changed neither
by water, nor air, nor by fire; i. e. which are neither soluble,
combustible, fusible, neither yield colour, nor are particularly
heavy. Such minerals have been properly called earths, as silicious,
sacrilegious earth, &c.

b. _Salts_ are those which have aqueous properties, i. e. are soluble.

c. _Inflammables_ are those which have aerial properties, i. e. are
inflammable and volatile.

d. _Metallic ores_ are those which have the three properties of fire,
are superlatively heavy, yielding light or colour, and fusible.

506. The _Earths_ are to be regarded as the proper total earth-element,
namely as carbon neutralized by oxygen. The _Salts_ are to be regarded
as combinations of the earth-and water-elements; therefore as
combinations of carbon with oxygen and hydrogen. The _Inflammables_
are to be regarded as combinations of the earth-element with the
air-element, thus of carbon with hydrogen, which supplies the place
of nitrogen. The _Metals_ are to be regarded as combinations of the
earth-element with the fire-element; therefore as carbon without any
other body, only combined with spiritual actions, namely gravity, light
and heat. Hence the apparent simplicity of metals, and the great number
of special properties, which are absent in the other classes.


DEVELOPMENT OF THE CLASSES.

507. As there is not simply a single earth, salt, Inflammable
and metal, but in each class many of them; we have to inquire
what is the groundwork of their further distinctions or of their
systematic division. Here also may we go to work again chemically and
philosophically.


a. _Chemical Division._

The _Metals_, _chemically_ regarded, do not admit of being separated
into constituent parts. They exhibit only physical differences in
gravity, colour, hardness, malleability, conducting power, tension or
their mutual polarity. If it be endeavoured to arrange them according
to these respects, nothing but disorder results. The same is the
case in reference to their affinity for oxygen, sulphur, the acids
and other metals. Rather more order is at once displayed if their
philosophical composition, namely as carbon and fire, be submitted to
our consideration.

508. In consequence of this view, the _Metals_ must divide into
Earth-metals and Fire-metals; and the latter again into three
subdivisions, nearly as follows:--

A. Earth-metals--difficultly fusible and invariably
oxydized--Sidereometalla, e. g. Iron--Manganese, Wolfram, Uranium,
Titanium, Chromium, &c.

B. Fire-metals.

a. Heavy metals; difficultly fusible, unoxydized or noble metals, e. g.
Platinum, Nickel, Cobalt.

b. Light metals; the easily fused noble metals--e. g. Gold, Silver, &c.

c. Heat-metals; the easily fused, ignoble and frequently volatile
metals, e. g. Lead, Tin, Antimony, Zinc, Arsenic, &c.

509. The _Inflammables_ divide under a chemical point of view into two
groups--into the varieties of Coal and Sulphur, whereof the Earthy lies
at the basis of the former which is non-fusible; the Aerial at that of
the latter. They do not admit of being divided, unless a mean betwixt
the two be taken, the combinations of carbon and hydrogen in the resins.

510. The _Salts_ admit of a better dismemberment. Their constituent
parts are alkalies and acids, the former the Earthy, the latter the
Aqueous. The mean condition is exhibited by the neutral salts, so that
three orders are the result.

511. Now by the philosophical view we have first attained to the very
remarkable import of the acids. They are forsooth nothing else than
oxydized elements and mineral classes. In the nitric acid it is evident
that, as the acid of nitrogen, it is the _aerial acid_; as sulphuric
acid is the _inflammable acid_; arsenic acid the _metallic acid_. Upon
this ground we may expect that the other acids also have a similar
origin. Without much hesitation hydrochloric acid may be viewed as the
_aqueous acid_, which is associated with the sea; the carbonic acid
as _æther-_ or _igneous-acid_, as well on account of its constituent
parts and gaseous character, as chiefly on account of its general
diffusion. There remain then only two that have been called mineral
acids, the fluoric and boracic acids, the first of which, as conqueress
of the earths is the _earth acid_, the last being thus the acid of the
_salts_. We have accordingly--


a. _Elemental acids._

  1. The oxydized æther        is    Carbonic acid.
  2. The oxydized air                Nitric acid.
  3. The oxydized water              Hydrochloric acid.


b. _Mineral acids._

  4. The oxydized earth        is    Fluoric acid.
  5. The oxydized salt               Boracic acid.
  6. The oxydized inflammable        Sulphuric acid.
  7. The oxydized metal              Arsenic acid.

512. The vegetable and animal acids are none other than repetitions of
the elemental and mineral acids. They may perhaps be parallelized in
the following manner.

  Fire-acid         (Carbonic acid)       Acetic acid      Hæmatosine.
  Air-acid          (Nitric acid)         Malic acid       Lactic acid.
  Water-acid        (Hydrochloric acid)  Saccharine acid  Mucic acid.
  Earth-acid        (Fluoric acid)        Tartaric acid    Phosphoric ac.
  Salt-acid         (Boracic acid)        Tannic acid      Uric acid.
  Inflammable-acid  (Sulphuric acid)      Succinic acid    Sebacic acid.
  Ore-acid          (Arsenic acid)        Indic acid       Formic acid.

All the remaining acids must be viewed as subordinate to, or as kinds
of these.

513. The _alkalies_ appear to follow the same course, though it does
not admit of being so completely demonstrated.

  Fire-alkali  Ammonia  Vegetable,  and  Animal alkalies.
  Air-alkali   Potash   Alcaloids        Alcaloids.
  Water        Soda                      Urea.
  Earth        Lithium                   Bile, &c.
  Salt
  Inflammable
  Ore-alkali

514. The earths proper do not consist of two principles, and do not,
therefore admit of being chemically divided.

515. This division is only incorrect in a naturo-historical sense,
because it has no reference to the totality. Inasmuch as every mineral
class is viewed as having originated out of only one or two elements,
it divides by the chemical method only into constituent parts or
fractions, as the acids and alkalies, which are obviously only
moieties, and taken in a strict sense are not true minerals.


b. _Genetic Division of the Classes._

516. The total division only is genetic and consequently correct.

517. As the classes have originated through that which directly
preceded them, namely, the elements; so must the divisions of the
classes be determined by the other classes. Such divisions are called
orders. Every class necessarily divides into four orders.

  Order 1. Earths.
        2. Salts.
        3. Inflammables.
        4. Ores.


_CLASS I._


EARTHS.

518. There must be therefore pure earths, haloid or salt-earths,
inflammable earths and metallic earths or ores.

1. The Earth-earths must have neither saline, nor inflammable nor
metallic properties, and thus also be insoluble in acids. Such is the
case with the _Silicious earths_.

2. The Haloid-earths must have saline properties, dissolve in acids,
but not fall to pieces when exposed to air and fire. Such is the
behaviour of _Argillaceous earth_; it admits besides of combining with
water, that antetype of the salts.

3. The Inflammable earths must be soluble in acids and exhibit electric
or aerial properties. Such is the behaviour of the _Talcose earths_;
its minerals are unctuous, fall when exposed to the air into electric
lamellæ, and burn brittle.

4. The Metallic earths must undergo change in acids, air and fire. The
_calcareous earth_ dissolves in all acids, burns corrosive and becomes
almost a metallic calx. The Orders of earth are consequently:

  1. Earth-earths             _Silica_; Quartz, &c.
  2. Haloid-earths            _Clays_; Felspar, &c.
  3. Inflammable-earths       _Talcs_; Mica, &c.
  4. Metallic-earths or Ores  _Calx_.

519. Nature does not produce any so-called pure calcareous earth,
but only this earth in an _oxydated_ condition. Carbonic acid is the
oxygen of the earth that has become free, and the corroding calx is the
Metallic, the other constituent part of the Earthy, which has obtained
some oxygen, but lost the Aqueous by the carbonic acid and thereby has
become corrosive.

520. The carbonate calcareous earth is the whole earth, not the
corrosive. This is only the half of the earth-element, only its basic
or phlogistic principle. What has been called pure calcareous earth is
a half earth; the perfect or naturo-historical earth is just that which
is chemically impure.

521. The calcareous earth is not, however, perfected with one position.
It still exhibits several stages of development which appear to be
approximations to the salt, e. g. Strontian and Baryta.

522. The silicious earth, which principally represents the Earthy,
holds its principles more firmly together. No separation occurs there
in the carbonic acid and the basic or corroding body of earth; no
association with water, no great activity, no direct participation in
the highest evolutions of the planet; but it continues to lie in an
extreme state of contraction, and in a state of indifference in the
non-differencing darkness.

523. This pure earth is the basis, the pedestal of all the other
earths, and the foundation of the planet; for it alone is the earth
proper, the earth-abiding earth-element, while the other masses of
earth, divided in their principles, have pitched themselves in outward
opposition to the sun and other elements. The silicious earth is
in every respect the centre of all earthy productions, these being
only digressions from it. The Zircon earth is only a removal or
displacement of the silicious toward the argillaceous earth.

524. The argillaceous earth also is not dissevered into its principles;
it is not found as a carbonate. On the contrary, it is at once shown to
be far more pliable by its capacity for being kneaded and moulded in
water, and by its hardening when exposed to air and fire. It is also
seized upon and dissolved, i. e. reduced to the aqueous condition,
by all acids. Its kindred earths are the Glucine and Yttria, verging
towards the talcose earths.

525. The first dismemberment of principles is shown by the talcose
earth. Where it appears uncombined with the former earths it is
carbonate, yet still feebly corrosive.

526. These three principal earths together make up the body of the
earth, while the calcareous earth is only spread over them like a
mantle or crust.

527. As no earth is in its totality corrosive, and none such occurs
in nature or has at least not been originally produced from it, so
may the insolubility of the earths in water be set up as an essential
and thoroughly valid characteristic of the earths. Their distinctive
characters have been sedulously rendered fluctuating, by having been
drawn not from nature, but the products of art. That the corrosive
chalk is soluble in water, and may therefore be a salt is true; but
it has not issued thus out of the womb of nature. Mineralogy knows
nothing of a corrosive calcareous earth. The earths are sufficiently
separated from the salts by their insolubility in water. They are
separated from the ores by their incombustibleness, or, if they have
been already burnt, by their incapacity for reduction. As both of these
qualities are imparted by fire, so the earths are distinguished by
their immutability in fire, whereby is naturally understood not the
scoriation, but change of the earthy character. They differ also in
the same manner from the Inflammables. Nature does not undertake the
artificial reductions of earths to Metalloids, at least not so, that
they may become again of themselves earths. The metals are permanent
reductions.

528. Earth is thus the body, which is mutable neither in water, air,
nor fire. _Earth is a water-, air-, and fire-proof body._ This is
the brief, rigid, wholly exclusive, and significantly expressive
definition, which a so-called empirical science could never, but
philosophy alone, bestow.

529. The Ore is not soluble in water, nor mutable in air; on the
contrary, it is fusible, oxydizable, or reducible in fire. _Ore is a
water-and air-, but not fire-proof body._

530. The Inflammable is immutable in water, but mutable in air and
fire. _The Inflammable is a water-proof, but not air-and fire-proof
body._

531. The Salt is soluble in water, and decomposible in fire, but
immutable in air. _Salt is an air-, but not water-and fire-proof
body._ The legitimate series of gradations comprised in the above four
definitions cannot escape the attentive reader, nor moreover that the
properties of the earths are all affirmative. Nature has not employed
such insignificant means of distinction as our mineralogy has done;
has nowhere used an acid in order to distinguish the metals from the
earths, nor savour to separate the salts from the earths; but she
selects universal reagents which are the elements themselves. So simple
is Nature, if we do not violate her by art.


DIVISION OF THE EARTHS.

532. There is not merely a single silicious mineral, but many such,
just as in clay, talc, and calx. How, then, do differences occur in
these earths? When we survey the science of Mineralogy we remark that
most minerals are composed of several earths; with them also metals,
coal, sulphur, alkalies and acids are frequently associated. It follows
thereupon that the further distinctions are no longer of an _internal_
kind, namely, alterations of substance; but proceed from combinations
and thus indicate stöchiometric bodies. The next division of the orders
I call _Families_.

Order 1. _Silicious_ minerals.    *

533. With how many bodies now can the silicious earth combine? It will
first of all appear in a pure condition, as in quartz; then, in the
next place, combine with the other earths, thus with clay, talc and
calx. We have thus four families of _Earth-silices_.

  Fam. 1. Pure-Silex        Quartz.
       2. Argillaceo-Silex  Zircon.
       3. Talco-Silex       Emerald.
       4. Calcareo-Silex    Leucite.

534. Thus the hardest minerals or the silicious precious stones are
here placed. But these are obviously not exhausted with the above
four combinations, but more of the latter must still be sought for.
Those bodies which rank next to the earths, and can therefore enter
into the following combinations are the other mineral classes, such
as the salts, Inflammables, and metals; and we accordingly obtain the
following _silicious_ minerals, as constituting _classes_.

  Fam. 5. Salt-Silex         Topaz.
       6. Inflammable-Silex  Diamond.
       7. Ore-Silex          Garnet.

535. Still all the silicious minerals are not exhausted with these
combinations. But now the silicious earth can combine with nothing more
than the _elements_, whence three families originate.

  Fam.  8. Water-Silex  Hornstone, Silicious schist, Jasper, Flint, Opal.
        9. Air-Silex    Silicious sinter, as Tripoli and Polierschiefer.
       10. Fire-Silex   Obsidian with Pitchstone, Pearlstone and Pumice.

536. Upon casting a glance at this series, it is shown, that the first
seven families occur in a crystalline, but the last three only in a
compact or structureless condition. The latter occur at the same time
in large masses, the former, on the contrary, but scantily dispersed.
The first family or the quartz, occurs as well in a compact and massive
state as crystallized; the others, on the contrary, taken collectively,
are only crystallized, and scarcely form small rocks here and there,
but never mountain-chains. They are the precious stones proper, both
on account of their hardness, as also their rarity. Precious stones
are thus only combinations of silex with other earths, and with the
classes; on the contrary, the elemental silices only, viz. the earth-,
water-, air-and fire-silices, are massive.

537. It is here shown, that freedom finds a place also in dead nature.
Quartz only is necessary as the earth in general. Its marriages with
the other earths, &c., to form precious stones are not necessary, but
free or accidental, and may therefore happen for the first time in the
laboratory.

538. If we now proceed to the arrangement of the Clay, we find
exactly the same law to prevail in the genesis of its minerals i. e.
stöchiometric combinations with other orders, classes, and elements. We
have likewise--


A.--_Earth-Clays._

  Fam.  1. Silicious clays      Felspar.
        2. Argillaceous clays   Sapphire.
        3. Talcose clays        Ruby.
        4. Calcareous clays     Epidote.


B.--_Class-Clays._

  5. Salt-clays           Schorl.
  6. Inflammable clays    Azurite.
  7. Ore-clays            Harmotome.


C.--_Elemental-Clays._

   8. Water-clays          Clay-slate.
   9. Air-clays            Potter's-clay, Clay-stone.
  10. Fire-clays           Lavas, Phonolite, Toad-stone.

The water-clays are hydrates; the air-clays volatilized hydrates; the
fire-clays are clay fused or transmuted by heat. Here also the first 7
families only are crystallized; the 3 last, on the contrary, as well as
the first in part, occur only in a compact state and in large masses.

539. The Talcs follow the same laws, and we have--


                  A.--_Earth-Talcs._

  Fam. 1. Silicious talcs        Mica.
       2. Argillaceous talcs     Sapphirine.
       3. Talcose talcs          Talc, Chlorite.
       4. Calcareous talcs       Augite.

                  B.--_Class-Talcs._

       5. Salt-talcs          Hornblende.
       6. Inflammable-talcs   Asbestus.
       7. Ore-talcs           Olivine.

                  C.--_Elemental-Talcs._

  Fam. 8. Water-talcs         Serpentin, Steatite.
       9. Air-talcs           Lithomarge, Fuller's-earth, Bole.
      10. Fire-talcs          Basalt.

Here also the first 7 families only are crystallized and occur for the
most part in a scattered manner; but the aqueous, aerial, and igneous
families, as well as the first family in part, are merely compact and
mountainous masses.

540. The fourth order or that of the Calcareous earths is developed
likewise according to the same laws. As, however, it approximates the
salts, and therefore combines with acids, it presents many anomalous
varieties, of which account cannot be taken in every instance. These
minerals are soft throughout, change by fire and admit of being
wholly or partially dissolved in acids. Here belong the zeolites, or
combinations of the calcareous earths with the other earths.

            A.--_Calcareous earths, Zeolites._

   1. Silicio-calcareous earths  Lapis lasuli, Scapolite.
   2. Argillaceo-      "         Mesotype, Analcime, Stilbite.
   3. Talco-           "         Stellite.
   4. Calcareo-        "         Tabular spar.

            B.--_Classes of Calcareous earths._

   5. Halo-calcareous earths    Boracite.
   6. Inflammable-  "           Phosphate of lime, Fluorspar?
   7. Ore-          "           Titanite, Tungsten.

                C.--_Elemental-Calcareous earths._

   8. Water calcareous earth    Hydrophyllite? Wavellite.
   9. Air-           "          Gypsum, Heavy-spar, Celestine.
  10. Fire-          "          Limestone.

Here also the first 7 tribes only occur crystallized, the 3 last, in a
great measure, compact, and as mountainous masses.


_CLASS II._

WATER-EARTHS. SALTS.


541. The chief distinctions of the salts consist also in their
combination with the other classes, and we have therefore 4 orders--

  1. Earth-Salts         Double-salts.
  2. Saline-Salts        Neutral-salts.
  3. Inflammable-Salts   Saponaceous-compounds.
  4. Metallic-Salts      Vitriols.

The same will hold good without doubt of the orders, as in the case
of the earths. They form as many families as there are principal
masses of them present, with which they may combine. As the acids,
from being the children or offspring of water, play the chief part in
the water minerals, and are themselves nothing else than oxydized and
outwardly lying masses, they carry consequently within themselves the
number and import of the families; thus it is they which determine
indeed the division. If the bases were to be taken as the groundwork
of arrangement, there would be only earths and alkalies, and on the
other hand numerous metals, by which step the mineralogist would fall
into the unprincipled method of classification adopted by empirics.
Here also the philosophy of nature shows, and that indeed upon sound
reasoning, that the acids and not the bases afford the principle of a
natural classification. A somewhat different opinion is held by the
chemist, who must characterize the salts according to both series; but
this is by no means the course taken by the historian of nature.


ORDER I.

_Earth-Salts--Double Salts._

(Combinations of acids with earths.)

  Fam. 1-4. Earthy-acids or Fluoric-acid earths; here also belong Bromic,
            Iodic, and Cyanic acids.
  5. Salt or Boracic-acid.
  6. Inflammable or Sulphuric-acid--Alum, Sulphate of magnesia.
  7. Metallic or Arsenic-acid.
  8. Water or Hydrochloric-acid--the earths Barytes, Strontian, and Lime;
     Murias ammoniæ, Chloride of Calcium.
  9. Air or Nitric-acid--Strontium, Nitrate of lime.
  10. Fire or Carbonic-acid--Vegetable-acid earths.


Order II.

_Salt-Salts--Neutral Salts._

(Combinations of acids with alkalies.)

  1-4. Fluoric-acid
    5. Boracic-acid       Borax.
    6. Sulphuric-acid     Sulphate of soda, Sulphate of potash.
    7. Arsenic-acid.
    8. Hydrochloric-acid  Rock-salt, Muriate of soda, Sal-ammoniacum or
                          salmiac.
    9. Nitric-acid        Nitrate of potash or saltpetre, Cream of tartar.
   10. Carbonic-acid      Soda, Subcarbonate of potash, Binoxalate of
                          potash, Acetate of potash.


ORDER III.

_Inflammable-Salts--Saponaceous-compounds._

(Soluble, and at the same time combustible bodies.)

  1-4. Earth-Soaps        Calcareo-sulphuret of potash.
    5. Salt-Soaps         Common sulphuret of potash.
    6. Inflammable-Soaps  Fatty or soft soaps.
    7. Metallic-Soaps     Metallic Soaps.
    8. Water-Soaps        Animal mucilages.
    9. Air-Soaps          Saccharum or sugar.
   10. Fire-Soaps         Vegetable extracts.


ORDER IV.

_Ore-Salts--Vitriols._

(Combinations of acids with metals.)

  1-4. Fluoric-acid
    5. Boracic-acid
    6. Sulphuric-acid      Iron, Copper, Zinc, Vitriol.
    7. Arsenic-acid        White arsenic.
    8. Hydrochloric-acid   Calomel, Corrosive sublimate.
    9. Nitric-acid         Nitrate of silver.
   10. Carbonic-acid       Sugar of lead.


_CLASS III._

AIR-EARTHS--INFLAMMABLES.


542. It is very difficult to arrange this class, because it has
been wholly neglected by mineralogists, and is, properly speaking,
quite unknown to them, because they have had recourse only to those
combustible bodies which occur accidentally in the earth, while
according to philosophical principles everything belongs to the
province of natural history, that has originated or may originate in
nature, so that its situation is a matter of complete indifference.
If we follow the same laws according to which the earths and salts
have been so excellently arranged, we must here also adopt four
orders, namely, combustible things which bear a resemblance to earths,
others to salts, others to metals; finally, others which represent
combustibility in a pure state, and thus we obtain--

  1. Earth-Inflammables         Coals.
  2. Salt-Inflammables          Fats.
  3. Inflammable-Inflammables   Resins.
  4. Ore-Inflammables           Colouring matters.

The Earth-inflammables will be such as are solid and burn, without
becoming fluid, e. g. Common Coal. The Salt-inflammables will either
be or become fluid before they undergo combustion, and are readily
converted of themselves into acids, e. g. Animal and Vegetable Fats.
The Inflammable-inflammables will be of a sulphurous character, solid
or fluid, fragile, electric, fetid and fluid before they burn. These
properties are found in the Resins. The Ore-inflammables are those
which, independently of their combustibility, possess pre-eminently one
property of metals, namely their non-transparency, or coloration, e. g.
the Pigments or colouring matters from the organic kingdoms.


ORDER I.

_Earth-Inflammables--Coals._

  1-4. Earth-Coals        Common-coal, a mixture of coal and earths.
    5. Salt-Coals         Gunpowder, viz. a combination of charcoal with
                          a salt.
    6. Inflammable-Coals  Glance-coal, viz. carbon without earths.
    7. Ore-Coals          Black-lead, or carburet of iron.
    8. Water-Coals        Peat-bog and brown or Common coal?
    9. Air-Coals          Lignite or wood-coal?
   10. Fire-Coals         Animal carbon, fibrine.

ORDER II.

_Salt-Inflammables--Adipaceous or Unctuous bodies._

  1-4. Earth-fats          Spermaceti? Tallow.
    5. Salt-fats           Lard and Train-oil?
    6. Inflammable-fats    Butter?
    7. Ore-fats            Wax?
    8. Water-fats          Vegetable oils?
    9. Air-fats            Desiccative or drying oils.
   10. Fire-fats           Greasy oils.


ORDER III.

_Inflammable-Inflammables--Resins._

  1-4. Earth-resins          Sulphur, Phosphorus.
    5. Saline-resins         Chloride of sulphur, Chlorate of Sulphur.
    6. Inflammable-resins    Mineral-pitch, Amber, Turpentine.
    7. Ore-resins            Balsams.
    8. Water-resins          Gum-resins.
    9. Air-resins            Ætherial oils.
   10. Fire-resins           Alcohol, Æther.


ORDER IV.

_Ore-Inflammables--Pigments._

  1-4. Earth-pigments         Ochre-pigments.
    5. Salt-pigments          Soluble-pigments from roots and wood, such
                              as Krapp and Dier's-weed.
    6. Inflammable-pigments   Retinoid-pigments from roots and wood, such
                              as Dragon's-blood, Turmeric.
    7. Ore-pigments           Indigo or devil's-dye.
    8. Water-pigments         Sap-colours, such as Sap-green, Oak-gall.
    9. Air-pigments           Flower colours, such as Saffranon and
                              Saffron.
   10. Fire-pigments          Animal colours, as Scarlet and Blood-red.


_CLASS IV._

FIRE-EARTHS--ORES.


543. The metals are again easier of arrangement, because they have a
resemblance to earths and have been better worked out both in chemistry
and mineralogy. They divide very naturally into--

  1. Earth-Ores         Ochres, combinations of metals with oxygen.
  2. Salt-Ores          Haloids, insoluble combinations of metals with
                        acids.
  3. Inflammable-Ores   Blendes, combinations of metals with Sulphur,
                        Phosphorus, and Selenium.
  4. Metallic-Ores      Pure metals.

The principles of this arrangement which has been at present pretty
generally followed, were first published in my essay 'Das naturliche
System der Erze,' 1809. In order to gain a proper insight into the
serial gradation of all the families we must first regard the 4th order.


ORDER I.

_Earth-Ores--Ochres._

   1. Silicious-Ochres     Metallic calces with silicious earth, as
                           Lierite, Dioptase, Electric calamine.
   2. Argillaceous-Ochres  Clay-iron-stone.
   3. Talcose-Ochres       Blue-iron-stone.
   4. Calcareous-Ochres    Black oxyde of manganese.
   5. Salt-Ochres          Calces not peroxydized. Bog-iron.
   6. Inflammable-Ochres   Pure calces without metallic lustre, as
                           Wolfram, Protoxide of Uranium, Rutile,
                           Tin-stone.
   7. Ore-Ochres           Oxydulated, as Iron-glance, Red oxyd of Copper.
   8. Water-Ochres         Hydrates, as Brown-iron-stone-ore, Gray ore of
                           manganese.
   9. Air-Ochres           Malm-rocks; volatilized Ochres of the
                           difficultly fusible metals, as Umbra, Yellow
                           earth, Earthy manganese, Black cobalt.
  10. Fire-Ochres          Slags, volatilized calces of the difficultly
                           fusible metals, as oxyde of or White antimony,
                           Protoxide of Arsenic.


ORDER II.

_Salt-Ores--Haloids._

  Fam. 4. Earth-Haloids         Fluoric-acid.
       5. Salt-Haloids          Boracic-acid.
       6. Inflammable-Haloids   Sulphuric-acid, as Sulphate of lead,
                                Phosphoric-acid as Green and Blue
                                phosphates of iron, Diarsenate of iron,
                                Uran-glance, Green phosphate of Lead.
       7. Ore-Haloids           Chromic-acid, as Chromate of lead,
                                Arsenic-acid, as Cube-ore, Arseniate of
                                iron, Olivenite, Cobalt-bloom.
       8. Water-Haloids         Hydrochloric-acid, as Muriate of copper,
                                Horn-silver.
       9. Air-Haloids           Nitric-acid.
      10. Fire-Haloids          Carbonic-acid, as Iron-spar, Red
                                manganese-ore, Earthy blue-copper,
                                Malachite, Carbonate of lead.

ORDER III.

_Inflammable-Ores--Blendes._

   1. Silicious-Blendes     Zinc-blendes, Cinnabar, Red antimony and
                            Ruby-silver-ore.
   2. Argillaceous-Blendes  Iron and Copper pyrites.
   3. Talcose-Blendes       Sulphuret of Titanium, Chrome, Uranium.
   4. Calcareous-Blendes    Sulphuret of Molybdena.
   5. Salt-Blendes          Copper-glance, Gray copper.
   6. Inflammable-Blendes   Nickel-glance, Cobalt-glance.
   7. Ore-Blendes           Sulphuret of Platinum.
   8. Water-Blendes         Gray antimony, Galena.
   9. Air-Blendes           Bismuth-glance, Arsenical pyrites.
  10. Fire-Blendes          Silver-glance-ore.


ORDER IV.

_Metallic-Ores.--Metals._

(Pure or reduced metals.)

544. The classification of metals is one of the most difficult, because
no natural arrangement of them has been as yet attempted, and their
signification is also so mysterious that we can only get at it, by
clinging fast to the laws of development. Thus assuming, that they
likewise arrange themselves according to the elements, classes and
orders of the earths, we have at once the _Elemental metals_. The
earth-metals are without doubt the difficultly fusible, ignoble or
oxydized, such as iron with its congeners. Then the air-metals present
themselves with their peculiar character of volatility, as Arsenic with
its congeners. These being once rendered solid, the easily fusible but
non-volatile will correspond to water, such as Lead with its congeners.
The noble metals consequently as Gold, Silver, &c., must doubtless be
regarded as fire-metals. Having once separated these 4 groups, the
_Class-metals_ admit of being more readily brought into their place.
There is one metal, which subjected to moisture is readily converted
into a salt, namely copper. This is consequently the representative
of the salts among the metals. Ore-metals are, without doubt, those
resembling iron, which do not, however, occur in an oxydized condition
and are therefore noble Irons. Of this kind are Platinum with its
retinue. Between Copper and Platinum nothing else can be introduced
but Nickel and Cobalt, as they are likewise difficultly fusible and
tolerably noble. They are thus the Inflammable metals. After all
these separations a great group is still left of the earth-metals
or the difficultly fusible and ignoble. They divide therefore
without doubt according to the 4 earths. If now iron approximates
the argillaceous-earths, so will those metals whose oxydes are
distinguished by a striking colour be regarded as talc-metals. Of this
kind are Titanium, Chromium, Uranium, which crystallize moreover into
spiculæ like hornblende, or into lamellæ like mica. These again being
separated the silicious and calcareous-metals remain for investigation.
The former are those which scarcely admit of being reduced; the latter,
on the contrary, those which approximate to the noble, difficultly
fusible metals, namely to platinum. It can hardly be doubted that
Tantalum is the silicious-metal. For the calcareous-metals Sulphuret
of Molybdenum is left, to which Osmium seems to approximate. We have
accordingly the following genetic arrangement:

  A.--_Earth-Metals._

  (Difficultly fusible and ignoble.)

   1. Silicious-Metals     Tantalium.
   2. Argillaceous-Metals  Wolfram, Cerium, Manganese, Iron.
   3. Talcose-Metals       Titanium,  Chromium, Uranium, Vanadium.
   4. Calcareous-Metals    Molybdenum, Osmium.

  B.--_Class-Metals._

  (Difficultly fusible and noble.)

   5. Salt-Metals          Copper.
   6. Inflammable-Metals   Nickel, Cobalt.
   7. Ore-Metals           Platinum, Palladium, Iridium, Rhodium.

  C.--_Element-Metals._

  (Easily fusible or noble.)

   8. Water-Metals         Antimony, Lead, Tin
   9. Air-Metals           Zinc, Cadmium, Bismuth, Arsenic.
  10. Fire-Metals          Tellurium, Mercury, Silver, Gold.

Every one will easily see that these groups of metals agree with their
antetypes in properties, as also that this arrangement is more natural
than any that has hitherto been advanced. Glancing at it, it must
strike the reader that in several of the families 4 metals are present,
and that none exceed this number. There are 4 sideroid, 4 titanoid, 4
platinoid, 4 arsenicoid and 4 argyroid metals. Now, as they are to be
viewed as deoxydized earths, it must be assumed that in each family
they are mindful of their origin, and everywhere represent the 4 earths
along with the character of their family. They are earths divided unto
the last members, or reduced in a primo-chemical manner. In order to
recognize the parallelism of the classes, orders and families, we have
only to compare the adjoining table. We cannot expect to find all the
minerals ranging there in their proper place. For we are treating the
subject at present only as regards its principles.

                             Table A
        FIRST CLASS.

        EARTH-EARTHS--EARTHS.

  +--------------------------+---------------------------+
  |         ORDER I.         |         ORDER II.         |
  |       Earth-Earths.      |        Salt-Earths.       |
  |          _Silex._        |          _Clays._         |
  |                          |                           |
  | _Fam. 1. Pure Silex._    |_Fam. 1. Silicious Clays._ |
  |  1. Quartz.              |  1. Feldspar.             |
  |  2. Iron Flint.          |  2. Anorthite.            |
  |                          |  3. Petalite.             |
  |                          |  4. Oligoclase.           |
  |                          |  5. Triphane.             |
  |                          |  6. Andalusite.           |
  |                          |  7. Crucite.              |
  |_F. 2. Argillaceo-Silex._ | _F. 2. Argillaceous       |
  |                          |                   Clays._ |
  |  1. Zircon.              |  1. Sapphire.             |
  |  2. OErstedite.          |  2. Chrysoberyl.          |
  |                          |  3. Cyanite.              |
  |                          |  4. Sillimanite.          |
  |                          |                           |
  |                          |                           |
  |                          |                           |
  | _F. 3. Talco-Silex._     | _F. 3. Talcose Clays._    |
  |  1. Emerald.             |  1. Spinel.               |
  |  2. Davidsonite.         |  2. Automolite.           |
  |  3. Euclase.             |  3. Dichroite.            |
  |  4. Phenacite.           |                           |
  | _F. 4. Calcareo-silex._  | _F. 4. Calcareous-Clays._ |
  |  1. Leucite.             |  1. Epidote.              |
  |  2. Glaucolite.          |  2. Mangan-epidote.       |
  |                          |                           |
  |                          |                           |
  |                          |                           |
  |                          |                           |
  |                          |                           |
  | _F. 5. Salt-Silex._      | _F. 5. Salt-Clays._       |
  |  1. Topaz.               |  1. Yttro-cerite.         |
  |  2. Physalite.           |  2. Schorl.               |
  |  3. Pycnite.             |  3. Axinite.              |
  |                          |                           |
  |_F. 6. Inflammable Silex._|_F. 6. Inflammable-Clays._ |
  |  1. Diamond.             |  1. Lazulite.             |
  |                          |  2. Turquois.             |
  |                          |  3. Amblygonite.          |
  |                          |                           |
  |                          |                           |
  |                          |                           |
  | _F. 7. Ore-Silex._       | _F. 7. Ore-Clays._        |
  |  1. Garnet.              |  1. Harmotome.            |
  |  2. Vesuvian.            |  2. Gadolinite.           |
  |  3. Acmite.              |  3. Orthite.              |
  |                          |                           |
  |                          |                           |
  | _F. 8. Water-Silex._     | _F. 8. Water-Clays._      |
  |  1. Flint-stone.         |  1. Wærthite.             |
  |  2. Jasper.              |  2. Allophane.            |
  |  3. Hornstone.           |  3. Pyrophyllite.         |
  |  4. Opal.                |  4. Clay-slate.           |
  |                          |                           |
  | _F. 9. Air-Silex._       | _F. 9. Air-Clays._        |
  |  1. Tripoli.             |  1. Potter's-clay.        |
  |  2. Polierschiefer.      |  2. Clay-stone.           |
  |  3. Silicious-sinter.    |  3. Porcelain-clay.       |
  |                          |  4. Cimolite.             |
  | _F. 10. Fire-Silex._     | _F. 10. Fire-Clays._      |
  |  1. Pitchstone.          |  1. Clay Iron-stone.      |
  |  2. Pearlstone.          |  2. Toad-stone.           |
  |  3. Obsidian.            |  3. Phonolite.            |
  |  4. Pumice.              |  4. Lavas.                |
  |                          |                           |
  +--------------------------+---------------------------+
  |       ORDER III.         |        ORDER IV.          |
  |    Inflammable Earths.   |       Ore-earths.         |
  |          _Talcs._        |    _Calcareous-earths._   |
  |                          |                           |
  |_Fam. 1. Silicious Talcs._| _Fam. 1. Silicious Kalke._|
  |  1. Mica.                |  1. Lapis-lazuli.         |
  |  2. Pinite.              |  2. Hauyne.               |
  |  3. Holmesite.           |  3. Sodalite.             |
  |  4. Margarite.           |  4. Scapolite.            |
  |                          |  5. Nepheline.            |
  |                          |                           |
  |                          |                           |
  |_F. 2. Argillaceous Talcs._| _F. 2. Argillaceo-Kalke._|
  |  1. Sapphirine.          |  1. Fugenstein.           |
  |  2. Seybertite.          |  2. Frehnite.             |
  |                          |  3. Chabazite.            |
  |                          |  4. Laumontite.           |
  |                          |  5. Stilbite. 6. Desmin.  |
  |                          |  7. Analcime.             |
  |                          |  8. Mesotype.             |
  | _F. 3. Talcose Talcs._   | _F. 3. Talco-Kalke._      |
  |  1. Talc.                |  1. Adelforsite.          |
  |  2. Pyrophillite.        |  2. Stellite.             |
  |  3. Chlorite.            |  3. Mellilite.            |
  |                          |  4. Humboldtite.          |
  |_F. 4. Calcareous Talcs._ | _F. 4. Calcareo-Kalke._   |
  |  1. Augite.              |  1. Tubular spar.         |
  |  2. Diopside.            |  2. Apophyllite.          |
  |  3. Sahlite. 4. Pyroxene.|                           |
  |  5. Coccolite.           |                           |
  |  6. Hedenbergite.        |                           |
  |  7. Diallage. 8. Bronzite.|                          |
  |  9. Hypersthene.         |                           |
  | _F. 5. Salt-Talcs._      | _Fam. 5. Salt-Kalke._     |
  |  1. Grammatite.          |  1. Boracite.             |
  |  2. Strahlstein.         |  2. Datholite.            |
  |  3. Hornblende.          |                           |
  |  4. Anthophyllite.       |                           |
  |_F. 6. Inflammable-Talcs._|_F. 6. Inflammable-Kalke._ |
  |  1. Asbestus.            |  1. Cryolite.             |
  |                          |  2. Fluorspar.            |
  |                          |  3. Wagnerite.            |
  |                          |  4. Apatite.              |
  |                          |                           |
  |                          |                           |
  | _F. 7. Ore-Talcs._       | _F. 7. Ore-Kalke._        |
  |  1. Chrysolite.          |  1. Titanite.             |
  |  2. Hyalosiderite.       |  2. Tungsten.             |
  |                          |  3. Pharmacolite.         |
  |                          |                           |
  |                          |                           |
  | _F. 8. Water-Talcs._     | _F. 8. Water-Kalke._      |
  |  1. Schiller-spar.       |  1. Diaspore.             |
  |  2. Serpentine.          |  2. Wavellite.            |
  |  3. Steatite.            |  3. Hydrophyllite.        |
  |  4. Meerschaum.          |                           |
  |                          |                           |
  | _F. 9. Air-Talcs._       | _F. 9. Air-Kalke._        |
  |  1. Agalmatolite.        |  1. Aluminite.            |
  |  2. Lithomarge.          |  2. Heavy-spar.           |
  |  3. Fuller's-earth.      |  3. Celestine.            |
  |  4. Bole.                |  4. Gypsum.               |
  | _F. 10. Fire-Talcs._     | _F. 10. Fire-Kalke._      |
  |  1. Basalt.              |  1. Mellilite.            |
  |                          |  2. Magnesite.            |
  |                          |  3. Strontianite.         |
  |                          |  4. Limestone.            |
  |                          |                           |


SECOND CLASS.

WATER-EARTHS--SALTS.

  +---------------------------+-------------------------------+
  |         ORDER I.          |           ORDER II.           |
  |       Earth-Salts.        |          Salt-Salts.          |
  |       _Double Salts._     |         _Neutral Salts._      |
  |                           |                               |
  | _Fam. 1. Silicic Acid._   | _Fam. 1. Fluoric Acid._       |
  |   Fluoric-acid earths.    |   Alkalis.                    |
  |                           |                               |
  |                           |                               |
  |                           |                               |
  |                           |                               |
  |                           |                               |
  |                           |                               |
  | _F. 2. Albuminic Acid._   | _F. 2. Bromic Acid._          |
  |    Bromic acid.           |                               |
  |                           |                               |
  |                           |                               |
  |                           |                               |
  |                           |                               |
  |                           |                               |
  |                           |                               |
  | _F. 3. Oxide of Magnesia._| _F. 3. Iodic Acid._           |
  |                           |                               |
  |                           |                               |
  |                           |                               |
  |                           |                               |
  | _F. 4. Oxide of Calcium._ | _F. 4. Cyanic Acid._          |
  |    Cyanic acid.           |                               |
  |                           |                               |
  |                           |                               |
  |                           |                               |
  |                           |                               |
  |                           |                               |
  |                           |                               |
  | _F. 5. Hydrochloric Acid._| _F. 5. Hydrochloric Acid._    |
  |    Boracic acid.          |  1. Sassoline.                |
  |                           |  2. Borax.                    |
  |                           |                               |
  |                           |                               |
  | _F. 6. Pyric Acid._       | _F. 6. Inflammable-Acid._     |
  |  1. Alum.                 |  1. Sulphate of Soda.         |
  |  2. Magnesia.             |  2. Sulphate of Potash.       |
  |                           |  3. Mascagnine.               |
  |                           |  4. Sub-nitrate of Bismuth.   |
  |                           |                               |
  |                           |                               |
  | _F. 7. Metallic Oxide._   | _F. 7. Ore-Acid._             |
  |    Arsenic acid.          |  1. Antimonium diaphoreticum. |
  |                           |      Fowleri.                 |
  |                           |                               |
  |                           |                               |
  | _F. 8. Water-Acid._       | _F. 8. Water-Acid._           |
  |  1. Sulphate of Magnesia. |  1. Rock-salt.                |
  |  2. Sulphate of Baryta.   |  2. Muriate of Soda.          |
  |  3. Murias Ammoniæ.       |  3. Salmiac.                  |
  |  4. Chloride of Calcium.  |                               |
  |                           |                               |
  | _F. 9. Air-Acid._         | _F. 9. Air-Acid._             |
  |    Nitric acid.           |  Nitrate of Potash.           |
  |  1. Nitrate of Strontian. |                               |
  |  2. Nitrate of Lime.      |                               |
  |                           |                               |
  | _F. 10. Fire-Acid._       | _F. 10. Fire-Acid._           |
  |    Carbonic acid.         |  1. Soda.                     |
  |    Super-carbonate of     |  2. Subcarbonate of Potash.   |
  |      Lime.                |  3. Binoxalate of Potash      |
  |    Acetate of Potash.     |  4. Acetate of Potash.        |
  |                           |                               |
  +---------------------------+-------------------------------+
  |        ORDER III.         |          ORDER IV.            |
  |    Inflammable Salts.     |          Ore-Salts.           |
  |        _Soaps._           |           _Vitriols._         |
  |                           |                               |
  |_Fam. 1. Silicio-sulphuret_| _Fam. 1. Fluoric Acid._       |
  |     _of Potash._          |   Metals.                     |
  |                           |                               |
  |                           |                               |
  |                           |                               |
  |                           |                               |
  |                           |                               |
  |                           |                               |
  |_F. 2. Argillaceo-sulphuret_ | _F. 2. Bromic Acid._        |
  |   _of Potash._            |                               |
  |                           |                               |
  |                           |                               |
  |                           |                               |
  |                           |                               |
  |                           |                               |
  |                           |                               |
  |_F. 3. Magnesio-sulphuret_ | _F. 3.  Iodic Acid._          |
  |     _of Potash._          |                               |
  |                           |                               |
  |                           |                               |
  |                           |                               |
  |_F. 4. Calcareo-sulphuret_ | _F. 4. Cyanic Acid._          |
  |    _of Potash._           |                               |
  |                           |                               |
  |                           |                               |
  |                           |                               |
  |                           |                               |
  |                           |                               |
  |                           |                               |
  | _F. 5. Salt-Soaps._       | _F. 5. Hydrochloric Acid._    |
  |  1. Potassio-sulphuret of |                               |
  |      Potash.              |                               |
  |  2. Ammoniaco-sulphuret   |                               |
  |      of Potash.           |                               |
  | _F. 6. Inflammable-Soaps._| _F. 6. Inflammable-Acid._     |
  |  1. Hard or Soda-soap     |  1. Green or Iron-vitriol.    |
  |  2. Soft or Potash-soap   |  2. Blue or Copper-vitriol.   |
  |  3. Linimentum volatile   |  3. White or Zinc-vitriol.    |
  |                           |                               |
  |                           |                               |
  |                           |                               |
  | _F. 7. Metallic Soaps._   | _F. 7. Metallic Acid._        |
  |  1. Carbonate of Lead.    |  1. White Arsenic.            |
  |                           |  2. Liquor arsenicalis        |
  |                           |      Fowleri.                 |
  |                           |                               |
  |                           |                               |
  | _F. 8. Water-Soaps._      | _F. 8. Water-Acid._           |
  |  1. Mucus.                |  1. Butter of Antimony.       |
  |  2. Gelatine.             |  2. Calomel.                  |
  |  3. Albumen.              |                               |
  |  4. Coagulable lymph.     |                               |
  |                           |                               |
  | _F. 9. Air-Soaps._        | _F. 9. Air-Acid._             |
  |  1. Sugar.                |  1. Nitrate of Silver.        |
  |  2. Manna.                |                               |
  |  3. Honey.                |                               |
  |                           |                               |
  | _F. 10. Fire-Soaps._      | _F. 10. Fire-Acid._           |
  |  1. Extracts.             |  1. Tartar emetic.            |
  |                           |  2. Sugar of Lead.            |
  |                           |  3. Fulminating Silver.       |
  |                           |                               |
  |                           |                               |


THIRD CLASS.

AIR-EARTHS--INFLAMMABLES.

  +---------------------------+-------------------------+
  |         ORDER I.          |        ORDER II.        |
  |    Earth-Inflammables     |   Salt-Inflammables.    |
  |          _Coals._         |          _Fats._        |
  |                           |                         |
  | _Fam. 1. Silicious Coals._| _Fam. 1. Spermaceti._   |
  |  1. Common Coal.          |                         |
  |                           |                         |
  |                           |                         |
  |                           |                         |
  |                           |                         |
  |                           |                         |
  |                           |                         |
  |_F. 2. Argillaceous Coals._| _F. 2. Adipocire._      |
  |  1. Common Coal.          |                         |
  |                           |                         |
  |                           |                         |
  |                           |                         |
  |                           |                         |
  |                           |                         |
  |                           |                         |
  | _F. 3. Talcose Coals._    | _F. 3. Oleine._         |
  |  1. Common Coal.          |                         |
  |                           |                         |
  |                           |                         |
  |                           |                         |
  | _F. 4. Calcareous Coals._ | _F. 4. Tallow._         |
  |  1. Common Coal.          |  1. Stearine.           |
  |                           |                         |
  |                           |                         |
  |                           |                         |
  |                           |                         |
  |                           |                         |
  |                           |                         |
  | _F. 5. Salt-Coals._       | _F. 5. Salt-Fats._      |
  |  1. Gunpowder.            |  1. Lard.               |
  |                           |  2. Train-oil.          |
  |                           |                         |
  |                           |                         |
  | _F. 6. Inflammable-Coals._|_F. 6. Inflammable-Fats._|
  |  1. Anthracite.           |  1. Butter.             |
  |                           |  2. Cream.              |
  |                           |                         |
  |                           |                         |
  |                           |                         |
  |                           |                         |
  | _F. 7. Ore-Coals._        | _F. 7. Ore-Fats._       |
  |  1. Black Lead.           |  1. Wax.                |
  |  2. Pyrorthite.           |                         |
  |                           |                         |
  |                           |                         |
  |                           |                         |
  | _F. 8. Water-Coals._      | _F. 8. Water-Fats._     |
  |  1. Brown Coals.          |  1. Cocoa-butter.       |
  |  2. Peat.                 |  2. Palm-oil.           |
  |                           |  3. Nutmeg.             |
  |                           |  4. Laurel-oil.         |
  |                           |                         |
  | _F. 9. Air-Coals._        | _F. 9. Air-Fats._       |
  |  1. Lignite.              |  1. Linseed-oil.        |
  |                           |  2. Nut-oil.            |
  |                           |  3. Hemp-oil.           |
  |                           |  4. Poppy-oil.          |
  | _F. 10. Fire-Coals._      | _F. 10. Fire-Fats._     |
  |  1. Fibrine.              |  1. Rape-oil.           |
  |                           |  2. Olive-oil.          |
  |                           |  3. Oil of Almonds.     |
  |                           |                         |
  |                           |                         |
  +---------------------------+-------------------------+
  |         ORDER III.        |          ORDER IV.      |
  |  Inflammable-Inflammables.|      Ore-Inflammables.  |
  |          _Resins._        |          _Pigments._    |
  |                           |                         |
  | _Fam. 1. Sulphur._        |_Fm. 1. Silicious-       |
  |                           |               Pigments._|
  | 1. Alcohol of Sulphur.    |  1. Litmus.             |
  | 2. Orpiment.              |                         |
  |                           |                         |
  |                           |                         |
  |                           |                         |
  |                           |                         |
  |                           |                         |
  | _F. 2. Boron._            |_F. 2. Argillaceous      |
  |                           |     Pigments._          |
  |                           |                         |
  |                           |                         |
  |                           |                         |
  |                           |                         |
  |                           |                         |
  |                           |                         |
  | _F. 3. Selenium._         | _F. 3. Talc Pigments._  |
  |                           |                         |
  |                           |                         |
  |                           |                         |
  |                           |                         |
  | _F. 4. Phosphorus._       | _F. 4. Calcareous       |
  |                                   Pigments._        |
  |                           |                         |
  |                           |                         |
  |                           |                         |
  |                           |                         |
  |                           |                         |
  |                           |                         |
  | _F. 5. Salt-Resins._      | _F. 5. Salt-Pigments._  |
  | 1. Chloride of Sulphur.   |  1. Krapp.              |
  | 2. Chloride of Phosphorus.|  2. Dier's-weed.        |
  |                           |                         |
  |                           |                         |
  |_F. 6. Inflammable-Resins._|_F. 6. Inflammable-      |
  |                           |               Pigments._|
  |  1. Mineral-pitch.        |  1. Sandal-wood.        |
  |  2. Amber.                |  2. Log-wood.           |
  |  3. Turpentine.           |  3. Curcuma.            |
  |  4. Caoutchouc.           |  4. Chlorophyle.        |
  |                           |                         |
  |                           |                         |
  | _F. 7. Ore-Resins._       | _F. 7. Ore-Pigments._   |
  |  1. Turpentine.           |  1. Succory.            |
  |  2. Balsam of Peru.       |  2. Quercitron.         |
  |  3. Mecca-balsam          |  3. Woad.               |
  |                           |                         |
  |                           |                         |
  | _F. 8. Water-Resins._     | _F. 8. Water-Pigments._ |
  |  1. Assafoetida.          |  1. Sap-green.          |
  |  2. Gumboge.              |   2. Oak-gall.          |
  |  3. Myrrh.                |                         |
  |  4. Opium.                |                         |
  |                           |                         |
  |_F. 9. Air-Resins._        | _F. 9. Air-Pigments._   |
  | 1. Petroleum.             |  1. Saffranon.          |
  |  2. Dippel's Oil.         |  2. Saffron.            |
  |  3. Camphor.              |  3. Anotto.             |
  |  4. Oil of Turpentine.    |                         |
  | _F. 10. Fire-Resins._     | _F. 10. Fire-Pigments._ |
  |  1. Spirits of Wine.      |  1. Scarlet.            |
  |  2. Sulphuric Ether.      |  2. Blood-red.          |
  |  3. Acetic Ether.         |                         |
  |  4. Formic Spirit.        |                         |
  |                           |                         |


FOURTH CLASS.

FIRE-EARTHS--ORES.

  +----------------------------+---------------------------+
  |          ORDER I.          |         ORDER II.         |
  |         Earth-Ores.        |         Salt-Ores.        |
  |          _Ochres._         |           _Halde._        |
  |                            |                           |
  |_Fam. 1. Silicious Ochres._ |_Fam. 1. Silicious Halde._ |
  |  1. Lierite.               |  1. Fluor-Cererium.       |
  |  2. Dioptase.              |                           |
  |  3. Antimonial Silver.     |                           |
  |  4. Electric Calamine.     |                           |
  |                            |                           |
  |                            |                           |
  |                            |                           |
  |_F. 2. Argillaceous Ochres._|_F. 2. Argillaceous Halde._|
  |  1. Clay Iron-stone.       |    Bromic acid.           |
  |  2. Polymignite.           |                           |
  |  3. Yttro-tantalite.       |                           |
  |                            |                           |
  |                            |                           |
  |                            |                           |
  |                            |                           |
  | _F. 3. Talc Ochres._       | _F. 3. Talc-Halde._       |
  |  1. Blue Iron-stone.       |    Iodic acid.            |
  |                            |                           |
  |                            |                           |
  |                            |                           |
  | _F. 4. Calcareous Ochres._ | _F. 4. Calcareous Halde._ |
  |  1. Black oxide of         |    Cyanic acid.           |
  |      Manganese.            |                           |
  |  2. Pyrochlore.            |                           |
  |                            |                           |
  |                            |                           |
  |                            |                           |
  |                            |                           |
  | _F. 5. Salt-Ochres._       | _F. 5. Salt-Halde._       |
  |  1. Bog-iron.              |    Boracic acid.          |
  |                            |                           |
  |                            |                           |
  |                            |                           |
  | _F. 6. Inflammable-Ochres._| _F. 6. Inflammable-Halde._|
  |  1. Wolfram.               |  1. Sulphate of Lead.     |
  |  2. Protoxide of           |  2. Blue phosphate        |
  |      Uranium.              |      of Iron.             |
  |  3. Rutile.                |  3. Uran-glance.          |
  |  4. Tin-stone.             |  4. Green phosphate       |
  |                            |      of Lead.             |
  | _F. 7. Ore-Ochres._        | _F. 7. Ore-Halde._        |
  |  1. Iron-glance.           |  1. Chromate of           |
  |  2. Titanate of Iron.      |      Lead.                |
  |  3. Chromate of Iron.      |  2. Cube-ore.             |
  |  4. Red Copper ore.        |  3. Olivenite.            |
  |                            |  4. Cobalt-bloom.         |
  | _F. 8. Water-Ochres._      | _F. 8. Water-Halde._      |
  |  1. Thraulite.             |  1. Muriate of Copper.    |
  |  2. Brown Iron-stone       |  2. Horn-lead.            |
  |      ore.                  |                           |
  |  3. Gray ore of            |  3. Horn-silver.          |
  |      Manganese.            |                           |
  | _F. 9. Air-Ochres._        | _F. 9. Air-Halde._        |
  |  1. Umbra.                 |    Nitric acid.           |
  |  2. Yellow-earth.          |                           |
  |  3. Black Copper.          |                           |
  |  4. Black Cobalt.          |                           |
  | _F. 10. Fire-Ochres._      | _F. 10. Fire-Halde._      |
  |  1. White Antimony         |  1. Iron-spar.            |
  |  2. Mennige.               |  2. Earthy blue copper.   |
  |  3. Bismuth Ochre.         |  3. Carbon of Lead.       |
  |  4. Protoxide of           |  4. Calamine.             |
  |      Arsenic.              |                           |
  +----------------------------+---------------------------+
  |           ORDER III.       |         ORDER IV.         |
  |    Inflammable-Ores.       |         Ore-Ores.         |
  |   _Inflammables._          |         _Metals._         |
  |                            |                           |
  |_F. 1. Silic. Inflammables._| _F. 1. Silicious Metals._ |
  |  1. Zinc-blende.           |  1. Tantalium.            |
  |  2. Cinnabar.              |                           |
  |  3. Red Antimony.          |                           |
  |  4. Ruby Silver-ore.       |                           |
  |                            |                           |
  |                            |                           |
  |                            |                           |
  | _F. 2. Argillaceous        | _F. 2. Argillaceous       |
  |     Inflammables._         |       Metals._            |
  |  1. Iron Pyrites.          |  1. Wolfram.              |
  |  2. Copper Pyrites.        |  2. Iron.                 |
  |  3. Tin Pyrites.           |  3. Cerium.               |
  |                            |                           |
  |                            |                           |
  |                            |                           |
  | _F. 3. Talc Inflammables._ | _F. 3. Talc-Metals._      |
  |                            |  1. Vanadium.             |
  |                            |  2. Uranium.              |
  |                            |  3. Titanium.             |
  |                            |  4. Chromium.             |
  | _F. 4. Calcareous          | _F. 4. Calcareous Metals._|
  |     Inflammables._         |                           |
  |  1. Sulphuret of           |  1. Molybdenum.           |
  |      Molybdena.            |  2. Osmium.               |
  |  2. Pyrochlore.            |                           |
  |                            |                           |
  |                            |                           |
  |                            |                           |
  | _F. 5. Salt-Inflammables._ | _F. 5. Salt-Metals._      |
  |  1. Copper-glance.         |  1. Copper.               |
  |                            |  2. Gray-copper.          |
  |                            |                           |
  |                            |                           |
  | _F. 6. Inflammable         |_F. 6. Inflammable-Metals._|
  |      -Inflammables._       |                           |
  |  1. Nickel-glance.         |  1. Nickel.               |
  |  2. Cobalt-glance.         |  2. Cobalt.               |
  |                            |                           |
  |                            |                           |
  |                            |                           |
  |                            |                           |
  | _F. 7. Ore-Inflammables._  | _F. 7. Ore-Metals._       |
  |  1. Sulphur-Platinum.      |  1. Rhodium.              |
  |                            |  2. Iridium               |
  |                            |  3. Palladium.            |
  |                            |  4. Platinum.             |
  |                            |                           |
  | _F. 8. Water-Inflammables._| _F. 8. Water-Metals._     |
  |  1. Antimonial             |  1. Antimony.             |
  |      Nickel                |  2. Tin.                  |
  |  2. Gray Antimony          |  3. Lead.                 |
  |  3. Galena.                |                           |
  |                            |                           |
  | _F. 9. Air-Inflammables._  | _F. 9. Air-Metals._       |
  |  1. Acicular Bismuth.      |  1. Zinc.                 |
  |  2. Bismuth-glance.        |  2. Cadmium.              |
  |  3. Arsenical Pyrites.     |  3. Bismuth.              |
  |                            |  4. Arsenic.              |
  | _F. 10. Fire-Inflammables._| _F. 10. Fire-Metals._     |
  |  1. Foliated Tellurium.    |  1. Tellurium.            |
  |  2. Silver-glance.         |  2. Mercury.              |
  |                            |  3. Silver.               |
  |                            |  4. Gold.                 |
  |                            |                           |


II.--_GEOLOGY_.

545. Geology is the history of the formation of the planet. It is the
doctrine which comprises the structure and thus the form, with the
organs or members of the planet, if we would compare the latter with an
organic body.


1. _Form of the Planet._

546. Crystallization belongs to the essence of the earth as the
globular form does to that of water. The life of the earth consists in
the formation of crystals. The being of the earth and of the crystal
are identical. The solid planet earth, has originated also according to
the laws of crystallization.

547. It is not, however, a single large crystal, the structure of which
appears to be homogeneous; but it is crystallized in its smallest
parts; it is an accumulation of crystals, which its atoms, integral
parts, or _constituent forms_ present for our examination. If a schorl
or feldspar were extended to the size of the whole earth, its integral
parts, though undiscoverable before by the microscope, would then
become visible. Crystals would be exhibited therein of silicious,
argillaceous, talcose, and calcareous earths, of iron, boracic acid,
&c. In short it would prove a complex _kind_ of _rock_ or _mountain_.
The fundamental or principal mass of the planet is thus a granular
_kind_ of _rock_ or _mountain_, probably like granite. Each of these
constituent forms is crystallized for itself out of the fluid-mass
according to the laws developed in the theory of crystallization,
in every point of the fluid a globe of crystallizing forces being
constituted, that generated the constituent forms.

548. The earth (regarded as planet, not as element) has during its
coagulation into a solid nucleus, generated an infinity of polar
spheres, as every polar line consists of an infinite vicissitude of
poles.

549. These integral crystals have originated only in drops of water;
for then only was an infinite multitude of polar axes and polar radii
separated from each other. Water in infinitely numerous drops is rain.
In the primary rain each drop crystallized, and each fell towards
the centre, because the primary water ranged over a vast extent. The
granular rock has originated in and out of rain. It is crystallized
_rain_.

550. It does not follow from this, that the earth should be an
accidental accumulation of small crystals, which, by the rotation of
the planet, formed themselves mechanically into a spheroid. As in small
crystals the infinity of poles reunites to constitute some principal
polarities, so also is this the case with the globe of the earth; this
results from its genesis whereby it is present in a definite space, and
hence coheres or hangs together as _one_ piece. The earth is only _one_
small punctule of contraction wrought in æther-space by the agency of
light. Again, it was without doubt a single central tension, which,
occurring upon a large scale, attracted together all the particles of
æther, and from that circumstance arranged them also. It was probably
magnetism, which is so intimately connected with the rotation of the
earth's axis, or the conflict of magnetism in its interior with the
electricity upon its surface, which was active in the condensation and
arrangement of the masses.

551. This arrangement of the parts of the earth, upon a large scale,
is a regulation of its constituent forms. The adjusting forces are,
however, those that operate through the whole sphere, and are thus
linear and spherical at one and the same time. By these the laminæ of
the nucleus were determined. The constituent forms of the earth are
consequently arranged in laminæ. What in the crystal is called the
cleavage of the laminæ, is in the earth _stratification_. The strike of
the strata combined with their dip determines the crystal nucleus of
the earth.

552. The strike and dip of the strata happened without doubt according
to definite laws of crystallization, and has by no means been resigned
to elevating force, mechanical dislocation, or even to chance.

553. On this very account the two directions of the earth's laminæ
cannot have a similar bearing over the whole earth. They can only
have a long tract extending in the same direction in individual
mountain-chains. This does not, however, exclude a parallel strike and
dip occurring in some wholly different quarter of the world; it must
indeed occur, and in such instances we meet with the opposing sides or
edges of the earth's nucleus.

554. The earth has without doubt originated according to the laws of
the polyhedron, which represents in the nearest manner the globe. The
polyhedron of the globe is the rhomboidal dodecahedron.

555. The land cannot therefore have an equal elevation everywhere above
the water, because the crystal consists of edges, angles, and surfaces
or sides. The mountain tops are probably the angles, the mountain
ridges or chains the edges, the plains the lateral surfaces of the
crystal.

556. Several mountain-chains run parallel, but interrupted, with the
equator. This parallelism extends to the most temperate zones. Then
follow oblique mountain-chains, as the Carpathian, Alps, Pyrenees.
Lastly, mountain-chains pass from the poles to the equator, as the
Sewo, Ural and Altai mountains. Subordinate mountain-chains unite the
latter transversely and the former in the direction of the meridian.
The earth is probably a _regular_ net of crystal edges and angles, and
thus of crystal surfaces also.


PRIMARY VALLEYS.

557. Although the earth may be regarded as originally a crystal, that
consists of level surfaces, edges and angles, wide fissures may still
have originated between its laminæ, such as we see in large crystals of
felspar. These fissures or gaps are the primary valleys.

558. There must be therefore valleys or parallel valleys, which
probably extend for hundreds of miles, and are many miles
deep--Longitudinal valleys.

559. The laminæ of the earth had without doubt transverse fissures,
which have been called hidden passages. These transverse fissures are
the transverse valleys, which are consequently less long and deep.

560. The mountains originate of themselves. They do not properly
originate, but valleys only originate, and the ridges of the crystal
laminæ afford the mountains. The mountains have not been originally
upheaved above the surface of the earth, nor the valleys depressed. A
valley, which is several miles broad, must originally have been several
miles deep, and the mountain wall consequently several miles high. The
earth at its origin was a cloven and jagged polyhedron, a polyhedric
star, such as the moon is still.

561. The mountains are not therefore large crystals, which crystallized
above the surface of the earth. They are only crystal laminæ, and may
be as irregular as possible in form; for they are ruptured crystals.

562. The water, which from the beginning had covered the polyhedron,
now sunk into the primary valleys. From the water resulted new
and final crystallizations, and these deposited themselves in the
valleys, upon the level ground and the flanks of the mountains; and
thus the fathomless primary valleys have been in part filled up. There
are no longer any primary valleys upon the earth.

563. After the water was once confined in narrow canals, it must begin
to flow, and by the force of its current many a steep primary wall must
have fallen in, been crumbled into ruins, and either been left upon the
spot or washed away--Diluvial drift rocks (Trümmersteine), Nagelfluhe,
Stratified rocks.

564. The principal direction of the water was formerly, as it is even
now, determined by the rotation of the earth; it flowed therefore
from east to west under the equator, from north-east to south-west in
our temperate zones, and pretty well from the north or from the poles
toward the equator in the frigid zones.

565. The primary valleys, which had originated in these directions,
were more excavated by aqueous agency than those which ran in other
directions, new valleys being also produced; the mountain chains
therefore upon the earth agree in the main with the water courses, and,
though not generated from, have been certainly changed in character
by, the latter. Such must be our conclusion, if in the formation of
the earth nothing but crystallization be taken into consideration.
Condensation alone brings yet other phenomena along with it.

566. The first and most important of these is the elevation of
temperature. We cannot think otherwise than at the first precipitation
of the earthy a number of huge cavities remained in the interior of the
earth, which were filled with water. This being heated, was converted
into steam, which thrust up the superincumbent rock, and converted it
into new mountains or mountain-chains. These agencies of heat may be
called primary volcanoes, although they are not to be confounded with
volcanoes proper.

567. The igneous cavities were probably placed in a certain order,
according with the original edges and angles of the earth's body. They
may have therefore thrown up mountain tops and chains.

568. But the cavities, besides raising mountain chains, could just as
well depress or allow them to sink in, and thus produce valleys. By
these means the seas have probably been formed. Like the seas so also
have the inland seas or lakes originated.

569. Lastly, a similar origin must be ascribed to the world-sea or
ocean. Many earthquakes arose, with all their concomitant phenomena,
by partial and sudden falling in of the deep descending cavities of
the earth. Frequently that which fell in was again driven out by the
expansive force of the suddenly compressed air.


2. _Organs of the Planet._

570. The principal mass or body of the planet is formed by the earths
proper, as being the typical or genuine representatives of the
earth-element. The other classes, as the metallic minerals or ores,
the Inflammables, and salts, are to be regarded only as viscera of
this body. If we take a circumspective glance at the planet, we cannot
fail to recognize this remarkable relation, that it is properly the
elemental families only of the earths that form the mountain masses,
while the other families are only scattered within them, like the
glands in an animal body. Let us again place the Families in tabular
contrast with each other.

       SILICIOUS,      ARGILLACEOUS,    TALCOSE and CALCAREOUS-EARTHS.

    A. Earth-silices.   Earth-clays.     Earth-talcs.    Earth-calces.

  Fam. 1. Quartz.      1. Felspar.     1. Mica.        1. Lapis-lazuli.
       2. Zircon.      2. Sapphire.    2. Sappharine.  2. Mesotype.
       3. Emerald.     3. Ruby.        3. Talc.        3. Stellite.
       4. Leucite.     4. Epidote.     4. Angite.      4. Tabular-spar.
       5. Topaz.       5. Schorl.      5. Hornblende.  5. Boracite.
       6. Diamond.     6. Azurite.     6. Asbestus.    6. Phosphorite.
       7. Garnet.      7. Harmotone.   7. Olivine.     7. Titanite.

    B. Water-silices.   Water-clays.     Water-talcs.    Water-calces.
       8. Hornstone.  8. Clay-slate.  8. Serpentine.  8. Hydrophyllite.

    C. Air-silices.      Air-clays.       Air-talcs.      Air-calces.
       9. Tripoli.     9. Clay-stone.  9. Lithomarge.  9. Gypsum.

    D. Fire-silices.    Fire-clays.      Fire-talcs.     Fire-calces.
      10. Obsidian.    10. Lava.       10. Basalt.     10. Limestone.

571. Now we here observe that only Quartz, Hornstone, Tripoli and
Obsidian, occur as mineral aggregates in large masses, while all
the others are only rare precious stones. Among the Clays, only
Felspar, Clay-Slate, Hornstone and Lava. Among the Talcs, only Mica,
Serpentine, Lithomarge, and Basalt. Among the Calcareous-earths, which
incline towards the nature of salts, all the first families are of
rare occurrence, and the latter only appear as mineral masses. This
regularity speaks moreover retrospectively in favour of the correctness
of the classification. The families have thus the same import or value
in Geology as in Oryctognosy.


A.--_EARTHS_.

572. The proper organs of the planet are the mineral aggregates or
rocks. These are either presented to us as they have originally
been precipitated from water by chemical process, or as they have
been changed by the co-operation of the other elements. There are
thus _genetic_ and _metamorphosed_ kinds of rock. The former were
crystallized previous to the current of the water--_Primary rocks_.
These rocks are changed either--

  1. By water--Transition-rocks, or
  2. By air--Trappean-rocks.
  3. By fire--Volcanic-rocks.

There are properly four kinds of rock formations--

  1. Earth-formation, masses that have originated through the crystallizing
  force of the earth-element itself--Primary-rocks.
  2. Aqueous-formation--Transition-rocks.
  3. Aerial-formation--Trappean-rocks.
  4. Igneous-formation--Volcanic-rocks.

The stratified rocks, having originated for the most part mechanically,
are only the object of Physio-philosophy, in so far as chemical
precipitations partly occur amongst them.

573. The earth-formation is represented by the crystallized primary
rocks.


a. _Earth-Formation._

574. The earths can only be precipitations from the element that
immediately precedes them, and thus from water. They have been
enveloped in the water, as this has been in the air, and the latter
again in the æther, but not mechanically, as we at present dissolve
clay in water, nor chemically either, as lime dissolves by corrosion in
water, but dynamically. The water did not exist from the beginning as
water in the air, but only its principles, which became for the first
time water, when they had combined by electricity.

575. Even so was it the case with the earths. The primary water,
which was present prior to the solid nucleus of the earth, is not
the water, with which we are at present acquainted; it had still the
earthy principles, the basic in itself, which being separated by a
differencing act from the oxygenous of the water, was deposited as
carbon specially produced. No calcareous, argillaceous, and silicious
earth was imbedded in the primary water. How then could they have
been dissolved in it? Some say, by a great quantity of acids which
prevailed at that time; but from whence then did these acids come? The
largest quantity of them resides in lime, gypsum, and common salt; but
how could this quantity, which has not so much as acidified all the
calcareous earth, have held the rest of the earths in solution? And
then again are all the earths soluble by the process of acidification?
We cannot reason in geogeny, as we would of a common chemical
precipitation, where we precipitate earths that have been dissolved by
elective affinities.

576. The earths _originated_ for the first time, when they were
separated from the primary water. The instant of their precipitation
was also the instant of their generation, even as rain is, or rather
was, a production of the water. It is easy to say that the earths had
been dissolved in the water, and were then precipitated by elective
affinities. But it is absurd to rest content with such an assertion.
The chief question still remains; how did the earthy originate, before
the earth was? Every one can say how that which had already originated,
and was only suspended in water, was precipitated. But we are in the
habit of distinguishing the several earths, before having taken a
survey of matters and inquired if earths then existed.

577. It must not, however, be thought, that all had happened in a
gradual manner; that air was first converted into water, and lastly,
after a lapse of some thousand years, the latter again into earth,
without with the one element the principles conducting to the others
being already and necessarily imparted. No, everything has been granted
and determined at _one_ stroke, even as with the impregnation of the
ovum all the organs of the future embryo are determined, although they
first develop themselves gradually. The same agent, which creates the
air solicits also its two principles unto combustion in the water; and
the same act, which separates the oxygen gas out of the air as water,
separates also the carbon from it to constitute earth. Not one can be
posited, without the other being codetermined.

578. The analysing principle cannot be a something internal residing
in the planet itself. But all that it is, it is through antagonism
with the sun. This antagonism is light. This it is that divorces or
separates the elements from their matrix; it is light, which has
sundered the æther into the twofold air, and the air again into the
denser elements, water and earth, separating the oxygen from the
nitrogen and later on from the carbon, which must be taken up in water
as an oxide.

579. At the commencement of the separation the fluid must be the first
to emerge, because the cohesion or fixation of the poles is possible
only in a successive manner, yet not as if water were according to its
determination to be the first and the Earthy the second in the order
of production. As the oxygen separated from the air to create water,
so also must the carbon that was left have been precipitated from the
water and metamorphosed into earth. Thence and thence only may we
venture to say, that the earths originated out of water; for, properly
speaking, they arose as absolutely for themselves as air and water; but
as air succeeded æther, and water air, so did the earth the water.

580. Whatever be the bulk of the mass of water, to the same extent is
the Earthy, or the germ of the Earthy, diffused throughout it. The
whole is a fluid mass of earth. Light, however, penetrates the mass of
water as a transparent body. As translucency is not a mechanical but a
dynamic act, or process of differentialization in matter; so does this
earth-water become separated into a mass of oxygen and carbon, or into
ordinary water and into the earth-element.

581. The genesis of the earths is a process of conduction of light. All
transparency is a formation of earth; for it is a separation of the
Aqueous from the body of gravity. Where non-transparency exists, there
has earth been already formed.

582. As the conducting process of light is an act of deoxydation, so
are the earths at the same time also deoxydized by precipitation, and
this in four stages which indicate the elements whereby light operates
upon the Basic in water; or it might be said, by the four colours
of, or by coloured, light. We already know that the earth, which
presents in itself the most dismembered character is the calcareous
earth; but that those which have preserved a more identical character
in themselves are the silicious, argillaceous, and talcose earths.
These earths may be viewed as those in which the lime has absorbed a
proportion of oxygen, which has in it become carbonic acid. There is
indeed only _one_ earth-substance in water. In this substance, which
is neither silex nor calx, the polar principle has distributed itself,
and that very portion, which has obtained the most thereof, has become
calcareous earth.

583. The calcareous earth has originated in the upper parts of the
aqueous globe, the other earths, however, in the depths, in the middle
of that globe; for in the upper regions of the water, the light can
exert a greater polarizing influence, and therefore that very earth
is generated which stands nearest to the æther or to the light, viz.
the different calcareous earth. But in the depths of the water, the
light loses its energy, and is no longer in a condition to elicit
the Oxygenous in the Basic; thereby identical and more fixed earths
originate.


GRANULAR ROCK OR GRANITE.

584. The differenced calcareous earth has been associated with the
differential water, remained for a longer period identical with and
dissolved in it, and was therefore the last to be precipitated from
it. The silicious earth with its neighbours must necessarily have been
the first to separate from the water, as it is in a proper sense,
that earth from which all water has been withdrawn. Two periods of
precipitation exist therefore in geogeny, one that of the identical or
fundamental earths, and one of the internally subdivided calcareous
earths.

585. The silicious, argillaceous, and talcose earths must occupy, from
their having been first precipitated, the middle of the planet. The
water being earthy everywhere, had everywhere the capacity to become
earth; but different earths originated, where the light was different
in the fluid mass of earth. In pure light, or that upon the surface,
the Earthy dualized itself into calcareous earth; in situations, where
the light exercised less influence, the Earthy became talcose, still
deeper argillaceous earth; lastly, at such a depth where the light
could scarcely reach, the Earthy became a pure Earthy or silicious
earth.

586. Precipitation, both upon a large and small scale, is a process of
crystallization; the integral parts of the planet originate, like the
nucleus and the perfected crystal, through central action and polar
action. The integral forms of the planet impart the crystalline granule
or its joints.

587. The integral forms of the three fundamental earths crystallized
with and through each other into _one_ mass, or, in other words, the
nucleus of the earth consists of a crystalline mass of the three
fundamental earths. The solid nucleus of the earth consists of crystals
upon a small scale of silex, clay, and talc.

588. As, however, no pole is produced of perfect purity in nature, so
are the integral forms not perfectly pure fundamental earths, but other
and later factors enter also into their composition, e. g. calcareous
earth, with even ores and salts. The silicious earth is crystallized as
quartz, the argillaceous as feldspar, the talc as mica.

589. The mixture of the three crystallized fundamental earths, which
composes the nucleus of the earth, and upon which the polarized masses
of soil have been supported, is therefore a definite species of rock,
which has all the properties of _Granite_, although that which has been
extruded from the earth may have been altered by heat.

590. As the mass of the earth is about five times denser than water; so
must the planet, before the Earthy was separated, have been much denser
than at present. With its separation the fluid must have suddenly
diminished, and moved towards the middle point of the planet. During
the descent of water for many miles in extent, it must separate in
drops. The separation of the earths was combined with rain.

591. In every falling drop the three fundamental earths, which are
insoluble in water, crystallized. The first crystals therefore are
only of the size of drops. It is only by this mode of origin that the
crystallization into one another of the three constituent parts of
granite without any cementing substance can be comprehended. Granite is
an earthy hail-storm. The hail-stones crystallized during their fall in
a similar manner with each other.

592. Upon the whole the silicious character predominates in granite,
as the primary formation of the planet, and must do so, for silicious
earth is the primary earth, the principal earth of this precipitation,
and one from which clay and talc subsequently proceed, being higher
heterogynisms produced by light. Properly speaking only two perfectly
different characters of earth exist, the silicious earth as the pure
separation of the Earthy, and the calcareous earth, as the last
separation of the water from the Earthy. It may also be said that
in the calcareous earth fire, in the talcose earths the air, in the
argillaceous earth water has exercised its influence and displaced
the Earthy. Not only quartz is silicious earth, but feldspar and mica
consist in a great measure of the same. Still, however, these last
two constituent forms are wholly different from quartz, and very far
removed from the nature of silex; the feldspar obviously forming the
transition to clay by its resolution into porcellanic earths, but the
mica passing over into talc.

593. There does not exist in nature an order of silex, clay, or talc,
so soon as we take up these earths in a simply chemical manner. Nature
instead of silex produces quartz, instead of clay feldspar, instead of
talc mica; and these must be the earths, that determine this part of
the mineral system; they are the characters of orders; there is thus
properly no order of silex but of quartz, none of clay but of feldspar,
none of talc but of mica, at least according to their signification.

594. The points of origin for this division of the mineral system
or that formed by the fundamental earths are the three fundamental
crystallizations, and upon these _everything_ that does not belong
to the calcareous earth must and does naturally arrange itself. The
mineral system is only the developed and separated granite. The fact
cannot rest unobserved, that mica has only one laminar cleavage,
feldspar two, quartz three, this being for the first time a perfect
crystal, a double tetrahedron with one column.

595. With granite and with it alone the solidity, the body and form of
the earth has been given; it is the homogeneous fundamental mass of the
planet, and is therefore crystallized throughout to the finest degree
in its three constituent forms.


GNEISS AND MICA-SCHIST.

596. If, in addition to granite, several formations are displayed
which bear traces of the same mode of origin, of the same component
parts and the same aggregation, it may be inferred that they are only
metamorphoses of the same precipitate. Granite is the basis of geogeny.

597. Granite is a totality for the earth, it is a representation of the
three terrestrial elements under the form of identical earth; it is the
earth represented in silex, water in clay, and air in talc; it is an
universe represented individually in the earth-elements.

598. The granite can undergo metamorphosis in only three ways; for its
essence is indeed only trinity. Nothing can individualize itself from
granite but quartz, feldspar, and mica. All the formations of this
period are thus _quartz_, _feldspar_, or _mica formations_. The granite
appears under a threefold form as quartz, feldspar, and mica-granite.

599. The first quartz formation is properly the granite itself, and
its character will be also the determinant for all the metamorphoses of
quartz--quartz-granite.

600. The first structure, in which the character of feldspar as regards
its laminated form and its more argillaceous nature obtains the
preponderance, is _Gneiss_--Feldspar-granite.

601. The first structure in which mica is the predominant character, is
the _Mica-schist_--Mica-granite.

602. All rocks that do not belong to the calcareous formation come
under these three forms. The progressive formation of the earth takes a
threefold course, since it begins in a threefold and yet single manner
in granite.

603. The gneiss and mica-schist precipitations followed subsequently to
the completion of granite. For all precipitation is a true process, in
which water has a certain tension peculiar to this process, by virtue
of which this form of earth and no other has been produced.

604. By granite the silicious principally came out of water, but what
was argillaceous and talcose remained behind.

605. Gneiss and mica-schist are indeed subdivided granite, but not in
the sense of the already perfected granite having been again stirred up
and dissolved, but as already separated in principles, in the primary
water.

606. Gneiss and mica-schists are products of a more mighty operation of
light than granite. They are nearer to the upper layers of water.

607. After the granitic rain, or after the formation of granite, the
sphere of water was no longer perfectly transparent; but water was
now found also in the primary valleys, in which the light had more
power, and thus greater capacity for splitting. During the formation
of granite the water has only become polar by light; but, as it was
there wholly transparent without opposition, it could never attain to a
perfect dualization. In the second earth-rain and in the valleys, the
light on the contrary produces dualization of the fundamental earths,
since the sides of the mountains afford opposition to the light, become
themselves polar against the water, and at the same time heat is
produced.

608. Gneiss and mica-schist enter into a polar relation with gravity,
and that indeed as a Different to an Identical, as periphery to centre
or as light to gravity.

609. Now the falling granite had in part lost its quartz and obtained
a predominance of feldspar. Furthermore as the water-globe was already
greatly collapsed, the crystals thus originated in larger drops, and
occurred besides in water already stagnant or flowing. The schistose
gefüge must have emerged as well through the preponderance of the
laminar felspar, as by the flowing of water and the attraction of the
granite-walls. This schistose granite is _gneiss_.

610. When the gneiss was thrown down the talc predominated in the
water; it now fell in the same manner with less quartz and feldspar,
and was deposited in a still more schistose form than mica-schist.

611. Granite, gneiss and mica-schist are the first that together form
a Whole, each factor whereof has been evolved in an equally perfect
manner.


LAMINATION.

612. By this active antagonism of granite to gneiss and mica-schist
the _Lamination_ of the latter is determined. Every particle of gneiss
is attracted from the granite-wall and placed in a definite direction,
corresponding to the polar operation of granite; the particles of
gneiss already deposited attract the coming ones, and so on. The parts
of the gneiss and mica-schist are not deposited upon the granite by
virtue of their dead or inert gravity, but by virtue of living polar
attraction. They are not therefore deposited in the depth of the
primary valleys, nor do they fill up the latter; but they are attracted
by the granite-walls and deposited to a greater or less extent like
laminæ of crystallization, in large perpendicular layers.

613. By these two precipitations the primary valleys were in part
filled up, and partly narrowed by the polar attraction of the walls.
The primary valleys therefore are no longer present upon the earth,
unless everything be called a primary valley that has not arisen or
been excavated by the current of water.

614. Gneiss and mica-schist have indeed taken part in the primary
crystallization, yet are, however, only its last movements, as the
water had already met with resistance, and was partly stagnant; their
mass therefore is not so purely crystallized as granite. They are not
parts of the earth's nucleus, but lie only like a crust upon it like
hollow crystals.

615. It may be said that gneiss and mica-schist originated only because
there were fathomless valleys in the granite, in which the dissevering
actions were inclosed, and extended themselves from one mountain-wall
to another, while the light could be reflected in them and heat the
earth.

616. So long as the granite was devoid of valleys, so long also did no
other formation originate. This is proved by the fact that upon the
highest mountains the granite is bare and uncovered, while this is not
the case upon its lateral walls. It is therefore the second and third
earth-rain that first originated, after the earth was heated. Gneiss
and mica-schist are, so to speak, precipitated by reflected light.

617. The principal valleys of gneiss and mica-schist have not
originated by themselves, but have been modelled according to the form
of the granitic valleys. The valleys of those earth-precipitates are
properly only subsequent valleys.

618. The lamination is not everywhere a mechanical phenomenon,
but without doubt also a polar. It is exactly the same law, which
determines the lamination of crystals, that does that of the strata of
the earth, and operates also in producing their lamination.


PRIMARY LIMESTONE.

619. The earths must be viewed as _one_ mass, the component parts of
which observe a mutual relation. Now, after the silex, clay and talc
had been precipitated, a proportionate abundance of lime became free,
which was then thrown down at the end of this period of precipitation,
as _Primary limestone_.

620. The calcareous mass may be viewed as corrosive earth, from which
a certain quantity of carbon has been set free. As such, and combined
with the oxygen developed out of the water by the influence of light to
form carbonic acid, the lime was insoluble and was precipitated.

621. The primary limestone has also not been mechanically deposited.
It has a crystalline texture, is a calcareous granite, and generally
succeeds the mica-schist formation.


b. _Water-Formation--Transition-Rocks._

METAMORPHOSIS OF THE PRIMARY PRECIPITATIONS.

622. The metamorphosis of the granite did not terminate with
these precipitations. They are only the starting points for the
metamorphosis, in which the effort was first manifested to free
themselves from the primary combination. In the metamorphosis of
earths, the fundamental earths, or the constituent parts of granite,
strove to become each for itself a particular rock. They were all
identified in quartz; in granite they for the first time parted company
with each other, yet still formed a common sphere; lastly, in gneiss
and mica-schist they all separated into three spheres, but which still
did not differ in mass from granite.

623. Individualization had not yet been attained. The gneiss had still
all the constituent parts of the granite, as well as the mica-schist;
both are only a more peripheric, slaty granite, the one having a
preponderance of the Argillaceous, the other of the Talcose. With these
formations, however, Geogeny cannot remain stationary; for verily the
law of the development of the world is individualization. Instead of
granite, simply quartz, instead of gneiss simply clay, instead of
mica-schist simply talc must be separated; and then the termination
of this period is attained, the trinity of the simple earths has been
completely represented.

624. All the Earthy could not have been separated from the water by
the first storm of precipitation. For the water now rested very much
collapsed upon the earth's nucleus, and could no longer therefore
assume the form of rain. That therefore which was now precipitated
could no longer be thoroughly crystallized, but must follow the current
and disquietude of the water, and thus emerge from it in a slaty or
massive condition.

625. The quartz of the granite endeavours to set itself free from the
clay and talc, or it becomes freed by the latter removing from it in
virtue of its polar behaviour. There is therefore one series of rocks,
in which the granite is constantly rejecting the feldspar and mica
more and more, and at last subsists as quartz simply, which _quartzose
rocks_ as forming entire mountains are for intelligible reasons not of
frequent occurrence.

626. The completion of the gneiss in its entire separation from the
granite, and the evolution of feldspar upon a large scale constitutes
the _clay-slate_, and finally clay-stone and clay-porphyry. This yields
us a new series of formations, in which the gneiss gradually attains to
being divested of quartz and mica and to a pure position as feldspar.
The clay-slate is a true gneiss, that has lost the definite particles
of quartz and mica.

627. The position of mica-schist constitutes in its purity the
talc-formation, talc-slate, chlorite-slate, hornblende-slate.

628. After these several precipitations, the calcareous mass
remains behind in the water, and now, as in the first periods of
crystallization, is charged with carbonic acid, and is precipitated as
transitionary calx under the form of _mountain limestone_.

629. These formations are found upon the whole to be arranged on the
earth, in the order of time at which they were precipitated from the
water. In the middle of the loftiest mountains is granite, then gneiss
and mica-schist; then follow quartzose rocks, clay-slate or porphyry,
talcose rocks, and lastly on the edge of all these runs the chain
of alpine or mountain limestone. In the last of these formations
are found fossil remains of corals and molluscous animals. For these
formations fell first of all after the water had a solid bottom, and
the granitic mountains projected above it.


SEDIMENTARY OR STRATIFIED ROCKS.

630. The period had now arrived in which the fundamental earths,
being upon the whole completed, predominate. That which was separated
in a chemical way from the Earthy out of water, has been in great
part precipitated. This period, however, although the first and most
extensive, indicates but the half of Geogeny, or as yet only one pole
in the genesis, which requires the other. In the beginning both poles
were in the water, that of the fundamental earths as well as that
of the calcareous earth; the light shone upon, dissevered them, and
earths, the most heterogeneous in respect to water, were first of all
precipitated.

631. While the fundamental earths were precipitated, the calcareous
earth was repelled and retained, on account of its homogeneity, in
water, because the acid half continued longer fluid than the basic.
The water was thus after its separation from these substances a true
limewater.

632. Through this separation, however, the great antagonism in the
water ceased; and subordinate antagonisms now made their appearance,
which were kept united by the former. The calcareous earth is now
occupied no more as one pole, but is the whole water itself, upon
which, as it is less deep, the light acts anew and with greater force.

633. The dispersions of earths began just at this period to
multiply themselves, from the only fettering agent, namely gravity,
having betaken itself to rest; every earthy now emerges from its
connexions, the factors falling wholly asunder into alkalies and acids,
which combine in a multifarious manner.

634. These dispersions associated with the torrents of water that
were now everywhere present prevented crystallization from taking
place upon a large scale; they moreover mingled with the mechanically
water-borne and crumbling débris of the earlier species of rocks; their
laminations therefore resemble rather a mechanical deposit from water.
They are the _Stratified rocks_.

635. As the first period must include the calcareous earth, so also
in the period of strata or in the dualized period this earth is not
without a slight antagonism of the fundamental earths; and this it
is which for the first time becomes distinct, but always with a
preponderance of the calcareous over the fundamental earths, while in
the primary periods this relative proportion of the two was the reverse.

636. The primary period repeats itself again in the second, and thus
strata consisting of the fundamental earths originate, as we have seen
exemplified in the primary and transition formations of limestone. The
precipitation of strata is divided also into four formations, into
silicious, argillaceous, talcose and calcareous strata, close to which
range also the strata of ores, Inflammables and salts.

637. In other respects the chemical deposits of this period are so
blended with the mechanical, that their mode of origin seems for the
most part to have happened in both ways.

638. The silicious formation returning in the stratified periods is
chiefly under the condition of _sandstone_. Apart from that, which has
originated through the detritus of the older kinds of rocks, it may be
assumed, that the prevailing lime still held some silicious earth in a
state of moisture within itself, and that this during its separation
was precipitated as a fine alcohol, namely, as sand. If, however, sand
fell, so also must a proportionate quantity of lime fall, by combining
itself with an acid. Sand and lime therefore usually accompany each
other. If the two be regarded also as only floated freely and suspended
in water, still the chemical antagonism manifests itself between them
as if they were in a mortar, and they have been precipitated in layers
alternating with each other. The sandstone is as a rule therefore
imbedded in the lime; it is a mortar containing but little lime. The
mechanical silicious deposits are exemplified in the Nagelfluh, old red
sandstone, Grauwacke, sandstone and drift-sand.

639. The stratified clay appears to have been deposited as clay-stone;
it passes over into slate and potters' clay. The talcose strata pass by
serpentine and potters' stone into steatite and meerschaum.


STRATIFIED LIMESTONE.

640. The pole which had operated continuously from the fundamental
earths contained in the Earthy has now separated from it, and the
tension is again extinguished. The Earthy is now contained in a pure
state in water without continuance of the silicious pole; the influx
of water has now obtained the preponderance. So soon, however, as the
antagonism of this water to the stratified silex, clay and talc ceases,
the more internal, hitherto restrained by the feebler antagonism,
becomes awakened, as it did after the precipitation of the fundamental
earths.

641. The principles are necessarily combined more firmly in the
fundamental than in the calcareous earths. In this both the oxygenic
and basic earth-principle must each attain for itself completion, and
represent the two primary bodies in the earth with the same capacity
for separation and activity.

642. The production of earths results from a constant antagonism
subsisting between them and water. The more the Basic is thrown down,
by so much does the Oxygenous preponderate to a greater degree in
water. The water becomes oxydized and seeks to divide into its two
principles, into oxygen and hydrogen.

643. By this contest tension is also excited in the earth-principles,
namely, oxygen and carbon, and they begin in themselves to separate.
The metallic basis of the earths strives to become free. During the
separation, however, the oxygen snatches as it were some carbon along
with it and appears as carbonic acid; but the carbon of the earthy lays
claim to some of the hydrogen and oxygen to combine with it and appears
as corrosive or calcareous earth.

644. The acid is therefore a half of the earth, which passes over into
water, and the corrosive earth is also a half of the earth that has
lost its Aqueous. The former is the Aqueous in the earths, the latter
the Earthy itself separated from the former.

645. The corrosive force is therefore no peculiar action in nature, but
only the effort made by the earths to complete themselves and imbibe
water or acid. The corrosive force is no synthesis, but a moiety.

646. A total earth may be therefore regarded as a combination of acid
and corrosive body. These two component parts are separable in the
calcareous and talcose earths; but in the argillaceous and silicious
earths they are so intimately dissolved, that they can not be separated
from each other.

647. Carbon, hydrogen and nitrogen, but not oxygen, fall or range upon
the corrosive side of the earth in question.

648. Regarded in this general manner the corrosive principle stands
opposite to the principle of combustion, and what is combustible, is
in idea corrosive. The corrosive power is, however, but feeble in the
gaseous nitrogen, stronger in hydrogen and finally strongest in the
body of earth. The earthy carbon is the proper corrosive principle.
The direct antagonism is not therefore between the corrosive body and
oxygen, but between it and the carbonic acid, and therefore between it
and all the acids, or acidity generally. The last earthy antagonism is
that between the corrosive body and acid.

649. The corrosive body regarded specially as simply a pure earthy
body, must stand opposite to the two moveable elements. The corrodent
is therefore constantly striving to draw water and air into itself, and
upon this depend also the effects produced by the corroding matters.
The corrosive calcareous earth acts in a destructive manner, it
abstracts water and air from bodies. The action of the corrosive body
is a deprivation of water and air, and hence the elevated temperature
of burnt lime in water. If again the corrosive lime be full of water
and air, it is neutralized. It is now forsooth again a total earth, in
a mechanical sense being again provided with water and acid. All earths
are an equal or identical mixture. Acids and alkalies are thus to be
regarded in this respect as moieties, and thereupon their chemical
relation appears to depend. The elemental bodies are desirous to
complete themselves. If therefore a base stands in corresponding import
with a certain acid, it will thus have a greater affinity for the
latter, tending to separate it from some other combination. Upon this
principle, which has indeed been hitherto unknown to exist, the grades
of affinity appear to depend.

650. As regards the mode of occurrence of the calcareous earth, it
also is not of so mechanical a nature as is generally supposed. Its
legitimate relation to sandstone and other precipitations, speak
against that. But crystallization has for the most part disappeared in
it; and it is only in cavities that crystals shoot out, like the ores
in metallic veins. In granite the commencement is crystal, but in lime
it is the termination; crystallization determines the character in
granite, in calx or lime, however, the crystals are only blossoms.

651. The calcareous earth multiplies itself as a reduction of the earth
of gravity and that indeed three times. There exists, so to speak, a
corrosive silicious as also argillaceous and talcose earth. The three
corrosive earths are calcareous earth, strontian and baryta, or it may
be said that the first would be salt, the second Inflammable, and the
third, metal.

652. Still a polar separation emerges in the stratified calx, while
the two earth-principles become more individualized. The carbonate of
lime ranks on the lowest stage. In this, however, the differencing
process of light had not remained stationary, but elevated the carbon
to a higher grade; carburetted hydrogen and sulphur originate in the
calcareous earth combined as gypsum, with oxygen.

653. It may be said, that calx were decomposed into alkali and carbon;
water into oxygen and acid. Carbon and oxygen become carbonic acid in
limestone. Carbons and hydrogen become sulphur, combined with oxygen
sulphuric acid in gypsum. Hydrogen and oxygen become hydrochloric acid
in common salt.

654. Gypsum is to be regarded as a calcareous earth, which is
inflammable in character, as the fundamental earths were metallic.
The philosophical essence of gypsum consists not in its oxydation
by sulphuric acid, but in the combination of calcareous earth with
sulphur, as occurs in that of iron-spar with iron; in this combination,
however, the carbonic acid has still remained, whereby the sulphur
became acid. The gypsum was therefore a carbonaceo-sulphate of lime, an
oxydized metal with a very large proportion of calcareous earth.

655. Gypsum and chalk are related polarwise to each other, separate
during the general precipitation, and are deposited opposite to, or
alternately upon, each other.

656. In fluor-spar, apatite and boracite the last differentialization
of lime and carbonic acid is lost. The principal masses are the
carbonate and sulphate of lime.

657. The strata of the Inflammables, such as of pit-coal, and of the
ores, as of iron, calamine, appear to have originated in simply a
mechanical manner.


REPEATED SEDIMENTARY PRECIPITATIONS.

658. The precipitating process is a process of polarization, which
comprises several stages. In it there are moments of time.

659. If the fluid mass be large, this polarization will then require
considerable time to penetrate throughout it.

660. The polarizing process will issue from a definite point, which
is different from water, and thus form the point upon which the light
operates with greatest force.

661. This is solid ground. During the calcareous precipitation, there
was no other ground present save that of the mountain tops. It was
thus from these that the calcareous precipitation set out.

662. With each precipitation a greater number of mountain tops made
their appearance, because the water sank; for the calcareous earth is
about three times denser than water.

663. Such being the conditions belonging to the sedimentary periods,
several consecutive centuries characterized by precipitations with
repeated recessions and elevations of the water, elapsed and have left
evidence of the time thus consumed.

664. The recession of the water was not always an ebbing or sinking
in, but a diminution or disappearance of the same, like the water in
a glass lessens in quantity, or becomes thoroughly solid, if salt
crystallizes therein.

665. By such precipitations whole basins of land became dry or freed
from sea-water. Streams therefore of fresh water originated, and with
them corresponding organizations.

666. These streams gradually filled the basins and formed seas. As the
seas coalesced by the constantly descending water, an inland sea arose.

667. This inland sea became again salidified, and that indeed of itself
by the influence of light and the dissolution of the salt-banks, which
were not overflown. Such is still the Caspian sea and others of that
kind. In these marine plants and animals could again originate.

668. Thereupon new precipitations of salt succeeded, the gypsum and
calx being again dissolved, and consequently diminutions also of water,
whereby rivers again originated. One and the same basin of land was
alternately covered with fresh and saline water.

669. Marine and fresh-water animals could therefore originate and
perish alternately. And this is the explanation of the fact why banks
inclosing both kinds of animals are found above and below each other.

670. An alternating ingress of the sea is not therefore necessary in
all cases to explain the occurrence of marine fossil remains. Such an
assumption is also wholly inconceivable. Nor is alternating elevation
and depression of the soil necessary to the explanation of this
phenomenon.

671. During the time of precipitation the temperature of the water and
consequently of the earth and air also was necessarily raised. All
creatures, which then originated, must correspond therefore to those of
warmer climates.

672. The fossil remains do not require the assumption of a change
having taken place in the inclination or bearing of the earth's axis;
nor of a heating of the surface by a fiery interior.

673. With every later precipitation other animals and plants must
originate, because the temperature and also the mixture of water was
changed. The fossils therefore indicate the age of the sedimentary
strata.

674. During the last precipitations the creatures of colder climates
must have originated.

675. Land animals cannot, or but rarely, be found in the sedimentary
strata, if even they had already been in existence prior to their
formation. For the inundations did not break in suddenly, but the water
rose by degrees. They had time therefore to retire to the high grounds.

676. Land plants may, on the contrary, lie in the sedimentary strata,
because of their inability to escape.

677. The bones of birds and men must be found least of all fossilized,
because a retreat by them was most easily effected. It does not follow,
from our not finding them, that they have not existed.

678. The different fossil remains have therefore not simply lived,
where they are found, but originated there also. Some of course may
have been floated also to these localities.

679. The inundations of water were in general necessary, because basins
of land and precipitations were everywhere present; but not all on that
account at the same time.

680. In this sense there was a general flood, a deluge, namely, for
every land.


c. _Air-formation._

TRAP-ROCKS.

681. Vapours and gases of different kinds may be contained in the
interior of the earth in two ways, either chemically combined as
carbonic acid, or mechanically inclosed in cavities of the earth.
Both may be developed, or expanded by calefaction, and the latter by
diminution of pressure.

682. If those that are chemically combined be developed by calefaction,
they then form vesicular spaces in the masses of earth whereby the
latter are extended and raised above the surface; such as amygdaloid,
basalt and others of this kind.

683. Warm springs may originate by subterraneous processes, chemical or
volcanic; probably, too, by the compression of air that has forced its
way into these situations.

684. Earthquakes may indeed originate in different ways; as in addition
to the falling in of cavities, by the chemical development also of
gases, by their subjection to heat, by aqueous vapours, and also by the
sudden diminution of pressure upon these incarcerated gases.

685. This diminution of pressure proceeds from sudden rarefaction
of the atmosphere--due probably to the disappearance of air in a
particular place, or resulting from a change of the wind, or the
formation of heavy rain. Earthquakes can therefore extend through many
countries, without requiring to depend upon each other or on a common
focus of action.

686. The silicious trap is silicious sinter, tripoli and polierschiefer.

687. The argillaceous trap, amygdaloid, clinkstone, several porphyries.

688. The talcose trap, basalt.

689. The calcareous trap, probably chalk.


d. _Fire-formation._

VOLCANIC-ROCKS.

690. Volcanoes are secondary combustions of masses that have originated
through the primary combustion, and are therefore only of local
occurrence. Such combustible masses are without doubt bodies belonging
to the class of Inflammables, and thus carbons, sulphur, sulphuretted
metals. Simply burning gases would throw up on high the masses of
earth, but not heat them to the degree of fusion.

691. By the heat of these combustions the masses of earth have been
fused, forming lavas. The silicious lavas are obsidian, pitch-stone.
The argillaceous lavas are the kinds usually met with. Next come the
talcose lavas. The calcareous lavas are probably dolomite.


B.--_METALLIC ORES AND INFLAMMABLES._

692. Metallic-ores and Inflammables are products of the planet, when
completed, and have not originated along with the origin of the latter,
like the earths. The question accordingly arises, what have been the
forces by which the metals and Inflammables were produced.


a. _METALLIC VEINS._

693. Fissures in rocks, so narrow that they cannot be illuminated by
the sun, are called passages or _veins_. They are rarely found in
granite, appear generally for the first time in gneiss, more rarely
in the later kinds of rocks, and almost cease to be met with in the
stratified chain of mountains. They are found principally in mountains,
and thus in masses of earth which project above the level land. We must
thus arrive at the conclusion that they have there originated by actual
fissure, and that indeed for this reason, that masses which project
or stand freely out would admit of yielding asunder more easily than
the masses of the plains. This fissure may take place by mechanical
disruption, by land-slips, or even also by desiccation.

694. The veins are not prolonged into the kind of rock that underlies
them, as e. g. gneiss veins into granite, and so on; they have hence
originated from above.

695. They are open and wider above and strike out below; they have not
therefore originated by a force acting from beneath.

696. In the schistose rock they form generally transverse fissures.

697. There was a time in which the veins stood empty, as well as a time
in which the primary valleys were empty, namely unreplenished with
gneiss, mica-schist, and such like minerals.


b. PRODUCTION OF ORE.

698. Geogeny takes two directions; the one passes upon the periphery
into the splitting action of light, the other into the abyss, where
darkness reigns.

699. The valleys were the condition that conduced to the
differentialization of the earths, because in them light had power
to produce the highest polarity. By the valleys the Earthy has been
separated into its principles; silex has separated into clay and talc,
to which finally carbonate calcareous earths and salts succeeded.

700. The Earthy cannot subsist in its identity in the broad valleys;
the earth cannot be represented as the pure symbol of gravity. All
bodies that have originated upon the _surface_ of the planet are oxydes
or salts.

701. If the earth-difference be generated in the illumined valleys, so
must the earth-identity be produced in the dark valleys; for it is the
absence of light alone that allows the purely Basic to subsist. This
earth generated out of gravity is the ore.

702. The ore is a child and a treasure of darkness; where light is, it
must vanish; it cannot endure its gaze. Metal when exposed to day is
given up to annihilation, to oxydation.

703. Darkness is, however, no power, and can consequently be only the
opportunity, not the cause of anything's happening. Other forces,
instead of that of light, must have therefore operated in the
production of ores. In order to discover these forces the relations of
the ores must be carefully weighed or considered.

704. The ore is in a philosophic sense a reduced earth, and so reduced
indeed that the basic principle has obtained the preponderance over the
oxygenic or supporter of combustion, and attained unto substantiality.

705. In light, in the water forsooth when illuminated, the two
earth-principles were already divided internally, but not completely
separated; salt only originated, namely an acid and alkali.

706. The ore is, however, a salt wholly reduced, and indeed the reduced
alkali has become metal, the reduced acid with the basis of hydrogen,
Inflammable, namely, coal or sulphur.

707. Now as light was not able to produce such a separation in the free
or full sense of the term, forces must thus have been present in the
dark passages, which completed this separation.

708. Ore and Inflammable are the total salt dissevered, and this is the
dissolution of the two; the former are blue and yellow, the latter is
the compound green.

709. The processes of the formation of salt and of ore are both indeed
processes of separation, but yet they stand opposite to, or rather
transcend each other. Both mutually conditionate each other.

710. While the earths submitted to the action of light upon the surface
of the planet are converted into salt, the process of the formation
of ore takes place in the dark or under the earth; or while above the
oxygen is predominant, the basic body is that below. The ore imparts
upon a large scale its oxygen to the salt, and the salt bestows its
basic body on the ores.

711. No ores could originate in the middle of the earth were light even
to have no access thereunto. For not merely do earth and darkness
belong to the genesis of the ore, but earthy water like as unto salt.

712. The ore is not a conversion of earths that have already existed,
or been actually separated; but it originates first of all during the
process of separation. Where ore is, fluid has thus been, and polarity,
which is not directly derived from light. The ore is a mere child of
the planet, a pure terrestrial essence generated without the joint
assistance of the heaven, and therefore the highest substantiality of
the planet, the spirit of the earth.

713. What gneiss and mica-schist, calx and salt, are in the bright
valleys, such is the ore in the dark valleys; the former are the
differenced ore, and this is their identification.

714. There is no peculiar metallic body or seed, which had already
existed in the primary creation as something special or peculiar,
and which by one process only, as perhaps even by its gravity,
was precipitated or posited from the fluid mass. One and the same
substance, if found exposed in a valley to the light, becomes earth;
but ore when it is in a dark passage.

715. Of a certainty neither clay, sand, talc, or calx become metal.
For these are at once definitions of the spirit, words that have been
already completed and expressed, and cannot be recalled; so also the
ore will not again become clay, even if it be submitted to light. The
indeterminate substance only, which under other conditions might have
become clay, becomes in the darkness ore.

716. What is not in idea, prior to the adjustment or fixation of a
pole, reduced to ore, can on no account become that out of an already
finished mass of earth. Conversions of earth into ore by chemical arts
are labours bestowed in vain.

717. Yet if ores do originate, they originate only out of the
indefinite Basic, which is still in the water, just as trap stones
originate not from a stony dust that pre-existed, but out of the pure
indifferent substance of the air.

718. The veins and the formation of ore are one, as are the valleys
with the calcareous and salt formations; and he who asks how has the
ore originated, must forthwith inquire as to what is the essence of the
veins.

719. The ore has not originated externally to the veins and been at
some time or other conducted into them by means of water. For how
should it thus originate? The reply is, a specific action must have
been at work in the fluid, which determined it to separate ore and
nothing else. But where is this ore-forming action in the free space
of water? Nowhere. And if also the ore had been separated or diffused
throughout the whole mass of water, what a world-wonder is it that
it merely flowed into the veins and some stockworks? What prevented
it from filling in large masses the broader valleys? The mechanical
theorist upon metallic veins must assume an attraction on the part of
the veins for the ore-particles in water; but how could this attraction
have drawn these particles for miles in extent out of the water? and
were this action strong enough, it must still be gifted with greater
power to produce or at least separate the ore out of the water, that is
found in the empty spaces formed by the veins.

720. Since ore has on a large scale separated from the calcareous and
salt formations like the Identical from the Different, it has done
so also upon a small scale in the veins. There the same process of
separation has preceded it.

721. Now, however, nothing can be separated, i. e. nothing be reduced,
without the oxygen accumulating upon something else. The Earthy must
therefore separate during the formation of metal into the Reduced and
Peroxydized.

722. The reduced earthy is the metal or inflammable; the peroxydized,
however, an earth proper. This earth is called _vein-stone_.

723. The ore has _only_ originated in opposition to the vein-stone,
and when this has taken the Different of the Earthy into itself.
Therefore the vein-stones are also different from the kind of rock in
which they occur, and that through greater differentialization; they
have even receded for the most part into acid and alkaline poles, as
calc-spar, fluor-spar, heavy-spar, which are the usual vein-stones.
All vein-stones are oxyds and as a rule, those in which the oxygen is
freely manifested, namely as acid. The vein-stones were the sheath of
the ore, which could first appear when this sheath had withdrawn itself.

724. The metal stands in relation to the vein-stone. Thus in
argillaceous vein-stones we commonly meet with iron, manganese; in the
quartzoze with gold; in the calcareous with lead, &c. There are here
also extremes. There are vein-stones, called sterile veins, in whose
antagonism no metal has been formed; and there are veins, that are
merely filled with metal, such as the Stockwerke, Lager.

725. Since the ore and the vein-stones thus originate together, and in
such a manner that they conditionate each other; their fundamental mass
must have been one, and a separating force, which is not light, must
have operated upon them.

726. Moreover, as the ores occur only in narrow spaces with their
vein-stones and both form alternating tables upon the walls of the
veins, they must have been attracted by the latter.

727. The walls of the vein consequently exert a polar influence upon
the ore and vein-stone. Now, if this be their mode of action, they must
be in a condition to separate the fundamental mass.

728. It is thus the vein themselves, which, by a vital force, produce
the metals; they are thus a living womb, or matrix as it has been
emphatically termed.

729. Two walls in close juxtaposition are requisite for the production
of metal. Upon a freely exposed wall or face of rock no metals are
found.

730. By this separation, however, two kinds of minerals originate,
Inflammables, and ores proper or metals. The action of the walls must
be therefore of a twofold nature.

731. But two cases also are conceivable, in accordance wherewith this
polarity of the vein admits of being divided. It subsists either quite
alone between the two walls, as surface-polarity or electricity; or
it subsists between the mediate point of the earth and the walls,
constituting centroperipheric polarity or magnetism.

732. The product of the surface polarity are the Inflammables, of the
radial polarity the metals.

733. Since no more metals and Inflammables originate at the present
day, although magnetism and electricity are in continual operation;
a third influence moreover must have been in constant activity. Now
this cannot be thought of as any other than _heat_. The metals must
thus have originated while the earth was still in a glowing state, and
when thus also magnetism and electricity could operate more powerfully
towards effecting a reduction of the mass. By heat the mass in the
veins was probably converted into gas, through which its separation
by means of magnetism and electricity into ore and transition earth
could more easily take place. The metals are thus sublimations, which
were first deposited, when the earths or rather the mountain-stock
began to cool. Thus also zeolithic crystals were deposited in the upper
stores of mines. Metals are thus the children of heat, of magnetism
and electricity; the heat renders the mass in a fit state for being
separated in the next place by the polar forces.

734. Metal is carbon completely reduced, which contains nothing more
of the other elements in itself, namely, neither hydrogen nor oxygen.
It is consequently the Basic of the earth-element without material
admixture, and thus is earth with the properties of its prototype, of
fire or of gravity, of light and of heat.

735. In accordance with this interpretation metal can be produced by no
other process than the centro-peripheric. Its occurrence in fissures of
the earth that are mostly perpendicular likewise proves this.

736. In the deeply situated veins, therefore, the more identical or
purer formations of ore must occur; while, on the contrary, in those
situated higher up or exposed to the day, i. e. in closer proximity to
the water, air and light, the more different or compound formations of
ore must be produced.

737. The four classes of ores occupy a position in the veins tolerably
accordant with these relations; an additional proof that they have
originated in the vein and not been floated into it by the action of
water.

738. The production of ore which occurs in the _upper_ parts of the
veins, furnishes us with the saline ores; for here the water, air
and earth are principally active. In the upper depths are found most
frequently the oxygenized metals, or as they are called mineral spars,
as spathic-iron, malachite, calamine, lead-spar, pyromorphite, &c.
Finally, the metallic or ore-spars actually pass over into salts, and
by the horn-silver ores into the vitriols. They are for the most part
crystallized.

739. The salt-formation of the ores has always decreased in proportion
to the light having less access to it, and hence in greater depths,
or in wholly mountainous masses. There the ore has not been deposited
as a light-difference, but only as a Terrestrial, just as the earths,
especially the calcareous earth, have obtained the same. It has not
attained to a complete evolution of the polar body so as to constitute
an acid, but the two principles have only emerged opposite to each
other. They are oxydized ores, consequently those among the ores,
that represent the character of earths, namely, the ochres. They are
frequently uncrystallized.

740. So far the appearance of these ores is thoroughly earthy and
devoid for the most part of metallic lustre; finally, the genesis of
the ore turns upon the side of the identity, the principle of gravity
having secured itself wholly in the depths, previous to the adverse
accession of water and light. In such situations nothing more than
heat and the centro-peripheric polarity of the vein-wall operates. The
Metallic recedes wholly from the salt and from the earth. The oxygen
disappears, but in its place comes sulphur, and the sulphuretted ores
originate, e. g. the bi-sulphurets of iron, blendes, glance-ores.

741. Lastly, every combination or influence of the other elements and
mineral-classes vanishes; acids, oxygen and sulphur are no longer
generated in the perfectly dark depths, and the ore stands there in its
entire identity, homogeneous, resplendent and heavy as the sterling
metal. The same results from sublimation. The heavier metals remain
below, the lighter ones and the sulphur ascend.

742. As the orders of earth are placed in the veins, so also are the
different metals themselves; for the cause of genesis is alike in both.

743. The earth-like metals, as iron, manganese, &c. which occur
constantly oxydized, are usually found upon the surface of the planet;
the hydroid or water-like, as lead, tin, lie usually deeper; the aeroid
or air-like, as arsenic, zinc, exhibit pretty nearly the same relations
as the sulphur metals; lastly, the pyroid or fire-like, e. g. the noble
metals such as gold and silver occur frequently in great depths and not
unfrequently in granite; the two preceding metals generally occur in
gneiss, but the first even in younger or more recently formed rocks.

744. As a certain regularity prevails in the arrangements of ores and
of metals in the veins, so also does this hold good in respect to their
distribution over the planet.

745. The more the polar earths are separated and deposited in the
broad valleys exposed to light, by so much the more in quantity and
of greater purity is the ore produced in its own valleys of darkness.
The first effect, however, happens through the power of the sun; the
more powerful therefore its influence, although indirect, so much the
greater in quantity and purity is ore produced in the depths. The
greatest quantity of ore and that of the noblest kind was inevitably
generated beneath the equator. There also more lime as well as more
salt are probably found upon the surface of the water; towards the
north the oxydized metals, or the whole series of iron-metals, were
produced. In the Temperate Zones we find more lead, zinc, bismuth and
arsenic.

746. Thus the theory itself of ores furnishes us with a proof, such as
the theory of the earth that has been hitherto entertained could not
afford, that the equator forsooth has since the formation of the metals
not been displaced. The metals formed themselves cotemporaneously
with the gneiss, and have thus begun to form prior to the existence
of the organic world. It is therefore a vague opinion, devoid also of
foundation, that since the earth has been inhabited by animals, even by
the higher or hair-clothed vertebrata, its axis has been changed.

747. No earthly phenomenon speaks so clearly and loudly against the
mechanical theories in the natural sciences as ore. Not only has the
whole planet been included in the ore, but also the whole of science,
the whole of philosophy.

748. The first transition of the Earthy into the metallic character
is indicated by iron. Iron ranks next to earth, especially to the
argillaceous earth, is everywhere associated with it and is most
generally distributed, being mixed with almost every earth and even all
organic bodies, to their very elements.

749. The whole series of metals has but _one_ root. What the primary
earth is for the metamorphosis of earths, that is iron for the metals:
it is their silicious earth.

750. The iron as being the first transition from the Earthy into
the Metallic has the highest grade of fusion, and all metals which
approximate to this, belong to the retinue of iron. This grade may be
set down as 20,000F.

751. As iron is the root of all metals, so every division or group of
ore has a principal metal, which occurs in more considerable quantity
than the rest and characterizes the division. Among the saline ores,
copper under the form of malachite is the principal metal. Its fusing
point is 6000F. Among the sulphurous ores, _lead_ is the chief metal;
it has with its neighbours the lowest grade of fusion, which may be
set down in round numbers as 600F. Among the volatile, arsenic is the
principal metal.

752. Among the standard metals, silver is the principal metal; it has
with its affinities a fusing point, which ranges midway between that of
iron and lead, being probably about 5000F.

753. There are four grades of fusion of the metals, which are removed
from each other by very wide intervals, between which no metal is
situated. Quicksilver is fluid at the temperature of the air and
becomes volatile like arsenic. Moreover the artificial metals are
associated with the alkalies and acids. Lead, with its congeners, melts
at 500F.; silver with gold and copper at 5000; iron, platinum and such
like at 20,000.

754. There are four metallic characters, which are shown to be peculiar
in all their relations, in their affinities for oxygen, acid, and
sulphur, in respect to specific gravity, fusibility, extensibility, in
their electric relation, in mode of fracture, in occurrence, age, and
geographical distribution, &c.


c. POISON.

755. It is a remarkable fact that the principal metal of the elemental
metals, obtains mostly by oxydation or acidification poisonous
properties, while the proper earth-metal, iron, acts beneficially upon
the animal organization. Among the water-metals lead becomes poisonous
by acidification; among the fire-metals mercury. Among the air-metals
arsenic ranks highest, becoming poisonous by mere oxydation. Among the
earth-metals, only one among the salt-metals is poisonous, and that is
copper.

756. The metals thus appear to become poisonous, when they enter into
or put on the character of salt, or of water.

757. The above are also those very metals, which unite most readily
with the others, to form alloys, amalgams or metallic compounds. Copper
is very readily alloyed; lead almost always contains silver; mercury is
susceptible of amalgamation; arsenic metallizes the others almost like
sulphur.

758. The air-metals appear to have lost for the most part the metallic
character; arsenic therefore destroys also magnetism.

759. The essence of metallic poison thus appears to reside in the
endeavour on the part of the metals to suppress the metallic character
and convert themselves into the formless elements. The metallic poison
is the direct opponent of the metals themselves, and through this, of
everything that has form, and thus of the Organic also.


d. MAGNETISM.

760. Two actions are necessarily manifested in iron, one clearing or
dividing in so far as it is earth, and one to be identifying, in so
far as it is metal. Iron is the fluctuation between oxydation and
reduction, between light and gravity, and this conflict of the two
latter is _Magnetism_. Magnetism is the spiritual function of the
metals.

761. Magnetism belongs essentially to the metals only. What is not
metal, is magnetic only according to idea or signification; it may be
therefore aptly said, that such a body hath no magnetism, and that what
has it, were metallic.

762. Magnetism is the direct property only of iron; this alone is the
hybrid or heterogynous metal.

763. Magnetism appertains only to the other metals in as far as they
are positions of iron; and is the more powerful, the nearer they stand
in relation to iron. All metals are magnetic in idea, whether magnetism
be manifested in them or not.

764. All metals have originated through magnetism, through the radial
polarity, or the conflict of light and gravity. Magnetism is the
action betwixt light and darkness, periphery and centre. Magnetism as
being a metalgenerating action tends towards the centre of darkness
of gravity. What in the earths and salts is the duplex tendency of
crystallization, is in the metals the identifying magnetism, as an
everlasting operation of attraction.

765. Magnetism is still, however, not identical with gravity. Gravity
is the centre abstractedly from the periphery; but magnetism is the
centre only in relation to the periphery or light.

766. Polarity belongs to the essence as well as the genesis of
magnetism; the metal subsists only through a constant resistance
against the universal process of oxydation, against the developmental
process of the earth-principles, which the metal is always striving to
conceal. The metal is altogether the most mysterious essence of the
planet. This resistance to the disclosure of the Innermost of the earth
is magnetism. Where magnetism has wholly attained this concealment, it
renders the metal perfectly free and disappears, because it has become
completely embodied. In the noble metals it has attained what it is
still seeking in iron.

767. Magnetism is a linear action with two different extremities,
like the primary radius. By one extremity magnetism runs towards
the identical centre, by the other towards the partite, electrical
periphery, towards the oxydized earths. One extremity will reduce, the
other oxydize; one will become metal, the other earth. This is the
difference between north and south pole, the former centre, the latter
periphery.

768. There is no peculiar magnetic fluid, any more than there is a
matter of light, heat and electricity. In magnetism the spirit only of
the earth appears, as in light the spirit of heaven.

769. Magnetism is a constant process of excitation. This process of
excitement is the process of imparting and of propagation. Magnetism
has not been given, but excited. It breathes life into the iron bar,
whereby the latter awakes, and that is magnetism.

770. Every action, which induces differences in a line of iron,
renders it therefore magnetic; thus electricity, unequal calefaction
and a blow, whereby it is thrown into a state of vibration. An iron bar
planted perpendicularly becomes magnetic, because it is then a radius
to the earth. From the same reason it becomes magnetic, if placed in
the magnetic meridian.


e. TERRESTRIAL MAGNETISM.

771. If all metals are in idea magnetic; so must the metallic veins, as
products of magnetism, be magnetic lines. Every vein has a north and a
south pole.

772. As every vein is a magnetic line or magnetic needle upon a large
scale; so must two veins abutting against each other represent likewise
a magnetic tension. A mountain of ores is a net of numerous magnets
interlacing each other. As one vein is related to the other, so must
one metalliferous mountain be related to the other; and thus two
mountains of this character stand in magnetic polarity with each other.
The whole earth is surrounded by a magnetic net.

773. As every metal, every vein, every rock is in miniature a
magnet, so must the earth be a magnet upon a large scale. There is a
_Terrestrial magnetism_.

774. This magnetism belongs only to the earth only in so far as it
possesses a metallic quality, for magnetism is only the spirit of
the metals, not of the other terrestrial bodies, as the earths,
Inflammables, and salts.

775. Magnetism is no general character of the earth, still less of the
whole solar system, except in so far as the metallic principle lies at
the basis of every thing earthy. Magnetism does not operate outwardly
over the earth.

776. The determinants of terrestrial magnetism are the _metallic
veins_, or the metallic beds in the crust of the earth.

777. Terrestrial magnetism has not been produced or determined by
a magnetic nucleus; since a metal in the middle of the earth is a
contradiction. All determinations of terrestrial magnetism depend
upon the nature, character, distribution, number and direction of the
metallic veins or beds.

778. Thus the direction of the magnetic axis of the earth, its
mutability, the declination of the magnetic meridian, the inclination
or dip of the needle, in short every phenomenon without distinction
that concerns magnetism, must be derived from the nature of the
metallic veins. Another momentum does not indeed exist for magnetism.

779. Terrestrial magnetism can only be based upon the polarity of
metallic veins, and this upon the ores they contain. It must therefore
accommodate itself to the distribution of the chief masses of metals,
especially of the idiomagnetic metal. Now it has been ascertained,
that the noble metals are accumulated about the equator, such as gold,
silver, copper, which may be regarded as non-magnetic. In the northern
temperate zones, the mountains contain for the most part metals that
are non-magnetic and semi-noble, as lead, zinc, antimony, which are
usually combined as ores with sulphur. Iron, on the contrary, being the
only magnetic metal, (a fact which is also determined chiefly by the
magnetic needle in terrestrial magnetism) is accumulated in greater
quantity towards the north-pole and becomes always rarer in occurrence
towards the equator. The southern hemisphere of the earth, is indeed
less known in this respect; but, that towards the south-pole iron
reincreases in quantity, is rendered evident by the magnetic needle
when conveyed beyond the equator, inclining to the south-pole. If the
cause of the inclination upon the northern hemisphere be sought for in
the presence of iron, the same must be done in regard to the southern.
The arrangement of the metallic groups from north-to south-pole is
thus; iron, lead, silver, lead, iron.

780. Iron has been deposited at both poles and this in accordance with
the genesis of metals, for iron is a half reduced metal, and must
consequently be subjected to the demi-action only of light. At or
beneath the equator the Ferrogeneous is wholly reduced, and becomes
noble.

781. There is obviously, however, less iron at the south-than the
north-pole, because the greatest part of the planet is there covered
with water, and thus in general with less earth less metal also is to
be found. From this alone it may be explained why the magnetic needle
conveyed beyond the equator still remains horizontal and first inclines
about the tenth degree of southern latitude towards the south-pole.

782. The north-pole is thus more energetic than the south-pole, so that
the two poles must be also inversely related to each other. It is only
from this antagonism of the two poles of the earth that we comprehend,
why upon the southern hemisphere the south-pole of the needle dips
towards the earth, and why the needle does not turn completely round.
For if there was an equal quantity of iron in both hemispheres of the
earth, the southern must have the same magnetic pole, and thus attract
the north-pole of the needle; and under the equator the needle must
have actually no direction. The cause of the direction and dip of the
needle rests thus in the antagonism of the two poles of the earth, and
this again in the unequal masses of iron.

783. The action of terrestrial magnetism does not reside in the iron
formation alone, but in its antagonism to the reduced ores. The
terrestrial magnetism is a tension between iron and silver. The lead
imparts the poles.

784. As the earth is a globe, so are the two masses of iron situated
nearer to its axis than the masses of silver and lead. If therefore
the latter exert also any influence upon the direction of the magnetic
needle, yet nevertheless the poles of magnetism must coincide nearly
with the poles of the earth's axis, because the exciters of magnetism
operate in this direction.

785. The magnetic meridian runs indeed in general from pole to pole,
but as it is not the earth's axis, which determines the magnetism, but
the metallic masses, so the direction of the meridian deviates from
the earth's axis in accordance with these masses.

786. The magnetic needle can therefore assume a different direction on
every part of the earth, according as its relative position is varied
between two principal masses of metals, and even as is indicated by the
movement of the compass with the change of geographical longitudes,
it is removed from one metallic mass, approaches another, and by
this becomes more powerfully attracted. Upon the whole, however,
the direction must tend toward the poles. Such are the phenomena of
_declination_ of the magnetic needle; and we can now comprehend why
this is present.

787. But there must be also spots upon the earth, where the needle
points straight to the north, probably, when it is between two metallic
masses, or stands at a certain angle to them. These are the _lines
without declination_, of which there are many as is well known, but
which have not as yet been reduced to any law. Nor can they ever be so,
because we shall never become acquainted with the metallic beds.

788. As the solid land, so far as it projects out of the water, forms
a horse-shoe figure, of which the two Americas represent one leg,
Europe with Asia and Africa the other leg, the sea being interposed
between them; so must the lines without declination fall principally
in the ocean, between the earth's crura. Moreover as both these crura
of the earth are unequal in size, so must the one influence the needle
more than the other, and in this respect also there can be therefore
no regularity in the lines without declination. Thus everything
co-operates, to the effect of rendering the direction of the magnetic
needle unequal; such as the distribution of metalliferous mountains, of
masses of iron, of the earth's hemispheres, of the earth's crura, and
inversely the earth has probably obtained this horse-shoe form through
magnetism. The cavities of the earth probably do not fall in there,
because the ground, namely the mountains, is supported by metallic
plates. On this account the earth probably maintains an oblique
position in her course. In accordance with this the earth's axis had
first changed, when the metals were generated. According to this also,
the sea had rushed in first, when the metallic veins were present.
Lastly, in accordance with this, the metals would be generated, when
the whole earth was still covered, and the veins filled with water.
Unto such conclusions the philosophy of nature can alone conduct us.
The cause of a horse-shoe magnet acting more powerfully than any other
shaped instrument, resides probably in the form of the earth's crura.

789. The magnetic meridian varies, however, not only according to
places, but times also. This is explicable from the mutation of metals
under the poles, as well as under the equator and in the temperate
zones. Processes of oxydation and reduction are always occurring, the
more too if the water recedes and tracts of land become dry. To this,
culture, the clearing of woods, the draining of swamps and probably
mining operations themselves conduce.

790. It must besides be clear to every one, who has learnt to look upon
nature as a whole, that the numerous metallic masses of metal upon the
earth are not indifferent to the genesis of metal, that they are not
foreign to iron; but that they stand invariably in one relation to it,
which can only be magnetic; for therein only are they metals.

791. Magnetism is an infinity of tensions spread over the whole earth,
of which the tension towards the axis is but the principal, not the
sole, tension. The expression hereof is the net of metallic veins.

792. Every magnetic line consists of an endless number of shifting
poles; for every magnetic line can be but the metatype of terrestrial
magnetism.


C.--_INFLAMMABLES._


_Electrism._

793. Coal and sulphur may be regarded as the representatives of the
Inflammables, making their appearance in the carbonic acid of lime, and
the sulphuric acid of gypsum, just as the metals did among the alkalies.

794. The Inflammables are accordingly associated with the acids or the
salts, the ores with the earths. It may be said that the former are
reduced acids, the latter reduced earths.

795. The Inflammables are consequently those that succeed next to the
salts or water-minerals. Their determining element is in this respect
also the air; that of the ores is therefore the fire.

796. The Inflammable, as being the reduced acid, must have the
strongest affinity for oxygen. A body, which by its own force, attracts
the oxygen from the air, so that it appears luminous, is called
combustible.

797. The generating spirit of the Inflammables coincides with the
spirit of air, and thus with electricity. The generating spirit of
metals coincides with the light; it is the radial action in the
Massive, or magnetism.

798. Electricity has become embodied in the Inflammable, i. e.
idioelectric; in metal, light has become embodied, i. e. idiomagnetic.

799. Now, as the Inflammable exists under two forms, with the
preponderance of the earth-nature as coal, and with that of the
air-nature as sulphur, so must the electricity appear fixed chiefly in
the latter. This fixation is the idioelectricity.

800. As electricity is in its essence a constantly dualized agent, so
can only one pole belonging to it become fixed. In sulphur this is what
has been called the _negative_ pole.


a. SULPHUR.

801. As the air stands opposed to the earth, so must sulphur to coal.
The latter is thus endowed with positive electricity.

802. Coal is, however, the fundamental body of the metals. The metals
are consequently related as positive electrics to sulphur. Sulphur is
air-metal or idio-negative; metal is earth-or idiopositive sulphur.
Sulphur therefore occurs almost solely with metals, as iron, pyrites,
glance; yet frequently with arsenic, the metal that resembles it, e. g.
in realgar.

803. Sulphur is the basis of all idioelectrism, and this property
occurs only in bodies, in so far as they are positions of sulphur.

804. Magnetism and electrism are correlated, as iron and sulphur, as
gravity and light, as centre and periphery. The same spirit, which when
ruling in the dark, exhibits itself as magnetic, is manifested when it
has attained to light in sulphur as electrical. Magnetism is only the
electricity identified.

805. We may therefore speak of idiomagnetic metals as well as
idioelectric bodies.

806. Magnetism therefore stands in accordance with these relations in
opposition to electrism; they mutually change or annihilate each other.

807. Electrism has, in accordance with its signification, the power
of manifesting itself with one pole accumulated or set free from the
other, as e. g. the negative in a cake of resin; in magnetism, on the
contrary, both poles are always together and inseparable. The radius is
divided into two in every part of its length.

808. As the functions of metal and of sulphur are correlated, so also
are their substances; they are opposed, and hence the metallization by
means of sulphur with all its results. This antagonism is, however,
dormant or concealed; that of the functions manifests itself much more
clearly.

809. The metals, as being dense, central, and linear masses, must
fall into a state of tension with electricity as with heat; this is
called conduction. The metals are therefore conductors of electrism. In
antagonism to the conducting power of the metals sulphur is naturally
an _isolator_; for what is idioactive is virtually also isolating.
Iron may be likewise called an isolator of magnetism. There is only
_one_ series of bodies in nature, belonging to the peripheric and
expansive functions, that conducts; the metals only are conductors.
Isolation belongs to the essence of electricity. _Isolating action_ and
_Electricity are one_; for electricity is the surface-function, wherein
the line, which is the only conductor, disappears.

810. Electrism does not tend towards the metals, and can therefore
have no definite direction in the earth; there is neither an electric
meridian, nor an electric equator. There is only an electrical surface
to the earth, and this is alike in all regions of the world.

811. The metals must accordingly stand opposed to sulphur as positive
bodies, if not as idiopositive, yet as such when brought into collision
with sulphur. The metals, when rubbed with sulphur, constantly become
positive, and the sulphur remains negative.

812. The earths also become positive when rubbed with sulphur; in
short, everything which, in the genesis of the earth, ranks below
sulphur, is positive. Heated bodies rubbed with cold, and rough bodies
with smooth, must become negative.

813. Bodies become positive with sulphur, simply because the essence
of sulphur is of a negative character, or because, in other words, it
is nothing else but negativity; the persistency of one pole and the
counter-resistance to every other, is called _isolation_. The metals
are conductors, because they stand opposed to sulphur.

814. Positive isolation only is evolved opposite to sulphur, in zinc,
probably because this belongs to the air-metals.

815. What sulphur is in its series, that is _zinc_ in the metallic
series; the isolating electric rod, with which the other bodies are
associated; the one the positive, the other the negative isolator; in
so far forsooth as one can isolate bodies that have arisen through
linear action. With zinc the other metals become negative, because it
can be nothing else than positive, as sulphur can be none other than
negative. (That this does not hold good absolutely, we need scarcely be
reminded).

816. Two fixations of electricity thus exist, and from these the
electric phenomena must be derived. So long as we imagine that
electrical proportions run in a continuous line, so long shall we never
be able to avoid contradictions. Two rods stand firmly, and from out
and around these two heaps of bodies form, which in reference to their
electrical relation (according to the experiments hitherto performed)
are naturally exhibited as only _one_ series.

817. Sulphur does not stand alone, but is associated with a series,
especially of the higher Inflammables, bitumens or mineral-resins,
ætherial oils and hydrogen gas. The higher the inflammability ascends,
by so much the more energetic is the negative character, so that,
finally, the sulphur itself becomes positive towards such matters.

818. If in every polar action it can be proved, that each polar line
consists of infinitely numerous poles, and that each point in it
can be alternately changing both polarities, in accordance with the
mutation of the principal poles that exert their influence; so is it in
electricity. There is scarcely a single body which cannot be positive
as well as negative, if it only becomes displaced in its own series, or
is transported into the other.


b. COAL.

819. During the electrical separation of the Basic of the earth, or
during the communication of the aerial character to the Earthy, a body
remains behind with positive character, or the _Coal_.

820. Coal may be regarded as volatilized metal, as a metal which can
change by the action of water or acid upon it into air. Black-lead is a
coal, which is directly associated with the metals.

821. Coal appears therefore less in particular places, than as
expanded into entire rocky masses, as e. g. in the clay-slate and as
carbonic-acid in lime.

822. The coal was, during the earth-formation, separated from the sea,
yet not, or only rarely, by itself, but along with other masses of
earth, while the sulphur rather accompanies the metals. Coal passes
over into the earths, the sulphur into the metals.

823. The volatilized earth or coal, i. e. the earth that has ascended
through water or salt unto air, is associated with a higher kingdom,
and that indeed the general mass of the vegetable kingdom, as is the
case in the pit-coals, which are reversions of plants.

824. As the earths and metals extend into pit-coals, so does sulphur
lose itself in idioelectric, inflammable substances, which are likewise
reversions of a sulphur that has escaped into a higher kingdom. Here
belong the amber, mineral resins and naphthas.

825. There are thus two ways, by which the reduced earthy seeks to
mount aloft; by the carbon, as belonging to the more inert earth;
and the Resinous, as belonging to the more active air. The vegetable
kingdom has its root in the simple earths, especially the hydroid
argillaceous earths; the animal kingdom in the divided calcareous
earths.

826. Sulphur is yellow, because it is the earthy that has come to
light, the carbon is black, because it is sulphur volatilized,
moistened in the gloom or darkness of the earth.


D.--_SALTS_.


_Salt-periods._

827. So long as the basis of the acid is an earthy, such as carbon
or sulphur in the carbonic and sulphuric acids, does the earthy also
obtain the preponderance, and the lime as well as the gypsum or
sulphate of lime are precipitated as insoluble bodies.

828. It is only through the influence of light constantly becoming
more powerful by reason of the solid land under the water that the
oxydation of water rises to the highest degree, so that this element
finally converts itself into an acid, or hydro-oxide. This process
must be regarded as a decomposition of water, whereby a portion of the
hydrogen forms sulphur with the carbon, the rest with the oxygen an
hydro-oxide.

829. The hydro-oxide is hydrochloric acid. This acid must be regarded
as peroxydized hydrogen. Its signification is thus that of being water
itself, or a whole element with a preponderance of oxygen. It attains
this rank by its constituent parts, namely, the two general gaseous
primary bodies, by its distribution as a whole element around the
earth; by its occurrence as an earth-formation in rock-salt; finally,
by its presence in all vegetable and animal juices. Hydrochloric acid
is the type of all acids, as the iron is of all metals. All acids are
but imitations of the hydrochloric. All abide by the signification of
water, or are conversions of elements or earths by oxydation into an
hydroid condition.

830. Between the acidified water and the Earthy a higher antagonism now
emerges. The Earthy separates a part of its carbon from the carbonic
acid and sulphur, so that the rest remains behind peroxydized, and
makes its appearance as an alkali.

831. The alkali is to be regarded as the last conversion of calcareous
earth in respect to water. It is an earth, whose oxygen has converted
itself with a portion of its carbon into acid and been set free; a salt
halved upon the basic side. This general alkali, that has originated in
water, is _soda_ or natrom.

832. Alkali and acid are the last antagonism in the earthy, moieties,
which can never subsist without each other.

833. The alkali is corrosive, because it seeks water and acid, in order
to perfect itself; acid is pungent to the taste, because it seeks earth
or alkali.

834. Their antagonism is the highest antagonism between water and
earth; it is also the representation of the antagonism between fire
and the terrestrial elements, or also between light and gravity.
Therefore this antagonism has a cosmic or universal signification.

835. The combination of this antagonism is the _sea_-or _common salt_.

836. Sea-salt is the universal salt. All other salts are to be regarded
only as metamorphoses of it, as well as the acids only conversions of
the acid of common salt, and the alkalies of soda.

837. The sea-salt is essential to water. It is the product of geogeny,
has not entered the water from without, but been generated in it, and
is constantly being regenerated, so long as light shines upon the sea.
Properly speaking, sea-salt has been in the water from the beginning;
but it was previously shrouded in the other earths, and could act
substantially for the first time, when they had been separated from it.
It has become salt, or water and earth-element by the agency of light.

838. The sea-salt has also been generated in opposition to the
calcareous earths, and during its separation been rendered polar
towards the latter. The salt mines are therefore associated with
the last calcareous formation, the gypsum, and this it is also that
determines their lamination.

839. As it may be said, that the metals separate into coal and
sulphur, namely, pass over at their iron-extremity into coal, at their
arsenical, into sulphur; so may it be said, that the earths separate
into acids and alkalies; the one by the conversion of silica into
fluoric acid, the other by that of calcareous earth into soda. Carbonic
and sulphuric acid take possession of the calcareous earth; the
hydro-oxide of the alkali.

840. The sea-salt has been the last to be separated from, because it
was last generated in, the water. The salt beds belong to the last
precipitation, by not having been mechanically thrown down, but as
already observed and as their occurrence proves, by an alternating
process of separation from the acidified lime. It is absurd to wish to
explain the presence of common salt in the sea by a solution of saline
beds. For where have the latter come from?

841. With the separation of the ore and the Inflammable out of the
primary water and the confluence of the Earthy into marine salt, its
metamorphosis upon the surface or when exposed to light is at an
end. All forms of the planet have been successively developed out of
the earth-element. It can attain no further to anything new, and if
nature had not yet been concluded, that which in the sequel is still
dynamically developed upon our earth, must be thus a product, which
extends beyond the mineral kingdom.

842. As the fundamental earths lose themselves in pure carbon, in
resin, and so in the vegetable world, so the series of corrosive earths
resolves itself likewise in remnants of an organic, and that indeed
the animal, kingdom. As the pit-coals and resins are associated with
the metals and Inflammables, so are the fossil animal remains with
the calcareous earth; and thus the voice of the organic world speaks
already with force and clearness to those that hearken, from out the
stones.

843. For the metamorphosis of the earths, nature has twice prepared
herself, has planted at the same time two great points of origin,
according to which all her action is directed, and which remain in
constant correspondence with each other.

844. The main pole is granite. It is at once the primary pole, to which
the second main pole, the lime, is directed. The granite brings the
series through gneiss and mica-schist down to clay-and talc-slate, then
makes a sudden transition to the ores, and terminates at a boundary,
where pit-coals and resins conduct us into a new kingdom.

845. The lime rejects from itself the sand and sedimentary clay,
progresses through barytes and strontian up to gypsum, makes a sudden
bound or transition from thence to the salts, and terminates at a
limit, where corals and molluscous animals conduct us into a new
kingdom.

846. Salt concludes the growth of the earths; it is the eruption
or breaking out of the soul, as the metal was the body of earths
completed. Both finally pass into a higher world, the metal into the
_corporeal_, the salt into the _psychical_.


CHEMISM.

847. The spiritual activity, the soul of the earth has declared itself
in crystallization, the spirit of the metals in magnetism, that of
the Inflammables in electrism. The calcareous epoch is also the
manifestation of a peculiar activity, whose ultimate product is salt.
It has been already shown what the functions of the latter are, but the
signification of its acts has not yet been mentioned.

848. By the influence of light the water becomes elevated in its
oxygen-action, enters thus into tension with itself, and this
constitutes the tendency to solution which is the function of water.
The oxygenous water solicits the basic principle in the earth; this
issues forth, but still combined with its oxygen that has become free;
the formerly identical earth is a calcareous earth in a state of
tension with itself. What does not admit of being brought into a state
of tension, is thrown down as fundamental earth. Hitherto this process
was a mere process of solution, i. e. it had attained in the solid and
fluid only to tension, not to disseverment of the poles.

849. But the light always renders the water more oxygenous, and
therefore the earth always more basic; finally, the one portion of the
basic in the water, namely the hydrogen, separates itself, and becomes
peroxydized or the hydrochloric acid. A portion of the Basic in the
Earthy, namely the metallic body or carbon, separates itself also, and
the remainder becomes peroxydized or soda. As the calcareous earth
was at first dissolved in, and therefore one mass with, water, so at
present is the alkali also combined with the acid water; while both
dissolved in each other constitute salt.

850. In this process therefore _whole_ elements have been taken only
as _one_ primary body, and they have combined with each other like
the two primary bodies. The water has no longer become an element or
Equiponderant, but an Oxygenous, a true light-body; the earth has
no longer continued a total earth of equal specific gravity, but by
relative peroxydation has become an Aqueous, a Soluble. The salt has
thus from the union of the two lower elements, seeing that each was of
no more value than one primary body, become a _new_ element.

851. This process converts the elements again into their primary
condition, creates new elements and thus actually new matters. It
is therefore a struggle of the elements with their primary bodies,
a separation and interchange of the same. Such a process is called
_Chemism_. This is the essence or interpretation of chemism, viz. the
creation of new elements out of the old, by the reduction of these to
the nature of the primary bodies.

852. Chemism, which separates or combines, ranks a step higher than the
process of solution, which has the power only of heterogynizing, but
not of separating. Thus the electrical spark separates and combines
in combustion, while the tension of air enforces only evaporation.
Chemistry drives the elements to their utmost. In water the oxygen is
the predominating; it becomes, however, perfect first in the acid of
salt. In the earth the body of gravity prevails; but it becomes first
of all predominant in soda.

853. The opposition of the two primary bodies has been represented in
the two inferior elements as chemical tension, and the combination of
these primary elements is a chemical product.

854. Chemism is moreover a process of combustion, in which, however,
a whole element supplies the place of oxygen, and a whole element the
place of the base. It is an elementary process of combustion.

855. Chemism is the metatype of primary creation, both from its being
a material process of combustion, as from its creating new elements.
It is the union of the antagonism between æther and terrestrial matter
occurring within the circle of the terrestrial elements. Chemism is a
true conversion of substances according to their fixation.

856. All chemism takes place only in water; not only because the
particles can move therein, but because chemism is a process of
combustion of the elements themselves. The inferior elements, however,
such as water and earth, can only undergo combustion with each other,
because the two are moreover related to each other as æther and mass;
or as oxygen and base, for the two, so to speak, have become unipolar.
Without Fluid and Solid we cannot think of chemism.

857. The chemism of air is in the beginning electricity and then
the true process of combustion; both are similar, but different in
position. In the process of combustion both elements are unipolar in
the air, thus moieties; but in chemism two elements unite so as to
constitute a Whole. The product of air-chemism is water, as the product
of earth-chemism is salt. Water and salt fall into one position, but
transcend each other, even as the process of combustion invades the
province of chemism. The relation of electrism to chemism has now been
expressed in the clearest manner. The one is chemical tension of air,
but chemism is the electrical tension of earth and water.

858. Chemism is related to magnetism, as salt is to metal, as the
sedimentary to the primary periods. The whole sedimentary period
is a product of chemism, as the whole primary period is a product
of magnetism; salt and metal are only the last evolution of these
periods, and the products for whose sake all the preceding actions and
formations have taken place; granite and lime with their ramifications,
are but the stems, upon which metal and salt are borne as blossoms.

859. Magnetism and chemism are thus the creating agents for the solid
nucleus of the earth, and through both is it completed. The process of
earth-formation is a magneto-chemism.

860. Regarding the earth as an entire crystal, magnetism is the
Determinant of its polar axes and polar radii, while chemism is the
same in respect to its integral parts.

861. All terrestrial action is an interchange of these two functions
or souls, which are none other than the living gravity and the living
light upon the planet. The electricity, like the heat, only maintains
them in eternal tension or extension.

862. Chemism is the process of space, density, quiescent heat;
therefore the latent heat or the temperature must change in every
chemical process. Chemism is related to magnetism, as heat is to
gravity, to electricity like as to light. Crystallization is point,
magnetism line, electrism surface, chemism cube, or expressed according
to their powers: O⁰, O¹, O², O³.

863. Nothing can become solid without taking water into admixture with
it. This water is the water of admixture. Nothing also can assume form,
without taking water into itself--water of crystallization.

864. In so far as magnetism is active in crystallization, it renders
the water identical, basic, and this therefore becomes solid; the water
is not as water in a crystal, but it first becomes so by separation.

865. All chemical processes are based on the union of bodies, which are
elements, but which, like acids and alkalies, have assumed the nature
of the primary bodies.

866. The elective affinities are based upon the polarizibility or
transmutability of the Fluid and the Solid into the primary bodies.
That is decomposed and combined, which during admixture maintains the
animation in the strongest degree unto the origin. What cannot be so
reduced, is precipitated, as is silex. The chemism is a bin-elementary
process, and therefore constitutes the termination of this period
of creation, or of the mineral kingdom. So soon as a tri-elementary
process originates, the products pass over into a new kingdom.




