Chapter III of his “Utilitarianism.” He writes:—

  “The internal sanction of duty, whatever our standard of duty
  may be, is one and the same—a feeling in our own mind; a pain,
  more or less intense, attendant on violation of duty, which in
  properly cultivated moral natures rises, in more serious cases,
  into shrinking from it as an impossibility. This feeling ... is
  the essence of Conscience; though in that complex phenomenon as it
  actually exists, the simple fact is in general all encrusted over
  with collateral associations, derived from sympathy, from love,
  and still more from fear; from all the forms of religious feeling;
  from the recollections of childhood and of all our past life; from
  self-esteem, desire of the esteem of others, and occasionally even
  self-abasement.”

This analysis of Mill’s reveals that what the intuitionists loosely
termed _conscience_ is a far more complex phenomenon than they had
suspected, and with this revelation the whole logical structure
of intuitionism breaks down. For if conscience is not the simple,
innate, infallible principle or faculty which the intuitionists
postulated it to be, the deductions they made from this hypothesis
become more and more untenable the longer they are scrutinized.
Mill’s analysis of the psychological factors in conscience, together
with Locke’s discovery of the cultural and geographical limitations
of any moral sense make it necessary to define this ethical
phenomenon in purely empirical terms.

Such a definition as we seek, however, could only be obtained by
securing an elaborate census of cases in which the words “conscience”
or “moral sense” were used. The census-taker would have to roam
over the whole earth, ask questions all day long, and even become
an eavesdropper at night, in order to gain the information he
desired. Even this method would hardly be exhaustive, since perhaps
far more “pangs of conscience” are felt than are ever expressed
in language; and so our census-taker, were he as thorough as we
might desire him to be, would have to be equipped with a sort of
ultra-stethoscope,—one that could elevate a blush into an audible
phenomenon,—in order to return with a full and complete report. The
lack of such exhaustive statistics must, of course, be permanent;
not only for want of census-takers, and for want of accuracy and
sincerity on the part of those giving their introspection, but also
because the concept of conscience may be slowly evolving, so that the
end of the census might not harmonize with its beginning.

Granting, indeed, that such an evolution exists, it does not
now appear to be either uniform or universal. For while, as we
have recently shown, the concept of conscience first attained a
philosophic importance in the XVIII century, and was thereafter
variously modified and developed, yet the popular notion of a moral
sense,—of “this deity within my bosom,” as some have even expressed
it,—has actually degenerated into something unworthy of a place
among the positive ethical values. Our quotation from James Murray’s
account of the behavior of the Adelie penguin is extremely pertinent
here. “_The fear of being found out_” is, we venture to say, the very
nucleus and core of the consciences of the majority of men. And while
without doubt some forms of fear are well-grounded, as, for example,
the farmer’s fear lest the oncoming storm wash out his seedlings, yet
when fear tends to limit prudence, or take the place of prevision,
the organism in which that fear arises is sub-normal and unsound.
Conscience, then, in so far as it is identical with this degrading
emotion of fear, and in so far as it begins and ends in a withdrawing
reaction, is nothing but a blight.

Yet something more remains to be said about the popular conception
of the word “conscience.” This word, as commonly used, denotes an
emotional state which, far from being in harmony with the ideals of
the group, often denotes the very opposite condition. It is hardly
necessary to remark that the fear of being found out does not imply
loyalty to the group any more than it implies the recognition of
that which makes for power, wisdom, and peace in the individual.
Indeed, conscience as popularly experienced, involving as it
does anxiety, trepidation, self-abasement, and a host of other
introversive tendencies, is an ethical liability, both to the group
and to the individual. The man who has transgressed the will of the
group is surely not a bit better off because of his fear of being
caught, nor can he regard his fear, even though he has already been
tortured by it, as giving him any right to a mitigation of the
penalty. As for himself, the conscience-stricken individual may have
so long squandered his energy in his effort to conceal his offence
as to bring him very close to ethical bankruptcy. The picture we
draw is not extreme,—it can be duplicated in every neighborhood,
if not in every family on the globe. For conscience, as it is
usually experienced, is a painful, withdrawing reaction, implying
negation rather than affirmation, incoordination rather than skilful
prevision, and morbidity instead of frank, overt, constructive
action. Accurate indeed is the phrase, “The pangs of conscience,” as
a description of the organic turmoil incident to this condition of
mal-adjustment. Can it not, then, be truthfully said, that in the
cases just described conscience is a pathological phenomenon?

Thus to discover that the popular form of conscience implies a vice
rather than a virtue is not, however, enough. We wish also to know
how and why this form of conscience has attained so great a vogue.
And here again we touch upon matters of the greatest importance for
a mechanistic ethics.

Conscience as a form of fear is so strong and so wide-spread for
two reasons. The first is already familiar to us, and is briefly
repeated. It is that the flexor system is originally stronger than
the extensor system. And so in the great majority of men whose
natures are less evolved, fear is almost a daily experience,—not
only the fear of nature and of the unknown, but also the fear of
the group by whose tolerance they exist. Moreover, sentiment and
not knowledge is the great group asset, by which we imply no such
educated sentiments as are derived from analytical inquiry, or from
an open search after the facts, but rather that kind of sentiment
which passively bars and actively hinders the enlargement of the
understanding. The group really never explains. When offended, it
simply becomes suspicious, and its gossips freely translate this
suspicion into rumor and inuendo. It is small wonder, then, that the
conscience-stricken individual, as a product of his group, has as
his first, and sometimes his only reaction, the tendency to shrink
and become unresilient when he realizes that his acts, or worse
still, his thoughts, have transgressed the taboos of his tribe. It
is a case of like master, like man; the group does not usually know
what its purposes are, much less does it ask to have those purposes
examined and revealed; and so the conscience-stricken individual,—the
sentimental child of the group,—reacts to his realization of
estrangement from the group in a manner that makes his last state
worse than his first.

This cannot be taken to imply that it is a sign of intellectual
maturity to transgress all the taboos of the group. Yet the argument
still holds that the influences produced by the exclusive use of this
negative form of conscience are baleful. Very early in the life of
the average child the expressions: “Don’t,” “If you dare to do that
again, I’ll whip you,” “What would people say?” and a score of other
negations are employed by his parents and teachers on the principle
that ethical guidance is achieved by such means. As a result, says
Edwin Holt, “The parent has set a barrier between the child and a
portion of reality; and forever after the child will be in some
measure impeded in its dealings” with those things which have become
taboo, always first feeling the prohibition, rather than the urgency
to act discriminatively upon a knowledge which a close contact with
the reality should produce. Such a parent has not “trusted the
truth,” and the final result is that the child has actually become “a
second-rate mind, not in harmony with itself,” since not in creative
touch with the environment.

Even more pointedly John Dewey writes in his criticism of the
doctrine of self-denial. “Morals is a matter of direction, not of
suppression. The urgency of desires cannot be got rid of; nature
cannot be expelled. If the need of happiness, of satisfaction of
capacity, is checked in one direction, it will manifest itself in
another. If the direction which is checked is an unconscious and
wholesome one, the one which is taken will be likely to be morbid and
perverse. The one who is conscious of continually denying himself
cannot rid himself of the idea that it ought to be ‘made up’ to him;
that a compensating happiness is due him for what he has sacrificed,
somewhat increased, if anything, on account of the unnatural virtue
he has displayed. To be self-sacrificing is to ‘lay up’ merit, and
this achievement must surely be rewarded with happiness—if not now,
then later. Those who habitually live on the basis of conscious
self-denial are likely to be exorbitant in the demands which they
make on some one near them, some member of their family or some
friend; likely to blame others if their own ‘virtue’ does not secure
for itself an exacting attention which reduces others to the plane of
servility. Often the doctrine of self-sacrifice leads to an inverted
hedonism; we are to be good—that is, forego pleasure—now, that we may
have a greater measure of enjoyment in some future paradise of bliss.
Or, the individual who has taken vows of renunciation is entitled by
that very fact to represent spiritual authority on earth and to lord
it over others.”

They who wish even a more striking picture of the extent to which
the negative type of conscience degrades the intellect, have
only to consult Alfred Adler’s “The Neurotic Constitution.” If
Dr. Adler correctly depicts the salient traits of the neurotic,
many intuitionists themselves are by implication introverts, and
consequently forfeit their claims to ethical leadership. The neurotic
is described as “a person possessing anxiety,” “the self-sacrificing
virtue,” “a marked sensitiveness,” “an irritable debility,” “an
estrangement from reality,” as well as “a person with a strong
tendency to symbolization,” and a penchant for “guiding fictions”
invented for the purpose of compensating him for his feeling of
inferiority at having lost solid contacts with reality. This, then,
is the success which the conscience-theory has met with at the hands
of scientific experts,—keen and sympathetic observers of the ways of
men.

Such an account of the degeneration of conscience into a
self-annihilating sentiment is, however, only one chapter in the
history of this concept. And while the list of uses to which the
word “conscience” has been put does not furnish as solid a basis
upon which to build a constructive ethical technique as did the uses
of “good,” “right,” and “virtue,” we can nevertheless still find a
positive ethical value for this term. How, then, will this value be
discovered?

It will be found by a study of those persons who have attained the
power to view the world in a purely objective and empirical manner;
of those persons who treat their own and other peoples’ actions
as experiments in the great laboratory of time, rather than as
timid ventures to be apologized for on the slightest provocation;
of those persons who have evolved to that point where their
knowledge determines their sentiments, and not their sentiments
their knowledge; and of those who, having by this means chosen
their dependable goods, learn the right methods to attain them, and
thereafter employ plain judgments of fact in estimating the success
which they acquire and the quality of the virtue which they achieve.
In such persons the positive, constructive, liberalizing type of
conscience exists,—a conscience which, through being built up of
objectively tested judgments, becomes the outstanding ethical asset
of the personality.

This type of conscience is not a myth, for it may be acquired in the
same way as any other skill is acquired. The objective knowledge
which it presupposes can be gained where every natural curiosity
of a child or an adult is developed into a frank acquaintance with
the object of curiosity; where fear is turned into intrepidity by a
bold analysis of its cause and by a frontal attack upon the exciting
stimulus; where one learns that ethical problems are always solved by
forming serviceable habits and never by the cultivation of permanent
anxieties; and where, finally, all the entangling alliances forced
upon one by unprofitable acquaintances are boldly, but politely,
annihilated. Even though many strongly entrenched traditions and
institutions of the world would decay were the type of conscience we
here describe to become wide-spread, yet this cannot deter the wise
man from making it his life work to add as many new names to the
list of those possessing ethical insight as it is within his power to
do. Indeed, whenever this list becomes so large as to be generally
regarded by autocrats as dangerous, we shall have come to that place
in the course of civilization where the first real ethical advance is
to be made.




