CHAPTER X

THE ACQUISITION OF AN ETHICAL TECHNIQUE

  “One of the reasons why pantheistic revery has been so popular is
  that it seems to offer a painless substitute for genuine spiritual
  effort.... When pushed to a certain point the nature cult always
  tends towards sham spirituality.

      ‘Oh world as God has made it
           All is beauty,
       And knowing this is love, and
           Love is duty,
    What further can be sought for or desired?’

  It seems to follow from these lines of Browning, perhaps the most
  flaccid spiritually in the English language, that to go out and
  mix oneself up with the landscape is the same as doing one’s duty.
  As a method of salvation this is even easier and more æsthetic
  than that of the Ancient Mariner, who, it will be remembered, is
  relieved of the burden of his transgression by admiring the color
  of water-snakes!”

  IRVING BABBITT, “Rousseau and Romanticism.”

  “Objection: Will not this end in ethical scepticism? Answer:
  Nothing is further from scepticism than the conception of a reality
  subject to laws, and of a rational action based on the knowledge of
  those laws.”

  L. LEVY-BRÜHL, “Ethics and Moral Science,”
  Table of Contents, p. xi.


  “In the preceding pages we have no doubt often hurt—but we have
  hurt to heal. The good surgeon probes deeply in order that he may
  not have the operation to perform again. Even a minute amount of
  diseased tissues left behind can prevent the return of vigorous
  and creative health. Thus what may seem to the anxious patient
  unnecessary cruelty may be the greatest kindness. A sentimental
  compromise is never welcomed by the mature judgment of the brave
  man. And in this day when so many have willingly given their lives
  for the sake of a human ideal, is it just and right to flinch
  in the spiritual warfare which confronts our generation? We are
  seeking nothing less than a renaissance in which men’s energies
  will be wisely and loyally directed to what is greatly human
  and humanly great. In such a service we must will to be hard on
  ourselves and on others.”

  ROY WOOD SELLARS, “The Next Step in Religion,” p. 211.


Little did Descartes dream that his attempt to find truth by the
method of candid doubting was a sign that human evolution had “turned
a corner,” or that the method he employed was to be the precursor
of an ethical renaissance. Yet the introduction of this one form of
psychological test as a philosophic instrument was an entering wedge
of such power that where great darkness had been, much light was
shed; and where the stolid inertia of many centuries had existed,
movement and life and enlightenment began to appear. But nature is
slow, and always takes plenty of time to play its elaborate game;
indeed, often nature seems to us to proceed by circuitous paths
where we would make an open right of way. However, even though it
was several centuries after Descartes before the first psychological
laboratory was founded, the development of thought toward the
recognition and use of the psychological method was nevertheless
steadily proceeding. Today there is no word we are more wont to
conjure with than the word _psychology_. And even if the foolish
always use it with derision, yet those who are wise know well to what
an extent it is symbolical of a new era of human development, on the
threshold of which era we now confidently stand.

What is this psychological method which has so silently become
established, and what has it to do with the acquisition of an
ethical technique? It is the method of analysis, experiment, and
constructive scepticism, which treats all phenomena objectively, that
is, by leaving out the personal equation, and by asking not how do
we preconceive that things _should_ appear, but only how _do_ they
appear with our personal bias in abeyance.

Such a method, which, by the way, is the essence of psychological
science, is very difficult to achieve. Indeed, for many it is
constitutionally impossible. The history of physical science records
how great were the struggles of men to become objectively-minded even
toward their external environment, struggles which have only recently
become successful. Witness the fact that for many centuries the
alchemists sought for the philosopher’s stone, a mineral which they
falsely preconceived to have the power of transmuting lead into gold;
witness the fact that the science of anatomy was for generations
denied its birth on account of pious prejudice and taboo; and witness
even today that many physical objects are said to be _bewitched_
when they fail to operate as expected, and that luck at cards is
still stoutly affirmed by otherwise estimable people. Indeed, there
are thousands of farmers in the United States who appeal to the
methods of divination in planting their crops and shingling their
houses. Consequently, it is plain that if the power to become
objectively-minded toward the physical world is so rarely attained,
it is even more difficult to become detached and un-self-conscious
toward the mental and social behavior of our fellow-men.
Nevertheless, this method of detachment, of looking at old things
with new eyes, is just what hundreds of teachers of psychology are
training thousands of students every year to employ; and its salutary
effects are being felt in every corner of the civilized world.

To some persons all this may come as a surprise, since the criticism
has already been publicly uttered that the study of psychology
tends to make one incurably introspective. On these grounds alone
the self-styled hard-headed business man often hastily classifies
psychology among the foibles of women and poets. This, however, is
simply another error due to hostile preconceptions. For even though
some psychologists have fallen into the practice of cultivating
Psyche for her own sake, yet their method originated from distinctly
other motives. Psychology, it is true, when cultivated by persons
constitutionally possessed of an introversive bias, may not always
eradicate that bias, any more than will the putting of an army rifle
into the hands of a timid man make him forthright into a model
top-sergeant.

In another strain, it is sometimes alleged that psychology is simply
a new head set upon the body of ancient Roman stoicism. But it
must be remembered that the detachment which the Stoics cultivated
lacked all the elements of a scientific inquisitiveness. It was
marked chiefly by a sweet indifference and unconcern, traits which
were derived from the belief that Reason which ruled the world was
interested only in the headlines of universal news. The psychologist,
far from being indifferent to the most transient phenomena of
human experience, regards them most steadfastly. Nevertheless, he
endeavors to maintain an equality of interest in all human affairs,
knowing full well that as soon as he takes sides, he loses his
sense of the proportions of the whole. Unlike the Stoic, he admits
the reality and inevitableness of pain and anguish; yet while he
studies these phenomena, he keeps a sharp lookout lest his personal
equation obtrude itself in the shape of sympathetic sorrows,—these
he steadfastly refuses to add to his report of the objective facts.
Nevertheless, it is conceivable that had not the elements of
stoic indifference been a basic capacity of human protoplasm, the
psychological attitude might not have been evolved.

Curiously enough, psychology has been both defended and attacked
on the basis of its supposed kinship with certain doctrines of
Jesus, as, for example, the Golden Rule. No psychologist is greatly
interested in any debate carried out on these lines. When Edwin
Holt’s “The Freudian Wish” first appeared a few years ago, some
caustic reviewer accused its author of “having gotten religion in
the form of Freud.” It is doubtful whether anyone, be he Christian
or non-Christian, would regard such a remark either as a help or
a hindrance to the acceptance of psychology as a contribution to
the technique of ethics. As far as the Golden Rule is concerned,
its relations to scientific method may be briefly indicated by
saying that while this maxim can be interpreted to imply a kind
of other-regard which seems to possess the elements of scientific
detachment, yet other things must also be considered before final
judgment is passed. For this hypothetical imperative,—“_Whatsoever ye
would_ that men should do unto you, do ye even so unto them,”—is only
possible of application among equals of intellect or of sentiment,
and it can be used then only by a forehanded and judicious person,
one with discriminative sympathies, and able to mature his wishes
into wills. Psychology ventures to make no universal rules of
conduct, especially since it must first take an inventory of human
nature in order to find out what rules there are to which man will
give his uncoerced and unconscious loyalty.

Let it not be assumed, however, that the psychologist urges an
ethical moratorium while he is pursuing his search into the secret
places of human nature. The method of scientific detachment has
itself provided such an insight into the problems of conduct as to
make any such assumption absurd. He who catches a glimpse of what
it means to understand his fellow-men, rather than to regard them
primarily as creatures to be classified as either good or bad,
virtuous or vicious, begins to grow into an ethically adult person.
He at once loses that ancient, clandestine, stultifying tendency to
obtrude his own bias into his social environment, and he no longer
finds his chief comfort in adoring those who are most like unto
himself, or in mentally lynching in advance those who rub his ego
the wrong way. Scientific neutrality hath also its victories. The
application of the psychological method to prison reform, where
the criminal is regarded as an effect as well as a cause of social
mal-adjustments, has already been acknowledged as humanly great. Is
it not possible that we see in such phenomena the passing of an age
in which maxims were necessary, and the birth of an era where the
educative methods of wise and kind men will take their places?

The further drift of this would be hard, indeed, to conceal. Ethics
as a branch of psychology is inevitably bound up with the abolition
of praise and blame, and of reward and punishment, as the chief
themes in the judgments we pass upon our fellow-men. The tendency to
make such bi-polar judgments usually implies a prejudice inherited
from a pre-scientific age. With this change, of course, many of the
traditional moral categories will be replaced by the true categories
of the understanding,—categories derived from psychological insight
into the ethical potentialities of the natural man. Even now,
however, such a replacement is in progress, the results of which are
neither small nor unimportant.

We refer here to the wide-spread use of trait analyses, both in
business and in education, by which a man is estimated on the basis
of his tendencies, capacities, and powers. His body is measured for
its strength and resiliency, and where defects are discovered, a
regimen leading to the re-education of his physique is prescribed.
His mental developments are tested, and the common attributes of
the human mind, such as sensory acuity, retention, discrimination,
and the like, are estimated and recorded. The special talents he
possesses are revealed by performance tests, and his hitherto
undeveloped potentialities are induced to betray themselves. The
emotions from which he either profits or suffers are discovered by
methods adroitly devised for the purpose. Likewise, the individual’s
sociability,—whether it be merely gang-attachment, or a zest for
cooperative endeavors,—is made a matter of sympathetic study; while
still other bases upon which a man may be estimated are employed in
the attempt to help him find out just what manner of man he is.

While it is admitted that physical and mental tests are often
stupidly devised and bigotedly inflicted on the testee, yet it seems
likely that we have given here a method which can be employed to the
greatest advantage even in every-day ethics. For the psychological
method, in that it teaches one first to become analytical and
discriminative, replaces the old, unfounded prejudice that men are
unequivocally either good or bad, virtuous or vicious, saints or
sinners, by a desire to know just what can be done with and for them.
And while the methods of psychology will probably always rank men on
a scale from low to high, and will always employ opposite poles in
its judgments, yet in the multitude of such antonyms there is safety.
Scientific judgments are, by being unemotional, devoid both of that
extreme congratulation and sharp censure which attach to purely
moral estimates, while the wide range of observation upon which they
are made provides for the greatest number of human contacts and
of educative measures possible. To extol a man is often not much
different in effect than to blame him, and both praise and blame can
equally hinder his power to acquire an ethical technique. Men differ
too variously to be fitted to any one Procrustean bed; the human mind
has infinitely more than two dimensions. Moreover, the moralist’s
use of bi-polar judgments tends inevitably to separate men, rather
than to unite them, or to teach them to cooperate with one another.
And when we consider that from now on, at least, the predicaments of
this planet will be common liabilities of the whole human race, the
pragmatic urgency to employ the methods of psychology in attaining
social harmony are undisguisedly patent.

The benefits derived from employing the psychological method in
ethics are, however, by no means exclusively social. The use of this
method reacts directly upon the user in several significant ways.
In the first place, the man who employs even as few as twenty-five
of the newer categories in making a trait analysis of his fellows,
soon becomes aware of the fact that his former analysis of himself
is in need of revision. Exaggerated self-preference is thus broken
down, and replaced, not by its opposite,—self-abasement,—but by an
estimate which arises from comparisons and contrasts resulting from
the use of an objective standard. Again, the user of this method
learns that human behavior is not the product of some mysterious
mental element called “character,” but that character itself is the
product of traits, and, furthermore, that every trait has had a
developmental history, which is at every point a record of the effect
of environmental stimulus upon original nature. His own character
thereafter becomes subject to scientific scrutiny, and he realizes,
for example, that his previous emotional repugnances were not always
signs of incorruptibility, but very frequently, indeed, signs of the
extent to which his own desires had been prevented from reaching
their maturity. And, only to mention one more of the many benefits
of such new scientific insight, the use of this method reveals that
times out of number purely moral judgments are employed to quench,
rather than to quicken thought, and are uttered not so much to
indicate that discriminative sympathies are being acquired, as to
show that they have long since ceased to germinate. Henceforth the
employment of the psychological method goes hand in hand with the
urgency to prevent as many young minds as possible from suffering on
account of a retarded development.

Such a change of emphasis from traditional morals to scientific
methods implies unequivocally that the problems of ethics are
henceforth to be solved by experts. Already the recognition of the
need of such a change is evident in the reliance that is being placed
upon psychiatrists and other medical men to assist in the cure of
those who are maladjusted to their environment. Health-clinics
likewise are being both promoted and attended by those who realize
that the virtues go as deep as the viscera, and that often such
things as ignorance of the shape of one’s stomach have been the
source of many a lapse from normality. This reliance upon trained
experts is, moreover, a sign of still further changes in our
occidental philosophy of life. It means that we are acquiring the
conviction that constructive criticism is better than ritual, and
analysis more efficacious than prayer. For we have begun to see
that progress must come by honest, painstaking efforts in the here
and now, rather than by presuming upon the perfection of a universe
which we have only begun to understand. It is indeed the well-born
sentiment of many thousands of people today that science wisely
employed for the benefit and use of men is the only true word of God.

Herewith, also, the question of what sort of ideals an applied
mechanistic psychology of conduct provides may have an answer. On
this point we need not be dumb, nor can we make a “sentimental
compromise.” When the mechanist asserts that we _are_ what we
_do_, he does not thereby denounce ideals; on the contrary, he
thus only affirms his purpose to take the whole question of ideals
seriously, more seriously, in fact, than it was ever taken before.
Herein also he declares for the Ethics of Hercules rather than the
“Ethics of Cinderella.” For while he must admit that there is,
accordingly, no class of people who can be truthfully said to be
“the pure in heart,”—owing to the fatigue of attention incident to
all other-worldly contemplation,—yet he also asserts that the man
who knows his capacities and powers as the result of an objective
analysis, is by that means equipped to advance to more inclusive
levels of conduct than he who merely cultivates an inner life of
private mystery. The mechanist would therefore let new standards
grow out of the development of natural human capacities, out of the
struggle to educate men so that their desires and abilities mature
simultaneously, and out of the freedom which can thus be achieved by
those able to achieve it.

“Great love comes from great knowledge,” said Leonardo da Vinci, and
the advance of science today in all its branches corroborates this
assertion. Although at the present hour it does not seem clear just
what the universe is doing, yet they who recognize even in seemingly
disastrous tumults the struggles of man to enlarge his power to
think, will see that even if nature’s way appears to be circuitous
and even at times crude, it is nevertheless nature’s inevitable way.
Much lamentation is heard today over the changes which evolution has
brought to this planet, and the outcry is even raised that science
has taken away our souls. Is it necessary to reply that a faith
in stagnation is clearly out of joint with the creative functions
of time, or that the loss of an ancient belief may be the sign of
a truly ethical advance? Indeed, we can well be assured that the
type of soul which is composed of self-stifled desires, of restless
sentiments due to an ignoble retreat from reality, of the fear of
ultimate annihilation, not only _will_ die, but it also _ought_ to
die. There is another and a better kind of soul,—the one created out
of sagacity, skill, and kindness, which generates power, wisdom, and
peace,—and this type of soul, as long as the sun remains hot, and the
earth’s crust keeps flowering into men, will have its immortality
guaranteed. This is the mechanist’s religion,—a consequence of,
rather than an apology for, his ethics. For religion, though it be
a word made base by those who claim to have an endless copyright
on truth, and a retroactive monopoly on the deeper human emotions,
means to a mechanist something more closely allied to its original
signification. It means a reliance on that much of nature, and a
support from that much of humanity, as contributes to the development
of a man’s talents, to the freedom of his actions, and to his peace
of mind. The new labors of Hercules will consist in making this true
for the whole human race.




INDEX


  Abstract terms, 24

  Action-pattern, 20

  Adler, A., 171

  Adrian, E. D., 27

  Andreas Hofer, 132

  All-or-none principle, 27-30, 109

  Aristotle, 8, 15


  Babbitt, Irving, 189

  Bayliss, W. M. 27, n; 32-n.

  Buddhism, 139

  Butler, Joseph, 157-8


  Charcot, J. M., 33

  Circular reflex, 89, 185

  Clarke, Samuel, 158-9

  Composition, fallacy of, 98

  Conditioned reflex, 26, 54, 89

  Couterat, L., 90

  Cox, C. G., 8

  Crile, G. W., 20


  Davis, W. M., 8

  Democritus, 12

  Descartes, 36, 190

  Dewey, I., 8, 16, 17, 21, 170-171

  Diogenes, 121

  Dynamogenesis, law of, 33


  Emerson, 13, 72

  Empedocles, 13, 59

  Everett, W. G., 175


  Golden Rule, 194


  Harvey, William, 15

  Helvetius, 164

  Hobbes, 8, 157

  Holt, E. B., 8, 16, 20, 31, 127, 170

  Homer, 19

  Hypostatization, fallacy of, 163


  Initial predication, fallacy of, 6


  James, W., 13, 51, 75

  Jesus, 29, 72, 136


  Language, functions of, 17-18

  Law, “moral,” 68, 162

  Legal rights, 84-94

  Leonardo da Vinci, 8, 201

  Levy-Brühl, L., 8, 162, 189

  Locke, J., 164-5

  Lucas, Keith, 27


  Mahommedanism, 139

  Meaning, 21-24

  Meyer, Max, 104

  Mill, J. S., 8, 165

  Milton, 59

  Morality not the same as ethics, 73

  “Moral” rights, 94-100

  “Motor set,” 20

  Murray, James, 156


  Outgoing reaction, 56


  Paulsen, F., 137

  Perry, R. B., 6, n; 175

  Plato, 121, 130

  Prince, Morton, 140

  Protagoras, 187


  Reciprocal innervation, law of, 32-35, 59

  Regulus, 132

  Reid, T., 162-3

  Richet, C., 33


  “Secret of Life,” 5

  Sellars, R. W., 8, 58, 190

  Shaftesbury, 158

  Socrates, 7-8, 72, 132

  “Specific response,” 20

  Spencer, H., 8

  Spinoza, 8, 99

  Starling, E. H., 28, n; 32, n.

  Stoics, 193

  “Stream of thought,” 14


  Thigmotaxis, 131

  Titchener, E. B., 20


  Vitalist, 5-7

  Vague, meaning of, 26


  Withdrawing reaction, 66


  Zoroaster, 13, 58-9




_A PARTIAL LIST OF BORZOI TEXTS_


EARLY CIVILIZATION: AN INTRODUCTION TO ANTHROPOLOGY

  _By Alexander A. Goldenweiser, Lecturer on Anthropology and
  Sociology at the New School for Social Research, New York_

Large 8vo, Cloth, XXIV 424 pages

While offering an elementary text for the beginner in anthropology,
this volume is mainly designed as a source book of information and
suggestion for students of sociology who may wish to amplify their
familiarity with modern social phenomena by an inquiry into the
nature of early civilization and the workings of the primitive mind.


SECRET HISTORY OF THE ENGLISH OCCUPATION OF EGYPT

_By Wilfrid Scawen Blunt_

Large 8vo, Cloth, 450 pages

This book makes clear the varying motives—imperialistic, economic,
and personal—which brought about the English occupation of Egypt.
Based on personal records and contemporary documents, its statements
and conclusions have a profound interest and importance for students
of history in general and of English history in particular.


THE GERMAN CONSTITUTION

  _By René Brunet, Professor of Constitutional Law at the University
  of Caen (translated from the French by Joseph Gollomb, with an
  Introduction by Charles A. Beard)_

8vo, Cloth, XIV 339 pages

This is a critical discussion of the new German Constitution, the
actual text of which is included, in English, as an appendix.
It gives a lucid and unbiased account of the German Revolution,
describes the conflict of forces which ended in the establishment of
the Republic, and concludes with a systematic analysis of the new
plan of government.


THE FOUNDATIONS OF SOCIAL SCIENCE

  _By James Mickel Williams, Professor of Economics and Sociology in
  Hobart College_

Large 8vo, Cloth, XVI 494 pages

A comparative study of the psychological aspects of the social
sciences. It treats of the relation of social psychology to political
science, jurisprudence, economics, history and sociology, analyzing
the psychological assumptions underlying the behavior of men living
in social relations.


PRINCIPLES OF SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY

  _By James Mickel Williams, Professor of Economics and Sociology in
  Hobart College_

Large 8vo Cloth, XII 459 pages

This book represents the first attempt that has been made to explain
society concretely in psychological terms. It describes the essential
processes that extend thruout the social organization, analyzing the
conflict of the different types of behavior in all human relations.


THE HISTORY OF SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT

  _By Franz Carl Müller-Lyer (translated from the German by E. C. and
  H. W. Lake, with Introductions by L. T. Hobhouse and E. J. Urwick)_

8vo, Cloth, 362 pages

This volume is mainly designed as a text for beginners in social
studies. It surveys broadly the various phases of man’s origin and
progress, co-ordinating the general facts of social evolution from
the earliest times and indicating the probable trend of future
developments.


HUMAN NATURE IN POLITICS

  _By Graham Wallas, Professor of Political Science in London
  University_

8vo, Cloth, 320 pages

This is a slightly revised edition, with a new Preface, of Professor
Wallas’ famous work first published in England, in 1908, and for some
time out of print. It offers a clear and forceful analysis of the
psychological processes which underlie political thought and action,
laying special emphasis upon the application of social psychology to
politics.


HOW ENGLAND IS GOVERNED

  _By Rt. Hon. C. F. G. Masterman_

8vo, Cloth, XVI 293 pages

An introductory study of the working of the British Constitution,
written from the standpoint of one who has had actual experience
of the working of the political machinery of England. Students of
politics and government will find in this volume a most interesting
and valuable source of information.


FACING OLD AGE

  _By Abraham Epstein, Formerly Director of the Pennsylvania
  Commission to Investigate Old Age Pensions_

8vo, Cloth, XVI 352 pages

This book offers a scientific examination of the social and economic
problems presented by the aged. Frankly a plea for social action, it
presents in a most thoro and lucid manner the latest available data
bearing upon this interesting and important question.

12mo, Cloth, 280 pages


OUR WAR WITH GERMANY

  _By John Spencer Bassett, Professor of American History in Smith
  College_

Large 8vo, Cloth, 398 pages

This is a compact but complete account of the part played by the
United States in the World War. It is in no sense a mere record of
military events, but an analytical account of the political, economic
and military events that marked the period of the war.


CONSUMERS’ COOPERATIVE SOCIETIES

  _By Charles Gide, Professor of Economics at the University of Paris
  (translation from the French, edited by Cedric Long)_

8vo, Cloth, 300 pages

This translation of Professor Gide’s famous work is intended to meet
the needs of American students of Distributive Co-operation. The
first three chapters are devoted to an elucidation of the meaning and
history of the co-operative movement, while the bulk of the volume
deals with the practical problems of organization, administration and
development of consumers’ societies themselves.


THE ETHICS OF HERCULES

  _By Robert Chenault Givler_

12mo, Cloth 210 pages

A strictly behavioristic treatment of ethical values. Not only is
human conduct the result of external and internal stimuli upon the
human body, but even our notions of right and wrong are derived from
the reactions of our nerves and muscles to the various stimuli which
excite them.


THE ETHICS OF JOURNALISM

  _By Nelson Antrim Crawford_

8vo, Cloth 270 pages

A clear-cut, objective exposition and analysis of contemporary
journalistic practice with reference to advertising, news, and
editorial, carefully documented. Here is a pioneer book on a subject
which is attracting keen attention especially among practicing and
prospective journalists.


THE BASIS OF SOCIAL THEORY

  _By Adam G. A. Balz, with the collaboration of William S. A. Pott_

12mo, Cloth 253 pages

The writers of this book take the position that a science of Human
Nature is requisite for the progress of all the social sciences, that
Social Psychology is failing to accomplish its fundamental purpose of
clarifying the uncertainties and ambiguities concerning the nature of
social facts and causes.


THE TREND OF ECONOMICS

  _By Various Writers (edited by Rexford G. Tugwell)_

8vo, Cloth 550 pages

A series of monographs contributed by thirteen outstanding American
economists of the younger generation designed to set forth the
present tendencies of economic thought and inquiry in the light of
their historical development.




  Transcriber’s Notes

  pg 30 Changed: if the word have a meaning
             to: if the word has a meaning

  pg 52 Changed: Class B is always life-enchancing
             to: Class B is always life-enhancing

  pg 149 Changed: adopted them in a semi-parodoxical
              to: adopted them in a semi-paradoxical

