CHAPTER VIII

IS CONSCIENCE ALWAYS A PATHOLOGICAL PHENOMENON?

  “When the rookery is pretty well filled, and the nest-building
  is in full swing, the birds have a busy and anxious time. To get
  enough of suitable small stones is a matter of difficulty, and
  may involve long journeys for each single stone. The temptation
  is too strong for some of them, and they become habitual thieves.
  The majority remain stupidly honest. Amusing complications result.
  The bearing of the thief clearly shows that he knows he is doing
  wrong. He has a conscience, at least a human conscience, i. e.,
  the fear of being found out. Very different is the furtive look
  of the thief, long after he is out of danger of pursuit, from the
  expression of the honest penguin coming home with a hard-earned
  stone.

  “An honest one was bringing stones from a long distance. Each stone
  was removed by a thief as soon as the owner’s back was turned. The
  honest one looked greatly troubled as he found that his heap didn’t
  grow, but he seemed incapable of suspecting the cause.

  “A thief, sitting on his own nest, was stealing from an
  adjacent nest, whose honest owner was also at home, but looking
  unsuspectingly in another direction. Casually he turned his head
  and caught the thief in the act. The thief dropped the stone and
  pretended to be busy picking up an infinitesimal crumb from the
  neutral ground.”

  “The Heart of the Antarctic,” SIR ERNEST SHACKLETON, Vol. II, p.
  253 (Section on the Adelie Penguin, by James Murray, Biologist of
  the Expedition).


The word “conscience” was perhaps originally synonymous with
consciousness, but it gradually came to mean _self_-consciousness
of a very special type, namely, the silent commendation or censure
which a man may bestow upon his actions or his projects. This word
“conscience” replaced the Middle English term _inwit_,—a term made
famous in the title of a book (circa 1340) called the “Ayenbite of
Inwit” (that is, the “Again-bite or Remorse of Conscience”). The
concept of conscience has played an important part in modern ethical
theory, and it is supposed by many persons to be the foundation of
all morality. What place it deserves to hold in a constructive,
mechanistic ethics can be determined, however, only by careful
analysis. So many extravagant claims have been advanced in its behalf
as to make one suspect that none of them are true. Things which
people have “always heard lauded and never discussed” are only with
difficulty saved from oblivion when intellectual revolutions have
altered the emphasis which man puts on the values of life. It was
thus with the word “soul,” and with the word “immortality,” and it is
likely to be the same with the word “conscience.” At least it will
be an advantage to look at the philosophical pedigree of this once
mighty shibboleth.

It may be surprising to learn that as far as ethical theory is
concerned, the doctrine of an infallible conscience is the product of
no less recent a time than the XVIII century. The Conscience-theory
is the philosophical property of such men as Butler, Clarke, Kant,
Shaftesbury, and Reid, rather than of their predecessors. Thomas
Hobbes (1588-1679), who founded critical English ethics, flatly
refused to give to the then immature concept of conscience any
recognition; indeed, he declared it to be nothing less than a
“disease” of the state, and one “of those things that weaken or
tend to the dissolution of a commonwealth.” In Chapter XXIX of the
“Leviathan,” he states the current notions of conscience: (1) “That
every private man is judge of good and evil actions,” and (2) “That
whatsoever a man does against his conscience is sin.” Both of these
notions Hobbes condemns. “For,” he observes with characteristic
sagacity, “a man’s conscience and his judgment is the same thing, and
as the judgment so also the conscience may be erroneous.”

This emphasis which Hobbes placed upon the untrustworthiness of
private ethical judgments was fatal to his purpose. His successors
began straightway to reanimate that which he had sought to bury once
and for all, and, whether on account of their temperamental antipathy
to the intellectualism of Hobbes, or because they were honestly
seeking for some valid ethical principle, they asserted, first
timidly, and later with a surprising boldness the very thing which
Hobbes had sought especially to efface from the docket of ethical
discussion.

We find this reaction beginning in Shaftesbury (1671-1713). Albeit
this author gives a minor place in his ethical theory to the notion
of a “moral sense,” or rational, reflex affection which approves only
socially beneficial actions, yet the positive emphasis which he puts
upon it is nevertheless significant. The affirmation proved to be
contagious, for those who followed Shaftesbury immediately elevated
conscience to a central position in their systems. We refer here to
Butler, Clarke, Kant, and Reid, who are known as intuitionists.

According to Butler (1692-1752), conscience is a “principle of
reflection” and not a mere _feeling_. And this principle of
reflection is for him a natural or inherent property of man’s
mind. It is the principle by which a man “approves or disapproves
his heart, temper, and actions”; it is a faculty which “tends to
restrain men from doing mischief to each other, and leads them to do
good.” Be it noted here that Butler says nothing about the so-called
infallibility of conscience, nor does he argue that it must be the
same for all persons. Moreover, he gives a somewhat analytical
definition of it, and is willing to grant that its function is
utilitarian.

The old belief in the certainty of conscience now begins to reappear.
It was Clarke (1675—1729) who attempted to defend it by the use of
a mathematical analogy. We are all familiar with the axiom (or
truism) that things which are equal to the same thing are equal to
each other. If now we keep the general form, but alter the substance
of this axiom, so that it reads: “Whatever I judge reasonable or
unreasonable for another to do for me, that by the same judgment I
declare reasonable or unreasonable that I in the like case should do
for him,” we have Clarke’s Law of Equity. To an arm-chair philosopher
such a statement sounds fairly cogent, but its empirical value is not
thereby guaranteed. As every student of psychology knows, individual
differences, individual preferences, and the capacity of individuals
by this method of give-and-take are completely ignored in the
formulation of this law. Besides, Clarke’s conception of conscience
may be said to contain a hint of ethical solipsism, or the theory
that oneself is the only accurate authority on social justice. We
need not pause longer over the insuperable difficulties of such a
point of view.

It is, however, in the writings of Kant and Reid that the
conscience-theory attains its modern, sentimental form. In his
“Metaphysic of Morality” Kant (1724-1804) makes the following
straddling assertion: “Nothing in the whole world, or even outside of
the world [sic!] can possibly be regarded as good without limitation
except a _good will_.” But this is not the full extent to which this
philosopher presses his claims. For he continues, “A man’s will is
good, not because the consequences which flow from it are good, nor
because it is capable of attaining the ends which it seeks, but it is
_good in itself_, or because it wills the good. Its intrinsic value
is in no way increased by success or lessened by failure.” From all
of which Kant concludes that “As the will must not be moved to act
from any desire for the results expected to follow from obedience to
a certain law, the only principle of the will which remains is that
of the conformity of actions to universal law. In all cases I must
act in such a way that I can at the same time will that my maxim
should become a universal law.” This last statement is the famous
categorical imperative.

At first glance this appears to have profundity, but it turns out
even upon the slightest analysis to be quite the opposite. For
example, the first passage quoted (“Nothing ... can be regarded as
good without limitation except a good will”) contains assertions
that nobody can know enough to make. It is ritualistic philosophy.
Moreover, the expression “good will” actually does (Kant to the
contrary, notwithstanding) put a logical limitation upon the concept
_good_, just as “good” cat, or “good” razor does. Besides, the term
“will” or volition always refers to a phenomenon which is strictly
dependent upon circumstances, for a man wills _only when_ there
is something to be possessed. These are not all the errors which
Kant here commits. His attempt to explain why the good will is good
(itself a statement exhibiting the fallacy of ambiguity) reveals
that Kant was a very poorly equipped psychologist. I ask you, how
many persons is it possible to find,—indeed, is it possible to find
one single man except among the psychopathic cases,—who would ever
be stimulated to live,—much less to subscribe to Kant’s theory,—if
his successes or failures had no effect whatever upon his future
volitions? We do not imply by this rhetorical question that every man
is, or can be, or should be immoderately egoistical, but only that
Kant had no insight whatever into the psychological problems involved
in ethics.

Consequently, the categorical imperative as a deduction from Kant’s
first principles is to be regarded as completely erroneous. How,
indeed, can a man act in such a way as to make the maxim of his
action a universal law? Suppose we offer a simple example. When I
am hungry, and food is before me, I eat it. Does this imply that my
will to eat becomes a universal law, namely, that all the hungry
should eat? But when I learn of the many hungry who are unable to
eat, my will to eat illustrates not a universal law, but an extremely
particular law, that is to say, the law that _if_ I am hungry, and
_if_ food is supplied, and, furthermore, _if_ I am willing to risk
that food, then, but only then, do I eat it. There seems to be no way
to establish the validity of Kant’s imperative, regardless of the
direction one’s thought takes. To cite a different example entirely,
let us imagine a hungry man who, having cornered all the food of
his tribe, eats it on the assumption that every other man would do
the same thing if he were similarly fortunate. Here the categorical
imperative appears in such a light as to shock its author profoundly.
And yet in strict logic, this interpretation is a valid one for an
intuitionist ethics. Do we wonder that Levy-Brühl speaks of “the
ambiguous and bastard concept of the moral law,” when they who
attempt to state such a law have neither comprehension nor patience
enough to discover the simplest principles of human conduct?

It is, however, in the “Essays on the Active Powers of Man,” by
Thomas Reid (1710-1796) that the commonplace notion of conscience
receives its principal philosophical support. Concerning this
“moral sense,” as Reid calls it in reminiscence of Shaftesbury, the
following formidable assertions are made. In the first place, “It is
without doubt far superior to every other power of the mind.” In the
second place, “The testimony of this moral sense,” like that of the
rest of the senses, “is the testimony of nature, and we have the same
reason to rely upon it.” In addition, just as the sense of vision
is fundamental for space perception, so “The truths immediately
testified by our moral faculty are the first principles of all moral
reasoning.” Reid would also have us note that this reasoning is not
inductive, but deductive, for he says, “The first principles of
morals are the _immediate_ dictates of the moral faculty.”

The outstanding fault of such a theory is that it assumes that every
name we choose to manufacture has a reality corresponding to it.
This is the fallacy of hypostatization, to which all idealistic
philosophers are addicted. Granted that it is true, as Butler says,
that we approve and disapprove of some of our actions, yet this does
not imply that there is a transcendent faculty within us which we
are at liberty to substantialize as Conscience or a Moral Sense.
Such language is merely noun-worship. It is granted that the words
“moral” and “sense” have each separately a meaning, but it does not
follow that the compound term “moral-sense” must therefore have one.
Moreover, all of these intuitionists are wilful and unperspicuous
rationalists, demanding a fundamental principle in ethics _before_
they have employed any induction or experimentation that might help
them to frame such a principle correctly. They are willing to do no
hard work, and to perform no crucial tests in order to see whether
their guesses are facts or fictions. To complete our criticism, we
must not omit to state that Reid’s elevation of conscience to a place
among the senses merely reveals the extent to which he was willing
to go in his defence of the testimony of the senses in general
against the idealists of his age. His use of the “moral sense” was
a debater’s trick. The high esteem in which conscience was held by
his antagonists tempted him to turn one of their own weapons against
them.

We can now better understand the statement previously made that the
personification of conscience was the peculiar artifice, the “useful
dodge,” of a certain school of ethical thinkers in the XVIII century.
Consequently it is erroneous to suppose that the commonplace view
of this phenomenon has always held undisputed sway over theoretical
ethics. It had no place whatever in the minds of Greek ethical
writers. Plato, Socrates, Aristotle, and their contemporaries
founded the science of ethics without even dreaming that there was
a conscience. Epictetus, Epicurus, and Marcus Aurelius showed no
poverty of constructive thought for the lack of it. Even Helvetius,
a contemporary of the intuitionists, rejected it as spurious when he
wrote: “He who will warrant his virtue in every situation is either
an impostor or a fool; characters equally to be mistrusted.”

Most people who have heard the name of John Locke will recall his
arguments against the assumptions of the moral intuitionists in
those passages where he combats the theory of innate moral ideas.
According to Locke, all such ideas would have to be (1) independent
of geographical location and climate, (2) independent of the age of
the person and of his training, and (3) recognized by all persons as
fundamental. But none of these conditions are found to be satisfied
by anyone who makes the shortest pilgrimage through the world in the
search for these statistics. And consequently the intellectually
honest Locke rejects the philosophical theory of conscience,
independently of his recognition of the facts of self-approval and
self-disapproval.

It remained, however, for John Stuart Mill to foreshadow the
beginning of the end of this fantastic theory of the moral faculty in
