CHAPTER IX

THE MITIGATION OF THE CONFLICT BETWEEN FREEDOM AND OBLIGATION

  “There is a phrase ‘liberty of conscience’ which well expresses the
  modern conception of moral obligation. It recognizes that duty in
  the last analysis is imposed upon the individual neither by society
  nor even by God, but by himself; that there is no authority in
  moral matters more ultimate than a man’s own rational conviction of
  what is best.”

  R. B. PERRY, “The Moral Economy,” p. 34.


“One could scarcely construct a more erroneous view than that every
human being is endowed at birth with the same ‘lump sum’ of freedom,
which remains an inalienable possession throughout life. Our freedom
is not complete, it is in the making.... The process by which freedom
is won is the process of enlightenment. It is the truth that sets men
free, the clear perception of moral relations and moral laws, the
understanding of human nature and its true needs.”

  W. G. EVERETT, “Moral Values,” pp. 358-9.


One of the most revolutionary changes which the scientific study of
psychology has wrought consists in the demolition of all the barriers
which formerly divided the body from the mind. The intellect, once
securely enthroned as the highest faculty in the mental hierarchy;
the reason, erstwhile religiously devoted to the contemplation
of pure truth; and the will, which formerly completed this trio
of sublime, unitary faculties, have, in the unbiased and careful
scrutiny of laboratory science, been shown to be not only highly
complicated processes, but products of experience as well; and not
only products of experience, but functions of brain and gland.
Furthermore, they have been revealed to be not solely functions of a
biological mechanism controlled by external stimuli, but also in a
larger sense they are now regarded as means by which the body of a
man adjusts itself to and gains control of its physical and social
environments. No longer do we ask the old question: “Why has the mind
a body?” but rather, “Why does the body have a mind?” And the answer
is: The body has a mind to enable the body to experiment with its
environment so that when it gets what it seems to want, it can know
that it has really wanted what it has gotten.

Some results of this highly reconstructive iconoclasm upon ethical
thought have already been depicted in the preceding chapters. Here
we are soon to see what effect such a doctrine has upon the last two
ethical concepts we shall analyze, namely, duty and freedom.

As may have already been divined, a mechanistic ethics on its
constructive side does not maintain a pension list for the outworn
conceptions of an earlier day. Consequently, in this place we
shall not ask what used to be thought of the “Freedom of the Will,”
nor shall we quote Wordsworth’s “Ode to Duty” as a prologue to our
theme. For while only a hundred years ago no ethical teacher could
have safely omitted giving great emphasis to the theological setting
of these two concepts, today such a treatment would not arouse the
slightest “problematic thrill.” What used to be called “the Will” is
now an obsolete expression;—indeed, ever since Spinoza wrote, it has
been regarded as a myth. In its stead, we speak of the individual or
particular volitions of men, and we discuss their value in reducing
the gap between our liquid matter and its good. Likewise, what was
once called the lump-sum of our Duty has now become separated and
analyzed into claims, interests, other-regarding sentiments, and the
like, each one of which has a history and a real meaning for our
flesh-and-blood personality.

All such changes, while perhaps highly disconcerting to those persons
who feel that they cannot get along without their “guiding fictions,”
are really signs of a salutary advance along ethical lines. Once it
is realized that what is popularly termed “will-power” is after all
only _skill-power_, and that “moral obligation” should be translated
into _pragmatic urgency_, it will be plain that only clearly-prevised
action-tendencies can properly be called either right or virtuous. It
may be true that many a successful action has been performed in the
name of a fetichistic belief, but who will doubt that an even more
profitable action could have been motivated with less waste of the
body’s energies, had there been correct insight and a frank facing
of the facts. As long as people are afraid of life, so long are they
bound to allege some false cause of their actions. Conversely, as
soon as they realize that they _are_ what they _do_, and whenever
they learn that their ethical books cannot be balanced by drawing on
a phantom bank account, they begin to pile up ethical assets, and to
reduce their ethical liabilities.

From our earlier remark that the science of ethics is primarily
concerned with what _is_ rather than what _ought to be_, it may
be difficult to imagine what place the concept of human freedom
can have in a mechanistic treatment of the problems of conduct.
It might seem easier to foreshadow what will be the fate of the
concept of obligation, especially when we realize that oughting is
always hypothetical, rather than categorical. For every obligation
is specific and particular,—it depends upon conditions, places,
times, and persons, just as does every signification of good and
bad, and right and wrong. There is no general Ought, as our recent
discussion of Kant’s categorical imperative clearly implied. When,
then, we ask from whom or from what obligation arises, what answer
does a mechanistic ethics provide? Some may expect us to make the
traditional answer, namely, that it comes from the group, and that
the _feeling_ of obligation is a variation of the elemental type of
conscience. This sort of an answer is not to be given here. Although
the group largely determines how we shall feel with regard to what
_ought_ to be done, yet the final education of an ethically adult
person leaves him with a different mind on this point. Indeed, it
is our purpose here not only to show that the concept of ethical
freedom is a valid concept for a mechanistic ethics, but also and
more particularly that a true conception of ethical obligation
depends upon the discovery of what ethical freedom implies. That this
involves no paradox will be understood as soon as we comprehend what
it means to say that a man is _free_. Herewith we shall state five
conditions under which freedom of action is guaranteed.

The first meaning of free action is _action that is physically
possible_. I am not now, I never was, and I never shall be free (that
is, able) to walk backward and forward at the same time, or to be
in Boston and New York simultaneously. Neither can I, while kissing
Jennie at her fireside, be also kissing Kate at her doorway a mile
from Jennie’s house. On the other hand, the man who is sound of limb,
sensorially acute, and otherwise endowed with natural capacities, can
be said to be free to employ these capacities whenever and wherever
the conditions provide the opportunity.

Right here we ask whether this first meaning of freedom does not
have an important bearing on the question of ethical obligation. Is
it, indeed, not plain that just as we cannot do what is physically
impossible, so there is no valid obligation under these conditions?
This, however, is something which the intuitionists and the idealists
have persistently ignored, regarding it often as somehow the very
acme of virtue to declare as an ideal of conduct something which
is totally impossible of realization, and thereby fostering the
neurotic temperament instead of ethical enlightenment. Yet it is
plain that if, while being unable to do the impossible, I still am
pathologically anxious about it, I shall succeed only in accumulating
impatience and turmoil, and be forced to get what sour consolation
I can from Schopenhauer, or else to “gnaw the file” in some other
fashion. Moreover, according to a mechanistic ethics, I am an evil
person as long as I waste energy in this fashion, or in demanding
consolation for my erroneous sentiment. Not only am I bound to fail,
and thereby to create discord rather than relieve it, but I am also
losing time and energy which might have gone into more profitable
pursuits. On the other hand, while we do not yet say that we are
under obligation to perform every physically possible action, yet
every valid urgency still lies in that direction.

The second meaning of the word “freedom” is _absence of external
restraints_ imposed by physical obstacles or generated by human
beings. No man is free to act when external hindrances are too great
for him to overcome. Thus while it is possible for a sound man
to walk either forward or backward, he cannot keep on walking in
a straight line if his path is intercepted by the sheer wall of a
hundred-foot cliff, or if some one stronger than himself obstructs
his going. Excellent examples of such thwarting occur in the Greek
mythology of Hades. Tantalus was forever hindered by the gusts of
wind from plucking the fruit from the tree; Sisyphus could not force
the stone over the brow of the hill; and the daughters of Danaus
lost all the water they carried in their sieves. They were not,
therefore, _free_ to perform these actions. They may, it is true,
have everlastingly _wished_ them, but they could not _will_ them.

Nevertheless, while many similar hindrances to human action exist,
such as the friction-hindrance to perpetual motion, and the wall
which kept Pyramus from Thisbe, yet, on the whole, most of the
so-called external restraints are far less serious barriers to
freedom than we realize. This is not only attested by the magnificent
conquests of nature recently made by applied science, but it might
also be deduced from the properties of man’s protoplasm as modified
in his muscular architecture. For protoplasm is liquid, and liquids
flow; and man’s stream of thought as a derivative of his liquid
protoplasm acquires its labile character as a sort of natural
right. Just as a liquid under pressure transmits that pressure in
all directions, so a man who is made of good protoplasm tends, when
confronted by such obstacles as we have just described, to think,
and plan, and experiment, that is, TO FLOW, out of the difficulty.
His neuro-muscular equipment also singularly facilitates the turning
of his wish into a will. Our muscles do not only contract and relax
to produce lever movements in one plane, but they also combine
their movements into pronation, supination, and rotation, and these
synergic actions enable us to explore the obstacle and almost
literally to flow around it. This is also the mechanism by which
we puzzle out any problem. The all-or-none principle makes mental
analysis always possible and often accurate. Applied to Pyramus,
this means that the wall that separates him from Thisbe stimulates
him with her aid so variously that he not only rebels and laments,
but also starts to explore its surface and its possibilities, with
the final result that he vaults it and descends “until he can
come at Thisbe’s lips more directly.” There has always been an
abundance of old saws to encourage the bold and the faint-hearted
to regard obstacles as merely stepping-stones to future success,
but the physiological basis of such maxims we are only beginning to
comprehend. In fine, then, when we speak of a permanent obstacle to
our actions, we mean it only in so far as we do not also imply some
serious deficiency in the quality of our protoplasm.

The relation between this second type of freedom and obligation
is very obviously hinted at by the popular maxims on the theme
of perseverance. Moreover, it is historically demonstrable that
pragmatic urgency usually increases in direct ratio to the ease with
which external restraints can be surmounted. On the other hand,
it is gradually becoming recognized that “there are hundreds of
thousands of human beings who can by no possibility ever do what is
expected of them by society. Society must give over expecting such
things.”[22] Those who have no power to plan, scheme, or supervise,
are consequently not educated enough to appreciate the obligations
which such abilities involve.

We may now consider a third meaning of the concept “freedom.” _It
is exhibited in those actions which we have been so well trained
to perform that they occur without any conscious effort whatever._
Accordingly, the man with training and skill is more free than the
man who lacks these abilities. If the oboist of a symphony orchestra
is too sick to play, only another oboist is free to sit as a
substitute at his desk. A plumber will not do. It will be perceived
at once that many sorts of skill, even though they be the exclusive
possession of one person, may yet be turned to the equal advantage
of a great number of people, making them all co-sharers in his
freedom. By using the skill of the substitute oboist, for example,
both the managers and the patrons of the concert are free to carry
out their wishes. The enormous social advantages of most forms of
skilful technique require only a passing comment. Indeed, what we
call business and trade are ultimately the bargains we make for each
other’s skill. And here again the pragmatic urgency implicated by
this form of freedom is apparent, not only in the sharing of socially
profitable skill, but also in the acquisition of it.

A fourth empirical characterization of freedom may now be considered.
For free actions, in addition to those which are physically
possible, externally unhindered, and within the range of our skill,
are especially _those which some mechanism of the body actually
carries out in the manner in which it was originally set to do
it_. In popular speech this form of freedom is exemplified by such
expressions as, “I was successful,” “I was determined to do it,
and I did it,” or, “The clerk tried to palm off a substitute, but
I persevered in getting the original.” Such freedom emphatically
implies a _continuity in behavior_ which is absent in cases where
the desire is thwarted or suppressed. The physiological processes
which guarantee this form of freedom are interesting to contemplate.
As the wish passes over into will, not only are more and more muscle
fibers involved in the action-scheme stimulated to their maximum
contraction, but also wider and wider synergies of muscular groups
are brought into play, until all the available kinetic energy of the
body is released along the channel of one final common motor pathway.
Moreover, each and every muscle involved in such an action-scheme
stimulates, upon its contraction, a receptor nerve embedded within
it, and these circular reflex stimulations automatically reinforce
the contractions already begun. This is nature’s own contribution to
the unification of our personality in the performance of this type
of free activity. The whole neuro-muscular architecture involved in
such behavior becomes an automatic mechanism for reinforcing the
centrifugal bodily posture, and for providing against the wilting
of any motor discharge in any single muscle due to its prolonged
contraction. Such actions, then, which involve the steady and
uninhibited output of energy that we have described we call _free_.
They are equally manifested by the cat who springs upon and catches
the mouse she has been warily watching, and by the violoncello
virtuoso who scurries safely through the cadenza and arrives at the
_tutti_ without having either produced a “wolf tone” or dropped his
bow. It is such action which is connoted by the popular phrase “free
will.”

The final touch to our delineation of freedom may be added by saying
that _only when a man’s actions result in enlarging his environment,
and in providing him with increasing opportunities for turning his
wishes into wills, is he in the highest sense ethically free_. The
preceding characterizations of the free man were derived from simply
watching him _in the midst_ of any of a thousand activities. This
last part of the picture is obtained by reckoning the permanent
ethical assets which his efforts have provided. These assets are,
moreover, defined in terms of a continuing freedom. For while we are
all in a sense free to do anything within our ability, and for which
there is the time, the place, and the opportunity, yet only under
certain conditions can we follow such an action with another of our
own choosing. The liar, the thief, and the slanderer know very well
to what an extent their putative freedoms produce antagonists of
their own making with whom they must ever thereafter wage a dismal
conflict. On the other hand, the man of frankness and a truthful
tongue, the man who makes fair bargains with the universe, and the
man who can solve his problems without the loss of his own temper or
the respect of other persons, is ipso facto equipped with the ability
to synergize his muscles repeatedly into freely willed activities.
Moreover, while this fifth type of freedom is dependent upon the
presence of the other four, its effect upon them is reflexively
beneficial, in making more actions physically possible, reducing the
external hindrances to them, increasing the skill by which they are
performed, and insuring the continuity with which they are carried
out. Indeed, we may now identify virtue with the attainment of
this last type of freedom, and vice with its loss or decline. Such
activity is also right, and its stimulus is a dependable good.

In thus defining the conditions under which human freedom exists, we
have, I surmise, also discovered the secret of ethical obligation,
of pragmatic urgency. That is to say, whenever an action is possible,
when it is not opposed by restraints beyond a man’s power to
overcome, when he has the skill with which to perform it, and when he
can will it as well as wish it, and when also the performance of this
action increases the range of his effectiveness, then, but not till
then, can it be said that he _ought_ to perform it. The expressions,
“I ought,” or “I should,” henceforth mean: “I imagine that there
would be greater freedom if this course of action which I contemplate
were to be carried out.” Under this new conception of pragmatic
urgency, oughting is neither a _vis a tergo_, nor a _vis a fronte_,
nor yet Somebody’s fiat superadded to the data of ethics, but it is
simply the logical resultant of the conditions of such human activity
as produces dependable goods. We recognize no valid obligations
imposed upon men from above; obligations are rather implicit in any
activity which employs a man’s skill to satisfy his needs at the same
time that it educates his desires.

It is thus plain that there is no fundamental difference between
ethics and any other science. Just as the business of physical
science is to describe the conditions under which any phenomenon
occurs, so the business of ethical science is to ascertain, by a
study of the mechanisms of human behavior, the conditions which
underlie all of our ethical values. Wisely indeed did Protagoras
remark that “Man is the measure of all things,” but it was not until
many centuries after this statement had been made that a positively
constructive interpretation, could be put upon it.


FOOTNOTES:

[22] George Clarke Cox, “The Public Conscience,” p. 25.




