CHAPTER VII

_THE EVOLUTION OF ANIMAL BEHAVIOUR_


I.--THE PHYSIOLOGICAL ASPECT

At the outset of our inquiry, we used the word “behaviour” in a wide
and comprehensive sense. Thus broadly used, I said, the term in all
cases indicates and draws attention to the reaction of that which
we speak of as behaving in response to certain surrounding forces
or circumstances which evoke the behaviour. The behaviour of living
cells is dependent on changes in their environment; that of deciduous
trees, as they put forth their leaves in the spring or shed them in
the autumn, is related to the change of the season; instinctive,
intelligent, and emotional behaviour are called forth in response
to those circumstances which exercise a constraining influence at
the moment of action. Used in this comprehensive sense, the term
“behaviour” neither implies nor excludes the presence of consciousness.
We know from our own experience, however, that consciousness does in
some cases accompany behaviour, and we infer that in many other cases
it may be present. But we need a criterion of its presence to guide
our inferences, and this criterion we found in the ability of living
beings to profit by experience. In Dr. Stout’s phraseology, if a thing
seems to acquire meaning for such a being, and the behaviour is guided
in accordance with such acquired meaning, we infer the presence of
consciousness as supplying conditions effective in determining its
course. Still this does not exclude, nay, rather it presupposes the
presence of sentience at a lower stage of evolution, a sentience which
is as yet ineffective since the process of conscious coalescence has
not begun, or has not been carried far enough.

In foregoing chapters we have constantly held the problems of evolution
in view, and in special sections directed attention to them. But the
subject is so central to modern thought and discussion, that some
further consideration of certain aspects of the evolutionary process
and products will fitly serve to bring our inquiry to a conclusion.

We must accept, as a datum from the physiological point of view, the
fact that protoplasm does respond to stimuli,--that it possesses the
fundamental property of irritability. It is a substance that is in a
state of unstable equilibrium. Its tendency to pass to a condition of
more stable equilibrium is that in and through which organic behaviour
in its very simplest expression is possible. And this, with progressive
complication, runs through the whole gamut of animal behaviour, and
eventually passes over into the sphere of consciousness. “The tendency
to equilibrium,” writes Dr. Stout,[187] “is the physiological correlate
of what on the psychical side we call conation,--the striving aspect of
consciousness.” But, protoplasm at the outset--or as near the outset
as we can get--is, in technical phrase, differentially responsive. The
nature of the stimulus and the nature of the conditions decide what
the nature of the response shall be. And even in that jelly-like speck
of living matter, the _Amœba_, the responses conspire to a biological
end. If they did not so conspire, we should not have the phenomena of
life. The mere act of living, building up from food-stuff and oxygen an
unstable substance which “explodes” and contracts under stimulation,
implies that the processes which thus conspire are related in such
a manner as to fulfil and secure their end. In higher unicellular
animals, such as the _Paramecium_, the relations are less simple; but
in them the continuance of that sum of organic behaviour which we
call life, is secured only on the condition that these less simple
relations are duly preserved, and that the vital processes conspire
with sufficient unity of biological purpose. And when we pass to the
higher creatures in which many cells unite to form one animal, the very
word “unite” indicates that the vital processes of all must conspire
with sufficient _unity_ of biological purpose to insure the continued
life of the whole.

Now, in all the higher and more active animals a nervous system is
developed, which has for its purpose and end the preservation and
furtherance of unity amid circumstances of progressively increasing
diversity. And in the course of its evolution an added means of
preserving and furthering the essential unity is provided in
consciousness, which, through the coalescence of scattered units of
sentience, leads behaviour to acquire a new and higher unanimity of
purpose. Thus a mental evolution is engrafted on the organic evolution
which precedes it. But every step in this mental evolution presupposes
a step in organic evolution. And such is the complexity of structure
and process in all the higher animals that much of the business of
behaviour is relegated to quasi-independent nervous centres, which
perform this business automatically, and will continue to perform it,
with much subsidiary unity of end, when they are left to themselves and
all connection with the supremely unifying sensorium has been severed.

Before proceeding to give some examples of this fact, and to indicate
its bearing on our interpretation of behaviour, it may be well to
state distinctly that no attempt is or will be here made to trace in
detail the course of the evolution of animal behaviour through the
ascending grades of life, nor, indeed, to prove that there has been any
such evolution. Evolution by natural genesis is here assumed as the
only hypothesis with which science has any concern. If it be false,
then have the labours of workers and thinkers, since Darwin and Mr.
Herbert Spencer worked and thought, been vain. Special creation is
not a scientific hypothesis, but a reference of biological and mental
phenomena to an ultimate cause, which lies beyond and altogether apart
from the scope of scientific inquiry. The fundamental assumption of
the man of science is, that any natural event he may select for
detailed study has natural conditions and antecedents. And it is only
in such detailed study--taking this or that particular occurrence and
endeavouring to ascertain what were its related antecedents--that
advance in the evolutionary interpretation of nature can be secured.

Such advance has been secured by the labours of those physiologists
who have established by careful experiment the quasi-independent
action of subsidiary nerve-centres as constituents of the nervous
system as a whole. In such animals as the crayfish and the lobster
the central nervous system consists of a chain of “ganglia,” or
nerve-knots, which are connected together by nerve-strands. If these
strands be cut between the thorax, which carries the walking limbs,
and the abdomen or hinder portion of the body, the nerve-connection
between these parts is severed. If the forepart be irritated through
its sense-organs, the limbs of that part will respond; but, whereas
an unmutilated crayfish, subjected to such irritation, would give a
vigorous flap of the tail, this does not take place in the crippled
animal.[188] Still, if the abdomen be irritated, it will respond by a
strong and swift contraction. The two portions of the body are each
capable of acting independently with well co-ordinated movements, but
no longer of working together with unity of purpose. In the hinder
portion the abdominal limbs, or swimmerets, all swing backwards and
forwards simultaneously with rhythmic strokes; they act in concert.
Sever now the connections between their ganglia, and each pair of
limbs will continue to swing rhythmically but not with concerted
rhythm. We have isolated a number of quasi-independent centres, and
rendered them really independent. Each is concerned with its own
proper co-ordination, but can no longer combine with others in a
wider co-ordination. Mr. Hyde[189] has shown that in the king-crab,
_Limulus_, when the nerve-chain is severed just in front of the
abdominal region, the rhythmic respiratory movements of the abdominal
segments still proceed regularly and co-ordinately. Even when only
a fraction of the nerve-cord, separated by severances in front and
behind, is left, corresponding with a single abdominal segment,
the rhythmic action of that segment continues; but it is no longer
synchronous with that of adjacent segments similarly isolated.

It will probably not be contended that the co-ordinated rhythm of
the isolated segment in crayfish or king-crab is anything but a bit
of organic and physiological behaviour. Whether it be accompanied by
consciousness--a bit of consciousness isolated from other bits--we
do not know; but we have no grounds for supposing that the rhythmic
behaviour is guided by consciousness. And when, as Dr. Carpenter
pointed out half a century ago, a water-beetle, from which the “brain”
has been removed, swims forwards if placed in water, we must surely
regard the co-ordinated progression as organic behaviour, whatever view
we may hold with regard to a consciousness which in such a case is in
a very literal sense a divided consciousness.

In these invertebrates the central nervous system is obviously
segmented--one can distinguish the ganglia and their connecting
nerve-strands. In the vertebrate the brain and spinal cord form a
continuous mass of nerve-tissue without obvious segmentation. But the
pairs of spinal nerves, each nerve with its afferent and efferent
“root,” indicate a really segmented condition, though in the cord
itself the segments so run together and overlap that they cease to be
externally obvious. And there is a certain, though limited, amount of
overlap in the distribution of these segmental nerves. Still, well
co-ordinated responses occur when comparatively short portions of the
spinal cord are isolated by severance from the rest. In the male frog,
especially during the breeding season, a clasping reflex is produced by
stimulating the dark swollen pads on the inner side of the hand, and
this, as Goltz has shown, is exhibited when all the central nervous
system has been destroyed save the segments to which the nerves for
the arms proceed. “Similarly,” writes Dr. Sherrington,[190] “in the
cat and monkey, the reflex wagging of the tail persists when behind
the spinal transection only the sacral region of the cord is left
intact.” When the spinal cord of the dog is severed, so as to isolate
that portion which is concerned with movements of the hinder part of
the body, pressure on the pad of one hind-foot usually produces, not
only a lifting of that leg, but also an extension of its fellow--that
is to say, a co-ordinated response of the two limbs. But in the case
of the vertebrates, more than in that of the invertebrates, the
co-ordinated response of an isolated part of the central nervous system
seems to lack the furtherance of its action, which normally comes
from the higher centres from which it has been severed. “The spinal
reflexes significant of progression seem,” says Dr. Sherrington,[191]
“to contribute chiefly towards preparatory posture in readiness for
the onset of action executed by the musculature under the driving of
higher centres. Thus the well-known reflex spinal posture of the frog
is flexion of the hind limbs, the extensors of the joints being taut
and ready for the jump. The spinal reflexes, which in their results
approximate most closely to the normal reactions of the unmutilated
individual, are those connected with the pelvic and abdominal
viscera,” many of which “are executed as spinal reflexes in a manner
presenting little or no physiological defect from the normal. And if
the bulb”--the continuation of the spinal cord within the skull to form
the basal portion of the brain--“be included with the spinal cord, and
these together, including their nerves, be isolated from the rest of
the nervous system, the animal as regards its visceral life, including
that of the heart and lungs, is practically intact.”

Huxley graphically describes the actions of a frog from which the
cerebral hemispheres have been removed. “If that operation,” he
says,[192] “is performed quickly and skilfully, the frog may be kept
in a state of full bodily vigour for months, or it may be for years;
but it will sit unmoved. It sees nothing; it hears nothing. It will
starve sooner than feed itself, although food put into its mouth is
swallowed. On irritation, it jumps or walks; if thrown into water it
swims. If it be put on the hand it sits there, crouched, perfectly
quiet, and would sit there for ever. If the hand be inclined very
gently and slowly, so that the frog would naturally tend to slip off,
the creature’s fore paws are shifted on to the edge of the hand, until
he can just prevent himself from falling. If the turning of the hand
be slowly continued, he mounts up with great care and deliberation,
putting first one leg forward and then another, until he balances
himself with perfect precision on the edge; and if the turning of
the hand is continued, he goes through the needful set of muscular
operations, until he comes to be seated in security on the back of the
hand. The doing of all this requires a delicacy of co-ordination and a
precision of adjustment of the muscular apparatus of the body which are
only comparable to those of a rope-dancer.”

Now, why have we entered into these details? To reinforce, from a
somewhat different point of view, that which has again and again been
urged in the preceding sections of this inquiry, that much of animal
behaviour is an organic legacy. A going mechanism of great delicacy,
with ready-made co-ordinations, the products of biological evolution,
affords to consciousness a vast body of its primary data. As Dr.
Sherrington himself says,[193] “co-ordination is abundantly shown
to result from the independent power of the spinal arcs, altogether
apart from the influence of the great cranial sense-organs, and of
the cerebral arcs superposed upon them. These senses and the brain
find the elementary co-ordination of the skeletal musculature an
achievement already provided and to hand in the spinal cord. And no
doubt the product of the instrument is, with the instrument itself,
given over to their use in the reactions they elicit from the spinal
musculature.” We have seen how instinctive behaviour, in those animals
in which it is best studied, affords in hereditary biological outline,
a sketch which subsequent acquisition, under experience, serves only
to elaborate by the filling in of details and of the more delicate
shading in behaviour. But in the higher animals, in which a period of
youth is a time for the acquisition of experience--for experimentation
and practice,--it might seem that the inherited biological legacy was
of less importance. The “spinal animal,” as Dr. Sherrington calls
it,--that is, the animal in which the spinal centres are isolated
from the cerebral centres--goes far to disprove any such view. In
them the cerebral senses and the brain find elementary co-ordination
of the bodily movements an achievement already provided and to hand
in the spinal cord. But when different animals are compared--frog,
bird, rabbit, dog, and monkey--the permanent effects of severance of
brain connection, the effects which remain when the temporary period
of disturbing “shock” is over, are more marked in the higher than
the lower types. And concerning this, Dr. Sherrington says,[194]
“The deeper depression of reaction into which the higher animal, as
contrasted with the lower, sinks when made spinal, appears to me
significant of this, that in the higher types, more than in the lower,
the great cerebral senses actuate the motor organs, and impel the
motions of the individual.”

Whether in the animal in which all direct connection between the
anterior and posterior portions of the central nervous system has been
severed there is a double consciousness--a cerebral consciousness and a
spinal consciousness--we are not in a position accurately to determine.
If the generally accepted opinion, that the higher brain-centres
constitute the sensorium or seat of consciousness, be correct, we must
suppose that a maimed consciousness, with many avenues of experience
closed, is retained in the anterior moiety, while the posterior is
relegated to a condition of mere sentience at best. In any case all
relation between the two is prevented. The two--if two there be--are
rendered quite independent through severance of the cord in the region
of the neck. But there is a point of view indicated by Dr. Sherrington
which is full of suggestion and interest.

“It is significant in the evolution of animal form,” he says,[195]
“that the organ that exhibits most uninterrupted and harmonious
increase in development, as studied successively in passing from lowest
to highest, is the brain. And it is significant that in the nervous
system--segmental system as it is--the brain is developed, not in those
segments whose sense organs are ordinary cutaneous (tactual, etc.),
muscular and visceral, but in the segments connected with the visual,
olfactory, and auditory sense-organs; in other words, the brain is
developed in the head. The head is, so to say, the individual; it has
the mouth, it takes the food, including air and water, and it has the
main sense organs providing data for both space and time. To this the
body, an elongated motor organ with a share of the viscera and the
skin, is appended primarily as a machine for locomotion. This latter
must of necessity lie at the behest of the great sense organs of the
head.”

Now let us try and picture to ourselves a spinal animal, or one which
retains only the lowest portion of the brain, the part known as the
bulb or _medulla oblongata_; let us assume that it is conscious and
capable of acquiring experience through the association and coalescence
of the data afforded by the senses that remain to it; and let us try
to imagine the conscious situations which would arise, and their
value in the guidance of behaviour. The senses that remain are touch
and the temperature sense, the motor sense affording data from the
muscles, joints, and tendons, and those which supply certain visceral
sensations. There is not one of much, if any, guiding value left. There
is not one of what we may term anticipatory use. There is not one
which could serve to infuse anything like definite meaning into the
situation. For, after all, meaning is expectation. There is an element
of anticipation in all those senses which are of any real guiding value
in the conscious situation. Sight, hearing, and, especially for some
animals, smell,--these are the senses which forewarn of something
which may follow; of other sensations with which in the course of
experience they have coalesced. And they are all cut off from the
supposed spinal animal. A light touch might in some cases forewarn
of the shock or severe pressure, which would perhaps follow. But the
shocks would so often come suddenly that it is questionable whether the
warning would be of much avail. Still, touch is a warning and cognitive
sense, and through it the environment would acquire a limited amount of
meaning.

Now, the biological value of coalescent association lies in this
very element of warning. The anticipatory senses, sight, hearing,
smell, are in their several degrees the “projective” senses, the
senses which carry with them the quantity of “outness.” And their
“projective” character is the necessary psychological expression of
their distinctive biological end. They must be projective, must carry
with them “outness,” if they are to convey what we, following Dr.
Stout, have so often spoken of as meaning. But if the biological value
of coalescent association lies in the expectation it renders possible;
and if, in the spinal animal, there are no senses left save touch,
which could receive from the environment preparatory warning of what
is coming; it would seem exceedingly improbable that it should develop
quasi-independent conscious situations of its own. In the unmutilated
animal, at any rate, tactual experience would most probably coalesce
with that derived from the senses which more distinctively take the
lead in the acquisition of meaning. And we may therefore, on these
grounds, as well as on others, acquiesce in the current view that the
quasi-independent functioning of the spinal cord and its constituent
segments is, at best, lit up with those flashes of mere sentience of
which Sir Michael Foster speaks in the passage we quoted in an earlier
section.[196]

If from the consideration of the isolated spinal animal we turn for a
moment to that of the isolated cerebral animal, we find it in a very
different position. It is possessed of the warning senses--those which
from several points of view are the leading senses--but they are
leaders without a following; they have only a very limited company to
conduct into action. The company is there, on the further side of the
severance, but they have lost touch with it. They know not what it is
doing, and have therefore neither the data nor the executive power to
guide its manœuvres in the field of behaviour. They can form maimed
coalescent situations, but they are as impotent as a mere theorist
devoid of all power of practical application. We need not, however,
follow the theme further. We need only add that, could we isolate
tracts of nervous tissue in the lower brain-centres of such a cerebral
animal, we should find that subsidiary co-ordinations would belong, as
a physiological heritage, to these isolated fragments.

The conclusions we may draw, then, with regard to the evolution of
behaviour, as viewed in its physiological aspect, are that it is,
in its simplest expression and in its most complex, conditioned by
sufficient unity of purpose to meet the biological end of survival;
that the complex unity of purpose may be analyzed into a multiplicity
of subsidiary processes each with its subsidiary unity of purpose; and
that the psychological coalescence which gives unity to experience
under the guidance of the leading senses, is paralleled in a
physiological coalescence within the nexus of the nervous system.


II.--THE BIOLOGICAL ASPECT

The biological aspect of behaviour--its relation to biological
ends--has so often come under our consideration in the foregoing
chapters that little need be added in this section: and that little
may be most appropriately devoted, first to the question whether
consciousness does influence behaviour; and secondly, this being
accepted, to the importance of the _rôle_ that is played by the
development of conscious situations in securing, in the higher animals,
the biological end of racial preservation.

That this end is secured without the aid of consciousness in the
case of many organic species, in all those, for example, which we
classify as plants, must not be taken as presumptive evidence that in
other species, for instance in the multitudinous host of insects, the
development of conscious situations is of no biological value. The fact
that chlorophyll is not developed in any mammal does not show that the
possession of this substance is of no service to the higher plants.
It would not be worth while to give expression to this very obvious
truth, were it not that critics of natural selection persistently
argue that because one species gets on perfectly well without this
or that particular character it can have played no part in securing
the survival of another species. When I described, at a meeting of
naturalists, how well young chicks could swim, such a critic drew me
aside after the meeting, and expressed his surprise that this did
not convince me that the webbed foot of the duck could not logically
be attributed to natural selection. This is an extreme case, and one
obviously taken on peculiarly weak grounds. But even Huxley urged
that, because a frog, from which the cerebral hemispheres have been
removed, performs many co-ordinated actions without conscious guidance,
consciousness is, throughout nature, merely an accompaniment of certain
molecular changes in the brain. “Such a frog,” he says,[197] “walks,
hops, swims, and goes through his gymnastic performances quite as well
without consciousness, and consequently without volition, as with it;
and if a frog, in his natural state, possesses anything corresponding
with what we call volition, there is no reason to think that it is
anything but a concomitant of the molecular changes in the brain which
form part of the series involved in the production of motion.

“The consciousness of brutes,” he continues, “would appear to be
related to the mechanism of their body simply as a collateral product
of its working, and to be as completely without any power of modifying
that working as the steam-whistle which accompanies the work of
a locomotive engine is without influence on its machinery. Their
volition, if they have any, is an emotion indicative of physical
changes, not a cause of such changes. It does not enter into the chain
of causation of their actions at all.”

If the literal truth of this contention--the logical soundness of this
conclusion--be admitted, it seems absurd to speak of the biological
value of consciousness in behaviour or to discuss the importance of the
_rôle_ that is played by the development of conscious situations in
securing the biological end of racial preservation.

Now, consciousness is regarded by an influential school of thinkers as
a sort of _deus ex machina_, which, sitting enthroned, and crowned with
a capital letter as Will, directs, like a being from another sphere,
the doings of the body. It was against the doctrines of this school
that Huxley took up arms. They do not concern us here. The will, or
volition, as an underlying cause, stands outside the pale of scientific
inquiry. It belongs to the wide realm of metaphysics; its plea must be
heard in another court. In this part of his contention Huxley was, we
believe, unquestionably right from the scientific standpoint. Neither
will, nor impulse, nor instinct, nor consciousness itself, should be
introduced into any scientific description or explanation of phenomena
as a cause of their existence or being, for as such it does not enter
into the sequence of events; it is that which metaphysics claims as
their _raison d’être_--that which gives them being. Science in this
matter should be frankly agnostic--neither affirming nor denying
aught. This, of course, is not equivalent to saying that the agnostic
position is the true end of human reason. That would only be so on the
assumption that the problems of science are the only problems with
which that reason can deal. To exclude metaphysics from science is not
to exclude it from human thought. As a matter of fact such exclusion
is neither possible nor reasonable. But to clearly distinguish the
problems of science from those of metaphysics is absolutely necessary,
if we are to prevent hopeless confusion of issues.

In contending, however, against the introduction of metaphysical
doctrines into the region of scientific explanation, Huxley seems
to have been carried too far by the force of his own attack. So long
as he held to the position that every conscious state has, as its
concomitant, a molecular change in the brain, he had all the forces
of evolution on his side. But when he said that consciousness is
merely the steam-whistle of life’s locomotive, or merely answers to
the sound which the animal-bell gives out when it is struck, he takes
up another position of far less strategical strength. For whereas
the frog from which the physical centres of consciousness have been
removed sits crouched and motionless, and “will starve sooner than
feed itself, although food put into its mouth is swallowed;” the frog
in which conscious situations can take form in unmutilated cerebral
hemispheres behaves in a very different manner. It is nothing less
than pure assumption to say that the consciousness, which is admitted
to be present, has practically no effect whatever upon the behaviour.
And we must ask any evolutionist who accepts this conclusion, how he
accounts on evolutionary grounds for the existence of a useless adjunct
to neural processes.

“It is,” says Huxley,[198] “experimentally demonstrable--any one who
cares to run a pin into himself may perform a sufficient demonstration
of the fact--that a mode of motion of the nervous system is the
immediate antecedent of a state of consciousness. We have as much
reason for regarding the mode of motion as the cause of the state of
consciousness, as we have for regarding any event as the cause of
another. How the one phenomenon causes the other we know as much, or as
little, as in any other case of causation; but we have as much right
to believe that the sensation is an effect of the molecular change, as
we have to believe that motion is an effect of impact; and there is as
much propriety in saying that the brain evolves sensation, as there is
in saying that an iron rod, when hammered, evolves heat.” But if we
speak of the related antecedent as the cause, it is not obvious why we
should not describe the desire to demonstrate the supposed fact as the
cause of running in the pin. We seem to have just as much reason for
calling this antecedent state of consciousness the cause of certain
movements and behaviour, as of calling a mode of motion in the brain
the cause of a further state of consciousness. It is true that we
have not the least idea how the desire can cause the act; but Huxley
practically admits that we have no idea how molecular change can be the
cause of consciousness. In the one case we are no worse off than we
are in the other. Neither position is logically defensible; since each
assumes that physical events and states of consciousness can constitute
links in the same causal chain.

The philosophical hypothesis known as monism regards the molecular
change, not as the antecedent of a conscious state, but as its
concomitant. That which from a physical and physiological point of
view is a complex molecular disturbance is, at the same time, from a
psychological point of view, a state of consciousness. The two are
different aspects of one natural occurrence. Why such an occurrence
should have two so different aspects we have not the faintest idea; but
here we are not one whit worse off than we were before. The hypothesis
does, however, help us to get over our difficulty. An essential
feature of Huxley’s contention is that the physical and physiological
chain of causation is complete in itself, which may be granted; and
further, that if consciousness does arise it is merely an adjunct
without influence on the sequence of events--what is influential is
the molecular disturbance, not the consciousness which accompanies it.
But according to monism the state of consciousness actually is that
very same something which the physiologist calls, in the language of
physics, a molecular disturbance. And in saying that consciousness
influences behaviour one who accepts this hypothesis is merely avoiding
a cumbrous form of circumlocution. He puts it in this way instead
of saying that the nerve-changes in the cerebral hemispheres, or
elsewhere, which from a psychological point of view _are_ a conscious
situation, influence and determine the course of behaviour. But from
this point of view it is absurd to say that the consciousness is merely
an adjunct--absurd to say that were there no conscious situation the
neural situation would remain unchanged. They are the very same thing
from different points of view; and to say there is no influential
conscious situation is simply equivalent to saying that there is not
this determining neural situation.

However we explain the fact, there are few who hesitate to accept it
for the purposes of scientific explanation. The conscious situation,
having no doubt for the physiologist a neural aspect if he could only
get at it as a whole, does practically determine the behaviour of the
animal which has gained the requisite experience. If we accept the
fact, we may pass on to its importance in securing the biological end
of race preservation.

It is a commonplace of evolutionary doctrine that, other things being
equal, those races will survive, in the constituent members of which
intelligent behaviour enables them to deal most effectually with an
environment of increasing complexity. And it is a matter of familiar
observation that such behaviour is closely connected with delicacy
and refinement of development in those senses which take the lead in
cognitional process, and with rapidity and precision in the motor
co-ordination through which prompt and skilful advantage is taken of
the situation which has, through experience, acquired meaning.

But though the importance of intelligent adjustment to the
circumstances of life is widely admitted as a general principle, it
is perhaps through a study of animal behaviour that we are best able
to realize its full range and extent. Biologists are so largely, and
quite wisely, occupied in the study of morphological and physiological
problems, which admit of a treatment more exact than the most ardent
advocate of the investigation of behaviour, under natural or even
under experimental conditions, can claim; they devote, again quite
rightly, so large a share of attention to the variation and natural
selection of adaptive structure in its adult condition and embryonic
stages; the pendulum of opinion has, under the teaching of Professor
Weismann, swung so far in the direction of the non-acceptance of
the hereditary transmission of characters individually acquired
through intelligent adjustment or otherwise; that the part played by
consciousness in the evolution of the higher and more active animals is
apt to pass unnoticed or unrecorded. It is well, therefore, to put in
a reminder that a great number of animals would never reach the adult
state in which they pass into the hands of the comparative anatomist
save for the acquisition of experience, and the effective use of the
consciousness to which they are heirs; that their survival is due,
not only to their possession of certain structures and organs, but,
every whit as much, to the practical use to which these possessions
are put in the give and take of active life; and that many interesting
problems which are keenly discussed by evolutionists in the light of
natural selection presuppose conscious situations which are more or
less tacitly taken for granted.

Let us cast a rapid glance over some of these topics of biological
discussion. The fascinating subject of mimicry, involving as it
necessarily does the discussion of the value of warning colours and
behaviour, a subject opening up an extensive group of problems so
brilliantly studied by Professor Poulton, is meaningless save in so
far as there is implied a conscious reaction to colour and form on the
part of animals which can learn from experience. The warning colours
reinstate a conscious situation, so that, misled by appearances, a bird
mistakes the mimicking insect for its nauseous “model.”

The whole range of behaviour, included under play, experimentation, and
practice, on the importance of which, following the lead so ably given
by Professor Groos, we have insisted, is equally meaningless, save as a
means to the acquisition of serviceable experience for use in the more
serious business of after-life; and experience is the establishment,
through association and coalescence, of conscious situations which
possess guiding value. And if, as we shall hereafter see, they may
also be regarded as a means of securing pleasure, as a psychological
end of behaviour, it is not less obvious that it is only through the
development of consciousness that such a psychological end can have any
existence.

It matters not if the particular form assumed by play and
experimentation be largely dependent on instinctive tendencies. For
all the phenomena of instinct, profoundly organic as are the modes of
behaviour comprised under this head, definite as are the inherited
co-ordinations in the most typical examples of its occurrence, have
also, except in some doubtful cases, a conscious aspect. At any rate
this is the case in so far as instinctive response forms the hereditary
basis on which is reared a more nicely adjusted intelligent edifice,
in so far as instinctive procedure is subsequently modified and guided
by acquired experience, in so far as there creeps in that “little dose
of judgment” which Huber found in bees, Lord Avebury attributes to
ants, Dr. Peckham sees in spiders and solitary wasps, and all observers
find in birds and mammals. For if in these cases instinctive behaviour
were unconscious, it would, as such, remain outside experience; and if
outside experience, there could be no data on which consciousness could
base any modification of inherited behaviour, no opportunity of taking
up the ready-formed responses into the mental synthesis and utilizing
them for the wider ends of intelligent purpose.

In social behaviour there is a reciprocity of suggestion between the
members of the community. And such suggestion is operative through an
appeal to consciousness. However instinctive the forms of procedure
may be in social insects, there remains much beyond which is hard to
explain on the hypothesis that there is, in them, nothing analogous to
a conscious situation; while in such vertebrates as birds and mammals
we cannot but believe that consciousness is the main determinant of
much behaviour which seems to imply the germs, or more than the germs,
of sympathy. The little monkey I saw in Hamburg cuddling up caressingly
to a wounded companion, must surely have experienced a conscious
situation analogous to that which prompts a child to nestle alongside
her companion in distress. And he who has seen no signs of sympathy in
dogs, has either watched their behaviour in vain, or is himself lacking
in sympathy.

In sexual selection by preferential mating, even if we follow Professor
Groos in believing that it is a special mode of natural selection,
the conscious situation is essential. If we accept the theory in any
form, we must regard the adornments, antics, and display of the male
as an appeal in some way to the consciousness of the female, whatever
particular form the effects in that consciousness may take, whether the
appeal evoke a sense of beauty, or simply be a means of exciting to the
consummation of the natural end of courtship. Even if we follow Mr.
Wallace in regarding plume and song as “recognition marks,” it is only
by their appeal to consciousness in this way, if in no other, that they
are of any biological value. And this, of course, applies equally to
the whole range of his theory of recognition marks--their sole utility
lies in their being a stimulus to consciousness through which the end
of recognition is secured. So, too, not only the specialized behaviour
which we dignify by the name of “courtship,” but every case in which
mate is drawn to mate through sight, smell, hearing--any of the leading
senses--testifies to the importance of consciousness in furthering an
end of supreme biological importance.

And if, as Darwin urged, the “law of battle” among the males
co-operates with preferential mating, as we can hardly deny, in
securing strong, vigorous, and healthy fathers of the generation they
beget, here, too, consciousness is an important factor. Can we conceive
a “law of battle” among unconscious beings? If success in the combat
were a mere matter of brute strength, it would imply some consciousness
in its dull exercise. But it is more. It is also a trial of skill.
Were it not so our forefathers would not have spent hours in watching
a cock-fight, or laid heavy odds on their particular “fancy.”

We need not labour the theme. In the search for food or a nesting
site, in the capture of prey and escape from enemies, in all that
demands attention, and in all that necessitates practice, in what
M. Houssay calls “the industries of animals,” and in that which Mr.
Hudson calls “tradition,” consciousness has a part to play. Even
plants unconsciously appeal to the consciousness of insects, birds,
and mammals. Their bright, scented, nectar-bearing flowers, and their
sweet, coloured fruits are means of effecting the biological ends of
fertilization and the dissemination of seeds, but only on condition
that their colours stimulate the sense of sight, and their scent and
sweetness the senses of smell and taste. It is, perhaps, going too far
to claim that, wherever sense-organs exist they imply at least some
dim and rudimentary form of conscious situation of guiding value so
far as it goes; for it is possible that in some cases the coalescence
of elementary items of sentience has not been carried far enough to
justify us in speaking of experience by which the animal can profit.
But it is surely not going too far to claim that, wherever two or three
such sense-organs are gathered together in any living being, there is
consciousness in the midst of them, beginning to exercise that guidance
which serves so markedly to differentiate the typical animal from the
typical plant.

But throughout the animal kingdom, until we reach its highest
development in man, the guidance of consciousness, important as it
is, seems to be almost wholly subservient to a biological end, that
of the preservation of the race, and for the race of the individual.
Practical utility is the touchstone of animal intelligence, and of the
whole range of feeling and emotion in beings still under examination in
the stern school of natural selection. By this we mean that practical
utility has determined what degree and complexity of intelligence,
feeling, and emotion shall be attained. If the requisite level be not
attained--elimination. Higher levels no doubt bring advantage--so long
as they are practically useful. But in the school of natural selection
useless accomplishments are not much taught. Although its examinations
are in a sense competitive, all are allowed to pass who qualify for
survival. But the competitors become more numerous and the standard
for a pass rises. As the school increases in size higher classes with
harder problems to solve are established. Progress is an incident of
the constant survival of the fittest when there are variations in
fitness.


III.--THE PSYCHOLOGICAL ASPECT

On the hypothesis of monism, the nature of which, so far as it bears
on our inquiry, was briefly indicated in the foregoing section, the
conscious situation is the psychical or mental expression of that
which for the physiologist is what we may term a neural situation. As
such it does not enter into the chain of physical causation; nor do
physical events as such--that is to say, save as experienced--enter
into the chain of mental causation. For mental development they have
no independent existence, and are negligible except in so far as they
enter as items of experience into the conscious situation.

But altogether apart from the way or ways in which we may attempt to
explain the fact, most of us believe, with unquestioning confidence,
that the growth of practical experience, somehow associated with
nervous changes in the brain or sensorium, is of real value in the
guidance of behaviour in such manner as to secure biological ends.
Conscious experience must therefore, in the animal world, serve its
biological purpose, or it will be of no avail. If there be not a
pre-established harmony, there must be an evolved harmony; and how such
a harmony could be evolved if consciousness be not by some means in
vital touch with behaviour, influenced by and in turn influencing it,
we cannot conceive. The steam-whistle theory of consciousness leaves
the matter, for the evolutionist, in this inconceivable position.

We need not, however, flog a dead horse. We need not ask how, on the
steam-whistle theory, those states of feeling which we broadly classify
as pleasurable could become associated with behaviour conducing to
welfare, and those which we group as hurtful with behaviour which
is biologically harmful. It is more important, again, to notice
that, associated and consonant with the biological end, there
arises a psychological end of behaviour--what we may term, with the
qualifications before considered,[199] the getting of pleasure and the
avoidance of pain. This is the purpose of behaviour as viewed from the
psychological aspect. The biological end of animal conation is racial
survival; its psychological end is individual satisfaction. And the two
ends are, in the main and broadly speaking, consonant--a result which
would unquestionably be secured by natural selection, but is on any
other naturalistic hypothesis difficult of explanation.

But the two ends are not only consonant; they are supplementary one
to the other. During much of the life of the higher animals there is
no need, immediately present and pressing, for the output of action
to meet biological ends. There are periods of life and intervals of
time when the sharp incidence of the struggle for existence does not
call for the serious business of behaviour. But at these periods and
in these intervals the animal is not inactive; indeed, it is restless
in its activity. Unless it be weary with unwonted exertion, or basking
in the psychical sunshine of content, due to the unsought advent of
pleasant stimulation or the after-effects of previous behaviour (for
example, when hunger has been relieved), the healthy animal must be up
and doing. This familiar fact no doubt affords the basis in observation
of the surplus-energy theory of play. But is it necessarily surplus
energy? Is it not rather normal energy which expends itself in this way
when there is no immediate and serious biological business on hand?
And, as Professor Groos has pointed out, play is seen when we have
every reason to suppose there is no surplus energy, nay, even when the
normal energy is at a low ebb. There is no more pathetic sight than a
sick kitten, with energy obviously much below par, utilizing its little
remaining strength in feeble attempts to play.

It is unnecessary to do more than remind the reader of the theory
elaborated with so much skill and care by Professor Groos, that the
forms assumed by play--in which, it will be remembered, he includes a
very wide range of behaviour--have a very important indirect biological
end in practice and experimentation. Our present point is, that its
direct psychological end is the satisfaction it affords. Without
this the individual would not be impelled to the continuance of
performances which occupy a wide space in the field of animal behaviour
in which the biological end has reference, not to present requirements,
but to future needs.

No one has given better expression to the sway of this psychological
end than Mr. W. H. Hudson. “We see,” he says,[200] “that the inferior
animals, when the conditions of life are favourable, are subject to
periodical fits of gladness, affecting them powerfully and standing
out in vivid contrast to their ordinary temper. And we know what
this feeling is--this periodic intense elation which even civilized
man occasionally experiences when in perfect health, more especially
when young. There are moments when he is mad with joy, when he cannot
keep still, when his impulse is to sing and shout aloud and laugh at
nothing, to run and leap and exert himself in some extravagant way.
Among the heavier mammalians the feeling is manifested in loud noises,
bellowings, and screamings, and in lumbering, uncouth motions--throwing
up the heels, pretended panics, and ponderous mock battles.

“In smaller and livelier animals, with greater celerity and certitude
in their motions, the feeling shows itself in more regular and often in
more complex ways. Thus Felidæ, when young, and in very agile sprightly
species, like the puma, throughout life, simulate all the actions of
an animal hunting its prey--sudden, intense excitement of discovery,
concealment, gradual advance, masked by intervening objects, with
intervals of watching, when they crouch motionless, the eyes flashing
and tail waved from side to side; finally, the rush and spring, when
the playfellow is captured, rolled over on his back, and worried to
imaginary death. Other species of the most diverse kinds, in which
voice is greatly developed, join in noisy concerts and choruses; many
of the cats may be mentioned, also dogs and foxes, capybaras and other
loquacious rodents; and in the howling monkeys this kind of performance
rises to the sublime uproar of the tropical forest at eventide.

“Birds are more subject to this universal joyous instinct than mammals,
and there are times when some species are constantly overflowing with
it; and as they are so much freer than mammals, more buoyant and
graceful in action, more loquacious, and have voices so much finer,
their gladness shows itself in a greater variety of ways, with more
regular and beautiful motions, and with melody. But every species or
group of species has its own inherited form or style of performance;
and however rude and irregular this may be, as in the case of the
pretended stampedes and fights of wild cattle, that is the form in
which the feeling will always be expressed.”

That all this, which Mr. Hudson so graphically describes, belongs to
the psychological aspect of animal behaviour and is directly prompted
by conative tendencies whose immediate end is conscious satisfaction,
the mere joy of unrestrained and healthy activity, may be freely
admitted, without denying that all this exuberant psychical life
owes its evolution to the fact that it is in consonance with and
supplemental to biological ends which secure survival. It is with
animals as it is with man; play is the preparation for earnest. As I
have elsewhere said,[201] what our national games have done for the
English race it is difficult to overestimate. They train us to use our
bodies and expend our energies to the best advantage. An old soldier,
watching a football match, said, “That’s the training for our future
soldiers and sailors.” The playing fields are the finest school of
organized co-operation in the world. But, apart from compulsion, a
boy will not enter into the game with that zest through which alone
it acquires real value for training, unless there be an immediate
psychological end in the satisfaction he derives. And with animals
practice and preparation for the business of life could not occur if
the ultimate biological purpose of it all were not supplemented by the
enjoyment it brings for its own sake.

But in animal play, as indeed in that of human youth, we are perhaps
a little apt, in laying stress on the bodily skill and readiness
of response to which it so effectually ministers, to forget that it
is also a psychological training. In technical phraseology, we are
disposed to fix our attention on the acquired co-ordination of act
and movement rather than on the correlation of conscious data, which
renders possible the skilful performance. And yet, rightly considered,
the behaviour itself is simply the outcome of a conscious situation,
duly elaborated, and knit together through the association and
coalescence of its constituent data. It is a means to the unification
of consciousness by bringing into relation scattered and, at first,
quasi-independent sensory and emotional elements. Success is only
attained through the concentration of attention and effort on that
which is the centre of interest and also the focus of endeavour. And
this close attention and well-directed effort, which are trained in
the playful output of energy, are just the mental qualities which
will stand the animal in good stead when the real incidence of life’s
struggle comes upon it, when the reward of success is survival and
the penalty of failure elimination. For they are not merely physical
qualities, though their effects are bodily movements of attack and
defence, of active escape, or merely “lying low.” They are essential
psychological features of a unified and well-directed conative process.

In the fairly abundant play-time of animal life, this unification and
direction of conative process can take form under conditions wherein
the preliminary failures which accompany all forms of learning do
not entail the severe penalty of elimination. If we may so put it,
and so apply a deeply instructive parable, Natural Selection says
to her more favoured children, in which conscious situations can be
developed, “Here are the talents with which I have endowed you; make
use of them till I come, as come I shall in due time.” This animal
puts them out to usury in play; that animal keeps them laid up in the
napkin of inactivity. Then Natural Selection, the austere one, comes;
gives the commendation of survival to the animal that had learnt to
put its talents to use in the period of preparation, and condemns to
elimination that which had not traded with his talents at the bank of
play. In animal life, on the perceptual plane, we have the same need
for training in little things and seemingly unimportant matters in
preparation for the stress and storm which may, nay must, come upon
them, that we find in men and women on the higher ethical plane. To
those who think that the play of animals is too trifling a thing to
affect the question of survival, we would suggest the application, with
a necessary difference, of the thought which Miss Edith Simcox puts
into the following words: “Does it,” she says, “seem a trifling thing
to say that in the hours of passionate trial and temptation a man can
have no better help than his own past? Every generous feeling that has
not been crushed, every wholesome impulse that has been followed, every
just perception, every habit of unselfish action, will be present in
the background to guide or to sustain. It is too late, when the storm
has burst, to provide our craft with rigging fit to weather it; but we
may find a purpose for the years that oppress us by their dull calm, if
we elect to spend them in laying up stores of strength and wisdom and
emotional prejudices of a goodly human kind, whereby, if need arises,
we may be able to resist hereafter the gusts of passion that might else
bear us out of the straightforward course.” To apply the thought, the
trifles of play supply the psychological rigging which alone can save
the animal craft in the coming storm of the struggle for existence. And
the point on which we have to lay special stress in this section is,
that it is psychological rigging--or, if this seems to lay too much
emphasis on the genesis of conscious situations, we may at least urge
that the psychological ropes are of co-ordinate importance with the
biological spars.

So far, then, we reach the following conclusion: that if we classify
the behaviour of the higher and more intelligent animals under two
heads, the one comprising all those acts which are of direct biological
value in enabling the animal to escape elimination under the immediate
stress of the struggle for existence, and the other including all those
acts which are of indirect preparatory or educative value, the latter,
which are under their biological aspect not less important than the
former, are under their psychological aspect of perhaps even greater
importance. For the conditions of actual struggle are not those under
which mental development could most easily be furthered, though they
are those in which it is most effectually tested. Hence, the more
intelligent animals pass through a period during which they are more
or less shielded from the incidence of natural selection by their
parents, and this is the period of play and of psychological education.
And the tendency to play is so far organic, in that it is dependent on
inherited instinctive propensities, and so far psychological in that
it is accompanied by a felt want, which constitutes a conative impulse
finding its appropriate end in the consciousness of satisfaction. But
play--if we accept the term as the group-name for all these modes
of behaviour which fall under our second class, those of indirect
biological value--does not cease with the period of youth; it occupies
all the intervals in the more serious business of animal life. And no
discussion of animal behaviour can be adequate which does not assign
to this class its due place, alike in biological and in psychological
evolution.

The whole value of experience lies in the linkage and coalescence
of the data afforded to consciousness. It is true that an inherited
nervous system supplies the organic conditions of that physiological
linkage and functional coalescence of which experience is the
psychological expression. It is true that this physical integration
secures a ready-made grouping of the conscious data which are the
concomitants of orderly molecular changes in the brain or analogous
sensorium. Still, it also remains true that the value of experience
lies in the further linkage and coalescence that is acquired by the
individual in the course of what we may fitly call its education. Every
step in this education gets its psychological sanction through the
satisfaction it affords in consciousness; and the time of acquisition
is not during the stress of examination in the actual struggle for
existence, but rather in the youthful period and in the subsequent
intervals of preparation and practice during the play-time of animal
life.

The examination analogy--if, indeed, it may not be rightly regarded
as something more than an analogy--may be pressed a little further
as a means of fixing our attention on two points which are worthy
of consideration. The first is that, in the preparation for the
examination, specific practice as much of it is, cramming is not
the system exemplified by the higher animals. A good all-round
education in the acquisition of conscious situations more or less
coalescent into a unified system of experience, and in their effective
utilization without unnecessary delay and bungling along more or
less converging lines of practical behaviour; this is what secures a
“pass” in survival, especially where the circumstances of life have
reached a considerable degree of complexity. The instinctive act,
with its relatively definite response to a question which is almost
certain to be set to every candidate for survival, is that, which is
the analogue in behaviour to the result of a system of cram. Organic
nature does employ this system in the lower classes of her school;
definite responses are ground into merely instinctive types generation
after generation, and the right answers are given, automatically and
unintelligently, whenever the oft-recurrent questions are set. But this
will not do when the questions require the exercise of intelligence,
when they are of the nature of problems, with just those delicate but
not unimportant shades of difference which baffle the candidate who
has been drilled in a merely mechanical fashion. Hence the cramming
of instinct does not suffice for animals whose environment presents
problems of greater variety and greater complexity. Intelligence
is required to meet the particular combinations as they arise. The
greyhound, which is loosed on a hare, has never seen that hare run in
exactly that way over that special tract of country. But he has been
trained in such situations, and is thus prepared to meet the special
problem in its details as they present themselves in the light of the
experience he has gained of other like problems. And his skill in
pursuit has not only been gained through education in coursing. In a
thousand ways, as puppy and dog, he has learnt how to use well those
sinewy limbs. The training of his whole life is brought to bear on the
question immediately before him.

The general bearing of these facts is obvious. Play, as a means of
animal education, is varied, and has for its end all-round training
of the animal mind in its sphere of operation. Although there are
some specific propensities, certain observable trends of behaviour,
as in hunting-play, courtship-play, and the like, we must not expect,
nor do we find, anything like stereotyped definiteness of conative
activity. We find that freedom and elasticity in animal education which
is, perhaps, more often advocated than carried into practice in human
education.

The second point arising out of the examination analogy is, that its
range determines the level of preparation therefor. It is, for animals,
a practical examination, not a theoretical. Not a single question is
set demanding an explanation. The problems are such as can be solved by
intelligence, not such as require the exercise of reason, as we have
used the term in foregoing pages. These higher problems are only set
when the sixth form is reached, and there is no conclusive evidence
that any animals get into the sixth. This, however, is entirely a
question of evidence, and many of us will be glad to welcome them
there, if proved ability to deal reflectively with ideational questions
justifies their promotion.

If any of them do belong to this form, they have probably got there
through play. For in the stress of the actual examination there is not
much time for reflection. Or perhaps we may rather say that, not in
actual struggle, and not in active preparation for it in play-time,
but in intervals of leisure between both, when the animal lies quietly
turning over in his mind we know not what, will experience be reviewed,
and generalizations drawn as to the why of events in this strange
world. Probably the animal accepts things as they are, and does not
trouble about their explanation. But it may not be so. At any rate,
if animals lack the means of descriptive inter-communication, and
have no words as concrete pegs on which to hang abstract ideas, their
explanations cannot be carried far. Theories without the power of
disputation would be a poor solace in leisure moments.

One more point may be noticed with regard to the psychological aspect
of the evolution of behaviour--the reciprocal action of intelligence.
It is the intelligence of others that introduces so much variety and
complexity into the environment. Hunters and hunted, combatants,
rivals, mate and mate, enemies or companions in their varied aspects,
introduce through their intelligence complications which only
intelligence can meet. And, as intelligence begets intelligence, so do
emotional attitudes beget answering emotional states. Psychological
evolution translated into practical behaviour gives rise to situations
of reciprocal complexity. This point of view is, however, so familiar,
that nothing need be said in its further elucidation. The behaviour
of any given animal does not stand alone, but is closely related with
the behaviour of others. Among social animals the relationships are
peculiarly close, and it is among them that the psychological aspect of
behaviour reaches its highest expression.


IV.--CONTINUITY IN EVOLUTION

Under the head of organic behaviour, in the widest acceptation of
the term, fall the whole of physiology, the whole of embryological
development, nay, more, the whole of organic evolution; while mental
evolution, in all its stages, may be regarded as the psychological
aspect of that which, from the physiological aspect, is the evolution
of nervous systems. Life itself is the behaviour of a particular kind
of substance which is found more or less abundantly under natural
conditions. No other known substance behaves in this way, and so
ignorant are we as to the conditions of its natural origin, that it is
useless to guess at a scientific explanation. And even if we knew all
the antecedents and conditions of its origin we should be no nearer a
comprehension of why protoplasm has the peculiar properties which we
find it to possess. That is a question to which science can give no
answer. Who knows why a certain compound of oxygen and hydrogen in
certain proportions has the properties of that which we call water?

Let us note the distinction between saying, as we said above, that life
is the behaviour of protoplasm, and asserting that life is the cause
of this behaviour. The one is a scientific statement of observed fact,
the other an explanation of the fact in metaphysical terms, a reference
of the fact to its underlying cause. So long as we quite clearly
understand that we are talking the language of metaphysics, we may
speak of life as a cause of organic behaviour; but let us be careful
to remember that the statement has no more value for science than the
assertion that aqueosity is the cause of the behaviour of water.

Leaving on one side, then, the natural origin of protoplasm, the
conditions of which are unknown, we find that, as a matter of
observation, every bit of living substance, the history of which has
been traced, is a fragment detached from some other bit which behaved
in the same way. This is the basal fact of the continuity of organic
evolution. But such a detached fragment has the property of increasing
by taking up from the environment more of those elementary materials
from which it is itself compounded in subtle synthesis. Nay, further,
every fragment of which we know the history is found to increase in
such a way as to reach, in form, structure, and idiosyncracies of
behaviour, the likeness of the organism--plant or animal--from which it
was derived. In the higher plants and animals the separated fragments
or cells are the ova and sperms, or their equivalents, which unite,
with fusion or coalescence of their nuclear matter, and thus give rise
to a new individual in the course of embryological development.

Now, as we have already seen, much modern biological discussion centres
round the question whether the detached reproductive fragment, ovum or
sperm as the case may be, is derived from the whole body of the parent,
by what Darwin termed pangenesis or in some other way, or only from
germinal substance set apart in development for this end. And we have
provisionally accepted the hypothesis that it is the direct descendant
of other reproductive cells; and that, throughout a long ancestry,
stretching back into the far past, there never occurs in the direct
line of genealogical sequence, any highly differentiated cell, such as
a gland-cell, muscle-cell, nerve-cell; never, with certain reservations
into which we need not enter, is found the representative of any
tissue save that to which the reproductive function is restricted. In
technical phraseology, the continuity of organic evolution is due to
the continuity of the germinal substance.

During embryological development the fertilized ovum--consisting
of two fused fragments of this germinal substance--gives rise to a
host of ordered and marshalled cells, which are divisible into two
groups: the one forms the body with its muscles, bones, glands,
digestive system, skin, sense-organs, nerve-centres, and so forth;
the other forms a reserve store of germinal substance, from which
are derived the ova and sperms. The former take no direct share in
reproduction; they are off the line of continuous descent; they die
without issue. But they protect and minister to the reproductive
function of the second group--the potential ancestors of the races to
follow. But all instinctive and intelligent behaviour is the outcome
of the orderly working of the nervous system, is initiated through
sensory stimulation, and is executed by the motor organs; and all the
structural parts, through which such behaviour is possible, belong
to the body--that which dies without issue. How, then, can instinct
and intelligence be inherited? In a sense they are not inherited. The
nervous system which is their organic basis begets no heirs. But it is
begotten of germinal substance, which not only produced the body of
which the nervous system is a part, but also handed on, with that body,
samples of the same germinal substance capable of reproducing a similar
body and a like nervous system. Herein lies the basis of heredity.

The stress of the struggle for existence falls upon the body; and
instinctive or intelligent behaviour is a means to its preservation
in the struggle for existence. According as it survives or not, will
the samples of germinal substance it contains fulfil their biological
end or perish with it. Natural selection secures the survival of those
animals which bear the seed from which their like will be developed.

On this view all variation arises within the germinal substance, but it
is manifested in the body which is its product. How variations arise we
do not know with any exactness of detail. That the germinal substance
is influenced in its nutrition and in other ways by the surrounding
tissues is highly probable; and this influence may lead to changes
which are the source of variations; but it is very doubtful whether
such influence can be what we before termed “homœopathic.”[202] It is
improbable that the formation of the nerve-connections involved in
intelligent behaviour which has grown habitual through repetition,
can so influence the germinal cells as to give rise to variations of
like nature. In other words, acquired habit is probably not a direct
determinant of an inherited variation of like nature in instinctive
behaviour. Apart from such influence the only source of variations
which can be assigned is either the differential division of nuclei
in preparation for the process of fertilization,[203] or the process
of fertilization itself. The union of perhaps differentiated germinal
substance from two distinct parents affords the opportunities for the
admixture and compounding of hereditary qualities in the two samples,
from which variations favourable or the reverse may arise.

It is now generally recognized, however, that the origin of variations
is a problem quite distinct from that of the survival of those whose
direction is favourable to that end. The theory of natural selection,
as such, does not pretend to offer any explanation of the manner in
which variations arise; though of course a complete theory of organic
evolution must assign the antecedents and conditions of organic
progress in all its varied phases. We know that variations do occur;
we know, too, that more individuals are born than survive to procreate
their kind; and, on the theory of natural selection, we draw from these
data the conclusion that, on the average, the animals that escape
elimination are those in which the variations are of such a nature as
to conduce to this end.

It will be seen that, on the hypothesis of organic heredity, thus
briefly sketched, continuity can, in strictness and, as we may phrase
it, in its first intent, only be predicated of the germinal substance;
but that this substance gives rise to products--active vigorous animals
behaving in certain ways, each after his kind--which hold similar
germinal substance in trust for future use. Natural selection deals
with the trustees; and if they succumb, that which they hold in trust
is lost. To put the matter in another way: Nature says to the germinal
substance, “By your products you must be judged in accordance with the
criterion of utility and efficiency.” Practical use in the give and
take of active life is the touchstone of all behaviour which makes for
survival. This being secured, there may be a balance of behaviour for
other purposes. But in animals the balance is not of large amount, and
other purposes have not taken form and direction. It should be clearly
noticed that, on the hypothesis we are considering, use is the test
of survival, and though it is not the direct cause of variations, it
affords their sanction in survival. That animal escapes elimination
whose behaviour is of practical use; and it holds in trust for the
future a store of germinal substance from which is produced a successor
capable of behaving in like manner.

The whole drama of organic evolution may be regarded as the realization
in a succession of individuals of the evolving potentiality of
continuous lines of germinal substance. The successive individuals
die--but the germinal substance lives on in their heirs, if they have
any. In virtue of what intimate and hidden structure or disposition of
parts the germ possesses this potentiality we do not know. The ovum
of a dog is a microscopic speck less than one-hundredth of an inch in
diameter; the sperm is far more minute. They unite, and their nuclei
coalesce. The cellular product divides and subdivides. The cell colony
absorbs nutriment from the maternal tissues. Division proceeds apace,
and the cells are marshalled and ordered in embryological development;
definite tissues are formed; the stages of their genesis can be
predicted with accuracy; and in due time a puppy is born which shall
grow to the likeness of its parents and behave as they behaved. We can
trace the succession of events; we see that they form a related series;
we have good reason for believing that the state of matters at any
one moment is the antecedent condition of the state of matters at the
succeeding moment. More than this science cannot say. The underlying
cause is, for science, hidden in the mists of the unknown. Even for
metaphysics it is but part of the force that beats through the universe
and makes it not a chaos but a cosmos--a force known to us only in its
effects.

It will thus be seen that the conception of continuity in organic
evolution has, broadly considered, a threefold aspect. First,
there is the continuity of the germinal substance through whose
reproductive behaviour under the appropriate conditions embryological
development occurs; secondly, there is continuity in this embryological
development, stage by stage, from the fertilized ovum to the adult
which is its final product and expression; thirdly, there is continuity
in these final products, in the animals whose organic, instinctive,
and intelligent behaviour lie open to our study and investigation. The
first is germinal, the second developmental, the third evolutional
continuity.

Before attempting to summarize some of the contributions afforded by
our inquiry towards the doctrine of continuity in the last of these
three aspects, we must pause for a moment to consider how far and in
what sense continuity can be predicated of mental development.

We have regarded the conscious situation as the psychical aspect of a
nerve-situation in the sensorium; and the nervous system, capable of
behaving in this way, is in developmental continuity with the germinal
substance of the fertilized ovum. But what shall we say with regard to
the psychical aspect? Two hypotheses seem open to us, each of which
presents difficulties, but of different kinds. The first is, that when
the organic development of the nervous system reaches a certain level
and order of complexity consciousness emerges, how and whence we know
not. The second is, that consciousness is developed from sentience,
which is the concomitant of all organic behaviour; which accompanies
life wherever it occurs and therefore shares the continuity of the
germinal substance.

The difficulty inseparable from the first hypothesis, is that it
is contrary to the analogy of all that we know or infer elsewhere
throughout the realm of nature. Huxley[204] likened its emergence to
the production of heat when an iron bar is struck by repeated blows
of the hammer. But this analogy will not hold; for heat is a mode
of energy, and only emerges through the transformation of other and
pre-existing modes of energy. A certain amount of the energy of motion
in the massive hammer-head is transferred to the iron rod, and assumes
the form of that molecular vibration which we call heat. And by what
amount the one is the gainer, by that amount is the other the loser.
But we have no reason to suppose that the like takes place in the
origin of the mental concomitants of neural changes. No portion of the
brain’s store of physical energy is drained off to form the rivulet
of consciousness. Now, whenever we speak of a product elsewhere in
nature, we mean a specialized bit of something pre-existent. Water is
the product of pre-existing oxygen and hydrogen. Heat is the product
of other forms of energy. But this is not so on the first hypothesis,
according to which consciousness emerges when the functional activity
of the nervous system reaches a certain level and order of complexity.
The mental concomitants are not “products,” in the recognized sense
of the term. Furthermore, although on this hypothesis we may still
speak of what was termed above evolutional continuity in the mental
concomitants, there is nothing analogous to either developmental or
germinal continuity.

On the second hypothesis, according to which sentience is the
concomitant of all organic behaviour, such developmental and germinal
continuity, or their analogues in the psychical order of being, are
rendered conceivable. Consciousness is regarded as a developed form
of sentience. But the sentience is wholly hypothetical. It is at best
a “may be,” and its existence is incapable of proof. And science is
rightly impatient of hypotheses the validity of which cannot in any way
be verified. Our safest course, therefore, is to accept that which is
common to both hypotheses, evolutional continuity, and for the rest to
be content with a confession of ignorance.

We have already drawn attention to the fact that mere sentience,
if it exists, has no power of guidance over organic behaviour; but
consciousness, when it emerges, is a concomitant of nervous processes
which determine the nature and direction of such nerve-changes as are
the antecedents of intelligent behaviour. The steps by which this
control is established are unknown. It is, indeed, probable that
conscious guidance arises as an accompaniment of the differentiation
of controlling centres from the automatic centres of the nervous
system; but of how this takes place we are as ignorant as we are of
many other differentiations in the course of embryological development
and evolutional progress. Of those nervous arrangements within the
brain which are the physiological concomitants of the far later mental
processes of reflection, abstraction, generalization, and the formation
of ideals, we are, if it be possible, even yet more profoundly
ignorant. Nor would it serve any good purpose to indulge in speculation
where there are not even the data to enable us so much as to hazard
a probable guess. The utmost we are justified in attempting is to
show how organic behaviour leads up to and affords the requisite data
for the exercise of intelligence, and how both supply the necessary
preliminary stages in the development and evolution of what, following
Dr. Stout, we have termed ideational process. This we have endeavoured
to do in preceding pages; and all that is now required is to conclude
our inquiry with a brief summary by which the results, as affording
some basis for evolutional continuity, may be focussed.

We regard reflex action and instinctive behaviour, broadly considered,
as genetically prior to that which is intelligent. Their development
in the individual and their evolution in the race are reached by the
differentiation and integration of nerve-centres. In the abdominal
region of the crayfish, for example, special centres are differentiated
for the behaviour of each pair of swimmerets; but these are so
integrated that the whole series of like abdominal appendages swing
rhythmically with co-ordinated movements. Now, when a sensorium is
developed, it does not have to group by an act of conscious selection
and deliberate arrangement the multiplicity of scattered sensory
data which it receives; it does not have to organize from diverse
and hitherto unrelated elements some sort of system in experience:
it receives them as a physiological heritage already grouped, and to
some extent organized. Stimulus and response are organically linked;
and within the response inherited co-ordinations, often exceedingly
complex, afford a correlated group of sensory data. Just in so far
as organic heredity has provided a working system of bodily parts,
does consciousness receive systematic information of their orderly
working. No doubt it is true that the development and evolution of the
sensorium proceeds _pari passu_ with the development and evolution of
reflex actions compounded and co-ordinated to give rise to instinctive
behaviour. No doubt the progress of the one is in close touch and
relation with the progress of the other; for such relation receives
the emphatic sanction of utility. Still it is none the less true that
in individual development, as in racial evolution, the organic takes
the lead. What is intelligently acquired is something added to that
which has been engrained, through natural selection or otherwise,
as a potentiality of the germinal substance. What we have first to
note, then, is that organic evolution provides ready-grouped data to
consciousness.

The second point is, that the germs of abstraction and generalization,
or rather processes which are the precursors of abstraction and
generalization, arise, and cannot fail to arise, in the genesis of
experience from the performance of inherited responses, and from
the coalescence of their results into a conscious situation. To a
quite young chick I gave pieces of yellow orange peel, which were
found to be distasteful and rejected. In Dr. Stout’s phraseology,
they acquired meaning in experience. Can one doubt that the colour
and taste were thus rendered predominant, and that the shape, size,
and other qualities of the bits of orange peel remained practically
unnoticed? Shortly afterwards the chick was given chopped and
crumbled egg; the fragments of “white” were eaten, but the bits of
hard-boiled yolk were untouched. They possessed a sufficient general
resemblance to the orange peel to carry the same meaning. In many
ways particular qualities of objects are emphasized in so far as
they incite to behaviour; they form centres of biological interest,
just as the abstract quality of ideational thought is the centre of
rational interest on a higher plane of mental development. And in
many ways objects presenting certain salient features in common,
amid differences which remain unnoticed, are unconsciously grouped
as the starting-points of similar perceptual situations, just as
in the generalization of ideational thought similar relationships
are deliberately grouped as the starting-points of like conceptual
situations. Both are purposive and have an end, which we as
investigators are able to assign; but only for reflection and
conceptual thought are they also purposeful--the end being foreseen and
realized, not only by the investigators, but by the agent concerned.
And the purpose or end itself is in the two cases different. In the one
case it is the biological end of practical behaviour; in the other case
it is the rational end of explanation--abstraction and generalization
being deliberately used as a means to this latter end. The question
has again and again been asked: Do animals reason? And different
answers are given by those who are substantially in agreement as to
the facts and their interpretation, but are not in agreement as to
their use of the word “reason.” Perhaps, if the question assume the
form--Are animals capable of explaining their own acts and the causes
of phenomena?--the position of those who find the evidence of their
doing so insufficient may be placed in a clearer light. This is what
is generally meant by the statement that animals have probably not
reached the level of rational beings.

But even if they have not reached this level, their perceptual
processes supply the antecedent conditions which are necessary if this
level is to be attained in the course of further evolution. We have
seen that, even in relatively simple cases, where conscious situations
mark only the beginnings of intelligence, there is a biological
emphasis of some, rather than others, among what we call the qualities
of objects, and there is a grouping, on biological grounds, of certain
things which have some quality in common--such, for example, as being
fit for food. Here we have at the outset of perceptual development the
germs of processes which are the precursors of the abstraction and
generalization of ideational thought. And in the more complex conscious
situations of the higher animals these processes attain to such degree
of development as is necessary to secure more difficult and more remote
biological ends, until all that is necessary, for their rational use,
is the quickening touch of a new purpose, that of explanation.

We have seen that, through what Dr. Stout terms “manipulation,” and
Professor Groos “experimentation”--names applied to a type of behaviour
widely exemplified among the higher animals,--things, as the nuclei of
conscious situations, become differentiated from the environment. One
can hardly question that a fly to the trout, a ball to the kitten, a
bone to the puppy are things distinguished from their surroundings, and
that they become marked off as special centres of interest. Here on the
perceptual plane is a process which is the antecedent of the conception
of quasi-independent objects on the ideational plane. For rational
thought the thing, as object, is not only the centre of a practical
situation leading to behaviour of direct or indirect biological value,
but is the nucleus around which we build all the qualities which
are ascertained by more elaborate manipulation and experimentation
carried out deliberately and of set purpose for rational ends. It
becomes capable of definition with the aim of explaining what are its
characteristics as an object.

There can be little doubt that the higher animals become intimately and
practically acquainted with their environment. The dog who accompanies
his master in many a ramble, the horse who carries him again and again
over all the surrounding country, has a good perceptual knowledge of
a somewhat extended environment. And this, again, is the precursor
of the far more extended conceptual knowledge which leads up at last
to a rational conception of the universe of objects in their varied
relationships. But only through the concentration of thought rendered
possible by much true abstraction and generalization,--only through
disentangling the relationships and regrouping them for the purpose of
framing an ideal scheme,--only, in short, by explanation and for the
sake of explanation is this difficult process brought to a more or less
successful issue.

Again, there can be little doubt that the higher animals, in the course
of experience begotten of behaviour, reach a perceptual sensing of
the bodily self, through experience derived from the non-projecting
senses, in pain and sickness, and often, we may hope, in the sense of
well-being, and the joy of existence. They do not probably set this
self in antithesis to the not-self. That comes with reflection, and is
the result of ideal construction based on the analysis of experience,
with a view to reaching some explanation of the genesis of experience.
But in their perceptual awareness of the embodied self, they have
that kind of consciousness which affords the necessary data, for
the later conception of the self--when experience is polarized into
its subjective and objective aspects and thus is explained, so far
as science can explain it; suggesting, indeed, long ere science has
attained this end, metaphysical explanations by reference to underlying
causes--too often accepted as an easy substitute for the difficult
tracing out of the antecedent conditions which science endeavours
painfully and by slow steps to formulate.

It is unnecessary to do more than remind the reader that we have found
that such processes as attention and imitation pass through instinctive
and intelligent stages which are the precursors of the ideational
stage, where they reach a higher expression as deliberately conscious
acts. In the young bird that instinctively pecks at some small, perhaps
moving, thing, which forms the starting point of a piece of responsive
behaviour, we have attention in the germ. When experience has caused
the thing to acquire meaning, attention passes into a succeeding
intelligent phase; but only when we desire to explain this meaning,
and attention thus has a deliberate purpose, do we find it entering
upon its higher ideational career. So, too, as we have seen, imitation
is at first a specialized form of instinctive behaviour, where the
response is seen to resemble that which stimulates it. Later it becomes
intelligent when the repetition of the imitative behaviour is due to
the satisfaction it introduces into the conscious situation. Then, at
last, it reaches the ideational stage, where reflection gives rise to
an ideal, which is to be realized in conduct. The imitation by the
child of its older companions is at first probably intelligent; but
when the child begins to consider why it imitates these and not those
among its companions, he is passing to the ideal stage, and imitation
becomes the sincerest form of hero-worship. The boy who merely imitates
his elder brothers playing at soldiers because he gets satisfaction
from so doing, becomes the subaltern who has his ideal soldier, and
will face death firmly rather than fall below his conception of how
such a soldier should behave.

We need not again attempt to indicate how among animals we have the
perceptual precursors of the æsthetic and ethical concepts. But we may
remind the reader that we endeavoured to show that intercommunication
had its foundation in instinctive sounds; and that it passed into the
intelligent stage in the perceptual life, when these sounds acquired
meaning, and hence became guides to behaviour. This is especially
instructive from our present standpoint, since it is probable that the
passage of communication from the indicating to the descriptive stage
afforded the conditions under which rational thought was evolved.
For such thought it is essential that attention should be focussed on
the relationships of things. And no description is possible without
making distinctly present to consciousness these relationships,
in time and space, the data for which are abundantly present in
the perceptual life, though lurking in the background, and needing
something to fix them and to aid consciousness in distinguishing them
clearly. In descriptive communication parts of speech, or their initial
equivalents, afford fixation points for these relationships, and serve
to render them distinct. If the reader will try to describe even the
simplest occurrence without introducing the symbols for the relations
which the events bear to each other, his failure will serve to bring
home how essential a feature this is. In social communication, then,
we probably have the key to the passage from perceptual to ideational
process; and in this passage description is the antecedent of, and
affords the conditions to, explanation. Words, moreover, as we have
already said, form the pegs upon which we can hang up, for ready
reference, the products of abstraction and generalization, or, to
modify the analogy, they form the bodies of which these products are
the rational soul.

If we are ever to trace the passage from the instinctive through
the indicating stage of communication, and so onwards through the
beginnings of description to its higher levels, and thus to the use of
language as a medium of explanation, it must be through child-study.
In every normal human child the passage does actually take place,
though, no doubt, in a condensed and abbreviated form as an epitomized
recapitulation in individual development, of the steps of evolutional
progress. Thus we may obtain a key to the solution of one of the most
difficult problems in evolution by continuous process--that of the
transition from animal behaviour to human conduct.




INDEX


  A

  Abstract and general ideas, 57

  Abstraction, 166;
    germs of, 332 ff.

  Acceleration, 250

  Accommodation defined, 36

  Acquired characters, inheritance of, 35, 110

  Acquired instincts (Wundt), 66, 106

  Acquisition defined, 36;
    ultimately dependent on natural selection, 289

  Adaptation defined, 37

  ADDISON on instinct, 63

  Æsthetics, animal, 270

  Afferent and efferent impulses, 32, 101

  Aid, mutual, among animals, 227

  _Ammophila_ mode of stinging prey, 75;
    of carrying prey, 76;
    deposition of egg, 77;
    intelligent behaviour of, 127

  _Amœba_, 296

  Antlers of deer, 15

  Ants, behaviour of, 123;
    intercommunication of, 198;
    social communities of, 205

  _Aporus_, intelligent behaviour of, 126

  Appreciation, germs of, 273

  Ardour of male in courtship, 269

  _Argyromœba_, instincts of, 79

  Arrest of development in egg, 14

  Association in coalescent situation, 46

  Attention, 242

  AUDUBON on American night-hawks, 261

  AVEBURY, Lord, on ants, 198;
    on Van, 200;
    on aphides and ants, 214;
    on slave ants, 215;
    on intelligence of ants, 218


  B

  BALDWIN, Prof. Mark, on organic selection, 37 (note), 115;
    on functional selection, 163;
    on imitation, 179 ff.;
    on projective stage of development, 275

  Batesian mimicry, 165

  BECHSTEIN on canaries, 262

  Bees, homing of, 131;
    social communities of, 205

  Beetle soliciting food from ant, 213

  _Bembex_ mode of carrying prey, 76

  BETHE, Dr., on instinctive behaviour of ants, 217

  BINET, M., on infusoria, 6

  Biological value of play, 250;
    purpose, 294;
    aspect of animal behaviour, 305

  Birch-weevil, leaf-case of, 121

  Birds, instinct of, 84

  Bison, behaviour of the, 226

  BLACKBURN, Mrs. Hugh, on instinct of cuckoo, 90

  BLOCKMANN, Dr., on _componotus_, 210

  BOLTON on goldfinches’ nests, 136

  Bower-bird, observations on, 261, 273

  BUCKMAN, Mr. S. S., on speech of children, 203

  BUDGETT, Mr. John S., on nest-building, 135

  Bullfinch, nest of, 135


  C

  CAMERON, Mr., on mimetic insects in ants’ nest, 212

  Canaries’ nest, building of, 135

  Canon of interpretation, 270

  Capacity, innate, 176

  Capuchin monkey, imitation in, 188, 278

  CARPENTER, W. B., on water-beetle, 299

  Catasetum, fertilization of, 29

  Cats, Prof. Thorndike’s experiments on, 147, 184

  Causation, idea of, 257

  Cell-division in egg, 14

  _Cerceris_, instincts of, 74;
    locality studies of, 129

  _Chalicodoma_, parasites of, 78;
    Fabre’s observations on, 130

  Chick swimming, 85;
    instincts of, 85 ff.;
    imitation in, 183

  Child-study, desirability of, 155, 337

  Choice, apparent in Paramecia, 9;
    in the pairing situation, 266

  Ciliary action in Paramecium, 4-10

  Circular process (Baldwin), 181

  _Clepsine_, behaviour of, 159

  Coalescence in conscious situation, 46

  Coincident variations defined, 37;
    survival of, 115, 174

  Communities, social, of bees and ants, 205

  Companion as centre of special interest, 244

  _Componotus_, communities of, 210

  Conation and impulse, 187, 235

  Concept, nature of, 167

  Condensation of experience, 163

  Conduct implies motive, 60;
    and ideal, 278

  Congenital responses, 41

  Conjugation in Paramecium, 4

  Connate instincts, 66, 69

  Conscience, ambiguity of word, 281

  Conscious accompaniments of certain organic changes, 42;
    aspect of instructive behaviour, 99

  Consciousness, as accompaniment and as guide, 34;
    effective, defined, 43;
    as heir to organic estate, 52;
    as epiphenomenon, 306

  Consentience, 53, 62

  Consonance of biological and psychological end, 286, 316

  Constancy of environment leads to stereotyped behaviour, 173

  Continuity in evolution, 324;
    threefold aspect of, 329

  Control, the sign of effective consciousness, 43

  Co-ordinated acts, 69, 100;
    inherited, 94, 95

  Corporate behaviour, 14

  Courtship in animals, 259

  Coyness of female birds, 264 ff.

  Cranial sense-organs, 301

  Crayfish, reflex action in, 298

  Creation, special, 297

  Criteria of effective consciousness, 43;
    of intelligence, 120

  Cruelty in cat, 277

  Cuckoo, instinct of nestling, 90


  D

  DARWIN, Charles, fig. of sun-dew leaf, 26;
    of Venus’s fly-trap, 27;
    of catasetum, 31;
    on earthworms, 158;
    on social life of animals, 225;
    on human ancestry, 229;
    on play and practise, 259;
    on sexual selection, 262 ff.;
    on law of battle, 313

  DAVIS, Prof. Ainsworth, on limpets, 156

  DEAN, Dr. Bashford, on chick swimming, 85

  Deceit in animals, 280

  Deferred instincts, 70

  Definiteness of instinctive behaviour, 66

  Description, involves relational terms, 202

  _Didunculus_, changed habits in, 221

  Differentiation and integration of nerve-centres, 167

  Disintegration of instincts, 176

  Diving, instinctive, 86

  Dog, observations on, intelligence of, 141 ff., 152, 200, 271, 322

  Duckling, inherited co-ordination in, 96

  _Dytiscus_, instinct of, 104


  E

  Earthworms, Darwin’s observations on, 158 ff.

  Education in play, 255, 320 ff.

  Effective consciousness defined, 43

  Efferent and afferent impulses, 32, 101

  Egg, cell-division in, 14

  EIMER, Th., on instincts of solitary wasps, 73;
    on origin of instincts, 108

  Emotions, and feelings, 235 ff.;
    psychological nature of, 246;
    evolution of, 282

  Energy stored in cell, 23

  Equilibrium, tendency to, 296

  _Eristalis_, mimicry of, 164

  ESPINAS, Prof., on social life of animals, 230

  Ethics, animal, 270

  Evolution of organic behaviour, 35;
    of consciousness, 61;
    of instinctive behaviour, 106;
    of intelligent behaviour, 155;
    of social behaviour, 225;
    of feeling and emotion, 282;
    of animal behaviour, 295;
    as continuous, 324 ff.

  Experience, of value for future guidance, 44;
    is it inherited? 48, 97;
    condensation of, 163

  Experimentation, 251, 253

  Explanation, characteristic of later phases of mental development,
        58, 257

  Explosive nature of cell, 21

  Expression of emotions, 247

  External stimuli to instinctive behaviour, 102


  F

  FABRE on behaviour of _Sphex_, 77, 172;
    of _Chalicodoma_, 78, 129;
    of _Leucopsis_, 79;
    of _Pompilus_, 129

  Faculty, instinctive, 64

  Falcons, training of, 137

  Fear in birds not inherited in specific direction, 49, 110

  Feelings and emotion, 235 ff.;
    evolution of, 282;
    feeling-tone, 240

  Ferns, fertilization of, 24

  Fertilization of ferns, 24;
    of _Valisneria_, 28;
    of orchids, 29

  FINN, Mr. Frank, on the acquisition of experience by young birds, 50

  Fission, reproduction of Paramecium by, 4

  Flight, instinctive, 86

  FOREL on _Componotus_, 211

  FOSTER, Sir Michael, on consciousness accompanying reflex action in
        pithed frog, 33

  Frog, reflex action in, 33, 299, 300

  Functional selection, 163

  Fungus garden of ants, 216


  G

  GARNER, Mr. R. L., “The Speech of Monkeys,” 198

  Gas-engine, analogy of, 20

  General and abstract ideas, 57;
    generalization, 167;
    germs of, 332 ff.

  Generic image, 162;
    situations, 163

  Germinal substance, continuity of, 328

  GOULD, Dr., on humming-birds, 273

  GREEN, Mr. E. G., on ants, 210

  Greenfinch, nest of, 135

  GROOS, Prof., on instinct, 64;
    origin of, 116;
    on imitation, 187;
    on animal play, 248 ff.;
    on “Love Play,” 259;
    on coyness of female birds, 264;
    on choice in mating, 267;
    on make-believe, 280


  H

  Habits and habitual acts, 107, 177

  HAGUE on ants, 199

  HAMERTON, P. G., on trained dog, 152

  HANCOCK, Dr. John, on cuckoo, 92

  Heredity and circumstance, 39;
    twofold aspect of, 40;
    relation of to use, 170, 177;
    in evolution as continuous, 326

  Homing of bees, 131

  Homœopathic influence defined, 36

  Honey-pot ant, 215

  House-martin, nest-building of, 113

  HUDSON, Mr. W. H., on fear in birds, 49, 50, 110;
    on animal gladness, 317

  Hunting play, 254

  HUXLEY, T. H., on reflex action in frog, 300;
    on consciousness as epiphenomenon, 306 ff.;
    on consciousness as product of nervous changes, 330

  HYDE, Mr., on king-crab, 298

  _Hydractinia_, colonial polype, 206


  I

  Ideals, distinguish ethics, 278

  Ideational stage of mental development, 59

  Imitation, 179 ff.;
    three stages of in child, 192

  Impulse in intelligent behaviour, 60;
    Prof. Thorndike’s use of the term, 186;
    connection of with conative process, 235

  Independence of automatic and controlling centres, 43

  Infant, congenital responses in, 54

  Influence of intelligence on instinct, 169

  Inheritance of acquisitiveness, 40

  Innate capacity, 176;
    likes and dislikes, 119

  Insects, instinctive behaviour in, 71;
    intelligent behaviour in, 123

  Instinct, broader and narrower view of, 99;
    primary and secondary, 108, 109;
    influence of intelligence on, 169;
    priority of, to intelligence, 173;
    disintegration of, 175

  Instinctive behaviour defined, 63;
    in insects, 71;
    in birds, 84;
    conscious aspect of, 98

  Integration and differentiation of nerve-centres, 167

  Intelligence lapsed, 107;
    influence of, on instinct, 169;
    of ants, Lord Avebury on, 218;
    biological importance of, 310

  Intelligent behaviour, 117;
    evolution of, 155

  Intelligent process distinguished from rational, 59, 138

  Intercommunication, 193, 336

  Interest, 243

  Internal factors in instinctive behaviour, 102

  Irritability, fundamental, property of protoplasm, 240, 296


  J

  JAMES, Prof. Wm., theory of emotions, 246, 292

  Jays, bathing of, 89;
    mode of taking food, 94

  JENNER on cuckoo, 92

  JENNINGS, Dr. H. S., on behaviour of Paramecia, 5


  K

  KERNER, Dr., on sun-dew, 26;
    on sensitive Oxalis, 27;
    on Valisneria, 29

  King-crab, reflex action in, 298

  KNIGHT, Andrew, on Norwegian ponies, 110

  KROPOTKINE, Prince, on mutual aid among animals, 227


  L

  Lamarckian hypothesis, 169, 171, 177

  Language, nature of, 195

  LANKESTER, Prof. E. Ray, on small-brained mammal, 168

  Lapwing, instinctive behaviour of, 113

  Law of battle, 313

  Leech, observation on, 159

  _Leucopsis_, instincts of, 79

  LEWES, G. H., on lapsed intelligence, 107

  Limpets, observations on, 156

  LINDLEY, Dr., on children, 141

  Locality, studies by wasps, 128

  LOCKE, John, limitations of animals, 167


  M

  MACKENZIE, Prof. J. S., on ethics, 278;
    on conscience, 281;
    on ambiguity of word “pleasure,” 285

  Make-believe, 280

  Mammals, early small-brained, 168

  Manipulation (Stout), 251

  MARCHAL, Prof., on instincts of _Cerceris_, 74

  MARSHALL, Mr. H. R., on instinct, 66

  Martin, nest-building of, 113

  MARTINEAU, James, on pleasure and pain, 284

  MAUPAS, M., observations on infusoria, 4

  MAYER, Dr. A. G., on mating instinct of moths, 83

  MCCOOK, Dr., on ants, 214

  Meaning, Dr. Stout’s use of term, 46, 243, 268

  MEDLICOTT, Mr. H. B., on behaviour of wild pigs, 196

  Megapodes, instinctive flight of, 87

  _Meloë_, instincts of, 81

  Mental development, stages of, 48, 56

  MERCIER, Dr. Charles, on criteria of intelligence, 120

  Metaphysical explanations, 19;
    aspect of instinct, 64;
    of impulse, 237;
    of purpose, 294;
    of will, 307;
    of life, 325

  MILLS, Prof. Wesley, on social influence on puppy, 220

  _Miltogramma_, parasitic fly, 134

  Mimicry, Batesian and Müllerian, 165;
    intelligent aspect of, 311

  Modifiability, 171

  Modification, defined, 36;
    relation of, to hereditary characters, 170

  MÖLLER, Herr, on fungus garden of ants, 216

  Monistic hypothesis, 309, 315

  Monkey, capuchin, imitation in, 188

  _Monodontomerus_, instincts of, 79

  Moor-hen, diving of, 89

  Moths mating, instinct of, 83

  Motive in rational conduct, 60

  Movement plays, 251

  MÜLLER, Prof. Max, on barrier between brute and man, 204

  Müllerian mimicry, 165, 166

  Mystery of life, 18


  N

  Natural selection, shielding of chicks from, 111;
    under uniform and variable circumstances, 175;
    in playtime of life, 319

  Nervous arc, 33;
    system of higher animals, 297

  Nest-building, observations on, 135

  NOIRÉ on concept, 167

  Norwegian ponies, 109

  Nucleus division, 12


  O

  Object and subject, 245, 276

  Octopus, intelligence of, 158

  _Œcophylla_, behaviour of, 210

  Orchids, fertilization of, 29

  Organic basis of differentiation of consciousness, 53

  Organic behaviour in development, 15

  Organic selection, 37 (note), 115

  Overproduction of movements, 164

  Oxalis, sensitive, behaviour of, 27

  _Oxybelus_, mode of carrying prey, 76


  P

  PALEY, definition of instinct, 64

  Paramecium, behaviour of, 3, 296

  Partridge, note of young, 93

  PECKHAM, Dr. G. W., on instinct, 65;
    on solitary wasps, 72 ff., 126 ff.

  Pecking instinct of chicks, 93

  Peewit, note of young, 93

  _Pelopœus_, instincts of, 72

  Perceptual stage of mental development, 59

  Personality, 245, 257

  Pheasants, note of young, 92;
    inherited co-ordination in, 95;
    plumage of Argus, 262

  _Philanthus_, prey of, 73;
    mode of stinging prey, 74

  Physiological aspect of animal behaviour, 295

  Pigeons, nests of, 136

  Pigs, wild, behaviour of, 196

  Plants, behaviour of, 24

  Plastic period of life, 168

  Plasticity of tissues, 40;
    of behaviour, 172

  Play of animals, 248 ff.;
    biological value of, 250;
    psychological aspect of, 256, 311, 316

  PLAYNE, Mr. H. C., on pigeons’ nests, 136

  Pleasure, 241;
    ambiguity in word, 285

  _Polistes_, locality studies of, 131

  _Pompilus_, mode of carrying prey, 76;
    Fabre’s observation on, 129

  Presentative elements distinguished from re-presentative, 46

  Primary instincts (Romanes), 108

  Projective stage of mental development, 275;
    senses, 304

  _Pronuba_, instinct of, 82

  Propensity, instincts as, 64;
    congenital, 176

  Protoplasm, fundamental properties of, 296

  Psychological aspect of play, 256;
    purpose, 294;
    aspect of animal behaviour, 315


  R

  Rational process distinguished from intelligent, 59, 138

  Reflex action, 31, 35, 298 ff.;
    relation of instinct to, 70

  Relationships, importance of, 202

  Re-presentative elements distinguished from presentative, 46

  _Rhynchites_, instinct of, 121

  ROMANES, G. J., on “discrimination” and “perception” in plants, 32;
    on instincts of solitary wasps, 73;
    definition of instinct, 99;
    on primary and secondary instincts, 108, 109;
    on ants, 126;
    on general ideas, 166;
    on animal communication, 201;
    on cruelty in cat, 277

  ROMANES, Miss, observations on capuchin monkey, 188, 278

  Roots of spinal nerves, 299

  ROTHNEY, Mr. G. A. G., on Indian ants, 212


  S

  SCHNEIDER, on octopus, 158

  SCOTT, Dr. D. H., on fern fertilization, 25

  Scratching in duckling, 96

  Sea anemone, diffused nervous system of, 32

  Secondary instincts (Romanes), 108, 109

  Segmental nature of central nervous system, 299

  Selection, functional, 163;
    natural, shielding of chicks from, 111;
    under uniform and variable circumstances, 175;
    in playtime of life, 319;
    sexual, 261 ff., 313

  Self, as ideal construction, 239

  Sentience, 62;
    origin of, 330

  Sexual selection, 261 ff., 313

  SHARP, Dr. D., on birch-weevil, 121;
    on _Œcophylla_, 210

  SHELLARD, Mr. E. J., observations on staghound, 144

  SHERRINGTON, Prof., on emotion, 292;
    on spinal animal, 298 ff.

  Shock, effects of physiological, 302

  SIMCOX, Miss Edith, quoted, 320

  _Sitaris_, instincts of, 82

  Slave ants, 215

  Snails, observations on, 157

  Social behaviour, 179;
    evolution of, 225

  Solitary wasps, instincts of, 72 ff.;
    intelligence of, 126 ff.

  Solomon Islands, rats of, 222

  Sounds emitted by young birds, 92

  SPALDING, Douglas, on newly hatched turkeys, 49;
    on instinct, 99

  Special creation, 297

  Speech, connection of, with rational process, 58, 233;
    so-called, of monkeys, 198;
    of children, 203;
    aids passage from perceptual to ideational process, 337

  SPENCE, on instinct, 63

  SPENCER, Mr. Herbert, on instinct and reflex action, 70;
    on play due to surplus vigour, 248;
    on pleasure and pain, 284, 287;
    on survival, 288

  _Sphex_, mode of carrying prey to nest, 77, 172

  Spiders placed in crotch by wasps, 133

  Stereotyped behaviour, 172

  Sticklebacks, observations on, 130

  STOUT, Dr. G. F., on “meaning” for consciousness, 46, 243, 268;
    on ideational and perceptual stages of mental development, 59, 271;
    on octopus, 158;
    on conative process, 235;
    on the self, 239;
    on manipulation, 251;
    on emotion, 293

  STRANGE, Mr., on bower-bird, 261

  Subject and object, 245, 276

  Sun-dew leaf, behaviour of, 25

  Swimming, instinctive, 85


  T

  TAIT, Lawson, on begging-cat, 110

  TARDE, M., on imitation as a social factor, 179

  Tendencies, congenital, 176

  THOMAS, Mr. Oldfield, on rats of Solomon Islands, 222

  THORNDIKE, Dr., on swimming of chick, 85;
    experiments on intelligence, 147 ff.;
    experiments on imitation, 179, 183 ff.

  Tradition, animal, 220

  Trial and error, method of, 139


  U

  Unity of perceptual process, 240;
    of biological purpose, 297

  Use, super-normal, 170;
    relation of, to heredity, 171, 177


  V

  VALISNERIA, fertilization of, 28

  Variation defined, 36;
    origin of, 327

  Venus’s fly-trap, behaviour of, 26

  Vigour, play due to surplus, 248

  Volition as conative, 238


  W

  WALLACE, Dr. A. R., on sexual selection, 264

  WALLASCHEK, Mr., on play as surplus vigour, 248

  Wapiti, antlers of, 16

  WASMANN, Dr., on insects associated with ants, 213

  Wasps, solitary, instincts of, 72 ff.;
    intelligence of, 126 ff.

  WEIR, Mr. Jenner, on canaries, 135

  WEISMANN, Prof., on origin of instinct, 109

  WHITMAN, Prof., on _Clepsine_, 159

  WHITMEE, Rev. S. J., on tooth-billed pigeon, 221

  Will, metaphysics of, 307

  WILLISTON, Dr. S. W., observation on _Ammophila_, 127

  WOOD, Mr. Foster, on hen-swimming, 86

  WORCESTER, Dr., on megapode, 87

  WUNDT, Prof., on instinct, 65, 99, 106


  Y

  Youth, plasticity of, 168

  Yucca moth, instincts of, 82




THE END




PRINTED BY WILLIAM CLOWES AND SONS, LIMITED, LONDON AND BECCLES




FOOTNOTES


[1] See “The Psychology of a Protozoon,” in the _Amer. Jour. of
Psychology_, vol. X., No. 4, July, 1899, and the fuller papers there
quoted.

[2] “The Psychic Life of Micro-Organisms,” 1889, p. 61.

[3] This paragraph is taken from “Animal Life and Intelligence,” p. 28.

[4] The following paragraphs are taken with some slight changes from
“Animal Life and Intelligence,” pp. 30-35.

[5] D. H. Scott, “An Introduction to Structural Botany,” part ii.,
“Flowerless Plants,” pp. 70, 71.

[6] _Ibid._, p. 71.

[7] Kerner, “Natural History of Plants,” translated by F. W. Oliver,
vol. i., p. 145.

[8] Kerner, “Natural History of Plants,” vol. i., p. 536.

[9] Kerner, “Natural History of Plants,” vol. ii., p. 132.

[10] Darwin, “Fertilization of Orchids,” 2nd edit., pp. 191, 192.

[11] “Mental Evolution in Animals,” p. 50.

[12] _Ibid._, p. 51.

[13] “A Text-book of Physiology,” 5th edit., part iii., p. 909.

[14] “A Text-book of Physiology,” 5th edit., part iii., pp. 911, 912.

[15] Professor Mark Baldwin has applied the term “organic selection”
to the result of this interaction (_American Naturalist_ for June and
July, 1896). Cf. also H. F. Osborn (_Science_, Nov. 27, 1896); August
Weismann (Romanes Lecture on “The Effects of External Influences on
Development,” 1894), and “Germinal Selection,” _Monist_, Jan., 1896;
and the author’s “Habit and Instinct,” ch. xiv., 1896.

[16] “Habit and Instinct,” p. 26.

[17] _American Journal of Psychology_, vol. ix., No. 1.

[18] _Psychological Review_, vol. vi., No. 3.

[19] “Naturalist in La Plata,” p. 88.

[20] _Journal Asiatic Society of Bengal_, lxvii., part ii., 1897, p.
614.

[21] _Spectator_, No. 120.

[22] Kirby and Spence, “Introduction to Entomology,” Letter xxvii. p.
537 (7th Edit., 1858).

[23] Cf. supra, p. 18.

[24] “The Play of Animals,” translated by Elizabeth L. Baldwin, p. 62.

[25] George W. and Elizabeth G. Peckham, “On the Instincts and Habits
of the Solitary Wasps,” p. 231.

[26] “Lectures on Human and Animal Psychology,” pp. 388, 397, 399.

[27] “Instinct and Reason,” pp. 90, 92.

[28] “Instinct and Reason,” p. 91.

[29] Chapter I., Section V.

[30] “On the Habits and Instincts of the Solitary Wasps,” by George W.
and Elizabeth G. Peckham (1898).

[31] “Mental Evolution in Animals,” p. 299.

[32] “Organic Evolution,” translated by J. T. Cunningham, p. 280.

[33] See A. G. Mayer “On the Mating Instinct of Moths.” _Ann. and Mag.
of Nat. Hist._, ser. 7, vol. v., Feb., 1900, p. 183.

[34] Some of the observations on which the summary of results given in
this section are founded are presented in some detail in “Habit and
Instinct,” pp. 29-100.

[35] _Psychological Review_, May, 1899, p. 286.

[36] “Birds from Moidart and Elsewhere,” p. 107. Edinburgh: Douglas.

[37] _Transactions of Northumberland and Durham Natural History
Society_, vol. viii., p. 213.

[38] “Mental Evolution in Animals,” p. 159.

[39] “Lectures on Human and Animal Psychology,” p. 401.

[40] “Instinct and Acquisition,” _Nature_, vol. xii., p. 507.

[41] On the nature of impulse, see _infra_, p. 235.

[42] “Lectures on Human and Animal Psychology,” p. 405.

[43] “Organic Evolution,” pp. 223, 263, 258, 279, 276, 298.

[44] “Essays on Heredity” (1889), p. 91.

[45] _Op. cit._, pp. 196-198.

[46] Professor Henry Osborn has also indicated the relationship
referred to.

[47] “The Play of Animals,” p. 64.

[48] “Solitary Wasps,” p. 236.

[49] See D. Sharp, “Cambridge Natural History,” “Insects,” part ii., p.
293, and the original authorities cited on p. 294.

[50] This and the three succeeding paragraphs are taken from “Animal
Life and Intelligence,” p. 425.

[51] “Animal Intelligence,” p. 59.

[52] “Instincts and Habits of the Solitary Wasps,” p. 55.

[53] _Op. cit._, p. 22.

[54] _Op. cit._, p. 215.

[55] “Dürfen wir den Ameisen und Bienen psychische Qualitäten
Zuschreiben.” _Pflüger’s Archiv._, lxx., 1898.

[56] “Solitary Wasps,” p. 219.

[57] _Op. cit._, pp. 131, 132.

[58] In a letter to Darwin, quoted by Romanes, “Mental Evolution in
Animals,” p. 226.

[59] “The Structure and Life of Birds,” p. 335.

[60] Preface to “Harmonia Ruralis,” quoted by Yarrell, “British Birds,”
vol. i., p. 541.

[61] _American Journal of Psychology_, vol. viii., no. 4, pp. 431-493.

[62] “Introduction to Comparative Psychology,” p. 255.

[63] “Introduction to Comparative Psychology,” p. 290.

[64] _The Portfolio_ (1873), p. 27, “Canine Guests.”

[65] “Animal Intelligence,” pp. 28, 29.

[66] _Nature_, vol. xxxi., p. 200.

[67] _Ibid._, vol. li., p. 127.

[68] “Manual of Psychology,” p. 257.

[69] “Vegetable Mould and Earthworms,” p. 95.

[70] _Wood’s Holl Biological Lectures_ (1898), p. 287.

[71] _Supra_, p. 44.

[72] “Mental Evolution in Man,” p. 27.

[73] “Intelligence of Animals,” p. 121.

[74] “Mental Development in the Child and the Race--Methods and
Processes,” p. 278.

[75] “Animal Intelligence:” monograph supplement to _Psychological
Review_, 1898, p. 61.

[76] _Op. cit._, pp. 263, 172, 201, 132, and 248 (note).

[77] “Animal Intelligence,” pp. 47-64.

[78] _Op. cit._, pp. 66, 14, 15.

[79] Cf. _infra_, p. 235.

[80] “The Play of Animals,” Eng. trans., p. 79.

[81] “Habit and Instinct,” pp. 174-180.

[82] “The Evolution of Mind in Man,” footnote, pp. 25, 26. Quoted in
“Introduction to Comparative Psychology,” from which the comments on it
are extracted.

[83] “The Speech of Monkeys.”

[84] “Scientific Lectures,” pp. 112, 118.

[85] _Nature_, vol. vii., p. 443.

[86] “The Senses of Animals,” p. 277.

[87] “Mental Evolution in Man,” p. 100.

[88] _Op. cit._, p. 175.

[89] Compare chap. xiii., on “The Perception of Relations,” in my
“Introduction to Comparative Psychology.”

[90] _Nineteenth Century_, May, 1897, pp. 793-807.

[91] Sharp, “Insects,” part ii., p. 147.

[92] _Nature_, vol. lxii., p. 253 (July 12, 1900).

[93] The quotation is from “The Cambridge Natural History,” vol. vi.,
“Insects,” part ii., by David Sharp, F.R.S.; see pp. 145, 146.

[94] Sharp, _op. cit._, p. 147.

[95] G. A. J. Rothney, “Notes on Indian Ants,” _Trans. Ent. Soc._,
1889, p. 354.

[96] Sharp, _op. cit._, p. 226.

[97] Lord Avebury (Sir John Lubbock), quoted in Romanes’ “Animal
Intelligence,” pp. 62, 63.

[98] Lord Avebury (Sir John Lubbock), “Scientific Lectures,” pp. 78, 79.

[99] _Nature_, vol. xlvii., p. 393 (Aug., 1893), where A. Möller’s
investigations are described by J. C. Willis.

[100] A. Bethe, “Dürfen wir den Ameisen und Bienen psychische
Qualitäten Zuschreiben,” _Pflüger’s Archiv._, lxx., 1898.

[101] See p. 37.

[102] _Supra_, p. 138.

[103] “Scientific Lectures,” pp. 80-82.

[104] _Proceedings of the Zoological Society_, 1874, p. 184.

[105] “Scientific Lectures,” 2nd edit., p. 140.

[106] Weismann, “Essays,” vol. ii., p. 50.

[107] Huxley, “Collected Essays,” vol. vii., p. 155.

[108] “The Descent of Man,” vol. i. p. 853, 2nd Ed., 1888. The
quotations from Darwin in this paragraph and that which follows are
somewhat condensed by a few omissions.

[109] Vol. xxviii., Sept. and Nov., 1890, pp. 337-354, 699-719.

[110] _Nineteenth Century_, Feb., 1888, p. 165. “Collected Essays,”
vol. ix., p. 204.

[111] _Op. cit._, pp. 709, 710.

[112] Page 711.

[113] “Mutual Aid among Savages.” _Nineteenth Century_, vol. xxix.
April, 1891, p. 538.

[114] “Descent of Man,” vol. i., p. 96.

[115] “Des Sociétés Animales: Étude de Psychologie Comparée” (Paris,
1877).

[116] “Mutual Aid among Savages,” _Nineteenth Century_, April, 1891,
pp. 539, 540.

[117] Page 63.

[118] _Op. cit._, p. 267; _cf. supra_, p. 138.

[119] G. F. Stout, “Manual of Psychology,” p. 268.

[120] _Ibid._, p. 318.

[121] “Manual of Psychology,” p. 84.

[122] “Habit and Instinct,” ch. ix., p. 186.

[123] “Letters on the Æsthetic Education of Mankind,” xxvii.

[124] “Principles of Psychology,” § 533.

[125] “On the Origin of Music,” pp. 231, 232.

[126] “The Play of Animals,” Eng. trans., p. 12.

[127] _Op. cit._, p. 7.

[128] _Op. cit._, p. 19.

[129] _Op. cit._, pp. 75, 76.

[130] “Manual of Psychology,” p. 327.

[131] _Op. cit._, pref., p. xx.

[132] _Op. cit._, p. 290.

[133] “Manual of Psychology,” p. 266.

[134] _Op. cit._, p. 314.

[135] “Descent of Man,” vol. ii., p. 60, 2nd edit. 1888.

[136] “The Play of Animals,” Eng. trans., p. 229.

[137] Quoted by Groos, _op. cit._, p. 259.

[138] “Descent of Man,” vol. ii., p. 77.

[139] Darwin, _op. cit._, p. 99.

[140] Quoted by Darwin, “Descent of Man,” vol. ii., p. 58.

[141] “Descent of Man,” vol. ii., p. 56.

[142] “Habit and Instinct,” p. 217.

[143] “Descent of Man,” vol. ii., p. 251.

[144] _Op. cit._, p. 137.

[145] “Darwinism,” p. 285.

[146] _Op. cit._, p. 293.

[147] _Op. cit._, p. 172.

[148] _Op. cit._, pp. 285, 286.

[149] _Op. cit._, p. 283.

[150] _Op. cit._, p. 243.

[151] _Op. cit._, p. 242.

[152] _Op. cit._, pref., p. xxii.

[153] _Op. cit._, p. 240.

[154] _Op. cit._, p. 244.

[155] “Manual of Psychology,” p. 85.

[156] “Manual of Psychology,” p. 23.

[157] _Op. cit._, p. 22.

[158] “Introduction to Comparative Psychology,” p. 53.

[159] “Manual of Psychology,” p. 266.

[160] “Animal Life and Intelligence,” p. 340.

[161] “Mutual Development in the Child and the Race,” p. 19.

[162] _Supra_, p. 270.

[163] “Animal Intelligence,” p. 413.

[164] _Atalanta_, Jan., 1889. Reprinted in “Animal Sketches,” p. 17.

[165] “The Play of Animals,” p. 122.

[166] Appendix to “Animal Intelligence,” p. 486.

[167] “Manual of Ethics,” p. 1.

[168] “Animal Life and Intelligence,” p. 404.

[169] “Animal Life and Intelligence,” p. 400. “Introduction to
Comparative Psychology,” p. 369.

[170] “Animal Intelligence,” p. 444.

[171] “The Play of Animals,” p. 299.

[172] _Op. cit._, p. 145.

[173] “Manual of Ethics,” pp. 285, 286.

[174] Starcke, _International Journal of Ethics_, vol. ii., no. 3
(April, 1892), p. 348.

[175] “Manual of Psychology,” p. 234. “Displeasure” here means the
feeling attitude antithetical to “pleasure.”

[176] _Op. cit._, p. 65.

[177] “Types of Ethical Theory,” vol. ii., f. 350.

[178] “Manual of Ethics,” p. 85.

[179] “Principles of Psychology,” vol. i., pt. ii., ch. ix. § 125.

[180] “Manual of Ethics,” p. 72.

[181] “Life and Letters,” vol. i., p. 310.

[182] Vol. i., pt. ii., ch. ix., § 124. I quote from the valuable
“Epitome” prepared by Mr. Howard Collins, p. 214.

[183] “Principles of Biology,” revised and enlarged edit. (1898), p.
560.

[184] From “Animal Life and Intelligence,” p. 382.

[185] “Experiments on the Value of Vascular and Visceral Factors for
the Genesis of Emotion,” _Proc. Roy. Soc._, vol. lxvi., pp. 390-403
(1900).

[186] “Manual of Psychology,” p. 288.

[187] “Manual of Psychology,” p. 132.

[188] See Huxley’s book on “The Crayfish,” in the International Science
Series, p. 108.

[189] _Journal of Morphology_, vol. ix. Quoted by Professor C. S.
Sherrington in The Marshall Hall Address, “On the Spinal Animal”
(reprinted from _Medico-Chirurgical Transactions_, vol. 82), p. 4.

[190] “The Spinal Animal,” p. 5.

[191] _Op. cit._, p. 23.

[192] “Collected Essays,” vol. i., essay on “Animal Automatism,” p. 224.

[193] _Op. cit._, pp. 20, 21.

[194] _Op. cit._, p. 29.

[195] _Op. cit._, p. 18.

[196] _Vide supra_, p. 33.

[197] “Collected Essays,” vol. i., p. 240.

[198] _Op. cit._, pp. 238, 239.

[199] _Vide supra_, p. 285.

[200] “Naturalist in La Plata,” pp. 280, 281.

[201] “Psychology for Teachers,” p. 70.

[202] _Supra_, p. 36.

[203] _Supra_, p. 13.

[204] “Collected Essays,” vol. i., p. 239.




Transcriber's Note


Illustrations have been moved alongside the text which they
illustrate, and may no longer match the locations given in the List of
Illustrations.


The following apparent errors have been corrected:

p. vii "FIG" changed to "FIG."

p. viii "Mr" changed to "Mr."

p. 29 "Figs. 9" changed to "Fig. 9"

p. 34 (note) "on" changed to "of"

p. 50 (footnote) "p 88" changed to "p. 88"

p. 72 (note) "(1898)" changed to "(1898)."

p. 107 (note) "405" changed to "405."

p. 131 "219" changed to "219."

p. 131 (note) ">Pfluger’s" changed to "Pflüger’s"

p. 162 (note) "p 44" changed to "p. 44"

p. 165 "Mullerian" changed to "Müllerian"

p. 212 "Where-ever" changed to "Wherever"

p. 216 "79" changed to "79."

p. 226 "drives" changed to "drive"

p. 239 (note) "G. F" changed to "G. F."

p. 256 "objects" changed to "objects."

p. 267 "woes" changed to "woos"

p. 330 (note) "239" changed to "239."

p. 332 "co ordinated" changed to "co-ordinated"

p. 338 "106." changed to "106"

p. 338 "BECKSTEIN" changed to "BECHSTEIN"

p. 338 "leafcase" changed to "leaf-case"

p. 339 "nerve centres" changed to "nerve-centres"

p. 341 "nerve centres" changed to "nerve-centres"

p. 341 "king crab" changed to "king-crab"

p. 341 "of, intelligence" changed to "of intelligence"

p. 342 "on, infusoria" changed to "on infusoria"

p. 342 "mating, instinct" changed to "mating instinct"

p. 343 "SCHNEIDER on" changed to "SCHNEIDER, on"

p. 343 "Shock effects" changed to "Shock, effects"

p. 343 "SPENCE on" changed to "SPENCE, on"

p. 344 "106." changed to "106"

p. 344 "of 327" changed to "of, 327"

p. 344 "72 ff.," changed to "72 ff.;"


Punctuation and spelling have otherwise been kept as printed.


The following are used inconsistently in the text:

alarm-note and alarm note

co-existed and coexists

co-incident and coincident

danger-note and danger note

first-hand and firsthand

fox-terrier and fox terrier

ground-work and groundwork

inter-communication and intercommunication

newly-hatched and newly hatched

non-plussed and nonplussed

play-time and playtime

pre-requisite and prerequisite

re-presentations and representations

re-presentative and representative

Romanes’s and Romanes’

supra and _supra_

Venus’s Fly-trap, Venus’s Fly Trap and Venus’s fly-trap







End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Animal Behaviour, by C. Lloyd Morgan

