CHAPTER IV

_INTELLIGENT BEHAVIOUR_


I.--THE NATURE OF INTELLIGENT BEHAVIOUR

Such an animal as a newly hatched bird or an insect just set free
from the chrysalis is a going concern, a living creature. It is the
bearer of wonderfully complex automatic machinery, capable, under the
initiating influence of stimuli, of performing instinctive acts. But
if this were all we should have no more than a cunningly wrought and
self-developing automatic machine. What the creature does instinctively
at first it would do always, perhaps a little more smoothly as the
organic mechanism settled down to its work--just as a steam-engine goes
more smoothly when it has been running for a while; but otherwise the
action would continue unchanged. Instinctive behaviour would remain
unmodified throughout life. The chick, however, or the imago insect is
something more than this. It affords evidence of the accommodation of
behaviour to varying circumstances. It so acts as to lead us to infer
that there are centres of intelligent control through the action of
which the automatic behaviour can be modified in accordance with the
results of experience. When, for example, a young chick walks towards
and pecks at a ladybird, the like of which he has never before seen,
the behaviour may be purely instinctive; and so, too, when he similarly
seizes a wasp-larva. Even when he rejects the ladybird or swallows the
larva, this may be directly due to unpleasant stimulation in the one
case, and pleasant in the other. But when, after a few trials, the
chick leaves ladybirds unmolested while he seizes wasp-larvæ with
increased energy, he affords evidence of selection based on individual
experience. And such selection implies intelligence in almost its
simplest expression. We may say, therefore, that, whereas instinctive
behaviour is prior to individual experience, intelligent behaviour
is the outcome and product of such experience. This distinction is
presumably clear enough; and it is one that is based on the facts
of observation. But we must not fail to notice that, though the
logical distinction is quite clear, the acquired modifications of
behaviour, which we speak of as intelligent, presuppose congenital
modes of response which are guided to finer issues. We may say,
then, that where these congenital modes of response take the form of
instinctive behaviour, there is supplied a general plan of action
which intelligence particularizes in such a manner as to produce
accommodation to the conditions of existence.

We have already frankly admitted that, in the present state of our
knowledge, we do not know with any definiteness how intelligent
modification of behaviour is effected. But it seems probable that from
all parts of the automatically working organic machine messages come
in to the centres of conscious control, and that in accordance with
the net result of all these messages, and the past experience which
they recall, other messages go out to the automatic centres, and, by
checking their action here and enforcing it there, give new direction
to the resulting behaviour. If this be so, the consciousness associated
with the control-centres is like the person who sits in a central
office and guides the working of some organized system in accordance
with the information he is constantly receiving; who sends messages to
check activity in certain directions and to render it more efficient
and vigorous in others.

It may be said, however, that intelligent guidance is, at any rate
in such simple cases as the selection of a palatable grub and the
rejection of a nauseous ladybird, itself determined by instinctive
likes and dislikes. All young chicks apparently find wasp-larvæ
palatable and ladybirds the reverse; and this is just as much
the outcome of heredity as the instinctive act of pecking. Since,
therefore, heredity determines what shall be selected and what
rejected--since the likes and dislikes are themselves instinctive--any
essential difference between congenital and acquired behaviour seems to
be evanescent.

Now, if we apply to the affective qualities of mental states--the
pleasurable tone or its opposite which characterize such states--the
term “instinctive,” we do so in reference to the broader psychological
conception of instinct, rather than in accordance with the narrower
biological acceptation of the term. For the likes and dislikes
constitute part of the conditions under which the behaviour occurs,
and not elements in the co-ordinated response as such. Hence it is
preferable to apply to these hereditary qualities the term _innate_,
rather than the term _instinctive_. But, waiving this distinction,
it is true that such pleasant or unpleasant qualities of the sensory
results of stimuli are part of the animal’s hereditary outfit, and
are not acquired in the course of individual experience. What, then,
is acquired? What part does experience play in the development of
intelligent behaviour? Let us consider the case of the chick and the
ladybird, and see whether it helps us to answer these questions. The
chick is stimulated to the instinctive pecking response by a small
moving object. That is the first scene of the little drama. In the
second scene the ladybird is seized, sensory centres are unpleasantly
stimulated, and the insect is dropped or thrown on one side with signs
of disgust. Let us grant that this aversion with its characteristic
response is also instinctive. _There is no hereditary connection
between scene 1 and scene 2._ After an interval the curtain rises
on act ii. The characters are the same as in the first scene of the
previous act. But the action of the drama is different. The chick does
not seize the ladybird. Why? Because _there is an acquired connection
between scenes 1 and 2 of the previous act_. The chick has gained
experience of the nauseous character of the insect, and this experience
influences and modifies his behaviour. The essentially new feature,
therefore, is the establishment of a connection which is not provided
through inheritance. To put the distinction in a brief form, we may
say that instinct depends on how the nervous system is built through
heredity; while intelligence depends upon how the nervous system is
developed through use.

Assuming that an animal is capable of gaining experience and of
acquiring new nervous connections in the course of individual
experience, it follows that, as has already been indicated,
instinctive behaviour in its logical purity is only presented in
the first performance of any given co-ordinated act. For after this
the animal has gained experience of its performance; and this can
no longer conform to a definition of instinct, according to which
it is characterized as “prior to experience.” On the other hand,
intelligent behaviour cannot be presented on the first occurrence of
any action, since there is no prior experience thereof in the light
of which it may be guided. This logical distinction may be expressed
by saying that instinctive behaviour is always prior to experience,
while intelligent behaviour is always subsequent to experience. When,
however, instinctive procedure continues throughout life practically
unmodified or but little modified, we may still class it under
instinct, since the hereditary connections are still the predominant
factors. And where the latter part of an instinctive sequence is
modified by the experience gained in the former part, we may still term
the modification intelligent, however small may be the time-interval
implied in the word “subsequent.” Sharp as the logical distinction is,
the behaviour of animals is in the main a joint-product, and whether we
term it instinctive or intelligent depends upon whether the hereditary
or the acquired factor predominates.

Passing on now to consider some further characteristics of intelligent
behaviour, we may first notice what Dr. Charles Mercier, in his
work on “The Nervous System and the Mind,” terms the four criteria
of intelligence. Intelligence is manifested, he says, first in the
novelty of the adjustments to external circumstances; secondly, in the
complexity; thirdly in the precision; and fourthly, in dealing with
the circumstances in such a way as to extract from them the maximum of
benefit.

[Illustration: FIG. 18.--Leaf-case of Birch-weevil.]

If, however, we are to regard these severally as criteria of
intelligence, each should serve to differentiate intelligent from
instinctive behaviour. But this is not the case. The precision of the
adjustment cannot be regarded as a criterion of intelligence, for many
instinctive acts are remarkably precise. No grocer’s assistant rolls a
paper funnel with more precision than is displayed by the birch-weevil
(_Rhynchites betulæ_) in constructing the leaf-case in which her eggs
are laid. Curved incisions of constant form are made on either side of
the midrib, and are “of just the right shape to make the overlaps in
the rolling, and to retain them rolled up with the least tendency to
spring back,”[49] while the tip of the leaf is rolled into a second
smaller funnel, which is tucked in to close the opening of the first,
after the eggs have been deposited. “The eggs hatch in their dark
place, each giving rise to an eyeless maggot, which ultimately leaves
the funnel for the earth.... Hence the beetle cannot be considered
to have ever seen a funnel, and certainly has never witnessed the
construction of one, though, when disclosed, it almost immediately
sets to work to make funnels on the complex and perfect system”
characteristic of the species. This is but one example of instinctive
precision out of the many which could be cited. We may say, then,
that though, when an act is otherwise shown to be intelligent, the
precision is a criterion of the level attained by the intelligence,
still it cannot be said to be a criterion which serves to distinguish
intelligent from instinctive behaviour.

Nor can we regard apparent prevision (which is sometimes advanced as
a criterion of intelligence) as specially distinctive of intelligent
acts regarded objectively in the study of animal behaviour. For, as we
have had occasion to show, there are many instincts which display an
astonishing amount of what may be termed “blind prevision”--instance
the instinctive regard for the welfare of unborn offspring which the
mother will never see, and the instinctive preparation for an unknown
future existence in the case of insect larvæ.

Nor, again, is the complexity of the adjustment distinctive of
intelligence as contrasted with instinct. We have cited examples
which afford evidence of much complexity in instinctive behaviour.
The construction and storage of the nest among solitary wasps, and
their methods of capturing and conveying the insects or spiders on
which they prey, are sufficiently complex. So, too, is the behaviour
of the Sitaris larva which attaches itself to the male bee, passes to
the female, and then slips on to the eggs she lays; and so, again,
is that of the Yucca moth, which collects pollen from the anthers,
conveys it to the stigma, and then lays her eggs among the ovules.
These cases show, too, that the circumstances may be dealt with in
such a way as to extract from them the maximum of benefit. It would be
difficult intelligently to improve upon the manner of dealing with the
circumstances displayed in many familiar modes of instinctive procedure.

There remain the novelty of the adjustment and the individuality
displayed. And here we seem to have valid criteria of intelligent
behaviour. The ability to perform acts in special adaptation to
new circumstances, and the individuality manifested in dealing with
the complex conditions of a variable environment,--these seem to be
distinctive features of intelligence. On the other hand, in instinctive
behaviour there seems to be no choice; the animal is impelled to their
stereotyped performance through impulse, as by a stern necessity; they
are so far from novel that they are performed by every like individual
of the species, and have been so performed by their ancestors for
generations; and in performing the instinctive act, the animal seems to
have no more individuality or originality than a piece of adequately
wound clockwork.

Granting, then, that behaviour is shown to be intelligent by the fact
that there is evidence of profiting by experience, we may say that
the level attained by the intelligence is indicated by the complexity
of the adjustment, its precision, the individuality shown, the amount
of prevision disclosed, and in its being such as to extract from the
circumstances the maximum of benefit. Many of these points, however,
serve equally well to mark the level of instinctive procedure.


II.--INTELLIGENT BEHAVIOUR IN INSECTS

It is, as we have seen, among the higher invertebrates, especially in
insects, that some of the most remarkable and complex instincts may be
found. There is,[50] however, a tendency to ascribe the behaviour of
insects entirely to instinct, without sufficient evidence that neither
imitation, instruction, nor intelligent learning play any part. This
is, perhaps, a survival of the old-fashioned view that all the acts
of the lower animals are performed from instinct, whereas those of
human beings are to be regarded as rational or intelligent. In popular
writings and lectures, for example, we frequently find some or all of
the following activities of ant-life ascribed to instinct: recognition
of members of the same nest; powers of communication; keeping aphides
for the sake of their sweet secretion; collection of aphid eggs in
October, hatching them out in the nest, and taking them in the spring
to the daisies, on which they feed, for pasture; slave-making and
slave-keeping, which, in some cases, is so ancient a habit that the
enslavers are unable even to feed themselves; keeping insects as beasts
of burden, _e.g._ a kind of plant-bug to carry leaves; keeping beetles,
etc., as domestic pets; habits of personal cleanliness, one ant giving
another a brush-up, and being brushed-up in return; habits of play
and recreation; habits of burying the dead; the storage of grain and
nipping the budding rootlet to prevent further germination; the habits
described by Dr. Lincecum, and to a large extent confirmed by Dr.
McCook, that Texan ants prepare a clearing around their nest, and six
months later harvest the ant-rice, a kind of grass of which they are
particularly fond, even, according to Lincecum, seeking and sowing the
grain which shall yield this harvest; the collection by other ants of
grass to manure the soil on which there subsequently grows a species of
fungus upon which they feed; the military organization of the ecitons
of Central America; and so forth. Now, the description of the habits
of ants forms one of the most interesting chapters in natural history.
But to class them all as illustrations of instinct is a survival of an
old-fashioned method of treatment.

To put the matter in another way. Suppose that an intelligent ant
were to make observations on human behaviour as displayed in one of
our great cities or in an agricultural district. Seeing so great an
amount of routine work going on around him, might he not be in danger
of regarding all this as evidence of hereditary instinct? Might he not
find it difficult to obtain satisfactory evidence of the establishment
of our habits, of the fact that this routine work has to some extent
to be learnt? Might he not say (perhaps not wholly without truth), “I
can see nothing whatever in the training of the children of these men
to fit them for their life-work. The training of their children has no
more apparent bearing upon the activities of their after-life than
the feeding of our grubs has on the duties of ant-life. And although
we must remember,” he might continue, “that these large animals do not
have the advantage which we possess of awaking suddenly, as by a new
birth, to their full faculties, still, as they grow older, now one and
now another of their deferred instincts is unfolded and manifested.
They fall into the routine of life with little or no training as
the period proper to the various instincts arrives. If learning
thereof there be, it has at present escaped our observation. And such
intelligence as their activities evince (and many of them do show
remarkable adaptation to uniform conditions of life) would seem to be
rather ancestral than of the present time; as is shown by the fact that
many of the adaptations are directed rather to past conditions of life
than to those which now hold good. In the presence of new emergencies
to which their instincts have not fitted them, these poor men are often
completely at a loss. We cannot but conclude, therefore, that, although
shown under somewhat different and less favourable conditions, instinct
occupies fully as large a space in the psychology of man as it does in
that of the ant, while their intelligence is far less unerring and,
therefore, markedly inferior to our own.”

Of course, the views here attributed to the ant are very absurd. But
are they much more absurd than the views of those who, on the evidence
which we at present possess, attribute all the varied activities of
ant-life to instinct? Take the case of the ecitons, or military ants,
or the harvesting ants, or the ants that are said to keep draught-bugs
as beasts of burden: have we sufficient evidence to enable us to
affirm that these modes of behaviour are purely instinctive and not
intelligent; that all the varied manœuvres of the military ants, for
example, are displayed to the full without any learning or imitation,
without teaching and without intelligence on the part of every
individual in the army.

That in some cases there is something very like a training or education
of the ant when it emerges from the pupa condition is rendered probable
by the observations of M. Forel. As Romanes says,[51] “The young
ant does not appear to come into the world with a full instinctive
knowledge of all its duties as a member of a social community. It is
led about the nest and ‘trained to a knowledge of domestic duties,
especially in the case of larvæ.’ Later on, the young ants are taught
to distinguish between friends and foes.”

We have only to weigh the evidence brought forward by such observers
as Fabre and Dr. Peckham to see that among the solitary wasps and
mason bees the behaviour, though founded on instinct, is in large
degree modified by intelligence. The care with which a site for the
tunnelled nest in the ground is selected, betokens something more
than instinct. The following is a slightly condensed statement of Dr.
and Mrs. Peckham’s observations on one of the solitary wasps (_Aporus
fasciatus_).[52] “We were working one day in the melon-field when we
saw one of these little wasps going backwards and dragging a spider.
She twice left it on the ground while she circled about for a moment,
but soon carried it up on to one of the large melon leaves, and left
it there while she made a long and careful study of the locality,
skimming close to the ground in and out among the vines; at length she
went under a leaf close to the ground, and began to dig. After her head
was well down in the ground we broke off the leaf that we might see
her method of work. She went on for ten minutes without noticing the
change, and then, without any circling, flew off to visit her spider.
When she tried to return to her hole it was evident that some landmark
was missing. Again and again she zig-zagged from the spider to the
nesting-place, going by a sort of path among the vines from leaf to
leaf, and from blossom to blossom, but when she reached the spot she
did not recognize it. At last we laid the leaf back in its place over
the opening, when she at once went in and resumed her work, keeping
at it steadily for ten minutes longer. At this point she suddenly
reversed her operations, and began to fill in the hole that she had
made. She then glanced at the spider, selected a new place, and began
to dig again. This hole was also filled in; she looked once more at
the spider, and started a nest in a new place. This, in turn, was soon
abandoned, as was a fourth. The fifth beginning was made under a leaf
that lay close to the ground, but after twenty minutes’ work this place
also was abandoned and a sixth started. This, however, was the final
choice, and after forty-five minutes spent in digging it was completed.”

[Illustration: FIG. 19.--Solitary Wasp using a stone to beat down the
earth over its nest (after Peckham).]

This description shows an amount of apparent fastidiousness which
is quite irreconcilable with the hypothesis that the behaviour
is merely instinctive. Not less fastidious are some wasps in the
temporary closure of the hole with a stone or pellet of earth,
the operation being repeated several times with different covers
before the insect seems to be satisfied; while in other cases the
hole is hidden by bringing earth in such quantity as to render the
place indistinguishable from the rest of the field. But in one case
observed by Dr. Peckham, intelligent procedure was carried so far as
apparently to involve the use of a tool, the same behaviour having been
independently observed in the same genus (_Ammophila_) by Dr. S. W.
Williston of Kansas University. “Just here,” writes Dr. Peckham,[53]
“must be told the story of one little wasp whose individuality stands
out in our minds more distinctly than that of any of the others. In
filling up her nest she put her head down into it and bit away the
loose earth from the sides, letting it fall to the bottom of the
burrow, and then, after a quantity had accumulated, jammed it down with
her head. Earth was then brought from the outside and pressed in, and
then more was bitten from the sides. When, at last, the filling was
level with the ground, she brought a quantity of fine grains of dirt
to the spot, and, picking up a small pebble in her mandibles, used
it as a hammer in pounding them down with rapid strokes, thus making
this spot as hard and firm as the surrounding surface. Before we could
recover from our astonishment at this performance she had dropped her
stone and was bringing more earth, and in a moment we saw her pick up
the pebble and again pound the earth into place with it. Once more the
whole process was repeated, and then the little creature flew away.”

Here we have intelligent behaviour rising to a level to which some
would apply the term rational. For the act may be held to afford
evidence of the perception of the relation of the means employed to
an end to be attained, and some general conception of purpose. In
this section, which deals with description of behaviour based on
observation, the psychological explanation cannot be discussed. Similar
indications of deliberate action may be held to be afforded by the
sometimes elaborate “locality studies” which these insects seem to
make,--by the “care that is taken by wasps to acquaint themselves with
the surroundings of their nests.” A _Sphex_, for example, which had
partially made and then abandoned several nests, left them without any
locality study; but when she had completed a nest in a suitable spot
she made “a most thorough and systematic study of the surroundings.
She flew in and out among the plants, first in narrow circles near
the surface of the ground, and then in wider and wider ones as she
rose higher in the air, until at last she took a straight line and
disappeared in the distance.” Another species (_Cerceris deserta_) “has
the habit of making a number of half circles in front of the nest, and
then, after rising a little higher, of flying several times completely
round it.” The method of procedure is, it seems, so normal to the
species that it is probably founded on an instinctive basis. Dr. and
Mrs. Peckham, in commenting on their observations, say:[54] “If the
examination of the objects about the nest makes no impression upon the
wasp, or if it is not remembered, she ought not to be inconvenienced
nor thrown off her track when weeds and stones are removed and
the surface of the ground is smoothed over; but this is just what
happens.” For convenience of observation they “sometimes gently moved
intercepting objects to one side, but even such a slight change threw
the wasp out of her bearings, and made it difficult for her to recover
her treasure.” Where wasps form a number of nests in a small plot of
ground, as in the case of _Bembex_, each knows and returns to its own
hole, as was proved by Dr. Peckham, who marked the insects and their
nests with paint.

So, too, with regard to prey. In the course of his observations on
_Pompilus_, Fabre removed the spider which the wasp had deposited on
a tuft of vegetation before she made her nest. As she was at work
beneath the surface she could not see what went on above ground or
where the spider had been redeposited some twenty inches from its
former position. On emerging from the nest the wasp went straight to
the original spot, searched round it for some time, then made further
excursions, and discovered the spider. After slightly altering its
position, and placing it on another tuft of vegetation, she returned to
her subterranean labours, giving the observer an opportunity of again
moving the spider. Five times did Fabre repeat the operation, and every
time the wasp returned to the spot where she had last deposited her
prey.

The same observer records some interesting experiments with the mason
bee, _Chalicodoma_. The mud nests of the species investigated were
affixed to stones on the banks of the Rhone. When a nest was partially
constructed, the bee having flown off for more material, Fabre moved
the stone to a new position, near at hand and easily visible from the
original site. The bee went straight to the place where the nest had
been, searched the immediate neighbourhood, flew off, and returned
to the same spot to continue the search. If she came across her own
nest in its new position she did not recognize it as hers, but left it
after examination. But if a stone with the nest of another bee in about
the same stage of construction was placed in the position occupied
by her own, she adopted it. And when two nests near together, both
half built, were transposed, each bee unhesitatingly adopted the nest
which occupied the position where its own nest had been. It may well
seem strange that, the general locality-memory being so well marked,
the recognition of the particular stone and nest should be deficient.
This may be due to the fact that the so-called compound eyes are
the organs concerned in locality vision, while the ocelli deal with
details at very close range, and that the former alone afford the
requisite data for recognition; by their instrumentality alone arises
the conscious situation which affords guidance in behaviour. And in
that situation slight changes which for us make it “still the same but
with a difference” render it no longer the same for a being of more
limited intelligence--one probably incapable of analyzing the situation
and seeing that the sameness preponderates over the difference. Be
this as it may, the failure of a bee to recognize its own nest under
circumstances so foreign to its experience as removal to a new spot may
be paralleled with what I have observed in the case of sticklebacks.
A nest had been built in a round glass bell jar which stood near a
window. Some aquatic vegetation grew in the tank, and the nest was
built on the window side. An experiment was made by turning the large
bell jar through a right angle. The male stickleback searched for its
nest in the old direction on the window side--that is to say, the
same position in reference to the incidence of the light. The search
was, of course, fruitless, and a new nest was begun in this position.
Presently the old nest was discovered, and was then vigorously
destroyed in just the same way as the nest of a rival is pulled to
pieces and scattered. Here a new incidence of light and new direction
of shadows seemed to have completely transformed the visual situation.

To return to insects, it is probable that the homing faculty is not
the result of an inborn mysterious instinct dependent on some sense of
direction of which we have no knowledge, but is based upon experience
gained during their flight hither and thither--that, in a word, it is
intelligent and not instinctive. Experiments of Fabre at first seemed
to suggest some magnetic influence to which bees were sensitive; for
when a minute magnet was fixed to a bee as it started on its return
journey, the insect was at fault; but as a check experiment he affixed
a piece of straw instead of a magnet, with similar results. Some of
Fabre’s observations and those of Dr. Bethe[55] are difficult to
reconcile with the hypothesis that, in the homing, guidance is due to
acquired acquaintance with the locality. But, on the other hand, the
experiments of Lord Avebury and of Romanes seem to favour this view.
Romanes found that when bees were taken inland from their hive near
the seaboard, and then liberated, they returned from considerable
distances, the whole locality being familiar; but taken to the
seashore, where the objects around them were unfamiliar (since the
seashore is not the place where flowers and nectar are to be found),
the bees, though not far distant from the hive, were nonplussed and
lost their way. Dr. and Mrs. Peckham, as the result of their extremely
careful observations, seem to have no doubt that the homing of solitary
wasps is due to locality-experience; and of the social wasp, _Polistes
fusca_, they say:[56] “We have seen the young workers make repeated
locality studies when they first began to venture away from home, but
as they occupy the same nest all summer they, of course, grow more and
more familiar with their surroundings, until they become so thoroughly
acquainted with them that they can find their way without the least
difficulty. We have no doubt that with them, as with the solitary
wasps, the faculty is not instinctive, but is the direct outcome of
individual experience.”

In the interesting pages of the works in which Dr. and Mrs. Peckham
describe their investigations, there are many observations which show
that wasps are capable of intelligently profiting by the experience
which their instinctive behaviour places them in a position to acquire.
The inherited tendencies and aptitudes pave the way for acquired
modification and accommodation of behaviour. To catch and paralyze
spiders, to dig and prepare a tunnelled nest, and to carry the prey
to the nest, all this affords the instinctive basis; but when the
observers tell us that they “have several times seen wasps enlarge
their holes when a trial had demonstrated that a spider would not go
in,” and even on one occasion without trial when an unusually bulky
spider was brought, there is something beyond instinct; there is
intelligent adjustment to special circumstances given in experience.
Presumably intelligent is the habit frequently observed in one species
of _Pompilus_, and occasionally in another, of hanging the paralyzed
spider in a crotch of a branching stem, usually of bean or sorrel,
where it will be safe from the depredation of ants. On one occasion
Dr. Peckham, desirous of seeing the exact manner in which the victim
was stung, substituted an unhurt spider for that which the wasp had
paralyzed.[57] “According to the habit of its species when danger
threatens, it kept perfectly quiet, and when the wasp returned it was
hanging there as motionless as a piece of dead matter; but she would
not touch it; she hunted all over that plant and then over several
others near to it, returning continually to look again at the right
spot. After five minutes she flew off in the direction of the woods
to catch another spider. Why did she go to the woods? Why did she
not take the one that hung there in plain view? It could not have
been due to the fact that we had handled the spider, since when, on
other occasions, we took one that had been paralyzed, examined it, and
then returned it to the wasp, she accepted it without hesitation....
In forty minutes she came back with another spider, but, instead of
taking it into the nest, she hung it upon a bean plant near by, and
then proceeded to dig a new hole a few inches distant from the first.
Foolish little wasp, what a waste of labour! Truly, if you are endowed
with energy beyond your fellows, you are but meagrely furnished with
reason.”

[Illustration: FIG. 20.--Spiders placed by Solitary Wasps in the
crotches of branching stems (after Peckham).]

Here we have the routine of instinct--the normal mode of hunting and
capturing prey, the normal procedure of bringing the spider, and
then making the nest, predominating over any tendency to initiate
intelligent improvements. This, however, should not surprise us, in
whom the force of habit is often so strong. Nor should we feel surprise
at the apparently stupid tolerance some of these wasps display in
presence of parasites. _Bembex_, which does not store and close its
cell, but brings continual supplies of food to its larvæ, is not
disturbed by the presence in the cell of the grubs of the parasitic
fly _Miltogramma_. She could, we think, easily free her nest of these
intruders, but she continues to bring supplies, though the parasites
may absorb it all and leave her own larvæ to perish. She adapts her
procedure to the new conditions, being incapable of knowing that she is
feeding the enemies of her race.

Enough has now been said to show the extent and the limitations of the
intelligence of such insects as the solitary wasps. It will be noticed
that the acquired modifications of behaviour occur in close connection
with the inherited ground-plan of instinctive procedure. We shall
have occasion to note the same connection in our discussion of social
behaviour in the next chapter. And we shall consider the influence of
intelligence on instinct before we bring this chapter to a close.


III.--SOME RESULTS OF EXPERIMENT

It is unnecessary to give a _resumé_ of entertaining anecdotes
illustrative of intelligent behaviour in the higher animals. Such
anecdotes are too often the outcome of casual observations by untrained
observers; and the interpretation put upon the facts frequently shows
a want of psychological discrimination. Such is not the material of
which science is constituted. What is needed is systematic observation
conducted, so far as possible, under controlled conditions. Two
things are necessary: first, to distinguish instinctive behaviour,
inherited as such, from the acquired modifications or new departures
due to intelligence; and secondly, to determine the method and range
of intelligent procedure. These problems can only be solved in their
entirety by a complete knowledge of the life-history of the animal
concerned. But they may be attacked in detail by a systematic study
of particular modes of behaviour, and by an investigation into
their manner of origin. That this may be done with some approach
to accuracy, resort must be had to experiment, which permits of
observation under controlled conditions.

To ascertain, for example, how far nest-building is instinctive in
birds, Mr. John S. Budgett hatched a hen greenfinch under a canary. In
the following autumn he bought a caged bird, a cock, probably of the
same year, and in the succeeding spring turned the pair into a large
aviary, supplying such material as twigs, rootlets, dried grass, moss,
feathers, sheep’s wool and horsehair. The hen soon began to build, the
cock bird taking no share in the work, and finished her nest in a few
days. On careful comparison it was found to resemble that of a wild
greenfinch in every particular, being made of wool, roots, and moss,
lined with horsehair. A second nest the aviary greenfinch built was
also quite normal.

In the case of a bullfinch which Mr. Budgett reared, having obtained it
when a few weeks’ old, the first nest was composed of dried grass with
a little wool and hair, but without either rootlets or twigs. A second
which she built was, however, quite typical, made of fine twigs and
roots, and lined with horsehair; as was also a third nest.

It is just possible, though most improbable, that the bullfinch
utilized its three weeks’ experience gained in the nest from which it
was taken. But Mr. Jenner Weir describes[58] observations on canaries
in which this source of experience is excluded. “It is usual,” he
says, “with canary fanciers to take out the nest constructed by the
parent birds, and to place a felt nest in its place, and when her young
are hatched, and old enough to be handled, to place a second clean
nest, also of felt, in the box, removing the other. But I never knew
that canaries so reared failed to make a nest when the breeding time
arrived. I have, on the other hand, marvelled to see how like a wild
bird’s the nests are constructed. It is customary to supply them with
a small set of materials, such as moss and hair. They use the moss for
the foundation, and line with the finer materials, just as a wild
goldfinch would do.”

Experiment seems, therefore, to show in a way, and with a clearness
impossible of attainment by observation under natural uncontrolled
conditions, that nest-building in birds is instinctive. That the manner
and method of procedure is often modified in accordance with special
conditions--that the instinctive outline of nidification receives
its final touches through individual experience--is sometimes seen
under nature, and more often under the semi-experimental conditions
of domestication. Thus three pairs of pigeons in the Wilson Tower
of Clifton College made their nests in 1898, as I am informed by
Mr. H. C. Playne, of galvanized iron wire, pieces of which were
left in a corner at the top of the tower, thus affording a parallel
to the behaviour of the unconventional crow of Calcutta, mentioned
by Mr. F. W. Headley,[59] which made its nest of soda-water bottle
wires, which it picked up in a back yard. But even in this matter
experiment serves to bring out clearly the selective influence which
is exercised by intelligence. Bolton,[60] in 1792, observed a pair of
goldfinches beginning to build their nest in his garden. They formed
the ground-work of moss, grass, etc., as usual; but on his scattering
small parcels of wool in different parts of the garden they, in great
measure, left off the use of their own stuff and used the wool.
Afterwards he gave them cotton, and they then used this instead of the
wool; then he supplied fine down, and they finished their work with
this, leaving the wool and cotton.

In studying the behaviour of wild animals under natural conditions, it
must always be difficult to distinguish the congenital basis from the
acquired elements; for both tend to bring about a working adjustment
to the conditions of life, and we can seldom have opportunities of
tracing the interplay of the factors which produce the instinct-habits
of adult life. But under domestication we seek to bring about a new
working adjustment to conditions imposed by man. The skilful trainer
utilizes the natural instinctive tendencies as a basis; and, by a
system of rewards and punishments, leads the intelligent modifications
of behaviour along lines directed by his deliberate purpose. The
conditions are largely those of experiment, and they bring out the
play and range of intelligence in a way which would otherwise elude
our observation. The training of falcons for the chase affords a good
illustration, since they cannot be bred in confinement, and the effects
of training cannot therefore be hereditary. The falconer’s object is
to modify the congenital instinctive behaviour of a bird of prey for
the purposes of sport. She is trained to the lure at first at short
distances, and step by step through longer flights; she is taught by
snatching away the lure to stoop at it repeatedly as often as it is
jerked aside; and then she is trained on living quarry, at first under
easy conditions, till eventually she can be flown at a wild bird. And
as a result a well-trained falcon will follow her master from field
to field, regulating her flight by his movements, always ready for a
stoop when the quarry is sprung. The fact that she can be thus educated
for her work shows that her behaviour is plastic, and can be moulded
by intelligence. Experimental conditions reveal the fact; but under
nature the moulding influence of intelligence is presumably not less
important, though it is more directly in line with the congenital
instinctive tendencies.

That much of the behaviour of the higher animals is guided by
experience similar to that which plays so large a part in their
training under the experimental conditions of domestication is
generally admitted. But what are the range and limits of animal
intelligence, and whether it attains the level of rational conduct,
in the restricted sense of the term “rational,” are questions open to
discussion, to which answers are more likely to be obtained through
experiment than by chance observations.

Before giving some of the results of such experiment it will be well
to revert to the distinction, which was drawn in the second chapter,
between the lower or intelligent stage of mental development and the
higher or rational stage. It will be remembered that rational processes
were characterized by the fact that the situations contain the products
of reflective thought, presumably absent in the earlier stages of
development; that they were further characterized by a new purpose or
end of consciousness, namely, to explain the situations which at an
earlier stage are merely accepted as they are given in presentation or
re-presentation; they require deliberate attention to the relationships
which hold good among the several elements of successive situations;
and they involve, so far as behaviour is concerned, the intentional
application of an ideal scheme with the object of rational guidance.

On the other hand, the animal at the stage of intelligent behaviour
deals with the circumstances of his comparatively simple life by
making use of the particular situations which have been presented to
consciousness in the course of his practical experience. If such an
animal be placed in the midst of new circumstances he has to find out
by a process of trial and error how they are to be met. After a longer
or shorter period of trial, guided only by particular experiences,
he chances to hit upon a mode of procedure which is successful. The
successful act is then incorporated in a new situation; at first,
perhaps, only incompletely. The association is eventually established
by repetition, through which is acquired the habit of doing the right
thing in the appropriate manner. Why he does this and not something
else, in so far as he is intelligent and not rational, he probably
neither knows nor has the wit to consider. The satisfaction of success
suffices for intelligence as such. If the circumstances be so modified
as to render the particular mode of meeting them ineffectual, after
trying again and again in the old way, he will sometimes stumble upon
the proper mode of overcoming the difficulty, and after doing so two
or three times a new conscious situation involving the requisite
associations will be established, and the appropriate behaviour will
become habitual. But why this new mode of procedure rather than any
other is adopted, intelligence as such does not know, because it does
not analyze the situation and disentangle the essential relationships.
The satisfaction of success again suffices. In a word, such an animal
in the perceptual stage of mental development seems wanting in the
power of reflection. He does not appear to show evidence of framing
anything like a general scheme of knowledge which he can apply to the
solution of particular problems, of a practical nature, involving
difficulties and obstacles.

The method of intelligence--in the sense in which we are using this
term--the method of varied trial and error with the utilization of
chance success, is a lengthy and somewhat clumsy process; but it
suffices. Now contrast it with the procedure of a rational animal, such
as man is or may be. When he is confronted by a difficulty he is not
content to meet it by trying this way, and that way, and another way,
anyhow, and trusting to chance to bring success, but he considers the
problem in all its relations with a view to ascertaining the essential
nature of the difficulty. For each attempted mode of meeting the case
he has a definite reason. He knows why he does this and not that. He
has a plan or scheme which he puts into execution. And if it fail,
he is not content till he finds out wherein the failure lay. This
enables him to plan a better scheme. He sees why it is better; and if
at last he be successful by a happy hit, as in the chance procedure
of intelligence, he looks for the reason of it. And seeing why this
fortunate attempt, unlike his previous efforts, just meets the case,
he repeats it because he perceives that herein lies the essential
solution of the difficulty. Both in the case of intelligence and in
that of reason, as here distinguished, present procedure is based upon
past experience; but reason has built upon the foundations thus laid an
orderly scheme, and knows its whys and wherefores, while intelligence
is at the mercy of chance associations. The reason for success it has
not the wit to assign.

The essential difference between the two cases may be put in another
way by saying that the intelligent being forms sensory impressions and
sensory images linked together by bonds of association, combining and
coalescing to constitute a conscious situation effective in behaviour
under the guiding influence of pleasure and pain; while the rational
being not only does all this, but goes further. He fixes his attention
on the way in which the elements in the situation are connected and
related; he builds an ideal framework on which the sensory impressions
are set or move in an orderly manner. And it is this scheme, fashioned
by reason and transforming the situation, which he utilizes in dealing
with difficulties.

Yet another way of putting the same essential distinction is to say
that intelligence deals with pictures, either directly presented to
the senses or called up in re-presentation. If we state the matter
thus, however, we must remember that the “pictures” may be painted in
colours supplied by any of the senses; and that smells, tastes, sounds,
touches, pressures, limb-movements, and so forth, are elements in the
pictured product. Bearing this in mind, we may say that intelligence
deals with sensory impressions and their revived images in concrete
and particular situations; while reason analyzes the pictures, and
extracts from them general notions in terms of which the pictures may
be explained. For example, we picture a stone falling to the earth;
but we explain it by the general notion of gravitative attraction. The
conception forms part of our ideal scheme of knowledge, which is not
itself picturable, though this or that example of its action may be
presented or re-presented in sensory imagery.

Once more we may say--and this way of looking at the question arises
naturally out of what has gone before--that intelligence deals with
concrete examples, and does not rise to the abstract and general
rule. The ideal scheme of reason is the result of abstraction and
generalization. It is a framework of conceptions which can be applied
to the particular facts which fall under observation to see whether
it fits and meets the case. Intelligence has to deal with the facts
as they present themselves, without the aid of an organized system of
knowledge built up into an ideal scheme.

Enough has now been said to indicate the distinction between the
method of intelligence and that of reason. It may, no doubt, be said
that the terminology used is open to criticism; for, on the one hand,
the words “intelligence” and “intelligent” are frequently used as
synonymous with “reason” and “rational;” and, on the other hand, acts
requiring neither abstraction, generalization, nor the application
of any scheme of knowledge are frequently spoken of as “rational.”
Hence there is, it may be urged, some danger of misunderstanding. This
may be granted. And unless some such restriction of meaning under
suitable terms be accepted by psychologists, misunderstanding will
continue. More essential, however, than the distinctive terms we are
to use is the distinction of method which underlies them. That, I
trust, is sound. Dr. Lindley, in an interesting paper on “A Study of
Puzzles,”[61] has utilized the distinction in his investigation of the
mental development of children, and has found that the procedure of
young children is predominantly of the “sense-trial and error” order
which has above been termed intelligent; and he expresses the opinion
that “most of the adaptations of animals are on this sense-trial and
error level.”

Such certainly seems to be the conclusion to be drawn from my own
experimental observations on dogs. It has frequently been asserted
that the behaviour of a dog with a stick in his mouth, when he comes
to a narrow gap, shows that he at once perceives the nature of
the difficulty, and meets it in a rational manner by adopting the
appropriate plan of action. He pulls the stick through by one end. But
experiments, which I have elsewhere described,[62] showed that a fox
terrier, fourteen months old, seemed to be incapable of perceiving
the nature of the difficulty which vertical iron railings presented
to his passage with a stick in his mouth, and only imperfectly learnt
to overcome it after many ineffectual trials and many failures. The
results obtained on the first afternoon may be quoted to indicate the
nature of the evidence. The dog was sent after a short stick into a
field, and had to pass through vertical rails about six inches apart.
On his return the stick caught at the ends. I whistled and turned as
if to leave; and the dog pushed and struggled vigorously. He then
retired into the field, lay down, and began gnawing the stick, but,
when called, came slowly up to the railings and stuck again. After some
efforts he put his head on one side, and brought the stick, a short
one, through. After patting and encouraging him, I sent him after it
again. On his return he came up to the railings with more confidence,
but, holding the stick by the middle, found his passage barred. After
some struggles he dropped it and came through without it. Sent after it
again, he put his head through the railings, seized the stick by the
middle, and then pulled with all his might, dancing up and down in his
endeavours to effect a passage. Turning his head in his efforts, he
at last brought the stick through. A third time he was again foiled;
again dropped the stick; and again seizing it by the middle tried to
pull it through. I then placed the stick so that he could easily seize
it by one end and draw it through the opening between the rails. But
when I sent him after it, he went through into the field, picked up the
stick by the middle, and tried to push his way between the railings,
succeeding, after many abortive attempts, by holding his head on one
side.

Subsequent trials on many occasions yielded similar results. But the
following summer, when I resumed the experiments, I was able with some
guidance to teach him to bring a long stick to the railings, drop
it, and then draw the stick through by one end; though even then,
if he had dropped it so that one end just caught a rail, he often
failed, shaking his head vigorously, dropping the stick and seizing
it again, and repeating this behaviour until it chanced to fall in
a more favourable position. He did not apparently perceive that by
gently moving the stick a little one way or other the difficulty
could be simply overcome with little effort. Nor when given a crooked
stick, which caught in a rail, did he show any sign of perceiving that
by pushing the stick and freeing the crook he could pull the stick
through. Each time the crook caught he pulled with all his strength,
seizing the stick now at the end, now in the middle, and now near the
crook. At length he seized the crook itself, and with a wrench broke
it off. A man who was passing, and who had paused for a couple of
minutes to watch the proceedings, said, “Clever dog that, sir; he knows
where the hitch do lie.” The remark was the characteristic outcome of
two minutes’ chance observation. During the half hour or more during
which I had watched the dog he had tried nearly every possible way of
holding and tugging at the stick. Such is the mode of behaviour based
on intelligence--continued trial and failure, until a happy effect is
reached, not by methodically planning, but by chance.

Two of my friends criticized these results, and said that they only
showed how stupid _my_ dog was. _Their_ dogs would have acted very
differently. I suggested that the question could easily be put to the
test of experiment. The behaviour of the dog was in each case--the
one a very intelligent Yorkshire terrier, the other an English
terrier--similar to that above described. The owner of the latter was
somewhat annoyed, used forcible language, and told the dog that he
could do it perfectly well if he tried.

In experimenting with my fox terrier on the method adopted in seizing
and carrying differently balanced objects, I used (1) a straight
stick, the centre of gravity of which was at the middle; (2) a Kaffir
knob-kerrie, the centre of gravity of which was about six inches from
the knob; (3) a light geological hammer; and (4) a heavier hammer. In
the last, the centre of balance was close to the hammer head. The net
result of the observations was that the best place for seizing and
holding the object was hit upon in each case after indefinite trials;
that after three or four days’ continuous experience with one (say the
knob-kerrie), another (say the stick) was at first seized nearer one
end, showing the influence of the more recent association; and that
there was little indication of the dog’s seizing any one of the four
at once in the right place, that is to say, the point of seizure was
not clearly differentiated in accordance with the look of the object. I
tied a piece of string, in later trials, round the centre of balance,
but this, at the time of the dog’s death, had not served as a sure
guide to his experience.

The way in which my dog learnt to lift the latch of the garden gate,
and thus let himself out, affords a good example of intelligent
behaviour. The iron gate outside my house is held to by a latch, but
swings open by its own weight if the latch be lifted. Whenever he
wanted to go out the fox terrier raised the latch with the back of his
head, and thus released the gate, which swung open. Now the question in
any such case is: How did he learn the trick? In this particular case
the question can be answered, because he was carefully watched. When
he was put outside the door, he naturally wanted to get out into the
road, where there was much to tempt him--the chance of a run, other
dogs to sniff at, possibly cats to be worried. He gazed eagerly out
through the railings on the low parapet wall shown in the illustration;
and in due time chanced to gaze out under the latch, lifting it
with his head. He withdrew his head and looked out elsewhere; but
the gate had swung open. Here was the fortunate occurrence arising
out of natural tendencies in a dog. But the association between
looking out just there and the open gate with a free passage into the
road is somewhat indirect. The coalescence of the presentative and
re-presentative elements into a conscious situation effective for the
guidance of behaviour was not effected at once. After some ten or
twelve experiences, in each of which the exit was more rapidly effected
with less gazing out at wrong places, the fox terrier had learnt to
go straight and without hesitation to the right spot. In this case
the lifting of the latch was unquestionably hit on by accident, and
the trick was only rendered habitual by repeated association in the
same situation of the chance act and the happy escape. Once firmly
established, however, the behaviour remained constant throughout the
remainder of the dog’s life, some five or six years.

[Illustration: FIG. 21.--Fox-terrier lifting the latch of a gate.]

Mr. E. J. Shellard observed[63] an act of similar import in a Scotch
staghound, which “appeared at first to be the result of thought,”
but which, on closer observation, was clearly seen to be the result
of intelligence in the restricted sense of the term. The dog released
the lever-latch of a yard door. “At first he raised his paws to the
door and scratched violently, manifesting various signs of impatience.
His scratches, which extended from the top of the door downwards, and
over the whole area, would thus inevitably at some time or other reach
the handle of the latch, which was thus struck forcibly downwards, the
latch itself rising upwards. The door would then open from the weight
of the dog pushing against it. The dog always opened the door in this
manner from the time when the incident was first noticed until he left,
a period of about three years. The door was opened with no greater
ease at the expiration of that period than at the commencement. His
paws would strike various parts of the door, and he never appeared to
exercise any degree of judgment in the localization of his strokes, the
fact of his paws striking the handle of the latch being a necessary
result, providing the dog had sufficient patience and strength to
continue.”

One or two more experiments with my fox terrier may be briefly
described. I watched his behaviour when a solid indiarubber ball was
thrown towards a wall standing at right angles to its course. At first
he followed it right up to the wall and then back as it rebounded. So
long as it travelled with such velocity as to be only just ahead of
him he pursued the same course. But when it was thrown more violently,
so as to meet him on the rebound as he ran towards the wall, he
learnt that he was thus able to seize it as it came towards him. And,
profiting by the incidental experience thus gained, he acquired the
habit--though for long with some uncertainty of reaction--of slowing
off when the object of his pursuit reached the wall so as to await its
rebound. Again, when the ball was thrown so as to glance at a wide
angle from a surface, at first--when the velocity was such as to keep
it just ahead of him--he followed its course. But when the velocity
was increased he learnt to take a short cut along the third side of a
triangle, so as to catch the object at some distance from the wall. A
third series of experiments were made where a right angle was formed
by the meeting of two surfaces. One side of the angle, the left, was
dealt with for a day or two. At first the ball was directly followed.
Then a short cut was taken to meet its deflected course. On the fourth
day this method was well established. On the fifth, the ball was thrown
so as to strike the other or right side of the angle, and thus be
deflected in the opposite direction. The dog followed the old course
(the short cut to the left) and was completely non-plussed, searching
that side, then more widely, and not finding the ball for eleven
minutes. On repeating the experiment thrice, similar results were that
day obtained. On the following day the ball was thrown just ahead of
him, so as to strike to the right of the angle, and was followed and
caught. This course was pursued for three days, and he then learnt
to take a short cut to the right. On the next day the ball was sent,
as at first, to the left, and the dog was again non-plussed. I did
not succeed in getting him to associate a given difference of initial
direction with a resultant difference of deflection.

I may here mention that, whenever searching for a ball of which he had
lost sight in the road, he would run along the gutter first on one
side and then on the other. A friend who was walking with me one day
regarded this as a clear case of rational inference. “The dog knows,”
he said, “the effects of the convex curvature of the road as well as we
do.” I am convinced, however (having watched his ways from a puppy),
that this method of search was gradually established on a basis of
practical experience. No logical inference on his part is necessary for
the interpretation of the facts; and we should not assume its presence
unless the evidence compels us to do so.

Dr. E. L. Thorndike, in a monograph on “Animal Intelligence” published
as a supplement to the _Psychological Review_ (June, 1898), has fully
described and carefully discussed a number of interesting experiments.
The subjects (one might, alas! almost say victims) of some of these
were thirteen kittens or cats from three to eighteen months old. His
method of investigation shall be stated in his own words.

  “After considerable preliminary observation of animals’ behaviour
  under various conditions, I chose for my general method one which,
  simple as it is, possesses several other marked advantages besides
  those which accompany experiment of any sort. It was merely to put
  animals when hungry in enclosures from which they could escape by
  some simple act, such as pulling at a loop of cord, pressing a lever,
  or stepping on a platform. The animal was put in the enclosure,
  food was left outside in sight, and his actions observed. Besides
  recording his general behaviour, special notice was taken of how he
  succeeded in doing the necessary act (in case he did succeed), and a
  record was kept of the time that he was in the box before performing
  the successful pull, or clawing, or bite. This was repeated until the
  animal had formed a perfect association between the sense-impression
  of the interior of that box and the impulse leading to the successful
  movement. When the association was thus perfect, the time taken to
  escape was, of course, practically constant and very short.

  “If, on the other hand, after a certain time the animal did not
  succeed, he was taken out, but _not fed_. If, after a sufficient
  number of trials, he failed to get out, the case was recorded as one
  of complete failure. Enough different sorts of methods of escape
  were tried to make it fairly sure that association in general, not
  association of a particular sort of impulse, was being studied.
  Enough animals were taken with each box or pen to make it sure that
  the results were not due to individual peculiarities. None of the
  animals used had any previous acquaintance with any of the mechanical
  contrivances by which the doors were opened. So far as possible the
  animals were kept in a uniform state of hunger, which was practically
  utter hunger.”

[Illustration: FIG 22.--Cage used in Professor Thorndike’s
experiments.]

To Dr. Thorndike’s monograph we must refer those who desire detailed
information as to apparatus and procedure. It must here suffice to
state that the box-cages employed were rudely constructed of wooden
laths, and formed cramped prisons about twenty inches long by fifteen
broad and twelve high. Nine contained such simple mechanisms as Dr.
Thorndike describes in the passage above quoted. When a loop or cord
was pulled, a button turned, or a lever depressed, the door fell open.
In another, pressure on the door as well as depression of a thumb-latch
was required. In one cage two simple acts on the part of the kitten
were necessary, pulling a cord and pushing aside a piece of board; and
in yet others three acts were requisite. In those boxes from which
escape was more difficult a few of the cats failed to get out. The
times occupied in thoroughly learning the trick of the box by those
who were successful are plotted in a series of curves, the essential
feature of which is the graphic expression of a gradual diminution
in the time interval between imprisonment and escape in successive
trials. This is shown in Fig. 23, which is constructed from some of Dr.
Thorndike’s data. In some cases the cats were set free from a box when
they (1) licked themselves or (2) scratched themselves.

[Illustration: FIG. 23.--Diagram showing times taken by a kitten to
escape from the cage in twenty-four successive experiments.]

Dr. Thorndike comments on the results of his experiments as follows:--

  “When put into the box the cat would show evident signs of discomfort
  and of an impulse to escape from confinement. It tries to squeeze
  through any opening; it claws and bites at the bars or wire; it
  thrusts its paws out through any opening, and claws at everything
  it reaches; it continues its efforts when it strikes anything loose
  and shaky: it may claw at things within the box. It does not pay
  very much attention to the food outside, but seems simply to strive
  instinctively to escape from confinement. The vigour with which it
  struggles is extraordinary. For eight or ten minutes it will claw,
  and bite, and squeeze incessantly.... The cat that is clawing all
  over the box in her impulsive struggle will probably claw the string,
  or loop, or button so as to open the door. And gradually all the
  other non-successful impulses will be stamped out, and the particular
  impulse leading to the successful act will be stamped in by the
  resulting pleasure, until, after many trials, the cat will, when put
  in the box, immediately claw the button or loop in a definite way....
  Starting, then, with its store of instinctive impulses, the cat hits
  upon the successful movement, and gradually associates it with the
  sense-impression of the interior of the box until the connection is
  perfect, so that it performs the act as soon as confronted with
  the sense-impression.... Previous experience makes a difference
  in the quickness with which the cat forms the associations. After
  getting out of six or eight boxes by different sorts of acts, the
  cat’s general tendency to claw at loose objects within the box is
  strengthened and its tendency to squeeze through holes and bite
  bars is weakened; accordingly it will learn associations along the
  general line of the old more quickly. Associations between licking
  or scratching and escape are similarly established, and there was
  a noticeable tendency to diminish the act until it becomes a mere
  vestige of a lick or scratch. After the cat gets so that it performs
  the act soon after being put in, it begins to do it less and less
  vigorously. The licking degenerates into a mere quick turn of the
  head with one or two motions up and down with tongue extended.
  Instead of a hearty scratch, the cat waves its paw up and down
  rapidly for an instant.”

Such experiments carried out on a different method give results in line
with my own. The conditions are, however, somewhat unnatural, which
I regard as in some respects a disadvantage. But we need experiments
on different methods--the more the better,--and if the results they
furnish are in accord, their correctness will be rendered the more
probable. It is to be hoped that Dr. Thorndike will devise further
experiments in which (1) the conditions shall be somewhat less strained
and straitened, while the subjects are in a more normal state of
equanimity (cannot “utter hunger” be avoided?), and (2) there shall
be more opportunity for the exercise of rational judgment, supposing
the faculty to exist. To establish the absence of foresight in the
procedure of the cats, it is surely necessary so to arrange matters
that the connections are clearly open--nay, even obvious--to the eye of
reason. It appears that this consideration has not weighed sufficiently
with Dr. Thorndike.

A series of experiments were made to ascertain whether instruction
(in the form of putting the animal through the procedure requisite
for a given act) was in any degree helpful. The conclusion is that
such instruction has no influence. Those who have had experience in
teaching animals to perform tricks will probably agree here--though
some trainers give expression to a different opinion. It is, however,
essential to distinguish carefully between showing an animal how a
trick is done, and either stimulating its attention or furnishing
accessory guidance (such as the occasional taps of the trainer’s whip
when he wants a performing horse to kneel), or affording suitable
conditions the results of which temporarily enter into the association
complex. If the latter be eliminated the practice of trainers, I
believe, bears out the general result of the experiments. Dr. Thorndike
never succeeded in getting an animal to change its way of doing a thing
for his. Nor was I, after repeated trials, able to modify the way in
which my dog lifted the latch of the gate. He did it with the back
of his head. I could not get him to do it (more gracefully) with his
muzzle.

It may be said that the remarkable feats of performing animals imply
the existence of faculties of a higher order than Dr. Thorndike and
I are prepared to admit on the basis of our experiments. Mr. P. G.
Hamerton many years ago described[64] how, in his own house, a cleverly
trained dog would fetch in their right order the letters which spelt
the English or German equivalents of common French words, and do other
wonderful things. But the owner of the dog (M. du Rouil) admitted that
there was a means of rapport between them which he was not prepared to
divulge. It is just because the trainer has to lead up to and utilize
chance experiences that such prolonged patience and care are required.
The animal is but the instrument on which his clever trainer plays;
an instrument of wonderful intelligence, but lacking in the higher
rational faculty. The organized scheme is the master’s, not that of his
willing slave. A rational being might not do more wonderful things; but
he would learn them more rapidly and by a less wearisome method. As it
is, the clever performing dog originates little or nothing, and repeats
again and again the same stereotyped behaviour, which--if one witnesses
the performance often--touches one with a profound sense of its lack of
rational spontaneity.

As at present advised, therefore, I see no reason for withdrawing
from the position provisionally taken up. The utilization of chance
experience, without the framing and application of an organized
scheme of knowledge, appears to be the predominant method of animal
intelligence.

On this view, then, we may see in instinctive behaviour, and the
multifarious automatic acts of animals, a means of providing
experience of the right kind and on profitable lines. We may see in
the play-instincts of the young a training ground for the more serious
business of animal life--a theme developed by Professor Groos. We
may see in the imitative tendency--the innate proclivity to follow
a lead blindly and at first unintelligently--a further means of
providing those useful items of experience which intelligence finds so
serviceable. And we may see in the intelligence which can profit by
chance occurrences that arise in these several ways all that suffices
for the simple needs of animal existence.

With some differences of opinion Dr. Thorndike and I have much in
common in the conclusions to which we have been independently led
as to the method and limits of animal intelligence. We seem to be
in essential agreement in the belief that the method of animal
intelligence is to profit by chance experience without rational
foresight, and that unless such experience be individually acquired,
the data essential for intelligent progress are absent. While in our
attempts to realize the general nature of animal consciousness there
is a close similarity of treatment. In my “Introduction to Comparative
Psychology” a good deal of space is devoted to an analysis of the
psychology of skill “in order that we may infer what takes place in
the minds of animals;” and I said:--“When I am playing a hard game of
tennis, or when I am sailing a yacht close to the wind in a choppy
sea, self does not at all tend to become focal. Hence, though I am a
self-conscious being I am not always self-conscious. And presumably
when I am least self-conscious, I am nearest the condition of the
animal at the stage of mere sense experience. I am exhilarated with the
sense of pleasurable existence, my whole being tingles with sentient
life. I sense, or am aware of, my own life and consciousness, in an
unusually subtle manner. Experience is vivid and continuous. Such I
take it to be the condition of the conscious but not yet self-conscious
animal.”

I can therefore cordially endorse Dr. Thorndike’s conclusions as
expressed in the following passages:--

“One who has watched the life of a cat or dog for a month or more under
test conditions, gets, or fancies he gets, a fairly definite idea of
what the intellectual [intelligent] life of a cat or dog feels like. It
is most like what we feel when consciousness contains little thought
about anything, when we feel the sense-impressions in their first
intention, so to speak, when we feel our own body, and the impulses
we give to it. Sometimes one gets this animal consciousness while in
swimming, for example. One feels the water, the sky, the birds above,
but with no thoughts about them or memories of how they looked at other
times, or æsthetic judgments about their beauty; one feels no ideas
about what movements he will make, but feels himself make them, feels
his body throughout. Self-consciousness dies away. Social consciousness
dies away. The meanings, and values, and connections of things die
away. One feels sense-impressions, has impulses, feels the movements he
makes; that is all.”

And after an illustration from such a game as tennis, Dr. Thorndike
adds: “Finally the elements of the associations are not isolated.
No tennis-player’s stream of thought is filled with free-floating
representations of any of the tens of thousands of sense-impressions
or movements he has seen and made on the tennis-court. Yet there
is consciousness enough at the time, keen consciousness of the
sense-impressions, impulses, feelings of one’s bodily acts. So with the
animals. There is consciousness enough, but of this kind.”

It may be said that between the method of intelligence and that of
fully developed rational procedure there is a wide gap which must
have been bridged in the course of mental evolution. Unquestionably.
And in contending that the methods of the animal are predominantly
intelligent, I am far from wishing to assert dogmatically that in no
animals are there even the beginnings of a rational scheme. Indications
thereof do not indeed at present appear to have been clearly disclosed
by experiment. But the experimental development of the subject is still
in its infancy. We shall probably have to await the further results
which must be the outcome of patient and well-directed child-study.
The human child does pass in the course of his individual development
from intelligent to rational procedure. Here there is a bridge which
is crossed by every child. When we know more about the stadia of this
development we shall be in a position to apply the results obtained in
child-study in the analogous field of animal-study. Till then we must
possess our souls in patience, and base our provisional conclusions on
the results of systematic investigation, rather than on those of casual
observation and anecdote.


IV.--THE EVOLUTION OF INTELLIGENT BEHAVIOUR

No attempt can be made in this section to trace the successive stages
of the evolutionary progress of intelligence from its lower to its
higher developments. It is indeed questionable whether comparative
psychology has, as yet, accumulated a sufficient body of data to render
such a task profitable or even possible. And the lower the level of
intelligence with which we have to deal, the less reliable are the
scanty psychological data which we can obtain. To interpret the mental
processes which accompany the acts of even the higher animals is a
hard task, requiring careful psychological analysis. Still harder is
the task to infer the psychological basis of the actions of the lower
animals.

It is difficult to say where, in the hierarchy of animal progress, the
beginnings of intelligence can first be traced. In the articulated
animals, such as the insects, spiders, and crustacea, there is abundant
evidence of intelligence of a relatively high grade. But even in their
case, how hard it is to realize the nature of their experience--to
get any adequate notion of their mental processes! We are inevitably
forced to describe their psychology in the most general terms. So, too,
with forms still lower in the scale of intelligence. Many molluscs
unquestionably profit by experience. But can we clearly picture to
ourselves the nature and manner of acquisition of this experience? The
way in which limpets return to the scars on the rock which form their
homes seems to show that they have acquired a practically adequate
experience of their near surroundings. Romanes cites[65] some of the
earlier observations which have been extended by Professor Ainsworth
Davis.[66] I looked into the matter myself some years ago, at Mewps Bay
near Lulworth in Dorsetshire. The method adopted[67] was to remove the
limpets from the rock, and affix them at various distances from their
scars. This can be done without difficulty or injury to the mollusc if
one catches them as they are moving. But one must make sure that they
are just leaving or returning to their proper homes, and are not taken
in the midst of a more extended peregrination, as in that case their
special scars cannot be noted. Failure to be careful in this matter
vitiated my earlier observations, which are therefore excluded in the
following table:--

  ---------+------------+------------------------------------+
   Number  |  Distance  |        Number returned.            |
  removed. | in inches. +-------------+-------------+--------+
           |            | In 2 tides. | In 4 tides. | Later. |
  ---------+------------+-------------+-------------+--------+
     25    |     6      |      21     |     --      |   --   |
     21    |    12      |      13     |      5      |   --   |
     21    |    18      |      10     |      6      |    2   |
     36    |    24      |       1     |      1      |    3   |
  ---------+------------+-------------+-------------+--------+

From the nature of the rock surfaces the removal of a limpet to a
distance of two feet almost invariably involved placing them on the
further side of an angle. And though some returned over such an angle,
the majority did not.

In most cases the individuals which failed to return to their
respective scars took up new positions; and in several instances, when
they were subsequently removed to a distance of a few inches from this
new position, they returned to it. Their return to the scar was watched
in many cases, and the course was fairly, but not quite direct. One
limpet covered a distance of ten inches, over a somewhat curved course,
in a little under twenty minutes. In another case the limpet on its
return journey had to pass between two others, which necessitated the
lifting of the shell to some height so as to clear one of them. On
reaching the scar they twist and turn about so as to fit down in the
normal position which is constant. When they come up the wrong way
round they rotate pretty rapidly through the 180 degrees to get into
position. One was observed to make a short excursion from and return to
its scar under stillish water. But as a rule they seem to remain fixed
when they are submerged, moving for the most part when the tide has
just receded.

The greatest distance I have watched a limpet reach from its home was
twenty-two inches. But I have found them at a distance of three feet
from their scars--that is to say, from those to which they fitted
perfectly. This was on a large flat surface.

When they move, the tentacles are projected out beyond the shell, and
keep on touching and slightly adhering to the rock. On reaching the
scar they carefully feel round it with the tentacles. By excision
of these feelers Professor Davis was led to conclude that it is not
through their instrumentality that the limpet finds its way back to its
particular scar. But I am inclined to question these results. At any
rate, further observations and experiments are needed to settle the
point.

Snails will also return to special dark hollows or crannies in the
wall after their foraging excursions. Such behaviour in molluscs
affords evidence of something more than instinct. In popular speech,
we should say that there is memory of the locality. And in any case
it is difficult to interpret the facts without the assumption that
the animals are conscious, and that re-presentative states are
evoked through the mediation of presentative sense-impressions. But
how difficult, if not impossible, it is to form anything like a
satisfactory conception of the rudimentary mental processes of a limpet!

The most highly developed molluscs are the cephalopods. They have
long sensitive mobile arms with which they feel for and capture their
prey. “Now Schneider observed,” writes Dr. Stout,[68] “a very young
octopus seize a hermit-crab. The hermit-crab covers the shell in which
it takes up its abode with stinging zoophytes. Stung by these, the
octopus immediately recoiled and let its prey escape. Subsequently it
was observed to avoid hermit-crabs. Older animals of the same species
managed cleverly to pull the crab out of its house without being
stung.” Such cases afford evidence of profiting by experience through
the exercise of intelligence.

Darwin’s careful observations on the manner in which earthworms
drag leaves into their burrows seem to show that these annelids act
intelligently, and deal with leaves of different shapes in different
ways. The leaves of Pine trees, consisting of two needles arising
from a common base, were almost invariably drawn down by seizing this
basal point of junction; while the leaves of the Lime were, in 79
per cent. of the cases examined, drawn down by the apex; in only 4
per cent. by the base; and in the remaining 17 per cent. by seizing
some intermediate portion. On the other hand, the leaves of the
Rhododendron, in which the basal part of the blade is often narrower
than the apical part, were in 66 per cent. of the observations drawn
down by the narrower base. Triangles of paper were in the majority of
cases seized by the apex. Commenting upon his observations, carried
out with great care under experimental conditions, Darwin says,[69]
“As worms are not guided by special instincts in each particular case,
though possessing a general instinct to plug up their burrows, and as
chance is excluded, the next most probable conclusion seems to be that
they try in different ways to draw in objects, and at last succeed
in some one way;” that is to say, they profit by experience based on
the method of trial and failure. But Darwin adds that the evidence he
obtained shows “that worms do not habitually try to draw objects into
their burrows in many different ways.” And he seems to attribute to
them an almost rational power of dealing with the circumstances in the
light of general conceptions. “If worms,” he says, “are able to judge,
either before drawing or after having drawn an object close to the
mouths of their burrows, how best to drag it in, they must acquire some
notion of its general shape. This they probably acquire by touching it
in many places with the anterior extremity of their bodies, which acts
as a tactual organ. It may be well to remember how perfect the sense of
touch becomes in a man when born blind and deaf, as are worms. If worms
have the power of acquiring some notion, however rude, of the shape of
an object and of their burrows, as seems to be the case, they deserve
to be called intelligent; for they then act in nearly the same manner
as would a man under similar circumstances.”

Such power of perceiving the relation of the shape of a leaf or other
object to the form of the burrow is presumably beyond the reach of
an earthworm. It may be regarded as more probable that the earthworm
inherits an instinctive tendency to draw down objects in special
ways, and that this is subject to some modification under the play
of experience, without the formation of anything so psychologically
complex as a general notion, however rude. In any case the behaviour
of earthworms in closing their burrows seems to afford indications
of something more than instinct--of that profiting by the results of
experience which characterizes intelligent procedure. More than this we
cannot say.

Professor Whitman[70] has made some interesting observations on
the leech _Clepsine_. “Place the animal,” he says, “in a shallow,
flat-bottomed dish, and leave it for a few hours or a day, in order
to give it time to get accustomed to the place, and come to rest
on the bottom. Then, taking the utmost care not to jar the dish or
breathe upon the surface of the water, look at the _Clepsine_ through
a low magnifying lens, and see what happens when the surface of the
water is touched with the point of a needle held vertically above the
animal’s back. If the experiment is properly carried out, it will be
seen that the respiratory undulations (if such movements happen to be
going on) suddenly cease, and that the animal slightly expands its body
and hugs the glass. Wait a few moments until the animal, recovering
its normal composure, again resumes its respiratory movements. Then
let the needle descend through the water until the point rests on the
bottom of the dish at a little distance from the edge of the body.
Again the movements will cease, and the animal will hug the glass with
its body somewhat expanded. Now push the needle slowly along towards
the leech, and notice as the needle comes almost in contact with the
thin margin of the body, that the part nearest the needle begins to
retreat slowly before it. This behaviour shows a surprising keenness of
tactile sensibility, the least touch of the water with a needle-point
being felt at once.... If its back were rubbed with a brush or the
handle of a dissecting needle, in order to test its sensitiveness to
touch, the appearance would probably be that of insensibility and
indifference to the treatment. Closer examination, however, would
show that the flesh of the animal was more rigid than usual, and that
the surface was covered with numerous stiff, conical elevations, the
dermal papillæ or warts, which are so low and blunt in the normal
state of rest as to be scarcely visible. It would be seen that the
animal, although motionless, was in a state of active resistance to
attack.... _Clepsine_ has another and entirely different method of
keeping quiet. The animal rolls itself up (head first and ventral side
innermost) into a hard ball, outwardly passive, free to roll or fall
whithersoever gravity or currents of water may direct it.... If by
chance the animal has eggs, it will not desert them to escape in this
way.... This species, then, has two quite distinct and peculiar ways
of keeping quiet, and thus avoiding its enemies. If the animal has no
eggs, or if it has young, it may adopt either mode of escape, while
if it has eggs it has no choice but to remain quiet over them.... The
act of rolling up into a passive ball may be performed (_a_) _under
compulsion_, as when it is her last resort in self-defence; (_b_)
_under a milder provocation_, as _one_ of three courses of behaviour,
as when the resting-place is turned up to light, and the choice is
offered between remaining quiet in place, creeping away at leisure,
or rolling into a ball and dropping to the bottom; (_c_) or finally,
_under no special external stimulus_, but rather _from internal_
motive, the normal demand for rest and shady seclusion, presumably very
strong in _Clepsine_ after gorging itself with the blood of its turtle
host.”

Professor Whitman rightly regards the act of rolling into a ball as
instinctive, and due to natural selection. But he does not undertake
to discuss the question as to how much intelligence, if any,
_Clepsine_ may have. Nor, indeed, is it an easy matter to determine.
The differential reaction according as the animal has eggs or not
suggests intelligence; but it may be instinct varying according to
the conditions of stimulation external and internal. The different
behaviour which may be seen in different cases when a stone is turned
to the light again suggests intelligence, but again may be determined
directly by the conditions of stimulation. Prompted by Dr. Whitman’s
observations, I endeavoured to determine whether a leech would grow
accustomed to frequent gentle stimulation with a camel’s-hair brush,
and cease to react under circumstances which were followed by no ill
effects. But though I incline to think that this is the case, the
observations were not such as to be satisfying and convincing. If
intelligence be present we seem to find it in an early and rudimentary
state.

Observation, we must confess, seems to afford little indication of the
conditions under which intelligence first makes its appearance in the
animal kingdom. And if we turn to general considerations, which at the
best afford uncertain guidance, little light is thrown on the subject.
If we accept the view already indicated,[71] that the nerve-centres
which are concerned in the conscious control begotten of experience
are independent of those primarily concerned in normal reflex action,
we may perhaps believe that the simplest nervous system, worthy of
the name, contains both these elements, and that in the course of the
evolution of nervous systems in higher and higher grades, there go on
_pari passu_ the further differentiation of these elements, and the
progressive integration of reflex and control centres into a closely
connected and effective whole. Not that any expression of the facts, if
such they be, in terms of an evolution formula, adds anything to our
knowledge of the organic _modus operandi_. We know but little of the
intimate nerve physiology of even the highest invertebrates. We see
ample evidence of the control of behaviour in the light of individual
experience. Of any detailed knowledge concerning the manner in which
this control is effected we do not seem to possess more than the rude
initial phases.

When we compare, however, the several grades of intelligence which
observation suggests, and when we watch the conscious development of
the more intelligent animals, we seem to find evidence of the growth
of a system of experience, at first in very close touch with inherited
modes of procedure, but gradually acquiring more of independence and
freedom. Increase of the range and complexity of behaviour brings
with it, not only increase in the range and complexity of experience,
but also--what is, perhaps, even more essential to effective
progress--greater unity and closer connection into a well-knit whole.
And with this greater unity and closer connection there goes what one
may term a condensation of experience by an elimination of detail and
the survival of essential features repeatedly emphasized. This is
analogous in the development of intelligence to the generalization
and abstraction which play so important a part in the development of
reason. It affords, in fact, the data which reflection utilizes in the
purposive and intentional condensation and concentration of knowledge
at a higher stage of mental development.

The omission of detail and the survival of the salient features is well
known to us in the familiar facts of memory. We have seen thousands
of sheep and oxen, no two of which are probably alike in all their
external details as presented to vision. But we remember what a sheep
or an ox looks like, and many of us can form a visualized image of
either of these animals. This, however, is not the re-presentative
image of any particular sheep or ox. It is what psychologists term a
generic image. It is like a composite photograph made by superimposing
on the same plate a number of individual images so that the salient
features which all possess in common stand out clearly by their
coincidence on the plate, while the distinctive details are but
dimly presented. Thus does memory preserve the essentials common
to many impressions while the distinguishing details are lost and
fade, eliminated by forgetfulness. And thus in the experience which
intelligence practically utilizes are the net results of a thousand
particular impressions condensed in one effective image.

Condensation of experience is also effected by the elimination, under
the guidance of consciousness, of those modes of behaviour which are
not efficacious--a process to which Professor Mark Baldwin applies
the phrase Functional Selection. There is a tendency at first to the
overproduction of relatively useless actions. The multifarious random
movements of the human infant, though their inexactness renders the
child terribly helpless, afford a wide store of plastic material which
intelligence can guide to its appropriate use. And the prolonged period
of pupilage in the child is correlated with an unsurpassed range of
combination and recombination of the abundant plastic material. The
hereditary legacy, though it contains fewer drafts for definite and
specific purposes than are placed to the credit of an animal rich in
instinctive endowment, affords a far larger general fund on which
intelligence may draw for the varied purposes of the freer financial
existence of a rational being.

The relatively helpless young of many of the higher mammalia exhibit
also much overproduction of seemingly aimless movements. But from
these intelligence selects those which are of value for the purposes
of life--those which experience proves to be effective. These--the
relatively few--afford the motor impressions which by repetition stand
out in experience, while the rest lapse from memory and are eliminated
from experience as they are eliminated from practical performance. This
is a great gain. Motor experience is rendered generic; the composite
image that is retained is the net result of effective behaviour; and
all that is valuable in the acquisitions of early life is condensed
within manageable limits.

This process of rendering generic the particular items of a widening
experience has a marked effect in the development of the conscious
situations in the light of which behaviour is intelligently guided.
It is not the master holding this whip or that ball which suggests
to the dog a hiding or a scamper; it is a generic situation with
interchangeable details. It is not this, that, or the other previously
unseen cat that at once determines the situation for the fox terrier;
the particular animal has never entered into his past experience: it is
the fulfilment of the essential conditions of the generic image that
is operative in behaviour. The experience of animals must inevitably
become in large degree generic by the elimination of the unessential
and survival in re-presentative consciousness of the salient elements
in many slightly diverse situations.

Stated in terms of this conception, the familiar phenomena of mimicry
are due to the fact that the mimicking form accords sufficiently well
with the generic image to carry the same suggested meaning. As is
well known, the model has been proved in many cases to be unpalatable
or hurtful, while the mimic is in itself neither the one nor the
other. The drone-fly, _Eristalis_, mimics the drone. And it has been
urged that this cannot be a true case of mimicry, since the drone
is harmless, though the female and “neuter” bees are possessed of
stings. But I have satisfied myself by experiments with young birds,
that (1) after experience with bees drones are avoided, and (2) that
after similar experience drone-flies are also left untouched. Hence it
seems that all three fall within the same generic image, the points of
resemblance outweighing the differences in detail--as they do, indeed,
with many men and women.

Such examples of mimicry belong to what is known as the “Batesian
type”--so called after H. W. Bates, who, in 1861, discussed its
occurrence among Amazonian insects in the light of the theory of
natural selection. There are, however, certain groups of insects
which, although themselves “protected,” possess common warning
colours, causing them to resemble each other. These are sometimes
classed under the head of “Müllerian mimicry”--so called after Fritz
Müller, who, in 1879, first offered an explanation of the facts
based on the theory of natural selection. He suggested that such
mutual resemblance is advantageous to both protected forms, since it
lessens the number of those which are killed by young birds and other
animals while they are learning by experience what to eat and what
to leave. For, as the result of careful observation, Mr. Frank Finn
concludes “that each bird has to separately acquire its experience,
and well remembers what it has learnt,”--a conclusion with which, as
already stated, my own observations are entirely in accord. There is
therefore a certain amount of destruction of even well-protected forms
by young and inexperienced birds. If, then, two such forms resemble
each other, the acquisition of experience is thereby facilitated and
the amount of destruction reduced, on the assumption that the two
fall within the same generic image. Upholders of natural selection
are not, indeed, at one in accepting this explanation, and further
observation is unquestionably needed. It is not improbable, however,
that common protective coloration, such as the banding of yellow and
black, seen in such different forms as the caterpillar of the cinnabar
moth and the imago of the wasp, is of mutual utility. The following
experiment was made with young chicks. Strips of orange and black paper
were pasted beneath glass slips, and on them meal moistened with
quinine was placed. On other plain slips meal moistened with water
was provided. The young birds soon learnt to avoid the bitter meal,
and then would not touch plain meal if it were offered on the banded
slip. And these birds, save in two instances, refused to touch cinnabar
caterpillars, which were new to their experience. They did not, like
other birds, have to learn by particular trials that these caterpillars
are unpleasant. Their experience had already been gained through the
banded glass slips; or so it seemed. I have also found that young birds
who had learnt to avoid cinnabar caterpillars left wasps untouched.
Such observations must be repeated and extended. But they seem to show
that one aspect of the Müllerian theory is not without some facts in
support of it; and, so far as they go, they afford evidence that black
and orange banding, irrespective of particular form, may constitute a
guiding generic feature in the conscious situation.

It may be said that the generic condensation of experience here
indicated implies the formation of general and abstract ideas, and
that we cannot in face of the evidence accept Locke’s dictum that
abstraction is “an excellency which the faculties of brutes do by no
means attain to.” Romanes contended[72] that “all the higher animals
have general ideas of ‘good-for-eating’ and ‘not-good-for-eating’ quite
apart from any particular objects of which either of these qualities
happens to be characteristic,” and he quoted with approval Leroy’s
statement,[73] that a fox “will see snares when there are none; his
imagination, distorted by fear, will produce deceptive shapes, to
which he will attach an abstract notion of danger.” According to such
views animals form concepts; and concepts belong to the sphere of
rational thought. It is not my intention to enter at length into the
refinements of psychological distinction. Many psychologists, however,
seek to distinguish between, on the one hand, the predominance by
natural emphasis, of certain qualities, such as that of being suitable
for food, and, on the other hand, the intentional isolation of these
qualities for the purposes of thought and rational explanation.
Abstraction they regard as a deliberate process applied with rational
intent to the material afforded by experience and reflection.
Generalization, too, they regard as deliberate, and carried out with
like intent. The result is not merely a composite or generic product,
but something more subtle and less dependent on sense. “All trees
hitherto seen by me,” said Noiré, “leave in my imagination a mixed
image, a kind of ideal presentation of a tree. Quite different is my
concept, which is never an image.” The concept “tree” is a deliberate
synthesis of abstract qualities intentionally isolated, and recombined
in accordance with the general relationships which subsist between them.

If we accept this distinction, if we regard abstraction and
generalization as intentional mental processes carried out with the
rational intent of discovering the relationships of phenomena with the
object of explaining them and recombining their essential features in
an ideal scheme of thought, we shall probably admit, with John Locke,
that these are excellencies which the faculties of brutes do by no
means attain to. But we shall none the less see that the predominance
of certain salient features in experience by reiterated emphasis in
association with natural needs, and the development of generic in place
of merely particular re-presentations will afford the appropriate
material for abstraction on the one hand, and generalization on the
other. Intelligence supplies the embryonic mental structures from
which, under the quickening influence of a rational purpose, abstract
and general ideas may be evolved.

The essential features of the evolution of intelligence seem, then,
to be, first, the development of controlling nerve-centres, by which
the responsive action of reflex automatic or instinctive centres
may be checked, augmented, or modified; secondly, the increased
differentiation and integration of these control centres with extension
of the range and complexity of experience in close touch with practical
needs; thirdly, the condensation and concentration of experience by
the formation of generic products through the reiterated emphasis
begotten of recurrent situations having certain salient features
in common, though differing in details; and fourthly, an increased
plasticity of behaviour, especially in early life, enabling an animal
to deal effectually with an environment far less simple than that
to which the more stereotyped instinctive behaviour is fitted by
inheritance to respond. And this evolution of intelligent behaviour is
working its way up to, though as such it cannot reach, the succeeding
phase of mental evolution in which the data, supplied by intelligence,
are treated with a new purpose for higher ends in the rational thought
which seeks to explain the phenomena, and frame an ideal scheme of
their relations and interconnections.

Two further points may be noticed. First, that it is during the early
and plastic days or months of life that intelligence is setting
its seal on animal behaviour, and stamping it with its distinctive
character. Adult life is very much what youth has made it; and old
age is stereotyped through habit. In times of progress, the character
of the race is determined by plastic possibilities of the young.
Among them it is that the incidence of elimination makes itself felt,
resulting in the survival of those whose intelligence can mould
behaviour in accordance with the new circumstances of a wider life.

Secondly, this selection of the intelligent involves the survival
of those in whose higher brain-centres there is room for a greater
range and variety of interconnection by means of associating fibres.
It involves a selective survival of the larger and more finely
organized brains. It is probable, as Professor Ray Lankester has
recently indicated, that the ridiculously small-brained mammals and
reptiles of the past were creatures of instinct with little capacity
for intelligent control. Their lives were simple, and their enemies
and competitors no better provided with higher brain-centres than
themselves. Stereotyped instinctive behaviour sufficed to enable them
to hold their own, and meet the requirements of a life of dull and
unprogressive monotony. Strength without cunning made these big-framed
animals for a while masters of the situation. But among those existing
animals whose skeletons indicate an analogous zoological position,
there is none which exhibits a cerebral development so poor. And we
may fairly conclude that the fact that these huge creatures have left
no lineal descendants may be taken as evidence of the importance and
value, in evolution, of that cerebral tissue which is the organic basis
of intelligence. The higher brain contains the potentiality of that
experience without which the evolution of intelligent behaviour in any
race of vertebrate animals is impossible.


V.--THE INFLUENCE OF INTELLIGENCE ON INSTINCT

We have seen that the relation of instinct to intelligence is
essentially that of congenital to acquired behaviour. We have seen,
too, that in the Lamarckian interpretation what is acquired in the
course of life may be transmitted through inheritance, and thus the
intelligent behaviour of one generation may become instinctive and
congenital in the next. But serious biological difficulties stand in
the way of the acceptance of this interpretation; there is, moreover,
little or no evidence of the assumed transmission to offspring of any
acquired modifications of structure or behaviour. We have, therefore,
been led to infer that instinctive behaviour has been evolved through
the selection of adaptive variations of germinal origin, the influence
of intelligence being restricted to the fosterage of co-incident
variations, that is to say, of those congenital variations which
coincide in direction with the acquired modifications of behaviour due
to intelligence. It is clear that on this interpretation the influence
of intelligence on instinct is more indirect and less simple than that
implied by the Lamarckian hypothesis. Intelligence and instinct are
in large degree independent, though there is continual interaction
between them. We have now to consider the nature of this interaction,
and to this end we must indicate the relation of acquired modifications
to the hereditary groundwork of the animal constitution.

The basal fact is, that the bodily tissues are subject to a certain
amount of structural change during the course of individual life in
accordance with the amount of functional strain put upon them. The
labourer’s thickened skin, the enlarged and strengthened muscles of
the athlete, the juggler’s acquired suppleness are familiar cases.
Less familiar instances are afforded under abnormal conditions.
Should one kidney from any cause be slowly destroyed, the other will
slowly enlarge to carry on the increased work of elimination of waste
products; when the larger shin bone of a dog has been removed after
injury, the smaller bone becomes thickened to bear the added strain;
new joint surfaces are sometimes formed where bones have been broken
and the natural joints injured.

One may say that the normal development of any structure depends upon
a due amount of use. But, since in the course of strenuous life any
organ is from time to time subject to an abnormal amount of strain, it
must be fitted to respond to a super-normal call on its strength and
functional activity. Were the heart and the lungs, for example, unable
to meet the greatly added drain on their energies, due to unwonted
and severe exertion, collapse, perhaps death, would ensue if such
exertion were imperatively demanded under special circumstances. And
it is clear that many wild animals must be not infrequently placed in
such circumstances as will subject their muscular structures and the
functional activity of their organs of circulation and respiration to a
strain nearly up to their extreme limits of endurance. The carnivorous
hunter would often fail to secure his prey if his organization were
unequal to a hard and prolonged chase; the hunted prey would not
survive to procreate his kind if he fell a victim to the first pursuer
through inability to stand the exertion necessary to enable him to
make good his escape. It is thus, we may believe, through natural
selection that a sufficiently high standard of strength and functional
endurance is maintained. The failures in these respects are steadily
eliminated. It is difficult to realize the great strain put upon a
bird’s organization by the migration flight. Some ten times as many
birds leave our shores in the autumn as return to them in the following
spring. What proportion of these is weeded out in the act of migration
we do not know; but we may be sure that only those fitted to stand a
severe test of physical endurance return to rear broods which shall
inherit in large degree similar vigour of constitution.

Two factors, then, determine the limits of efficiency in the bodily
organs--heredity and use. And these two co-operate in such a way
that we may say, either that due use is the essential condition of
the effective development of the hereditary powers, or that heredity
serves to condition their effective development through use. But though
closely related, so that each may be regarded as conditional on the
other, they are, if we accept the view that acquired characters are not
transmitted as such, so far independent in that use adds nothing to,
disuse subtracts nothing from, the hereditary store. It is, indeed,
difficult to conceive how, on any view, the absence of the conditioning
factor of normal use can be the efficient cause of a positive
diminution of the balance at the bank of heredity. And Lamarckian
thinkers have not succeeded in placing their conception of the matter
in the clear light of a working hypothesis.

The amount of what we may term “modifiability” by use differs a good
deal in the several organs and tissues. The teeth of carnivora and the
antlers of deer may be cited as structures in which the conditioning
effects of use form a relatively unimportant factor. On the other
hand, the nervous system, with which we are here primarily concerned,
is of all animal structures that in which what is acquired may attain
the greatest importance in the successful conduct of life; the nature
and the range of behaviour affording an index of the amount of
modifiability in this respect.

We have already seen that instinctive behaviour is primarily a matter
of the first occasion on which any given action is performed, and that
many instinctive acts are subject to subsequent modification in the
light of the experience gained during the early performances. The range
of such modification varies both in different animals and also with
respect to different modes of behaviour in the same animal. The more
fixed and deeply rooted an instinct the less readily does intelligence
obtain a hold on it, so as to direct the behaviour into new channels
of better accommodation to the circumstances. M. Fabre describes how
a _Sphex_, one of the solitary wasps, instinctively draws its prey, a
grasshopper, into the burrow by its antennæ. When these were cut off
the wasp pulled the grasshopper in by the jaw appendages; but when
these were removed she seemed incapable of further accommodation to the
unusual circumstances. It would seem an easy and obvious application
of intelligence to seize the prey by one of the forelegs. But this
was not done; and the grasshopper was then left. Intelligence did
not seem equal to meeting the altered conditions presented by the
maimed grasshopper. Still, there was some modification of the normal
instinctive behaviour; and, as Dr. Peckham has shown, there may be more
than Fabre noted. Let us assume the existence of an animal whose every
act is instinctive, whose whole behaviour is marked out in strictly
hereditary lines, no new departures being acquired in the course of
individual life. This extreme case would afford an example of what we
may term completely stereotyped behaviour. On the other hand, let us
assume the existence of an animal with no hereditary definiteness of
reaction, whose every act is intelligent, whose whole behaviour is the
result of individual acquisition. This antithetical extreme case would
afford an example of what we may term completely plastic behaviour.
It is questionable, however, whether either of these extreme types
occur in nature. What we find in our study of animal behaviour is
some intermediate condition in which both factors co-operate, with a
predominance either of stereotyped instinctive response on the one
hand, or of plastic intelligent acquisition on the other hand. And in
the latter case, as such behaviour approaches its ideal limits, we have
modifiability under the circumstances of individual life at its maximum.

The evolution of intelligence as such runs parallel with the evolution
of plastic behaviour; and this plasticity is necessitated by the
variety and the complexity of the conditions of life--a variety and a
complexity requiring many subtle modifications of response to enable
the behaviour to reach accommodation to the changeful exigencies of
diverse circumstances. To meet constant and relatively fixed conditions
stereotyped instinctive responses suffice; and the elimination under
natural selection of those individuals which fail to respond in fixed
ways by specially adaptive behaviour tends to render definite the
hereditary channels of nervous intercommunication. An inherited system
of no little complexity may thus be evolved; of which we have seen
examples in our study of instinctive behaviour. But the essential
condition of the successful working of such a system is constancy
in the environment to which the instinctive behaviour is adapted.
Completely stereotyped behaviour, in its theoretical perfection, is
in exact adaptation to the circumstances. Where instincts are only
relatively perfect, further adaptation is secured through congenital
variation and the survival of the individuals in which the behaviour
is better adapted to the comparatively invariable circumstances.
This is one line of evolution. But the evolution of intelligence is
along independent lines of progress. Both, however, result from the
functional activity of the same nervous system, they jointly determine
the behaviour, they interact not only in the course of individual life
but in the process of evolution, and they are both subject to the
incidence of natural selection, which can determine whether the one
line or the other shall preponderate--whether instinct or intelligence
shall dominate behaviour.

If an answer must be given to the question whether instinct or
intelligence has priority in the course of the evolution of behaviour,
it may be urged that, on theoretical grounds, the claims of instinct
are the stronger. Taking animals as we actually find them, however,
they afford numberless examples of behaviour at first instinctive but
subsequently modified, in greater or less degree, in accordance with
the teachings of experience. Let us, first, assume that the environment
is slowly changing, or has changed, in some definite manner. Such
change would, of course, be relative, and might be due, either to new
conditions brought to bear on the animal, or to the animal being itself
brought, in the expansion of its life, within their influence. The
old instinct is no longer quite adapted to the changed circumstances.
If the change were sufficient in amount, and occurred somewhat
suddenly, variations of instinct might not occur soon enough to enable
the animal to reach adaptation by the gradual process of natural
selection. If dependent on instinct alone the animal would, under
these circumstances, be eliminated. But if intelligence were able to
modify the behaviour to meet the new conditions this elimination would
be prevented. In successive generations intelligence would constantly
modify behaviour in the same manner and in a definite direction.
Meanwhile congenital variations in different directions would occur.
Those which were in directions antagonistic to that dictated by
intelligence would tend to thwart accommodation and render it less
effectual; but those which were coincident in direction would conspire
with accommodation and render it more effectual. The individuals in
which variations of instinct tended to thwart intelligence would be
eliminated; while those in which coincident variations assisted and
aided intelligent modification would survive. Thus intelligence would
lead the way along lines which congenital variations would follow. And
in the course of a number of generations the new instinct would reach
the fully adaptive level, and further modification by intelligence
would become unnecessary unless the environment continued to change yet
more. Individual accommodation of behaviour would in this way determine
the direction of instinctive variation; and yet throughout the process
there would be, strictly speaking, no transmission of the intelligently
acquired characters of the behaviour.

But though under constant and uniform changes in the environment the
net result would be only a guided variation of the original instinct,
under more variable and indefinitely changing circumstances the
result would be different. The higher animals exhibit an intelligent
plasticity which enables them to meet the requirements of the
more complex environment into which their wider life has risen;
for evolution lifts the animal from narrower into progressively
wider spheres of activity and behaviour, so that its environment
becomes relatively more complex. Here stereotyped behaviour would be
rather a hindrance than an advantage. The winning animal in life’s
struggle would be the one in which behaviour was most rapidly and
most surely modified to meet particular needs--the one in which the
teachings of experience were most promptly utilized in effective
action. The inevitable tendency of the evolution of intelligence
must be disintegration of the stereotyped modes of behaviour and the
dissolution of instinct. Natural selection, which under a uniform and
constant environment leads to the survival of relatively fixed and
definite modes of response, under an environment presenting a wide
range of possibilities leads to the survival of plastic accommodation
through intelligence. It is not that intelligence has any direct
influence tending to undermine the hereditary foundations of instinct,
for acquired plasticity is not inherited as such; it is rather that
when the stereotyped and the plastic are pitted against each other in
the struggle for existence in the wider, freer, and more varied life of
the higher animals the plastic survives and the stereotyped succumbs.

Imperfect as is our present knowledge of the manner in which the
nervous connections implied in psychological associations are
established, there can be no question that they are acquired in the
course of individual life; they are modifications of nervous structure
due to a special mode of use under the conditions of experience.
Here, then, in the case of the nervous system, as in that of the
bodily organs before mentioned, two co-operating factors determine
the limits of efficiency--heredity and use. Just as the heart and
lungs must inherit the power of standing abnormal strain if the animal
is to avoid elimination in times of unwonted exertion, so must the
nervous system inherit some reserve power of dealing effectively with
unwonted circumstances by intelligent accommodation, if the animal
is not to fall a victim to such circumstances. In other words, at
times of heightened competition those animals which can draw on a
reserve fund of intelligent accommodation will survive, while the
stupid blunderers will be eliminated. We may term this reserve fund of
intelligent accommodation, this inherited ability to meet specially
difficult circumstances as they arise, _innate capacity_. From the
nature of the case it must be indefinite, for it must carry with it the
ability to meet unforeseen combinations of the environing forces by new
combinations of the results of experience. Its distinguishing mark is
plasticity, in contradistinction to the stereotyped fixity of typical
instinct. And accompanying its evolution there is probably, as we have
seen, a dissolution of its antithesis, instinct. Thus may we account
for the fact that man, with his great store of innate capacity, has so
small a number of stereotyped instincts.

But the dissolution of instincts is not complete. Residua are left
in the inherited mental constitution. And these we term _congenital
tendencies_ and _propensities_. They differ from the typical instincts
in the fact that the definiteness of response has been lost. They
dictate a general trend of action, but the particular application in
behaviour is due to intelligent accommodation. They are commonly spoken
of as instinctive; and their mode of origin justifies the use of the
adjective in association with the term “propensities.” But it must
be remembered that the behaviour to which they lead is not, as such,
wholly instinctive; it is a joint product of instinct and intelligence,
the general trend being due to the instinctive propensity, while the
mode of application is guided by intelligence.

There is, however, another way in which analogous propensities may
be ingrained in the mental constitution, not as residual vestiges of
old instincts, but as congenital rudiments fostered by new habits.
It is a well-known and familiar fact that the frequent repetition of
intelligent accommodation in certain definite lines begets habits,
which so far simulate instincts as to be commonly described in
popular speech as instinctive. Professor Wundt indeed places them
in the category of “acquired instincts”--a usage which we regard as
unsatisfactory, seeing that it tends to mask the distinction between
the congenital and acquired factors in behaviour, and seeing that
we have the well-defined term “habits” for acts rendered to a large
extent automatic through repetition. Lamarckian thinkers regard habit
as the mother of instinct, assuming that the acquired automatism
of one generation may be transmitted to become congenital in the
succeeding generation. This conclusion we provisionally reject,
regarding the basal assumption as at present unproven. But though
we cannot accept the view that habit is the mother of instinct, we
regard it as not improbable that habit may be the nurse of congenital
propensities. Remembering that similar habits are acquired by animals
of the same species throughout a series of succeeding generations, and
assuming that congenital variations are constantly occurring in many
directions, it seems probable that some of these variations will be
coincident in direction with the acquired habits. Thus would arise a
congenital propensity to perform the habitual acts; and should they
be of sufficient importance in the conduct of life to be subject
to the action of natural selection, those animals in which such
propensities were congenital would survive, whereas those in which
no such propensities existed would be eliminated. It is unnecessary,
however, to elaborate this conception further, since it is in line with
that already discussed in considering the influence of intelligence in
fostering a diversion of instinct under changing circumstances. Then we
were considering how habit may lead to a congenital change in an old
instinct; here we are dealing with the development of a new propensity.

Sufficient has now been said to illustrate some of the ways in which
instinct and intelligence interact in the evolution of behaviour. Such
interaction is further exemplified in the social life of animals, which
will be dealt with in the next chapter.




