
  ANIMAL BEHAVIOUR

  BY
  C. LLOYD MORGAN, F.R.S.

  AUTHOR OF “THE SPRINGS OF CONDUCT,” “HABIT AND INSTINCT,”
  “PSYCHOLOGY FOR TEACHERS,” ETC. ETC.

  _ILLUSTRATED_

  SECOND EDITION
  THIRD IMPRESSION

  LONDON
  EDWARD ARNOLD
  1920
  (_All rights reserved_)




PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION


My book on “Animal Life and Intelligence” being out of print, I
undertook to revise it for a new Edition. As the work of revision
proceeded, however, it appeared that the amended treatment would not
fall conveniently under the previous scheme of arrangement. I therefore
decided to write a new book under the title of “Animal Behaviour.” A
few passages from the older work have been introduced, and some of the
observations and conclusions already published in greater detail in
“Habit and Instinct” have been summarized. But it will be found that
these occupy a relatively small space in the following pages.

      C. LL. M.

  UNIVERSITY COLLEGE, BRISTOL,
  OCTOBER 1_st_, 1900.




CONTENTS


  CHAPTER I

  _ORGANIC BEHAVIOUR_

                                                                    PAGE

  I. BEHAVIOUR IN GENERAL                                              1
  II. BEHAVIOUR OF CELLS                                               3
  III. CORPORATE BEHAVIOUR                                            14
  IV. THE BEHAVIOUR OF PLANTS                                         24
  V. REFLEX ACTION                                                    31
  VI. THE EVOLUTION OF ORGANIC BEHAVIOUR                              35


  CHAPTER II

  _CONSCIOUSNESS_

  I. THE CONSCIOUS ACCOMPANIMENTS OF CERTAIN ORGANIC CHANGES          42
  II. THE EARLY STAGES OF MENTAL DEVELOPMENT                          48
  III. LATER PHASES IN MENTAL DEVELOPMENT                             56
  IV. THE EVOLUTION OF CONSCIOUSNESS                                  61


  CHAPTER III

  _INSTINCTIVE BEHAVIOUR_

  I. DEFINITION OF INSTINCTIVE BEHAVIOUR                              63
  II. INSTINCTIVE BEHAVIOUR IN INSECTS                                71
  III. THE INSTINCTIVE BEHAVIOUR OF YOUNG BIRDS                       84
  IV. THE CONSCIOUS ASPECT OF INSTINCTIVE BEHAVIOUR                   98
  V. THE EVOLUTION OF INSTINCTIVE BEHAVIOUR                          106


  CHAPTER IV

  _INTELLIGENT BEHAVIOUR_

  I. THE NATURE OF INTELLIGENT BEHAVIOUR                             117
  II. INTELLIGENT BEHAVIOUR IN INSECTS                               123
  III. SOME RESULTS OF EXPERIMENT                                    134
  IV. THE EVOLUTION OF INTELLIGENT BEHAVIOUR                         155
  V. THE INFLUENCE OF INTELLIGENCE ON INSTINCT                       168


  CHAPTER V

  _SOCIAL BEHAVIOUR_

  I. IMITATION                                                       179
  II. INTERCOMMUNICATION                                             193
  III. SOCIAL COMMUNITIES OF BEES AND ANTS                           205
  IV. ANIMAL TRADITION                                               220
  V. THE EVOLUTION OF SOCIAL BEHAVIOUR                               225


  CHAPTER VI

  _THE FEELINGS AND EMOTIONS_

  I. IMPULSE, INTEREST, AND EMOTION                                  235
  II. PLAY                                                           248
  III. COURTSHIP                                                     258
  IV. ANIMAL “ÆSTHETICS” AND “ETHICS”                                270
  V. THE EVOLUTION OF FEELING AND EMOTION                            282


  CHAPTER VII

  _THE EVOLUTION OF ANIMAL BEHAVIOUR_

  I. THE PHYSIOLOGICAL ASPECT                                        295
  II. THE BIOLOGICAL ASPECT                                          305
  III. THE PSYCHOLOGICAL ASPECT                                      315
  IV. CONTINUITY IN EVOLUTION                                        324

  INDEX                                                              338




ILLUSTRATIONS


  FIG.                                                              PAGE

  1. _Paramecium_. (From “Animal Biology.” Longmans)                   4

  2. Behaviour of Paramecia. (After Jennings, _American Journal of
        Psychology_)                                                   8

  3. Cell-division. (From “Animal Biology.” Longmans)                 13

  4. Wapiti with antlers in velvet. (Drawing by Mr. Charles Whymper,
        after photograph by Miss Reynolds)                            16

  5. Wapiti with velvet shredding off. (Drawing by Mr. Charles Whymper,
        after photograph by Miss Reynolds)                            17

  6. Sun-dew leaf and tentacles. (From Darwin’s “Insectivorous Plants.”
        Murray. By kind permission of Mr. Francis Darwin, F.R.S.)     26

  7. Venus’s Fly-trap. (From Darwin’s “Insectivorous Plants.” Murray. By
        kind permission of Mr. Francis Darwin, F.R.S.)                27

  8. Flower of _Valisneria_                                           28

  9. Flower of _Catasetum_                                            30

  10. Flower of _Catasetum_ dissected. (From Darwin’s “Fertilization
        of Orchids.” Murray. By kind permission of Mr. Francis
        Darwin, F.R.S.)                                               31

  11. Solitary Wasp stinging Caterpillar. (After Plate III. in Dr. and
        Mrs. Peckham’s “Solitary Wasps”)                              75

  12. Solitary Wasp dragging a Caterpillar to its Nest. (After Plate IV.
        in Dr. Peckham’s “Solitary Wasps”)                            76

  13. Insect Larvæ: _Sitaris_, _Argyromœba_, and _Leucopsis_. (After
        Fabre “Souvenirs”)                                            80

  14. Yucca Flower and Moth                                           83

  15. Newly-hatched Chick swimming. (Drawn by Mr. Charles Whymper, after
        instantaneous photographs and a sketch by the author)         85

  16. Nestling Megapode. (From Dr. R. Bowdler Sharpe’s “Wonders of the
        Bird World.” Wells Gardner)                                   87

  17. Cuckoo ejecting Meadow Pipit. (From Mrs. Hugh Blackburn’s sketch
        in “Birds from Moidart.” David Douglas)                       91

  18. Leaf-case of Birch-weevil                                      121

  19. Solitary Wasp using a stone as a tool. (After Plate V. in Dr.
        Peckham’s “Solitary Wasps”)                                  127

  20. Spiders placed by Solitary Wasps in crotches of branching stems.
        (After Plate X. in Dr. Peckham’s “Solitary Wasps”)           133

  21. Fox-terrier lifting the latch of a gate. (Drawn by Mr. Charles
        Whymper, after a photograph by Miss Alice Worsley)           145

  22. Cage used by Dr. Thorndike. (After figure in “Animal
        Intelligence,” _Psychological Review_, 1898)                 148

  23. Diagram illustrating Dr. Thorndike’s Experiments. (Based on
        data given in his monograph on “Animal Intelligence”)        150

  24. Wood ant. (From Shipley’s “Invertebrates.” A. & C. Black)      207

  25. Beetle soliciting food from Ant. (After Wasmann. Enlarged)     213

  26. Honey-pot Ant. (Enlarged)                                      215




ANIMAL BEHAVIOUR




CHAPTER I

_ORGANIC BEHAVIOUR_


I.--BEHAVIOUR IN GENERAL

We commonly use the word “behaviour” with a wide range of meaning. We
speak of the behaviour of troops in the field, of the prisoner at the
bar, of a dandy in the ball-room. But the chemist and the physicist
often speak of the behaviour of atoms and molecules, or that of a gas
under changing conditions of temperature and pressure. The geologist
tells us that a glacier behaves in many respects like a river, and
discusses how the crust of the earth behaves under the stresses to
which it is subjected. Weather-wise people comment on the behaviour
of the mercury in a barometer as a storm approaches. Instances of
a similar usage need not be multiplied. Frequently employed with a
moral significance, the word is at least occasionally used in a wider
and more comprehensive sense. When Mary, the nurse, returns with the
little Miss Smiths from Master Brown’s birthday party, she is narrowly
questioned as to their behaviour; but meanwhile their father, the
professor, has been discoursing to his students on the behaviour
of iron filings in the magnetic field; and his son Jack, of H.M.S.
_Blunderer_, entertains his elder sisters with a graphic description of
the behaviour of a first-class battle-ship in a heavy sea.

The word will be employed in the following pages in a wide and
comprehensive sense. We shall have to consider, not only the kind
of animal behaviour which implies intelligence, sometimes of a high
order; not only such behaviour as animal play and courtship, which
suggests emotional attributes; but also forms of behaviour which, if
not unconscious, seem to lack conscious guidance and control. We shall
deal mainly with the behaviour of the animal as a whole, but also
incidentally with that of its constituent particles, or cells; and we
shall not hesitate to cite (in a parenthetic section) some episodes of
plant life as examples of organic behaviour.

Thus broadly used, the term in all cases indicates and draws attention
to the reaction of that which we speak of as behaving, in response
to certain surrounding conditions or circumstances which evoke the
behaviour. The middy would not talk of the behaviour of his ship as
she lay at anchor in Portland harbour; the word is only applicable
when there is action and reaction as the vessel ploughs through a
heavy sea, or when she answers to the helm. Apart from gravitation the
glacier and the river would not “behave in a similar manner.” Only
under the conditions comprised under the term “magnetic field” do iron
filings exhibit certain peculiarities of behaviour. And so, also, in
other cases. The behaviour of cells is evoked under given organic or
external conditions; instinctive, intelligent, and emotional behaviour
are called forth in response to those circumstances which exercise a
constraining influence at the moment of action.

It is therefore necessary, in a discussion of animal behaviour, that we
should endeavour to realize, as far as possible, in every case, first,
the nature of the animal under consideration; secondly, the conditions
under which it is placed; thirdly, the manner in which the response is
called forth by the circumstances, and fourthly, how far the behaviour
adequately meets the essential conditions of the situation.


II.--BEHAVIOUR OF CELLS

From what has already been said it may be inferred that our use of
the term “behaviour” neither implies nor excludes the presence of
consciousness. Few are prepared to contend that the iron filings in a
magnetic field consciously group themselves in definite and symmetrical
patterns, or that sand grains on a vibrating plate assemble along
certain nodal lines because they are conscious of the effects of the
bow by which the plate is set in sounding vibration. But where organic
response falls under our observation, no matter how simple and direct
that response may be, there is a natural tendency to suppose that the
behaviour is conscious; and where the response is less simple and
more indirect, this tendency is so strengthened as to give rise to a
state of mind bordering on, or actually reaching, conviction. Nor is
this surprising: for, in the first place, organic responses, even the
simplest, are less obviously and directly related to the interplay of
surrounding circumstances; and, in the second place, they are more
obviously in relation to some purpose in the sense that they directly
or indirectly contribute to the maintenance of life or the furtherance
of well-being. Now where behaviour is complex and subserves an end
which we can note and name, there arises the supposition that it may
well be of the same nature as our own complex and conscious behaviour.

Take for example the behaviour of the Slipper-animalcule, Paramecium,
one of the minute creatures known to zoologists as Protozoa. The
whole animal is constituted by a single cell, somewhat less than
one-hundredth of an inch in length, the form and behaviour of which
may be readily studied under the microscope. Thousands may be obtained
from water in which some hay has been allowed to rot. The surface of
the Paramecium is covered with waving hair-like cilia, by which it is
propelled through the water, while stiffer hairs may be shot out from
the surface at any point where there is a local source of irritation,
as indicated at the top of the accompanying figure. Two little sacs
expand and contract, and serve to drain off water and waste products
from the substance of the cell. Food is taken in at the end of the
funnel, shown in the lower part of the figure. The cilia here work
in such manner as to drive the particles into and down the tube, and
on reaching its inner end these particles burst through into the
semi-fluid substance, and circulate therein. Just above the funnel
there are two bean-like bodies, the larger of which is known as the
macronucleus, the smaller as the micronucleus.

[Illustration: FIG. 1.--Paramecium.]

The process of multiplication is by “fission,” or the division of each
Paramecium into two similar animalcules. Not infrequently, however,
two Paramecia may be seen to approach each other and come together,
funnel to funnel; and in each the nuclei undergo curious changes. The
macronucleus breaks up, and is scattered. The micronucleus in each
divides into four portions, of which three break up and disappear;
while the fourth again divides into two parts, one to be retained and
the other to be exchanged for the similar micronuclear product of the
other Paramecium. The retained portion and that received in exchange
then unite to form a new micronucleus. M. Maupas concludes from his
careful observations that, in the absence of such “conjugation” in
the mid-period of life, Paramecia pass into a state of senility which
ends in decrepitude and death. If this be so, conjugation is in them
necessary for the continuance of a healthy race.

Here we have what a zoologist would describe as a specialized mode of
behaviour of the nuclei; and we have also the behaviour of the minute
creatures (which contain the nuclei) as they approach each other and
come together in conjugation. Can one wonder that the latter, at any
rate, has been regarded as an example of conscious procedure? In
truth we do not know in what manner and by what subtle influences the
Paramecia are drawn together in conjugation. But it is scarcely logical
to base on such ignorance any positive assertion as to conscious
attraction. It is better to confess that here is a piece of organic
behaviour, the exact conditions of which are at present unexplained.

We may take from the writings[1] of Dr. H. S. Jennings, of Harvard,
some account of other modes of behaviour among Paramecia. They largely
feed upon clotted masses of bacteria. If a number are placed upon a
glass slip, together with a small bacterial clot, they will be seen to
congregate around the clot and to feed upon it. All apparently press in
so as to reach it, or get as near it as possible. And if a number be
placed on another slide without any clot, they soon collect in groups
in one or more regions, as in Fig. 2, III. It appears as if they were
actuated by some social impulse leading them to crowd together and shun
isolated positions. Nay, more; it seems as if, after thus collecting
and crowding in to some centre of interest, the attractive influence
gradually waned; the group spreads, and the Paramecia are less densely
packed; the assembly scatters more and more, but still seems to be
retained by an invisible boundary beyond which the little creatures do
not pass.

[Illustration: FIG. 2.--Behaviour of Paramecia (after Jennings).]

Furthermore, if kept in a jar, the Paramecia crowd up towards the
surface where the bacteria clots are floating; and if, beneath the
cover glass of a slip on which they are under microscopic examination,
a drop of liquid be introduced through a very fine tube, they will seem
either to be attracted to it, as in Fig. 2, I., or repelled from it,
as in Fig. 2, II., according to its nature. From alkaline liquids they
are repelled; to slightly acid drops they are attracted, unless the
acidity be too pungent. Heat and cold are alike repellent, and even a
drop of pure distilled water forms an area into which the Paramecia do
not enter.

With such facts before him, the incautious observer may be led to
the conclusion that Paramecia are not only conscious, but endowed
with intelligence and volition. Even M. Binet,[2] who occupies a
position which should lead him to exercise more caution, tells us
that there is not a single infusorian which cannot be frightened,
and does not manifest its fear by rapid flight; he speaks of some
of these unicellular animals as “endowed with memory and volition,”
and possessed of “instinct of great precision;” and he describes the
following stages:--

“(1) The perception of an external object;

“(2) The choice made between a number of objects;

“(3) The perception of their position in space;

“(4) Movements calculated either to approach the body and seize it, or
to flee from it.”

But when we seem to have grasped his point of view, when we have
catalogued the memory, fear, instinct, perception, choice and
volition, the whole intelligent edifice crumbles; for we are told that
“we are not in a position to determine whether these various acts
are accompanied by consciousness, or whether they follow as simple
physiological processes.” To most of us fear, memory, choice, volition,
imply something more than simple physiological processes; they imply
not only consciousness, but highly elaborated consciousness.

Dr. Jennings’s researches show that no such implication can be accepted
unless we are prepared to cast aside the trammels of reasonable
caution. In the first place, the whole matter of feeding appears to
be referable to simple organic behaviour not necessarily involving
consciousness. The cilia in the mouth-groove and funnel constantly
wave in such a manner as to drive a current of water, together with
any particles which float therein, towards the interior; and the
particles are then engulphed, no matter what their composition may be.
Digestible or indigestible, in they go. There is no selection of the
one or rejection of the other. But, as we have seen, the Paramecia
collect around a bacterial clot and feed upon it. Surely here there
is selection of the nutritious! Apparently not. They collect in just
the same way towards a piece of blotting-paper, cotton-wool, cloth,
sponge, or other fibrous body, and remain assembled round such an
innutritious centre just as long as round a bacterial clot. There seems
to be no choice in the matter; contact with any substance gives rise,
as an organic response, to the lessening or cessation of the regular
movements in all the cilia except those of the mouth-groove and funnel.
As the Paramecia swim hither and thither, first one, then another,
then more, chance to come in contact with the bacterial clot, the
blotting-paper, or other substance, and since the lashing of the cilia
is then automatically lessened, there they stay; others find their way
to the same spot in the course of their random movements, and they,
too, stay; thus many soon collect.

But this does not account for the seemingly social assemblages of
Paramecia where there is no such substance to arrest their progress.
Dr. Jennings attributes this to the fact that a dilute solution of
carbon-dioxide has, what we may call for the present, an attractive
influence. If a bubble of air and a bubble of carbon dioxide be
introduced into the water in which Paramecia are swimming beneath a
cover-glass, the animalcules collect around the carbonic dioxide, but
not around the air bubble. At first they press up close to the bubble
of carbon dioxide, but gradually form a ring farther and farther from
its limiting boundary. This is held to be due to the fact that it
is only the dilute solution of carbonic acid that has the peculiar
“attraction”--a stronger solution has a different effect. And, as the
gas dissolves, the Paramecia collect in a ring just where the solution
is sufficiently dilute.

Now carbon dioxide is a product of the organic waste of living
substance; it is given off by active Paramecia. Where therefore many
are collected together they form a centre of the production of this
substance; and when other Paramecia come, in the course of their random
movements, into such a centre they remain there and help to swell the
numbers in the cluster. If Paramecia be placed in water to which a
distinctly reddish tinge is given by mixing it with a small quantity
of rosol--a substance which is decolourized by carbon dioxide, and is
not injurious to Paramecia--it will be seen that, where the groups
are collected, the reddish tinge fades and disappears. As the groups
expand, and are less densely packed, the colourless area expands too:
and the limits within which the group is circumscribed are also the
limits of decolourization. Dr. Jennings considers it beyond question
that the assembling of Paramecia is due to the presence in such
assemblages of carbonic acid produced by the animals themselves. The
first beginning of the crowd may be some small fragment of bacterial
clot or other substance.

It would seem, then, that Paramecia are attracted by faintly acid
solutions; and here at least there is, it may be urged, an element of
choice. But even here, according to Dr. Jennings, there is not only
no real choice, but not even any real attraction. What takes place,
according to his observations, is briefly as follows. Suppose a faintly
acid drop be inserted beneath the cover-glass. Paramecia may almost
graze its boundary without being in any way affected by its presence.
But in their random movements some, and eventually many, perhaps most,
of the little animals chance to enter the faintly acid region; but
there is no sign of reaction or response; they swim on across the
drop until they reach its further margin. Here a reaction does take
place. Instead of proceeding onwards, slowly revolving on its long
axis, a Paramecium thus situated jerks backwards by a reversal of
all the cilia, at the same time revolving on its axis in a direction
opposite to that in which it was before turning. But the cilia of
the mouth-groove resume their normal mode of working sooner than the
others, and this causes the Paramecium to turn aside. It then goes
ahead until it again reaches the boundary at another point, when the
same behaviour is seen. The course of such a Paramecium is shown in
Fig. 2, IV.

If, instead of a faintly acid drop, a little alkaline liquid be
introduced beneath the cover-glass, the Paramecium similarly jerks
backward and turns aside on reaching its outer boundary. The turning
may carry it away from the alkali, as shown in Fig. 2, V.; but it just
as often brings it again towards the drop, especially a large one. It
seems to be a matter of chance which result follows. But eventually
the little creature sails off, since each time it comes within the
influence of the alkaline fluid it jerks back and turns. It appears,
then, that when it is swimming in a normal solution a faintly acid
liquid does not much modify its behaviour, but an alkaline fluid
evokes a reversal of the cilia; and that when it is a slightly acid
solution, not only does stronger acid cause reversal, but normal fluid
produces a similar result. A reaction of essentially the same kind is
in fact called forth by such different stimuli as chemical substances,
water heated above the normal temperature, or cooled considerably
below it, and fluids which cause changes of internal pressure within
the substance of the cell. Nor does it matter where the stimulus is
applied. If it be applied at the hinder end the infusorian still jerks
backward, though this may drive it into a destructive solution and thus
cause death. There is, however, some evidence of different behaviour in
some infusorians according as the stimulus is here or there. In other
words, the behaviour is to some extent related to the position of the
part stimulated.

Furthermore, it may be gathered from Dr. Jennings’s account that there
is nothing to lead us to suppose that such free living cells show
any indication of what may be regarded as the keynote of intelligent
behaviour. They do not profit by experience. They exhibit organic
reactions which may be accompanied by some dim form of consciousness,
but which do not seem to be under the guidance of such consciousness,
if it exist.

One of the first lessons which the study of animal behaviour, in its
organic aspect, should impress upon our minds is, that living cells
may react to stimuli in a manner which we perceive to be subservient
to a biological end, and yet react without conscious purpose--that is
to say, automatically. The living cell assimilates food and absorbs
oxygen, it grows and subdivides, it elaborates secretions, produces
a skeletal framework or covering, rids itself of waste products,
responds to stimuli in a definite fashion, moves hither and thither at
random, its functional activities being stimulated or checked by many
influences; and yet this varied life may give no evidence of a guiding
consciousness: if purpose there be, it lies deeper than its protoplasm,
deeper than the dim sentience which may be present or may be absent--we
cannot tell which.

And when the cells are incorporated in the body of one of the higher
animals, instead of each preserving a free and nomad existence; when
they become the multitudinous constituents of an organic republic with
unity of plan and unity of biological end, then the behaviour of each
is limited in range but perfected within that range, in subservience to
the requirements of the more complex unity. The muscle cell contracts,
the gland-cell secretes, the rods and cones of the retina respond to
the waves of light, and all the normal responses of the special cells
go on with such orderly regularity that the term behaviour seems
scarcely applicable to reactions so stereotyped. But the physiologist
and the physician know well that such uniformity of response is
dependent on uniformity of conditions. A little dose of some drug
will profoundly modify and render abnormal the procedure which was
before so mechanical in its exactitude; and we are thus led to see how
dependent the orderly behaviour really is on the maintenance of certain
surrounding conditions.

Moreover, the existence of every cell in the body corporate is the
outcome of a process of division involving a special mode of behaviour
in the nucleus, of which we are only beginning to guess the meaning
and significance, and of which we seek in vain to find an explanation
in mechanical terms. And when we trace these divisions back to their
primary source in the fertilized ovum, we find changes and evolutions
in the nuclear matter of which it can only be said that the more they
are studied the more complex and varied do they appear.

The egg, or ovum, is a single cell produced by the female, and varying
much in size, according to the amount of food-yolk with which it is
supplied. Like other cells, it has a nucleus, and this undergoes
changes which are definitely related to the fertilization of the ovum,
which we describe as the biological end. Such preparatory changes
for a future contingency are especially characteristic of organic
behaviour. There is nothing like it in the mineral kingdom. The nucleus
divides into two parts, one of which passes out of the ovum and is
lost. The nucleus again divides, and again one part passes out and is
lost. Thus only one quarter of the original amount of nuclear matter
remains. Now, division of the nucleus occurs whenever an animal cell
divides; but in this case (apart from details which would here be out
of place) there is this difference. During the ordinary division of
cells there are found in the nucleus a definite number of curved rods,
and this number is constant for any given species; but in the nucleus
which remains in the ovum after three parts of its substance are lost,
the number of rods has been reduced to half that which is common to the
species. The egg is now ready for fertilization. A minute active cell,
which is produced by the male, and which also has only half the normal
number of rods, enters the ovum. The two nuclei approach each other,
and give rise to the single nucleus of the fertilized ovum, which thus
has the full number of rods--half of them derived from one parent, half
from the other parent. The sperm cell of the male adds little to the
store of protoplasm in the ovum; but it introduces a minute body, which
seems to initiate subsequent divisions of the cell. The nature of these
divisions may be seen in the accompanying diagrammatic figure. In A
the cell is just preparing to divide. Above the nucleus is the minute
body (centrosome) just spoken of, which has already divided. In the
nucleus the matter of which the rods will be constituted is net-like.
In B this net-work has taken on the new form of a coiled thread, while
the divided body above is associated with a spindle of delicate fibres.
In C the membrane round the nucleus has disappeared, and the coiled
thread has broken up into curved rods (chromosomes), four of which are
shown. The two halves of the minute body form the centres of radiating
stars. In D each curved rod has split along its length, and the two
parts are being drawn asunder towards the centres of the two stars;
the cell itself is beginning to divide. In E the process is carried a
step further, while in F the cell has completely divided into two: the
rods have disappeared as such, and are replaced by a net-work; a new
nuclear membrane has been formed, and the minute body has again divided
preparatory to the further division of the cell.

[Illustration: FIG. 3.--Cell-division.]

Such, stripped as far as possible of technicalities, are some of the
facts concerning the behaviour of cells and their nuclei during the
process of cell-multiplication. No good purpose would be subserved by
pretending that we fully understand them. The splitting of the rods
does indeed seem an efficient means to the end of securing a fair
division of the nuclear substance, which, according to many biologists,
is the organic bearer of hereditary qualities in the cells. But that
is nearly all that we can say. Is the process accompanied by some form
of sentience? We do not know. That it is controlled and guided by any
consciousness in the cell is most improbable. But if it be a purely
organic and unconscious process it should at least impress on our
minds the fact that such organic behaviour may reach a high degree of
delicacy and complexity.


III. CORPORATE BEHAVIOUR

The word “corporate” is here applied to the organic behaviour of
cells when they are not independent and free, but are incorporated
in the animal body, and act in relation to each other. If the
behaviour of the individual cell during division impresses us with the
subtle intricacy of organic processes, the behaviour of the growing
cell-republic during the early stages of organic development must
impress us no less forcibly. We place the fertilized egg of a hen in
an incubator, and supply the requisite conditions of warmth, moisture,
and fresh air. Before the egg is laid cell-division has begun. A
small patch of closely similar cells has formed on the surface of
the yolk. Further subdivision is then arrested until the warmth of
incubation quickens again the patch into life. But when once thus
quickened no subsequent temporary arrest is possible--life will not
again lie dormant. If arrest there be it is that of death. And from
that little patch of cells, which spreads further and further over
the yolk, a chick is developed. Into the intricate technicalities
of embryology this is not the place to enter. But it is a matter of
common knowledge that, whereas we have to-day an egg such as we eat
for breakfast, three weeks hence we shall have a bright active bird,
a cunningly wrought piece of mechanism, and, more than that, a going
machine. During this wonderful process the cellular constituents take
on new forms and perform new functions, all in relationship to each
other, all as part of one organic whole. Here bones are developed
to form a skeletal framework, there muscles are constituted which
shall render orderly movements possible; feathers, beak, and claws
take shape as products of the skin; gut and glands prepare for future
modes of nutrition; heart and blood-vessels undergo many changes,
some reminiscent of bygone and ancestral gill-respiration, some in
relation to the provisional respiration of the embryo by means of a
temporary organ that spreads out beneath the shell, some preparatory to
the future use of the lungs,--some, again, related to the absorption
of food from the yolk, others to subsequent means of digestion;
nerve, brain, and sense-organs differentiate. A going machine in the
egg, the chick is hatched, and forthwith enters on a wider field of
behaviour. Few would think of attributing to the consciousness of the
embryo chick any guiding influence on the development of its bodily
structure, any control over the subtle changes and dispositions of its
constituent cells. But no sooner does the chick, when it is hatched,
begin to show wider modes of instinctive behaviour, than we invoke
conscious intelligence for their explanation, seemingly forgetful of
the fact that there is no logical ground for affirming that, while the
marvellous delicacies of structure are of unconscious organic origin,
the early modes of instinctive behaviour are due to the guidance of
consciousness. Such modes of behaviour will, however, be considered in
another chapter. Here we have to notice that the unquestionably organic
behaviour of the incorporated republic of cells may attain to a high
degree of complexity, and may serve a distinctly biological end.

[Illustration: FIG. 4.--Wapiti with antlers in velvet.]

There is, perhaps, no more striking instance of rapid and vigorous
growth than is afforded by the antlers of deer,[3] which are shed
and renewed every year. In the early summer, when growing, they are
covered over with a dark hairy skin, and are said to be “in velvet.”
If you lay your hand on the growing antler, you will feel that it is
hot with the nutrient blood that is coursing beneath it. It is, too,
exceedingly sensitive and tender. An army of tens of thousands of busy
living cells is at work beneath that velvet surface, building the bony
antlers, preparing for the battles of autumn. Each minute cell, working
for the general good, takes up from the nutrient blood the special
materials it requires; elaborates the crude bone-stuff, at first soft
as wax, but ere long to become hard as stone; and then, having done
its work, having added its special morsel to the fabric of the antler,
remains embedded and immured, buried beneath the bone-products of its
successors or descendants. No hive of bees is busier or more replete
with active life than the antler of a stag as it grows beneath the
soft, warm velvet. And thus are built up in the course of a few weeks
those splendid “beams,” with their “tynes” and “snags,” which, in the
case of the wapiti, even in the confinement of our Zoological Gardens,
may reach a weight of thirty-two pounds, and which, in the freedom of
the Rocky Mountains, may reach such a size that a man may walk, without
stooping, beneath the archway made by setting up upon their points the
shed antlers. When the antler has reached its full size, a circular
ridge makes its appearance at a short distance from the base. This
is the “burr,” which divides the antler into a short “pedicel” next
the skull, and the “beam” with its branches above. The circulation in
the blood-vessels of the beam now begins to languish, and the velvet
dies and peels off, leaving the hard, bony substance exposed. Then is
the time for fighting, when the stags challenge each other to single
combat, while the hinds stand timidly by. But when the period of battle
is over, and the wars and loves of the year are past, the bone beneath
the burr begins to be eaten away, through the activity of certain large
bone-absorbing cells, and, the base of attachment being thus weakened,
the antlers are shed; the scarred surface skins over and heals, and
only the hair-covered pedicel of the antler is left.

[Illustration: FIG. 5.--Wapiti with velvet shredding off.]

We have no reason to suppose that this corporate cellular behaviour,
involving the nicely adjusted co-operation of so vast an army of
organic units, is under the conscious guidance of the stag. And yet
how orderly the procedure! how admirable the result! Nor is there an
organ or structural part of the stag or any other animal that does not
tell the same tale. This is but one paragraph of the volume in which
is inscribed the varied and wonderful history of organic behaviour in
its corporate aspect. Is it a matter for wonder that the cause of such
phenomena has been regarded as “a mystery transcending naturalistic
conception; as an alien influx into nature, baffling scientific
interpretation”? And yet, though not surprising, this attitude of
mind, in face of organic phenomena, is illogical, and is due partly
to a misconception of the function of scientific interpretation,
partly to influences arising from the course pursued by the historical
development of scientific knowledge. The function of biological science
is to formulate and to express in generalized terms the related
antecedences and sequences which are observed to occur in animals and
plants. This can already be done with some approach to precision. But
the underlying cause of the observed phenomena does not fall within
the purview of natural science; it involves metaphysical conceptions.
It is no more (and no less) a “mystery” than all causation in its last
resort--as the _raison d’être_ of observed phenomena--is a mystery.
Gravitation, chemical affinity, crystalline force,--these are all
“mysteries.”

If the mystery of life, lying beneath and behind organic behaviour, be
said to baffle scientific interpretation, this is because it suggests
ultimate problems with which science as such should not attempt to
deal. The final causes of vital phenomena (as of other phenomena) lie
deeper than the probe of science can reach. But why is this sense
of mystery especially evoked in some minds by the contemplation of
organic behaviour, by the study of life? Partly, no doubt, because
the scientific interpretation of organic processes is but recent, and
in many respects incomplete. People have grown so accustomed to the
metaphysical assumptions employed by physicists and chemists when they
speak of the play of crystalline forces and the selective affinities
of atoms, they have been wont for so long to accept the “mysteries”
of crystallization and of chemical union, that these assumptions have
coalesced with the descriptions and explanations of science; and
the joint products are now, through custom, cheerfully accepted as
natural. Where the phenomena of organic behaviour are in question, this
coalescence has not yet taken place; the metaphysical element is on
the one hand proclaimed as inexplicable by natural science, and on the
other hand denied even by those who talk glibly of physical forces as
the final cause of the phenomena of the inorganic world.

So much reference to the problems which underlie the problems of
science seems necessary. It is here assumed that the phenomena of
organic behaviour are susceptible of scientific discussion and
elucidation. But even assuming that an adequate explanation in terms
of antecedence and sequence shall be thus attained by the science of
the future, this will not then satisfy, any more than our inadequate
explanations now satisfy, those who seek to know the ultimate meaning
and reason of it all: What makes organic matter behave as we see it
behave? what drives the wheels of life, as it drives the planets
in their courses? what impels the egg to go through its series of
developmental changes? what guides the cells along the divergent course
of their life-history? These are questions the ultimate answers to
which lie beyond the sphere of science--questions which man (who is a
metaphysical being) always does and always will ask, even if he rests
content with the answer of agnosticism; but questions to which natural
science never will be able, and should never so much as attempt, to
give an answer.

Enough has now been said to show that organic behaviour is a thing _sui
generis_, carrying its own peculiar marks of distinction: and further,
that, for science, this is just part of the constitution of nature,
neither more nor less mysterious than, let us say, crystallization or
chemical combination. But associated and closely interwoven with all
that is distinctively organic there is much which can to some extent be
interpreted in terms of physics and chemistry.

The animal[4] has sometimes been likened to a steam-engine, in which
the food is the fuel which enters into combustion with the oxygen taken
in through the lungs. It may be worth while to modify and modernize
this analogy--always remembering, however, that such an analogy must
not be pushed too far.

In the ordinary steam-engine the fuel is placed in the fire-box, to
which the oxygen of the air gains access; the heat produced by the
combustion converts the water in the boiler into steam, which is made
to act upon the piston, and thus set the machinery in motion. But
there is another kind of engine, now extensively used, which works on
a different principle. In the gas-engine the fuel is gaseous, and it
can thus be introduced in a state of intimate mixture with the oxygen
with which it is to unite in combustion. This is a great advantage. The
two can unite rapidly and explosively. In gunpowder the same end is
effected by mixing the carbon and sulphur with nitre, which contains
the oxygen necessary for their explosive combustion. And this is
carried still further in dynamite and gun-cotton, where the elements
necessary for explosive combustion are not merely mechanically mixed,
but are chemically combined in a highly unstable compound.

But in the gas-engine, not only are the fuel and the oxygen thus
intimately mixed, but the controlled explosions are caused to act
directly on the piston, and not through the intervention of water in a
boiler. Whereas, therefore, in the steam-engine the combustion is to
some extent external to the working of the machine, in the gas-engine
it is to a large extent internal and direct.

Now, instead of likening the animal as a whole to a steam-engine, it
is more satisfactory to liken each cell to an automatic gas-engine
which manufactures its own explosive. During the period of repose
which intervenes between periods of activity, its protoplasm is busy
in construction, taking from the blood-discs oxygen, and from the
blood-fluid carbonaceous and nitrogenous materials, and knitting these
together into relatively unstable explosive compounds, which play the
part of the mixed air and gas of the gas-engine. A resting muscle may
be likened to a complex and well-organized battery of gas-engines. On
the stimulus supplied through a nerve-channel a series of co-ordinated
explosions takes place: the gas-engines are set to work; the muscular
fibres contract; the products of the silent explosions are taken up
and hurried away by the blood-stream; and the protoplasm prepares a
fresh supply of explosive material. Long before the invention of the
gas-engine, long before gun-cotton or dynamite were dreamt of, long
before some Chinese or other inventor first mixed the ingredients of
gunpowder, organic nature had utilized the principle of controlled
explosions in the protoplasmic cell, and thus rendered animal behaviour
possible.

Certain cells are, however, more delicately explosive than others.
Those, for example, on or near the external surface of the body--those,
that is to say, which constitute the end-organs of the special
senses--contain explosive material which may be fired by a touch, a
sound, an odour, the contact with a sapid fluid or a ray of light.
The effects of the explosions in these delicate cells, reinforced in
certain neighbouring nerve-batteries, are transmitted down the nerves
as waves of subtle chemical or electrolytic change, and thus reach
that wonderful aggregation of organized and co-ordinated explosive
cells, the brain. Here it is again reinforced and directed (who, at
present, can say how?) along fresh nerve-channels to muscles, or
glands, or other organized groups of explosives. And in the brain,
somehow associated with the explosion of its cells, consciousness,
the mind-element, emerges; of which we need only notice here that
it belongs to a _wholly different order of being_ from the physical
activities and products with which we are at present concerned.

We must not press the explosion analogy too far. The essential thing
seems to be that the protoplasm of the cell has the power of building
up complex and unstable chemical compounds, which are perhaps stored
in its spongy substance; and that these unstable compounds, under
the influence of a stimulus (or, possibly, sometimes spontaneously),
break down into simpler and more stable compounds. In the case of
muscle-cells, this latter change is accompanied by an alteration
in length of the fibres, and consequent movements in the animal,
the products of the disruptive change being useless or harmful, and
being, therefore, removed as soon as possible. But very frequently
the products of explosive activity are made use of. In the case of
bone-cells, one of the products of disruption is of permanent use to
the organism, and constitutes the solid framework of the skeleton. In
the case of the secreting cells in the salivary and other digestive
glands, some of the disruptive products are of temporary value for the
preparation of the food. It is probable that these useful products
of disruption, permanent or temporary, took their origin in waste
products for which natural selection has found a use, and which have
been gradually rendered more and more efficacious in modes of organic
behaviour increasingly complex.

In the busy hive of cells which constitutes what we call the animal
body, there is thus ceaseless activity. During periods of apparent
rest the protoplasm is engaged in constructive work, building up fresh
supplies of unstable materials, which, during periods of apparent
activity, break up into simpler and more stable substances, some of
which are useful to the organism, while others must be got rid of as
soon as possible. From another point of view, the cells during apparent
rest are storing up energy to be utilized by the animal during its
periods of activity. The storing up of available energy may be likened
to the winding up of a watch or clock; it is when an organ is at rest
that the cells are winding themselves up; and thus we have the apparent
paradox that the cell is most active and doing most work when the organ
of which it forms a part is at rest. During the repose of an organ, in
fact, the cells are busily working in preparation for the manifestation
of energetic action that is to follow. Just as the brilliant display
of intellectual activity in a great orator is the result of the silent
work of a lifetime, so is the physical manifestation of muscular power
the result of the silent preparatory work of the muscle-cells.

It may, perhaps, seem strange that the products of cellular life should
be reached by the roundabout process of first producing unstable
compounds, from which are then formed more stable substances, useful
for permanent purposes as in bone, or temporary purposes as in the
digestive fluids. It seems a waste of power to build up substances
unnecessarily complex and stored with an unnecessarily abundant supply
of energy. But only thus could the organs be enabled to act under the
influence of stimuli, and afford examples of corporate behaviour. They
are like charged batteries ready to discharge under the influence of
the slightest organic touch. In this way, too, is afforded a means
by which the organ is not dependent only upon the products of the
immediate activity of the protoplasm at the time of action, but can
utilize the store laid up during preceding periods of rest.

Sufficient has now been said to illustrate the nature of some of the
physical processes which accompany organic behaviour in its corporate
aspect. The fact that should stand out clearly is that the animal body
is stored with large quantities of available energy resident in highly
complex and unstable chemical compounds, elaborated by the constituent
cells. These unstable compounds, eminently explosive according to
our analogy, are built up of materials derived from two different
sources--from the nutritive matter (containing carbon, hydrogen, and
nitrogen) absorbed during digestion, and from oxygen taken up from the
air during respiration. The cells thus become charged with energy that
can be set free on the application of the appropriate stimulus, which
may be likened to the spark that fires the explosive.

Let us note, in conclusion, that it is through the blood-system,
ramifying to all parts of the body, and the nerve-system, the
ramifications of which are not less perfect, that one of the larger
and higher animals is knit together into an organic whole. The former
carries to the cell the raw materials for the elaboration of its
explosive products, and, after the explosions, carries off the waste
products which result therefrom. The nerve-fibres carry the stimuli
by which the explosive is fired, while the central nervous system
organizes, co-ordinates, and controls the explosions, and initiates the
elaboration of the explosive compounds. Blood and nerves co-operate to
render corporate behaviour possible.


IV.--THE BEHAVIOUR OF PLANTS

A short parenthetic section on the behaviour of plants may serve
further to illustrate the nature of organic behaviour. We have seen
that Paramecium is apparently attracted by faintly acid solutions,
and have briefly considered Dr. Jennings’s interpretation of the
facts disclosed by careful observation. In the ferns the female
element, or ovum, is contained in a minute flask-shaped structure
(archegonium), in the neck and mouth of which mucilaginous matter, with
a slightly acid reaction, is developed; and this is said to exercise
an attractive influence on the freely swimming ciliated male elements,
or spermatozoids, which are necessary for fertilization. “Now, it
has been shown by experiment that the spermatozoids of ferns are
attracted by certain chemical substances, and especially by malic acid.
If artificial archegonia are prepared (consisting of tiny capillary
glass-tubes) and filled with mucilage to which a small quantity of this
acid has been added, they are found, when placed in water containing
fern-spermatozoids, to exercise the same attraction upon them which
the real archegonia exercise in nature. The malic acid gradually
diffuses out into the water, and the spermatozoids are influenced by
it, so that they move in the direction in which the substance is more
concentrated, _i.e._ towards the tube. Although it cannot be proved
that the archegonia themselves contain malic acid, as they are too
small for a recognizable quantity to be obtained from them, yet there
can be little doubt that the natural archegonia owe their attractive
influence to the same chemical agent which has proved efficacious
in experiment.”[5] In the light of Dr. Jennings’s observations, it
is perhaps not improbable that this so-called attractive influence
is similar to that seen in Paramecium; and that the spermatozoids
enter the organic acid in the course of their random movements, and
there remain. Be that as it may, the male elements collect in the
mucilaginous mass, and pass down the neck of the flask until one
reaches and coalesces with the female element, or ovum, and effects its
fertilization. Here we have organic behaviour unmistakably directed to
a biological end--behaviour which may indeed be accompanied by some dim
form of consciousness, but which is due to a purely organic reaction.
It is scarcely satisfactory to say that the spermatozoids “possess a
certain power of perception, by which their movements are guided.”[6]
If consciousness be present, it is probably merely an accompaniment
of the response, and has no directive influence on its nature and
character.

In the higher plants, as in the higher animals, the differentiation
and the orderly marshalling of the cell-progeny arising from the
coalescent male and female elements, afford, during development,
examples of corporate organic behaviour which can be more readily
described than explained, but which not less clearly subserve definite
biological ends, and in many cases, such as the direction of growth
in radicles and roots, the curling of tendrils, and the reaction to
the influence of light and warmth, are related to and evoked by the
environing conditions. More closely resembling familiar modes of
behaviour in animals are such movements as are seen in the “tentacles”
which project from the upper surface and margin of the Sun-dew leaf.
Their knobbed ends secrete a sticky matter, which glistens in the
sun, and to which small foreign bodies readily adhere. If particles
of limestone, sand, or clay, such as may be blown by the wind, touch
and stick to these knobs, there follows an exudation of acid liquid,
but no marked and continuous change occurs in the position of the
tentacles. But should an insect alight on the leaf, or a small piece
of meat be placed upon the tentacles, not only is there a discharge
of acid juice, but a ferment is also produced, which has a digestive
action on the nitrogenous matter. Slowly the tentacle curves inwards
and downwards, as one’s finger may bend towards the palm of one’s
hand; neighbouring tentacles also turn towards and incline on to the
stimulating substance; then others, further off, behave in a similar
way, until all the tentacles, some two hundred in number, are inflected
and converge upon the nitrogenous particle. Nay, more: “When two little
bits of meat are placed simultaneously on the right and left halves
of the same Sun-dew leaf, the two hundred tentacles divide into two
groups, and each one of the groups directs its aim to one of the bits
of meat.”[7]

[Illustration: FIG. 6.--Sun-dew (_Drosera_). Leaf (enlarged) with the
tentacles on one side inflected over a bit of meat placed on the disc.
(From Darwin’s “Insectivorous Plants.”)]

The movements, though slow, are orderly, methodical, and effective,
the secretions of many glands being brought to bear on just those
substances which are capable of digestion and absorption by the
plant. The seemingly concerted action is moreover due to an organic
transmission of impulses from cell to cell--a transmission accompanied
by visible changes in a purple substance contained within the cells. In
the Sun-dew any tentacle may form the starting-point of the spreading
wave of impulse. But in the Venus’s Fly-trap there are six delicate
spines, the slightest touch on any one of which causes the two halves
of the specially modified leaf-end to fold inwards on the midrib as a
hinge. The transmission of impulse is more rapid, the trap closing in a
few seconds; and electric currents have been observed to accompany the
change. Tooth-like spines at the edge of the trap interlock, and serve
to prevent the escape of small insects, while short-stalked purple
glands secrete an acid digestive juice. Division of labour has been
carried further; and organic behaviour, not less purposive, is carried
out in a manner even more effective.

[Illustration: FIG. 7.--Venus’s Fly-trap (_Dionæa_). Leaf viewed
laterally in its expanded state. (From Darwin’s “Insectivorous
Plants.”)]

In other plants adaptive movements are well known. “Few phenomena
have such a peculiar appearance as the movements which occur in the
sensitive Oxalis when rain comes on. Not only do the leaflets on which
the finest rain-drops fall fold together in a downward direction, but
all the neighbouring ones perform the same movement, although they have
not themselves been shaken by the impact of the falling drops. The
movement is continued to the common leaf-stalk bearing the numerous
leaflets. This also bends down towards the ground. The rain-drops now
slide over the bent leaf-stalk and down over the depressed leaflets,
and not a drop remains behind on their delicate surfaces.”[8] The
waves of impulse are said to be transmitted along definite lines, and
to cause the expulsion of water from certain cells at the point of
insertion of the leaflets or leaf-stalks, rendering them flaccid.

[Illustration: FIG. 8.--Flower of _Valisneria_.]

Appealing even more strongly to the popular imagination, though
probably not of deeper biological significance, is the behaviour of
plants in relation to the essential process of fertilization. Only two
examples can here be cited. _Valisneria spiralis_ is an aquatic plant,
with long submerged strap-like leaves, which grows in still water in
Southern Europe. The female flower is enclosed in two translucent
bracts, which form a protective bladder so long as the flower is
beneath the surface of the water; but the flower-stalk continues to
grow until the flower reaches the surface, when it becomes freely
exposed by the splitting of the bracts. There are three boat-shaped
sepals, which act as floats; three quite minute petals; and three large
fringed stigmas, which project over the abortive petals in the space
between the boat-like sepals. The flower is now ready for fertilization.

The male flowers, which are developed on different individuals from
those which produce the female flowers, grow in bunches beneath an
investing bladder. The stalk does not elongate, so that the bladder
never rises far above the bottom, and remains completely submerged.
Here the bladder bursts, and the male flowers, with short stalks, are
detached. Each has three sepals, which enclose and protect the stamens.
The separated flower now ascends to the surface, the sepals open and
form three hollow boats, by means of which the flower floats freely,
while the two functional stamens project upwards and somewhat obliquely
into the air, exposing the large sticky pollen-cells. Blown hither
and thither by the wind, these little flower-boats “accumulate in the
neighbourhood of fixed bodies, especially in their recesses, where
they rest like ships in harbour. When the little craft happen to get
stranded in the recesses of a female Valisneria flower, they adhere to
the tri-lobed stigma, and some of the pollen-cells are sure to be left
sticking to the fringes on the margins of the stigmatic surface.”[9]

This is a good example of purely organic behaviour admirably adapted to
secure a definite and important biological end. Few will be likely to
contend that it is even accompanied by, still less under the guidance
of, any conscious foresight on the part of the plant. And the lesson it
should teach is that, in the study of organic behaviour, adaptation to
the conditions of existence is not necessarily the outcome of conscious
guidance.

It is well known that the orchids exhibit, in their mode of
fertilization, remarkable adaptations by which the visits of insects
are rendered subservient to the needs of the plant. In the Catasetums,
for example, the male flower may be described as consisting of two
parts--a lower part, the cup-like labellum (Fig. 9, _l_), which
constitutes a landing-stage on which insects may alight; and an upper
part, the column (Fig. 9, _c_), surrounded by the upper sepal and
petals. In the upper part of the column the pollen-masses are borne at
one end of an elastic pedicel, at the other end of which is an adhesive
disc, and the rod is bent over a pad so as to be in a state of strain.
The disc is retained in position by a membrane with which two long
tubular horns (Figs. 9, _h_; 10, _an_) are continuous. These project
over the labellum, where insects alight to gnaw its sweet fleshy walls,
and if they be touched, even very lightly, they convey some stimulus to
the membrane which surrounds and connects the disc with the adjoining
surface, causing it instantly to rupture; and as soon as this happens,
the disc is suddenly set free. The highly elastic pedicel then flirts
the disc out of its chamber with such force that the whole is ejected,
sometimes to a distance of two or three feet, bringing away with it the
two pollen-masses. “The utility of so forcible an ejection is to drive
the soft and viscid cushion of the disc against the hairy thorax of
the large hymenopterous insects which frequent the flowers. When once
attached to an insect, assuredly no force which the insect could exert
would remove the disc and pedicel, but the caudicles [by which the
pollen-masses are attached] are ruptured without much difficulty, and
thus the balls of pollen might readily be left on the adhesive stigma
of the female flower.”[10]

[Illustration: FIG. 9.--Flower of _Catasetum_; _c_, column; _h_, horns;
_l_, labellum.]

Here again we have adaptive behaviour of exquisite nicety, and we
have the transmission of an impulse very rapidly along the cells of
the irritable horns, followed by the sudden rupture of a membrane.
Beautiful, however, as is the adaptation, effective as it is to a
definite biological end, the organic behaviour does not afford any
indication of the guidance of consciousness. Among plants we have many
interesting and admirable examples of organic behaviour; but nowhere so
much as a hint of that profiting by individual experience which is the
criterion of the effective presence of conscious guidance and control.

[Illustration: FIG. 10.--_Catasetum_; C, diagram of column; _a_, anther;
_an_, horn; _d_, adhesive disc; _f_, filament of anther; _g_, ovarium;
_ped_, pedicel; D and E, pollinium; _p_, pollen-mass. (From Darwin’s
“Orchids.”)]


V.--REFLEX ACTION

It is sometimes said that the tentacles of the Sun-dew leaf indicate
a primitive kind of reflex action in plants, and that they afford
evidence of discrimination. “It is,” says Romanes, “the stimulus
supplied by continuous _pressure_ that is so delicately perceived,
while the stimulus supplied by _impact_ is disregarded.”[11] And,
comparing this with what is observed in the Venus’s Fly Trap, he
says: “In these two plants the power of discriminating between these
two kinds of stimuli has been developed to an equally astonishing
extent, but in opposite directions.”[12] It is well, however, to
avoid terms which carry with them so distinctively a conscious
implication as “discrimination” and “perception” do for most of us.
Just as the photographer’s film reacts differently according to the
quality of light-rays, violet or red, which reach it, so do many
organic substances react differently to stimuli of different quality,
irrespective of their intensity. The “discrimination” of plants and of
some of the lower animals is of this kind, and it is better to speak of
it simply as differential reaction. There can then be no chance of its
being confused with conscious choice.

Nor should the movements of the Sun-dew tentacles or of those of the
Sea-anemone be termed in strictness reflex action. As originally
employed by Marshall Hall, and, since that time, by common consent,
_reflex action_ involves a differentiated nervous system. There is,
first, an afferent impulse from the point of stimulation passing
inwards to a nerve-centre; secondly, certain little-understood changes
within this centre; and thirdly, an efferent impulse from the centre
to some organ or group of cells which are thus affected. In plants
there is no indication of anything analogous to this specialized mode
of response. The impulse passes directly from the point of stimulation
to the part affected without the intervention of anything like a
nerve-centre. In the sensitive Oxalis the impulse passes directly to
the point of insertion of the leaflet or leaf-stalk; in Catasetum, from
the horn to the retaining membrane; in the Sun-dew, from the affected
tentacle to those in its neighbourhood. Even in the Sea-anemone, though
there is a loosely diffused nervous system, the passage of the impulse
from one part of the circlet of tentacles to other parts, seems to
follow a direct rather than a reflex course, and there do not appear to
be any specialized centres by which the impulses are received and then
redistributed.

In all animals in which well-differentiated nervous systems are found,
in which there are distinct nerve-fibres and nerve-centres, reflex
actions, simple or more complicated, occur. They form the initial
steps leading up to the highest types of organic behaviour. So long
as the nervous arcs--afferent fibres, nerve-centre, and efferent
fibres--remain intact reflex acts may be carried out with great
precision and delicacy, even when the higher centres, which we believe
to be those of conscious guidance and control, have been destroyed.
When, for example, the whole of the brain of a frog has been extirpated
and the animal is hung up by the lower jaw, if the left side be touched
with a drop of acid the left leg is drawn up and begins to scratch
at the irritated spot, and when this leg is held, the other hind leg
is, with seemingly greater difficulty, brought to bear on the same
spot. “This,” says Sir Michael Foster, “at first sight looks like
an intelligent choice.... But a frog deprived of its brain so that
the spinal cord only is left, makes no spontaneous movements at all.
Such an entire absence of spontaneity is wholly inconsistent with
the possession of intelligence.... We are therefore led to conclude
that the phenomena must be explained in some other way than by being
referred to the working of an intelligence.”[13] But if we concede that
intelligence is absent, may there not at least be some consciousness?
Sir Michael Foster’s reply to such a question goes as far as we have
any justification for going, even when we give free rein to conjecture.
“We may distinguish,” he says, “between an active continuous
consciousness, such as we usually understand by the term, and a passing
or momentary condition, which we may speak of as consciousness, but
which is wholly discontinuous from an antecedent or from a subsequent
similar momentary condition; and indeed we may suppose that the
complete consciousness of ourselves, and the similarly complete
consciousness which we infer to exist in many animals, has been
evolved out of such a rudimentary consciousness. We may, on this view,
suppose that every nervous action of a certain intensity or character
is accompanied by some amount of consciousness which we may, in a
way, compare to the light emitted when a combustion previously giving
rise to invisible heat waxes fiercer. We may thus infer that when the
brainless frog is stirred by some stimulus to a reflex act, the spinal
cord is lit up by a momentary flash of consciousness coming out of
the darkness and dying away into darkness again; and we may perhaps
infer that such a passing consciousness is the better developed the
larger the portion of the cord involved in the reflex act and the more
complex the movement. But such a momentary flash, even if we admit its
existence, is something very different from consciousness as ordinarily
understood, is far removed from intelligence, and cannot be appealed to
as explaining the ‘choice’ spoken of above.”[14]

These sentences indicate with sufficient clearness the distinction,
more than once hinted at in the foregoing pages, between consciousness
as an accompaniment, and consciousness as a guiding influence. We
shall have more to say in this connection in subsequent chapters. The
experiment with the frog shows, at any rate, that reflex actions, of
a distinctly purposive nature, may be carried out when the centres,
which are believed to exercise conscious control and guidance have
been destroyed. It is said that in man, when, owing to injuries of
the spine, the connection between the brain and the lower part of the
spinal cord have been severed, tickling of the foot causes withdrawal
of the limb without directly affecting the consciousness of the
patient. But in all such cases we are dealing with a maimed creature.
The living frog or man, healthy and intact, is, presumably in the one
case, certainly in the other, conscious of these reflex actions, and
can exercise some amount of guidance and control over them. In man this
is unquestionably the case. But granting that the brain is the organ
of conscious control, granting that it can receive impulses from and
transmit impulses to the reflex centres, no more is here implied, and
no more can be legitimately inferred, than that the kind of organic
behaviour we call “reflex action” is in the higher animals in touch
with the guiding centres. We have no ground for assuming that in
reflex action there is any power of intelligent guidance independent
of that which is exercised by the brain or analogous organ. In brief,
reflex acts, in animals endowed with intelligence, may be regarded as
specialized modes of organic behaviour; which are in themselves often
characterized by much complexity; which subserve definite biological
ends; which are effected by subordinate centres capable of transmitting
impulses to, and receiving impulses from, the centres of intelligent
guidance; and which, as responses confined to certain organs or parts
of the body, form elements in the wider behaviour of the animal as a
whole.


VI.--THE EVOLUTION OF ORGANIC BEHAVIOUR

The interpretation of organic behaviour in terms of evolution mainly
depends on the answer we give to the question: Are acquired modes
of behaviour inherited? A negative answer to this question is here
provisionally accepted. But the premisses from which this conclusion is
drawn are too technical for discussion in these pages. It must suffice
to state as briefly as possible what this conclusion amounts to, and to
indicate some of the consequences which follow from its acceptance.

The fertilized egg gives origin, as we have seen, to the multitude
of cells which build up the body of one of the higher animals. There
are, on the one hand, muscle-cells, gland-cells, nerve-cells, and
other constituents of the various tissues; and there are, on the
other hand, the reproductive cells--ova or sperms, as the case may
be. Now, every cell in the developed animal is a direct descendant of
the fertilized egg. But of all the varied host only the reproductive
cells take any direct share in the continuity of the race. Hereditary
transmission is therefore restricted to the germinal substance of
these reproductive cells. Trace the ancestry of any cell in the adult
body, say a nerve-cell, and you reach the fertilized ovum. Trace back
the ancestral line yet further, and you follow a long sequence of
reproductive cells, or, at least, of cells which have undergone but
little differentiation; but never again will you find, in the course of
a genealogy of bewildering length, a nerve-cell. Such a tissue-element
is a descendant, but cannot become an ancestor; it dies without direct
heirs.

It is universally admitted that the bodily structures are subject
to what is termed _modification_ under the stress of environing
circumstances. The muscles may acquire unusual strength by use and
exercise; the nerve-centres may learn certain tricks of behaviour
in the course of individual life; and other structures may be
similarly _accommodated_ to the conditions which affect them. To such
modifications of structure or function in the organs or parts the term
_acquired_ is primarily applied. The tissues have thus a certain amount
of organic plasticity, through which they are adjusted to a range of
circumstances varying in extent. They are able to acquire new modes of
behaviour. But the cells of which they are composed are off the line
of racial descent. They leave no direct heirs. When the body dies the
modifications of behaviour acquired by its parts perish with it. Only
if in some way they exercise what we may term a homœopathic influence
on the germinal substance can the accommodation they have learnt be
transmitted in inheritance. By a _homœopathic_ influence is here
meant one that is of such a nature as to communicate to the germinal
substance, the seeds of similar changes of structure or function.
And of the occurrence of any such homœopathic influence there is no
convincing evidence.

Logically contrasted with the modifications of the tissues, dependent
on organic plasticity, are the _variations_ which arise from the
nature and constitution of the reproductive cells. How they arise
cannot here be discussed. But they are, it is believed, subject to
the influence of natural selection, which has guided them, throughout
the ages of organic evolution, in the directions they have taken;
disadvantageous variations having been eliminated, and favourable
variations surviving in the struggle for existence. Such modes of
behaviour as are congenital and are due to hereditary transmission are
therefore the outcome of variations which have been selected generation
after generation. And the fit adjustment of this congenital behaviour
to the needs of life is termed _adaptation_. It is here assumed that
modifications of behaviour in one generation are not inherited, and
therefore contribute nothing to the store of adaptive behaviour in the
next generation.

It must not, however, be supposed that the provisional acceptance of
this conclusion involves the denial of all connection of any sort
between accommodation and adaptation. When we remember that plastic
modification and germinal variation have been working together,
in close association, all along the line of organic evolution to
reach the common goal of adjustment to the circumstances of life,
it is difficult to believe that they have been throughout the whole
process altogether independent of each other. Granted that acquired
modifications, as such, are not directly inherited, they may none the
less afford the conditions under which _coincident variations_ escape
elimination. By coincident variations I mean those the direction of
which coincides with that taken by modification. The survival of an
animal depends on its adjustment to the circumstances of its life, no
matter how this adjustment is secured. And this survival would in the
long run be better secured, we may suppose, where the two methods of
adjustment were coincident and not conflicting;[15] just as a man who
not only acquires by his own exertions a fortune but also inherits
one, is better off than his neighbour, of equal business capacity,
who is entirely dependent on his own exertions. The inheritance of a
small capital may, indeed, make just the difference between success
and failure. Even with it, if he had no power of acquiring more, he
might remain a poor man. Inheritance and acquisition combined may
best lead to survival in competition. Thus modification may supply
the conditions under which coincident variations are favoured, and,
given time, to reach step by step, through natural selection, a fully
adaptive level. If this be so we may accept many of the facts adduced
by the transmissionist in favour of the direct inheritance of acquired
characters, and at the same time interpret them on selectionist
principles.

If, however, acquired characters are not hereditary the method of
natural selection in racial progress is curiously indirect. Apart from
the preservation of their fecundity, the cells on which the continuity
of life, in all the higher animals, depends, have themselves taken
little part in the struggle for existence. Just as in the forest tree,
the firmly implanted roots, the sturdy stem, and the strong branches
have to bear the stress of the winter storm, that the flowers of
spring may ripen the seeds which contain the potentiality of all this
strength; so do muscle, sinew, and brain secure the survival of the
animal, that his descendants may carry on the struggle. One may liken
the cellular constituents of the animal to a hive of bees with fertile
drones and queen, and sterile workers. It is on the exertions of the
latter that, in the struggle for existence, the continued existence
of the swarm depends, while it is by the pairing of the fertile drone
and queen that the continuity of the race is secured. No worker can
transmit the qualities which are so essential to the well-being of
the community. But in the eggs of their sister the queen-mother these
qualities lie dormant. And since the race is one race, the workers
by their exertions contribute indirectly to the maintenance of those
hereditary aptitudes to which they are unable to contribute directly.
For it is essential to bear in mind that they not only work for their
own generation, but they determine the course of heredity. Picture two
such communities set in an environment which intensifies the struggle
for existence. The one is strong, healthy, and vigorous; the other in
all respects the reverse. The incidence of the battle of life falls
mainly on the workers. If they succumb in the one group their fertile
queen either perishes, or gives rise to a poor stock, certain in the
long run to be eliminated. But the vigorous workers in the other group
survive and secure, too, the survival of their queen, who, since she is
also their sister, bears, in her ovaries, the good seed from which a
new generation of vigorous workers shall be developed. Thus though the
sterile bees contribute nothing directly to the heredity of the race,
they indirectly determine the direction which that heredity shall take.
So, too, in the higher animals, the reproductive cells are the fertile
sisters of a host of sterile body cells, on which the main incidence
of the struggle for existence falls. Their sterility precludes their
directly contributing to the success of future cell-generations; but
in protecting their fertile sisters, the reproductive cells, they are
really determining the lines along which the evolution of the race
shall continue.

Acquired characters may thus be regarded as the results of those
accidents, fortunate or the reverse as the case may be, which happen
to the body, and more or less modify its outward form or hidden
structure, and its modes of organic behaviour; but which, as such, have
no direct effects for better or worse on the germinal substance. All
that the plant or animal can be is due to heredity; all that it _is_,
to heredity and circumstance. Even the ability to yield to circumstance
is part of heredity’s dower. Fortunate, then, the plant or animal
that inherits such definiteness of structure and behaviour as may fit
it to its station, together with such plasticity as may enable it to
accommodate itself to those changes of environing conditions which may
fall to its lot.

One more point must be noticed in connection with this difficult and
puzzling subject. The acceptance of the conclusion that acquired modes
of behaviour are not hereditary nowise commits us to the belief that
heredity has nothing whatever to do with them. Though what is acquired
may not be transmitted, what one may term the acquisitiveness is
unquestionably inherited. Though this, that, or the other acquired mode
of behaviour may have no direct descendants, the power of acquiring
any one of them under the appropriate circumstances is handed on as an
invaluable legacy. Just as the mirror which has reflected a fleeting
scene retains no lasting image of the bygone events, so heredity may
retain no impress of acquired characters; but just as the mirror
keeps its power of reflecting such scenes, so does heredity transmit
the power of acquiring such characters. As the leaves of the oak are
renewed each successive spring, so may acquired modes of behaviour be
repeated in each successive generation if only the requisite conditions
recur in due season.

From what has preceded it may, therefore, be inferred that organic
behaviour may arise either through modifications occurring in the
plastic tissues, or through variations having their origin in the
germinal substance. Broadly speaking, however, we may regard as
predominantly due to adaptation those congenital modes of behaviour and
those organic responses which on their first occurrence are relatively
definite in character, and which are directed to a biological end, for
whose attainment the tissues have had no preparatory training; and we
may regard as predominantly due to accommodation those responses which
are, so to speak, learnt by the tissues in the course of individual
life. Both are dependent on heredity, but in different ways. What the
animal owes to heredity may, indeed, as I have elsewhere said,[16] be
classified under two heads. Under the first will fall those relatively
definite modes of behaviour which fit the animal to deal at once, on
their first occurrence, with certain essential or frequently recurring
conditions of the environment. Under the second head will fall the
power of dealing with special circumstances as they arise in the
course of a varied life. The former may be likened to the inheritance
of specific drafts for definite needs which are sure to arise in the
conduct of life; the latter to the inheritance of a legacy which may
be drawn upon for any purpose as occasion may demand. If the need
becomes habitual the animal may, so to speak, instruct his banker to
set aside a specific sum to meet it as it arises. But this arrangement
is a purely individual matter, dictated by experience, and in no wise
enjoined by the original terms of the bequest. And both types are
fostered by natural selection which develops (_a_) such congenital
definiteness of response, and (_b_) such innate plasticity, as are
advantageous under the conditions of existence; uniform conditions
tending to emphasize the former, variable conditions the latter.

Difficult as it may be to earmark the items of the organic bequest--to
say that, of the sum of energy expended in any given case of organic
behaviour, so much is due to a specific draft definitely assigned in
heredity for this particular purpose, and so much is contributed from
the general legacy of innate plasticity,--it none the less conduces
to clear thinking to emphasize the logical distinction between them,
so long as it is steadily borne in mind that logical distinction does
not imply biological separation. The animal, with all its varied modes
of behaviour, is an organic whole, and as an organic whole it has
been developed from the fertilized egg. The very same tissues which
exhibit congenital modes of behaviour are capable also of acquiring new
responses and playing their part in accommodation. We have not one set
of organs which are the products of variation and another set which
result from modification. Our study would no doubt be simplified if
this were the case; but it is not so. And we must take the animal as we
find it, presenting varied behaviour of complex origin. Even the reflex
nervous centres, which are concerned in responses so automatic as to
suggest a stereotyped structure of distinctively germinal origin, are
also, as we saw at the close of the last section, in close touch with
those centres of control which are associated with the supreme power of
accommodation arising from the possession of consciousness.




