CHAPTER IX.

DEVELOPING THE AURA.


When it is remembered that the aura of the individual affects and
influences other persons with whom he comes in contact--and is, in fact,
an important part of his personality--it will be seen that it is
important that the individual take pains to develop his aura in the
direction of desirable qualities, and to neutralize and weed out
undesirable ones. This becomes doubly true, when it is also remembered
that, according to the law of action and reaction, the auric vibrations
react upon the mind of the individual, thus intensifying and adding fuel
to the original mental states which called them forth. From any point of
view, it is seen to be an important part of self development and
character building, to develop the aura according to scientific occult
principles.

In this work of aura development, there is found to be two correlated
phases, namely: (1) the direct work of flooding the aura with the best
vibrations, by means of holding in the mind clear, distinct and repeated
mental pictures of desirable ideas and feelings; and (2) the added
effect of mental images of the colors corresponding to the ideas and
feelings which are deemed desirable and worthy of development.

The first of the above mentioned phases is probably far more familiar to
the average student, than is the second. This from the fact that the
average student is apt to be more or less familiar with the teachings of
the numerous schools or cults which agree in the axiom that "holding the
thought" tends to develop the mind of the individual along the
particular lines of such thought.

This is a correct psychological principle, for that matter, even when
those practicing it do not fully understand the underlying facts. Mental
faculties, like physical muscles, tend to develop by exercise and use,
and any faculty may be developed and cultivated in this way.

Another teaching of these same schools is that the character of the
thoughts so "held" by the individual, effects other persons with whom he
comes in contact, and, in a way attracts to him objective things,
persons, and circumstances in harmony with such thoughts. This also is
in accordance with the best occult teaching--from which, of course, it
was originally derived.

I heartily endorse the facts of these teachings, and pronounce them
fundamentally correct. And, in this connection, I may say that every
healer may apply his own methods PLUS this teaching regarding the aura,
and thus obtain greatly increased results.

By the faithful, persevering, holding in mind of certain ideas and
feelings, the individual may flood his aura with the vibrations and
colors of such ideas and feelings, and thus charge it with auric energy
and power. By so doing, he gains the benefit of the reaction upon his
own mind, and also secures the advantage of the effect thereof upon
other persons with whom he comes in contact. In this way he not only
builds up his individual character along desirable lines, but at the
same time develops a strong, positive, attractive "personality" which
affects others with whom he comes in contact.

I do not consider it necessary to go into details here regarding this
phase of "holding the thought," for, as I have said, the average student
is already familiar with the rules regarding the same. In a nutshell,
however, I will say that each individual is largely the result of the
thoughts he has manifested, and the feelings which he has harbored.
Therefore, the rule is to manifest and exercise the faculties you would
develop, and inhibit or refrain from manifesting the ones you would
restrain or control. Again, to restrain an undesirable faculty, develop
and exercise its opposite--kill out the negatives by developing the
positives. The mind produces thought; and yet, it tends to grow from the
particular portion of its own product which you may choose to feed to
it--for it not only creates thought, but also feeds upon it. So,
finally, let it produce the best kind of thought for you, and then throw
that back into the hopper, for it will use it to grind out more of the
same kind and grow strong in so doing. That is the whole thing in a
nutshell.

The second phase of aura development (as above classified), however, is
not likely to be familiar to the average student, for the reason that it
is not known outside of advanced occult circles, and very little has
been allowed to be taught regarding it. But, the very reticence
regarding it is a proof of its importance, and I strongly advise my
students to give to it the attention and practice that its importance
merits. The practice, thereof, however, is extremely simple, and the
principle of the practice, moreover, is based solely upon the facts of
the relation of color and mental states, as shown in the astral auric
colors, as fully explained in the preceding chapters of this book.

In order to intelligently practice the development of the aura by means
of flooding or charging it with the vibrations of psychic colors, it is
first necessary that the student be thoroughly familiar with the scale
of colors related to each set of mental states or emotional feelings.
This scale and its key is found in a number of places in the preceding
chapters.

The student should turn back the pages of this book, and then carefully
re-read and re-study every word which has been said about the relation
of mental states and auric colors. He should know the mental
correspondence of the shades of red, yellow, and blue, so thoroughly
that the thought of one will bring the idea of the other. He should be
able to think of the corresponding group of colors, the moment he thinks
of any particular mental state. He should be thoroughly familiar with
the physical, mental, and spiritual effect of any of the colors, and
should moreover, test himself, psychically, for the individual effects
of certain colors upon himself.

He should enter into this study with interest and earnestness, and then
by keeping his eyes and ears open, he will perceive interesting facts
concerning the subject on every side in his daily work and life. He will
perceive many proofs of the principle, and will soon amass a stock of
experiences illustrating each color and its corresponding mental state.
He will be richly repaid for the work of such study, which, in fact,
will soon grow to be more like pleasure than like work.

Having mastered this phase of the subject, the student should give
himself a thorough, honest, self-examination and mental analysis. He
should write down a chart of his strong points and his weak ones. He
should check off the traits which should be developed, and those which
should be restrained. He should determine whether he needs development
along physical, mental, and spiritual lines, and in what degree. Having
made this chart of himself, he should then apply the principles of
charging the aura with the color vibrations indicated by his self
diagnosis and prescription.

The last stage is quite simple, once one has acquired the general idea
back of it. It consists simply in forming as clear a mental image as
possible of the color or colors desired, and then projecting the
vibrations into the aura by the simple effort of the will. This does
not mean that one needs to clinch the fist or frown the brow, in
willing. Willing, in the occult sense, may be said to consist of a
COMMAND, leaving the rest to the mechanism of the will and mind. Take
away the obstacle of Doubt and Fear--then the Royal Command performs the
work of setting the will into operation. This, by the way, is an
important occult secret, of wide application--try to master its all
important significance.

The mental imaging of colors may be materially aided by concentration
upon physical material of the right color. By concentrating the
attention and vision upon a red flower, for instance; or upon a bit of
green leaf, in another instance; one may be able to form a clear,
positive mental image of that particular color. This accompanied by the
willing, and demand, that the vibrations of this color shall charge the
aura, will be found to accomplish the result. Have something around you
showing the desirable colors, and your attention will almost
instinctively take up the impression thereof, even though you may be
thinking of, or doing something else. Live as much as possible in the
idea and presence of the desirable color, and you will get the habit of
setting up the mental image and vibration thereof. A little practice
and experience will soon give you the idea, and enable you to get the
best results. Patience, perseverance, and sustained earnest
interest--that is the key of success.




