Chapter IV. The Astral Colors (Continued)                             31

  Interpretations of the Astral Color Group. The Red Group. The
  varying reds of vitality and health; the shades of love; high and
  low; the crimson of sensuality; the scarlet plane of anger and
  passion. The Yellow Group of Orange, and the Pride of Intellect.
  The Golden Yellow of Intellectual Attainment. The haloes of the
  great teachers. The lemon hue of inferior intellect. The Green
  Group. The high and low greens. The green of love of nature. The
  green of Altruism. The green of sympathy. The dull green of
  insincerity and deceit. The ruddy green of Jealousy and malice.
  The Blue Group. The great souls of the spiritual and religious
  emotions. The Brown Group. The Gray Group. Black Group. White
  Group. The Great White light.


Chapter V. The Aura Kaleidoscope                                      39

  What the astral body is composed of. Also the etheric double. The
  ever changing clouds of aura coloring. Placid scenes and furious
  storms of the Aura. Opalescent effects. The pearly color of the
  etheric substance. The Aura of mental activity. The Aura of
  reverie or sleep. The Aura of anger and passion. The Aura of
  hate. The Aura of love. The Aura of churches, prisons, hospitals
  and places of vice. The Aura of character and of passing feeling.
  Astral atmospheres of buildings and places. Collective and
  composite auras. A key to some great and deep occult teachings,
  and esoteric mysteries. How the trained occultist is able to
  ascertain the character, and tendencies of a person.


Chapter VI. Thought Form                                              47

  What a Thought Form is and what it is made of. How Thought Forms
  are created. How Thought Forms travel. How Thought Forms affect
  persons. Why some Thought Forms are semi-living, elemental
  forces. Various forms and classes of Thought Forms. Full
  description of their character, appearance and effect. Thought
  Form whirls and swirls. Rotation Thought Forms. Thought Form
  whirlpools. Explosive Thought Forms. Thought Form bombs. Octopus
  Thought Form. How Thought Forms are projected and why they
  travel. A wonderful study of a fascinating subject.


Chapter VII. Psychic Influence of Color                               55

  Action and Re-action. Effect of Color on Mental States and
  Emotions. How certain tints affect persons favorably and
  unfavorably. The calming effect of restful greens. "Seeing Red."
  Gloomy Black. Depressing Grays. Angry Reds. Soothing Blues.
  Illuminating Yellows. The Psychology of Color. Healing Effect of
  Colors. The principles of Healing by Colors. Effect of color upon
  character and morals. Color in Child Life. Interesting and
  instructive information and teaching.


Chapter VIII. Auric Magnetism                                         63

  Human Magnetism. The Auric Reservoir of Magnetism. Magnetic
  Healing, how caused and why it occurs. Use of its hands. Flow of
  etheric force. New Methods of Magnetic Healing. Use of Auric
  Colors. Analysis and Full Explanation. Absent treatment by Auric
  Color Vibration. Tables of Auric Healing Colors, showing effect
  on Nervous System, Blood and Organs. Helpful suggestion in Auric
  Color Healing. How to Treat yourself and others by this method.
  Healing by the Great White Light.


Chapter IX. Developing the Aura                                       71

  How to build up a strong, positive Aura. How to flood the Aura
  with the right vibration. How to influence the color in the Aura.
  "Holding the Thought." Reflecting Color States. Principles of
  Occult Color Re-action. Self-analysis. Self-Treatment for
  Character and Qualities. Effect of visualizing colors. How to get
  the keynote of Color vibrations. The Key of Success.


Chapter X. The Protective Aura                                        79

  A forbidden subject plainly discussed. Need of Occult protection.
  How to change the Aura so that it will repel physical contagion
  and psychic attacks. How to Guard the body by Auric Colors. How
  to energize and illumine the mind, so as to protect against
  mental influences. The protective Golden Aura. How to protect
  your emotional nature from undesirable vibrations. The Great
  Auric Circle of Protection. The oldest occultist's instructions
  regarding building up of the protective Aura. How to fill the
  aura with vibrations of health and physical strength. How to
  protect yourself from the low passions and feelings of others.
  The Aura of great moral teachers. How those in ignorance of
  occult laws have been led from the moral path. The Auric Circle
  of Protection. The crumbs of teaching scattered through this
  book, other than those concerning the Aura. Those for whom these
  teachings are intended will recognize and appreciate them. A
  shelter for soul, mind and body against psychic influence. An
  infallible Armor against all force of attack. The Great White
  Light. Words from the Master.




