CHAPTER VII.

PSYCHIC INFLUENCE OF COLORS.


In all of Nature's wonderful processes we find many evidences of that
great principle of Action and Reaction, which, like the forward and
backward swing of the pendulum, changes cause into effect, and effect
into cause, in a never ending series. We find this principle in effect
in the psychic relation of mental states and colors. That is to say,
that just as we find that certain mental and emotional states manifest
in vibrations causing particular auric astral colors, so do we find that
the presence of certain colors on the physical plane will have a decided
psychic effect upon the mental and emotional states of individuals
subject to their influence. And, as might be expected by the thoughtful
student, the particular astral colors manifested in the aura by the
presence of some particular mental or emotional state exactly correspond
with the particular physical colors which influence that particular
mental or emotional state.

Illustrating the statements in the preceding paragraph, I would say that
the continued presence of red will be apt to set up emotional
vibrations of anger, passion, physical love, etc., or, in a different
tint, the higher physical emotions. Blue, of the right tint, will tend
to cause feelings of spirituality, religious emotion, etc. Green is
conducive to feelings of relaxation, repose, quiet, etc. Black produces
the feeling of gloom and grief. And so on, each color tends to produce
emotional vibrations similar to those which manifest that particular
color in the astral aura of the person. It is a case of "give and take"
along the entire scale of color and emotions, according to the great
natural laws.

While the explanation of these facts is not known to the average person,
nevertheless nearly everyone recognizes the subtle effect of color and
avoids certain colors, while seeking certain others. There is not a
single living human being but who has experienced the sense of rest,
calm, repose, and calm inflow of strength, when in a room decorated in
quiet shades of green. Nature, herself, has given this particular shade
to the grass and leaves of trees and plants, so that the soothing effect
of the country scene is produced. The aura of a person experiencing
these feelings, and yielding to them, will manifest precisely the tint
or shade of green which is shown on the grass and leaves around him, so
true is this natural law of action and reaction.

The effect of scarlet upon animals, the bull for instance, is well
known--to use the familiar term, it causes one to "see red." The sight
of the color of blood is apt to arouse feelings of rage, or disgust, by
reason of the same law. The sight of the beautiful clear blue sky tends
to arouse feelings of reverence, awe or spirituality. One can never
think of this shade of blue arousing rage; or red arouse feelings of
spirituality.

It is a well known fact that in insane asylums, the use of red in
decorations must be avoided, while the proper shades of blue or green
are favored. On the other hand, the use of a proper red, in certain
cases, will tend to arouse vitality and physical strength in a patient.
It is not by mere chance that the life giving blood is a bright, rich
red color when it leaves the heart.

When one "feels blue" he does not have the impression of a bright or
soft blue--but he really is almost conscious of the presence of a dull
bluish gray. And the presence of such a color in one's surroundings,
tends to cause a feeling of depression. Everyone knows the effect of a
"gray day" in the Fall or Spring.

Again, who does not know the feeling of mental exaltation coming from
the sight of a day filled with golden sunshine, or from a golden sunset.
We find proofs of this law of Nature on all sides, every day of our
lives. It is an interesting subject, which will repay the student for
the expenditure of a little time and thought upon it.

Speaking of the general class characteristics of the three primary
groups of colors, all occultists, as well as many physiologists and
psychologists, are agreed on the following fundamental propositions,
viz.: that (1) Red is exciting to the mind and emotions; (2) Yellow is
inspiring and elevating, and intellectually stimulating; and (3) Blue is
cool, soothing, and calming. It is also universally conceded that the
right shades of green (combining the qualities of blue and yellow in
appropriate proportions) is the ideal color of rest and recuperation,
followed by a stimulation and new ambition. The reason for this may be
seen, when you consider the respective qualities of blue and yellow
which compose this color.

It is interesting to note that the science of medicine is now seriously
considering the use of colors in the treatment of disease, and the best
medical authorities investigating the subject are verifying the
teachings of the old occultists, regarding the influence of colors on
mental states and physical conditions.

Dr. Edwin Babbitt, a pioneer in this line in the Western world, gave the
general principles in a nutshell, when he laid down the following rule:
"There is a trianal series of graduations in the peculiar potencies of
colors, the center and climax of electrical action, which cools the
nerves, being in violet; the climax of electrical action, which is
soothing to the vascular system, being in blue; the climax of luminosity
being in yellow; and the climax of thermism or heat being in red. This
is not an imaginary division of qualities, but a real one, the flamelike
red color having a principle of warmth in itself; the blue and violet, a
principle of cold and electricity. Thus we have many styles of chromatic
action, including progression of hues, of lights and shades, of fineness
and coarseness, of electrical power, luminous power, thermal power,
etc."

Read the above statement of Dr. Babbitt, and then compare it with the
occult teaching regarding the astral colors, and you will perceive the
real basis of the science which the good doctor sought to establish, and
in which cause he did such excellent pioneer work. The result of his
work is now being elaborated by modern physicians in the great schools
of medicine, particularly on the Continent, in Europe--England and
America being somewhat behind the times in this work.

The advanced occultist also finds much satisfaction in the interest, on
the part of physicians and jurists, in the matter of the influence of
color upon the mental, moral and physical welfare of the public. The
effect of color upon morality is being noticed by workers for human
welfare, occupying important offices.

The American journals report the case of a judge in a large Western city
in that country, who insisted upon his courtroom being decorated in
light, cheerful tints, instead of in the old, gloomy, depressing shades
formerly employed. This judge wisely remarked that brightness led to
right thinking, and darkness to crooked thinking; also that his court,
being an uplift court, must have walls to correspond, and that it was
enough to turn any man into a criminal to be compelled to sit in a dark,
dismal courtroom, day after day.

This good judge, who must have had some acquaintance with the occult
teachings, is quoted as concluding as follows: "White, cream, light
yellow, and orange are the colors which are the sanest. I might add
light green, for that is the predominant color in Nature; black, brown
and deep red are incentives to crime--a man in anger sees red." Surely a
remarkable utterance from the bench!

The effect of color schemes upon the moral and mental welfare of persons
is being recognized in the direction of providing brighter color schemes
in schools, hospitals, reformatories, prisons, etc. The reports
naturally show the correctness of the underlying theory. The color of a
tiny flower has its effect upon even the most hardened prisoner; while
the minds of children in school are quickened by a touch of brightness
here and there in the room. It needs no argument to prove the beneficial
effect of the right kind of colors in the sickroom, or hospital ward.

The prevailing theories, and practice, regarding the employment of color
in therapeutics and human welfare work, are in the main correct. But, I
urge the study of the occult significance of color, as mentioned in this
book in connection with the human aura and its astral colors, as a sound
basis for an intelligent, thorough understanding of the real psychic
principles underlying the physical application of the methods referred
to. Go to the center of the subject, and then work outward--that is the
true rule of the occultist, which might well be followed by the
non-occult general public.




