CHAPTER V.

THE AURIC KALEIDOSCOPE.


As we have seen, the human aura is never in a state of absolute rest or
quiet. Motion and change is ever manifested by it. It has its periods of
comparative calm, of course, but even in this state there is a pulsing,
wave-like motion apparent. The clouds of changing color fly over its
surface, and in its depth, like the fast driven fleecy clouds over the
summer sky, illumined by the rays of the setting sun.

Again, fierce storms of mental activity, or emotional stress, disturb
its comparative calm, and the wildest scenes are witnessed in the aura
by the observer. So intense are the vibrations of some of these mental
storms that their effect is plainly felt by the average person, though
he is not able to distinguish the colors or the great whirls and swirls
of auric substance accompanying them.

A person sunk in reverie, dream-states, or sleep, presents an
interesting auric kaleidoscope, which possesses great beauty if the
person be normal and of average morality. In such a case there is a
cloudy-clearness (if the term may be used) tinged with tints and shades
of varying colors, blending in strange and interesting combinations,
appearing gradually from previous combinations, and sinking gradually
into new ones.

To the observer of the aura the term "opalescent" instinctly presents
itself, for there is a striking resemblance to the opaline peculiar play
of colors of delicate tints and shades in a body of pearly or milky hue.
Color shades into color, tint into tint, hue into hue, as in the color
scale of the spectrum of which the rainbow is the most familiar example.
But the rainbow or spectrum lacks the peculiar semi-transparency of the
auric colors, and also the constantly changing and dissolving body of
colors of the aura.

At this point, I wish to call your attention to a phase of the aura
which I purposely passed over in the preceding chapters. I allude to the
phase of the aura which presents the "pearly" appearance of the
opalescent body, which we have just noted. This appearance is manifested
neither by any of the mental or emotional states, nor is it the
prana-aura or vital force which I have described in a previous chapter.
It is the manifestation of what is known to occultists as "etheric
substance," and is a very interesting feature of the auric phenomena.

This etheric substance, which manifests this peculiar radiance in the
body of the aura, composes that which is called by some occultists "the
astral body," but this latter term is also employed in another sense,
and I prefer to use the term "etheric double" to indicate what some
others know as "the astral body." Etheric substance is much finer form
of substance than that which composes the physical body. It is really
matter in a very high degree of vibration--much higher than even the
ultra-gaseous matter of physical substance. It may be sensed,
ordinarily, only on the astral plane, which is its own particular plane
of activity.

The etheric double, composed of this etheric substance, is the exact
counterpart of its physical counterpart--the ordinary physical body of
the individual--although it is capable of great expansion or shrinking
in space. Like the physical body it radiates an aura, and this combining
with the other forms of the auric body, gives to it its peculiar pearly
appearance, which is the background of its opalescence previously noted.

The etheric double explains the phenomenon of spectral appearances or
ghosts, for it persists for a time after the death of the physical body,
and under some conditions becomes visible to the ordinary sight. It
sometimes is projected from the physical body, and at such times appears
as an apparition of the living, of which there are many cases recorded
by the societies investigating psychical subjects.

The etheric double, or astral body, is referred to here, however, merely
to explain the peculiar pearly tint of the background, or body, of the
aura, in and through which the mental and emotional auric colors play
and move. It may interest you, however, to know that this phase of aura
is always present around and about a "ghost" or dematerialized
disembodied soul, or "spirit" as common usage terms it.

The aura of the wide-awake person is, of course, far more active and
more deeply colored than is that of the person in reverie, dream, or
sleep. And, again the aura of the person manifesting a high degree of
mental activity, or strong feeling or passion, is still brighter and
deeper than the ordinary person performing his daily routine work. In
the state of anger, or love-passion, for instance, the aura is
violently disturbed, deep shades of color whirling and swirling in the
depths and surface of the auric body. Lightning-like flashes shoot forth
and great bodies of lurid smoky clouds fly on the surface. Looking into
the aura of a man wild with rage and passion, is like peering into
Inferno. The astral plane, in the region of a lynching mob, or other
body of persons filled with rage, becomes a frightful scene of auric
radiation.

A person filled with the emotion of pure love, fills his aura with the
most beautiful tints and shades of high rosy color, and to behold the
same is a pleasure fully appreciated by the occultist. A church filled
with persons of a high devotional ideality, is also a beautiful place,
by reason of the mingling of auric violet-blue vibrations of those
therein assembled. The atmosphere of a prison is most depressing and
presents a most unpleasant appearance to one possessing the astral
vision. Likewise the astral atmosphere of an abode of vice and passion,
becomes really physically nauseating to the occultist of high ideals and
taste. Such scenes on the astral plane are avoided by all true
occultists, except when the call of duty leads them to visit them to
give aid and help.

There are two distinct features connected with the auric coloring of
every person. The first is the coloring resulting from the more habitual
thoughts and feelings of the person--from his character, in fact; while
the second is the coloring resulting from the particular feelings, or
thoughts, manifested by him at that particular moment or time.

The color of the feeling of the moment soon disappears and fades away,
while the more habitual feeling, bound up with his character, causes its
corresponding color to abide more permanently, and thus to give a
decided hue to his general auric color appearance.

The trained occultist is, therefore, able to ascertain not only the
passing thoughts and feelings of a person, but also to determine
infallibly his general character, tendencies, past character and
actions, and general nature, simply from a careful examination and study
of the auric colors of the person in question.

As all occultists well know, every place, dwelling, business place,
church, courtroom--every village, city, country, nation--has its own
collective aura, known as "astral atmosphere," which is simply but a
combined reflection of the individual auras of the human units of which
its body of inhabitants is made up. These atmospheric vibrations are
plainly felt by many persons, and we are instinctively attracted or
repelled by reason thereof. But, to the developed occultists, these
places manifest the auric colors, in the combinations arising from the
nature of the mentalities of the persons dwelling in them.

Each place has its collective aura, just as each person has his
individual aura. The astral plane presents a wonderful scene of color by
reason of this and similar causes. The harmony of the color scheme, in
some cases, is marvellously beautiful; while the horrible aspect of
scenes resemble a nightmare vision of the worst kind.

It is easy to understand why some of the ancients who stumbled into
glimpses of the astral plane, while in dream-state or trance, reported
the vision of terrible hells of unquenchable fire, fiery lakes of
smoking brimstone, etc., for such ideas would naturally come to the mind
of the uninformed person who had peered into the astral plane in such
cases.

And, in the same way, the visions of heaven reported by the saints, and
others of high spirituality, are explainable on the theory that these
persons had sensed some of the beautiful scenes of the higher astral
planes, filled with the combined auric tints and hues of souls of high
development. The principle of auric colors holds good on all the many
planes of being and existence--high as well as low.

I merely hint at a great occult truth in making the above statements.
The thoughtful will be able to read between my lines. I have given you a
little key which will unlock the door of many mysteries, if you will but
use it intelligently.




