CHAPTER II.

THE PRANA-AURA.


Many writers on the subject of the human aura content themselves with a
description of the colors of the mental or emotional aura, and omit
almost any reference whatsoever to the basic substance or power of the
aura. This is like the play of Hamlet, with the character of Hamlet
omitted, for, unless we understand something concerning the fundamental
substance of which the aura is composed, we cannot expect to arrive at a
clear understanding of the phenomena which arises from and by reason of
the existence of this fundamental substance. We might as well expect a
student to understand the principles of color, without having been made
acquainted with the principles of light.

The fundamental substance of which the human aura is composed is none
other than that wonderful principle of nature of which one reads so much
in all occult writings, which has been called by many names, but which
is perhaps best known under the Sanscrit term, _Prana_, but which may
be thought of as Vital Essence, Life Power, etc.

It is not necessary in this book to go into the general consideration of
the nature and character of Prana. It is sufficient for us to consider
it in its manifestation of Vital Force, Life Essence, etc. In its
broadest sense, Prana really is the Principle of Energy in Nature, but
in its relation to living forms it is the Vital Force which lies at the
very basis of manifested Life. It exists in all forms of living things,
from the most minute microscopic form up to living creatures on higher
planes, as much higher than man as man is higher than the simple
microscopic life-forms. It permeates them all, and renders possible all
life activity and functioning.

Prana is not the mind or the soul, but is rather the force or energy
through which the soul manifests activity, and the mind manifests
thought. It is the steam that runs the physical and mental machinery of
life. It is the substance of the human aura, and the colors of mental
states are manifested in that substance, just as the colors of chemical
bodies are manifested in the substance of water. But Prana is not
material substance--it is higher than mere matter, being the underlying
substance of Energy or Force in Nature.

While it is true, as we have seen, that all auras are composed of the
substance of Prana, it is likewise true that there is a simple and
elementary form of auric substance to which occultists have given the
simple name of the prana-aura in order to distinguish it from the more
complex forms and phases of the human aura. The simplicity of the
character of the prana-aura causes it to be more readily sensed or
perceived than is possible in the case of the more complex phases or
forms of the aura. For whereas it is only the more sensitive organisms
that can distinguish the finer vibrations of the mental and emotional
aura, and only the clairvoyant sight which can discern its presence by
its colors, almost any person, by a little careful experimenting, may
become aware of the presence of the prana-aura, not only in the way of
"feeling" it, but in many cases of actually seeing it with the ordinary
vision rightly directed.

That which is known as the prana-aura is of course the most simple form
or phase of the human aura. It is the form or phase which is more
closely bound up with the physical body, and is less concerned with the
mental states. This fact has caused some writers to speak of it as the
"health aura," or "physical aura," both of which terms are fittingly
applied as we shall see, although we prefer the simpler term we have
used here, i. e., the prana-aura. For the prana-aura does show the state
of the health of the individual radiating it, and it also really
contains physical power and magnetism which may be, and is imparted to
others.

The basic prana-aura is practically colorless, that is to say, it is
about the color of the clearest water or a very clear diamond. By the
clairvoyant vision it is seen to be streaked or marked by very minute,
bristle-like lines, radiating outward from the physical body of the
individual, in a manner very like "the quills upon the fretful
porcupine," as Shakespeare puts it. In the case of excellent physical
health, these bristle-like streaks are stiff and brittle-looking,
whereas, if the general health of the person be deficient these
bristle-like radiations seem to be more or less tangled, twisted, or
curly; and, in some cases present a drooping appearance, and in extreme
cases present the appearance of soft, limp fur.

It may interest the student to know that minute particles of this
prana-aura, or vital magnetism, is sloughed off the body in connection
with physical exhalations such as scent, etc., and remain in existence
for some time after the person has passed from the particular place at
which they were cast off. In fact, as all occultists know, it is these
particles of the prana-aura which serve to give vitality to the "scent"
of living creatures, which enables dogs and other animals to trace up
the track of the person, or animal, for a long time after the person has
passed. It is not alone the physical odor, which must be very slight as
you will see upon a moment's consideration. It is really the presence of
the particles of the prana-aura which enables the dog to distinguish the
traces of one person among that of thousands of others, and the feat is
as much psychical as physical.

Another peculiarity of the prana-aura is that it is filled with a
multitude of extremely minute sparkling particles, resembling tiny
electric sparks, which are in constant motion. These sparks, which are
visible to persons of only slightly developed psychic power, impart a
vibratory motion to the prana-aura which, under certain conditions is
plainly visible to the average person. This vibratory movement is akin
to the movement of heated air arising from a hot stove, or from the
heated earth on a mid-summer day.

If the student will close his eyes partially, until he peers out from
narrowed lids, and then will closely observe some very healthy person
sitting in a dim light, he may perceive this undulating, pulsing
vibration extending an inch or two from the surface of the body. It
requires some little knack to recognize these vibrations, but a little
practice will often give one the key; and after the first recognition,
the matter becomes easy.

Again, in the case of persons of active brains, one may perceive this
pulsating prana-aura around the head of the person, particularly when he
is engaged in concentrated active thought. A little practice will enable
almost any one to perceive faintly the dim outlines of the prana-aura
around his own fingers and hand, by placing his hand against a black
background, in a dim light, and then gazing at it with narrowed
eye-lids, squinting if necessary. Under these circumstances, after a
little practice, one will be apt to perceive a tiny outlined aura, or
radiation, or halo, of pale yellowish light surrounding the hand.

By extending the fingers, fan shape, you will perceive that each finger
is showing its own little outlined prana-aura. The stronger the vital
force, the plainer will be the perception of the phenomenon. Often the
prana-aura, in these experiments, will appear like the semi-luminous
radiance surrounding a candle flame or gas light. Under the best
conditions, the radiation will assume an almost phosphorescent
appearance. Remember, this is simply a matter of trained ordinary
sight,--not clairvoyant vision.

This prana-aura is identical with human magnetism, which is employed in
ordinary magnetic healing. That is to say it is the outer manifestation
of the wonderful pranic force. It is felt when you shake hands, or
otherwise come in close physical contact with a strongly magnetic
person. On the other hand it is what the weakly, human vampire-like
persons unconsciously, or consciously, try to draw off from strong
persons, if the latter allow them so to do from want of knowledge of
self protection. Who has not met persons of this kind, who seem to sap
one's very life force away from him? Remember, then, that the prana-aura
is the aura or radiation of life force, or vital power, which is the
steam of your living activity, physical and mental. It is the pouring
out of the vital "steam" which is running your vital machinery. Its
presence indicates Life--its absence Lifelessness.




