CHAPTER IV.

THE ASTRAL COLORS (Continued).


Remembering, always, the significance of the three primary colors on the
astral plane, let us consider the meaning of the combinations, shades,
hues, and tints of these colors.

THE RED GROUP. In this group of astral colors seen in the human aura, we
find strongly in evidence the clear bright red shade, similar to that of
fresh, pure arterial blood as it leaves the heart, filled with pure
material freshly oxygenated. This shade, in the aura, indicates health,
life-force, vigor, virility, etc., in pure and untainted form. The aura
of a healthy, strong child shows this shade of color very plainly and
strongly.

Strong, pure natural emotions, such as friendship, love of
companionship, love of physical exercise, healthy clean sports, etc.,
are manifested by a clear clean shade of red. When these feelings become
tainted with selfishness, low motives, etc., the shade grows darker and
duller. Love of low companionship, unclean sports, or selfish games,
etc., produce an unpleasant muddy red shade.

A shade of red, very near to crimson, is the astral color of Love, but
the tint and shade varies greatly according to the nature of this form
of emotional feeling. A very high form of love, which seeks the good of
the loved one, rather than the satisfaction of oneself, manifests as a
beautiful rose tint--one of the most pleasing of the astral tints, by
the way. Descending in the scale, we find the crimson shade becoming
darker and duller, until we descend to the plane of impure, sensual,
coarse passion, which is manifested by an ugly, dull, muddy crimson of a
repulsive appearance, suggesting blood mixed with dirty earth or
barnyard soil.

A peculiar series of red shades are those manifesting anger in its
various forms, from the vivid scarlet flashes of anger color, arising
from what may be called "righteous indignation," down the scale to the
ugly flashes of deep, dull red, betokening rage and uncontrolled
passion. The red of anger generally shows itself in flashes, or great
leaping flames, often accompanied by a black background, in the case of
malicious hate, or by a dirty, greenish background when the rage arises
from jealousy, or envy. The color of avarice is a very ugly combination
of dull, dark red, and a dirty ugly green. If persons could see their
own astral colors accompanying these undesirable mental states, the
sight would perhaps so disgust them with such states as to work a cure.
At any rate, they are most disgusting and repulsive to the occultist who
beholds them in the human aura, and he often wonders why they do not
sicken the person manifesting them--they often do just this thing, to
tell the truth.

THE YELLOW GROUP. In this group of astral colors seen in the human aura
we find as many varieties as we do in the red group. Yellow, denoting
intellect, has many degrees of shade and tint, and many degrees of
clearness.

An interesting shade in this group is that of Orange, which represents
different forms of "pride of intellect," intellectual ambition, love of
mastery by will, etc. The greater degree of red in the astral orange
color, the greater the connection with the physical or animal nature.
Pride and love of power over others, has much red in its astral color,
while love of intellectual mastery has much less red in its composition.

Pure intellectual attainment, and the love of the same, is manifested by
a beautiful clear golden yellow. Great teachers often have this so
strongly in evidence, that at times their students have glimpses of a
golden "halo" around the head of the teacher. Teachers of great
spirituality have this "nimbus" of golden yellow, with a border of
beautiful blue tint, strongly in evidence.

The paintings of the great spiritual teachers of the race usually have
this radiance pictured as a "halo," showing a recognition of the
phenomenon on the part of the great artists. Hoffman's celebrated
painting of the Christ in the Garden of Gethsemane shows this nimbus so
accurately depicted that the occultist is convinced that this artist
must have actually witnessed a similar scene in the astral light, so
true to the astral facts are its details. The images of the Buddha also
show this radiance.

The rich golden shades of intellectual yellow are comparatively rare, a
sickly lemon color being the only indication of intellectual power and
found in the aura of the great run of persons. To the sight of the
occultist, employing his power of astral vision, a crowd of persons will
manifest here and there, at widely separated points, the bright golden
yellow of the true intellect, appearing like scattered lighted candles
among a multitude of faintly burning matches.

THE GREEN GROUP. This is a peculiar group, consisting as of course it
does of various combinations of blues and yellows, tinted and shaded by
white or black. Even skilled occultists find it very difficult to
account for the fact of certain green shades arising from the spiritual
blue and the intellectual yellow--this is one of the most obscure points
in the whole subject of the astral colors, and none but the most
advanced occultists are able to explain the "why" in some instances. To
those who are fond of analysis of this kind, I will drop the following
hint, which may help them out in the matter, viz. The key is found in
the fact that Green lies in the centre of the astral spectrum, and is a
balance between the two extremes, and is also influenced by these two
extremes in a startling manner.

A certain restful green denotes love of nature, out of door life, travel
in the country, etc., and also, slightly differing in tint, the love of
home scenes, etc. Again, a clear beautiful lighter tint of green
indicates what may be called sympathy, altruistic emotion, charity, etc.
Again, illustrating variety in this group of astral colors, another
shade of green shows intellectual tolerance of the views of others.
Growing duller, this indicates tact, diplomacy, ability to handle human
nature, and descending another degree or so blends into insincerity,
shiftiness, untruth, etc. There is an ugly slate-colored green
indicating low, tricky deceit--this is a very common shade in the colors
of the average aura, I am sorry to say. Finally, a particularly ugly,
muddy, murky green indicates jealousy and kindred feelings, envious
malice, etc.

THE BLUE GROUP. This interesting group of astral colors represents the
varying forms and degrees of religious emotion, "spirituality," etc. The
highest form of spiritual, religious feeling and thought is represented
by a beautiful, rich, clear violet tint, while the lower and more gross
phases of religious emotion and thought are represented by the darker
and duller hues, tints, and shades until a deep, dark indigo is reached,
so dark that it can scarcely be distinguished from a bluish black. This
latter color, as might be expected, indicates a low superstitious form
of religion, scarcely worthy of the latter name. Religion, we must
remember, has its low places as well as its heights--its garden grows
the rarest flowers, and at the same time the vilest weeds.

High spiritual feelings--true spiritual unfoldment--is indicated by a
wonderfully clear light blue, of an unusual tint, something akin to the
clear light blue of the sky on a cool autumn afternoon, just before
sunset. Even when we witness an approach to this color in Nature, we are
inspired by an uplifting feeling as if we were in the presence of higher
things, so true is the intuition regarding these things.

Morality, of a high degree, is indicated by a series of beautiful shades
of blue, always of a clear inspiring tint. Religious feeling ruled by
fear, is indicated by a shade of bluish gray. Purple denotes a love of
form and ceremony, particularly those connected with religious offices
or regal grandeur of a solemn kind. Purple, naturally, was chosen as the
royal color in the olden days.

THE BROWN GROUP. The brown group of astral colors represents desire for
gain and accumulation, ranging from the clear brown of industrious
accumulation, to the murky dull browns of miserliness, greed and
avarice. There is a great range in this group of brown shades, as may be
imagined.

THE GRAY GROUP. The group of grays represents a negative group of
thought and emotions. Gray represents fear, depression, lack of
courage, negativity, etc. This is an undesirable and unpleasant group.

BLACK. Black, in the astral colors, stands for hatred, malice, revenge,
and "devilishness" generally. It shades the brighter colors into their
lower aspects, and robs them of their beauty. It stands for hate--also
for gloom, depression, pessimism, etc.

WHITE. White is the astral color of Pure Spirit, as we have seen, and
its presence raises the degree of the other colors, and renders them
clearer. In fact, the perception of the highest degree of Being known to
the most advanced occultist is manifested to the highest adepts and
masters in the form of "The Great White Light," which transcends any
light ever witnessed by the sight of man on either physical or astral
plane--for it belongs to a plane higher than either, and is absolute,
rather than a relative, white. The presence of white among the astral
colors of the human aura, betokens a high degree of spiritual attainment
and unfoldment, and when seen permeating the entire aura it is one of
the Signs of the Master--the token of Adeptship.




