The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Human Aura: Astral Colors and Thought Forms
    
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The Human Aura: Astral Colors and Thought Forms

Author: William Walker Atkinson


        
Release date: September 23, 2007 [eBook #22739]
                Most recently updated: January 3, 2021

Language: English

Other information and formats: www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/22739

Credits: Produced by Michael Ciesielski, Annika Feilbach and the
        booksmiths at http://www.eBookForge.net






Produced by Michael Ciesielski, Annika Feilbach and the
booksmiths at http://www.eBookForge.net









_True Occult Knowledge Gives You Practical Power and Strength_


THE HUMAN AURA
Astral Colors and Thought Forms


By
SWAMI PANCHADASI



Printed by
YOGA PUBLICATION SOCIETY

COPYRIGHT, 1940

COPYRIGHT
1912
YOGI PUBLICATION SOCIETY




CONTENTS


Chapter I. What Is the Human Aura                                      5

  The subtle, invisible emanation radiating from every individual.
  An ethereal radiation. The egg-shaped human nebula. Psychic
  atmosphere sensed by everyone, but seen by but few. The
  clairvoyant vision. The phosphorescent flame, and luminous cloud.
  The colors in the aura and what they mean. Effect of mental
  states, emotion and passion, upon its aura. The human aura is a
  very important and interesting phase of every personality. The
  finer forces, the most powerful.


Chapter II. The Prana Aura                                            15

  Prana, the Vital Force, Life Essence. How it affects the human
  aura. Health Aura. Physical Aura. Health Magnetism. Peculiar
  appearance of Prana Aura. How animals follow trails of Prana Aura
  particles. The tiny electric sparks, and vibratory movements. How
  one may perceive the vibrations of Prana Aura. Interesting
  experiments. Seeing Prana Aura by ordinary vision. Prana Aura and
  Magnetic Healing.


Chapter III. The Astral Colors                                        23

  Each mental or emotional state has its own astral hue, tint,
  shade or color. The Primary Colors, Red, Blue and Yellow. The
  Secondary Colors, Green, Orange and Purple. The combinations of
  Olive, Russet and Citrine. Black and White, and how formed. Key
  to the Astral Colors. Red the Physical Color; Blue, the
  Spiritual; Yellow, the Mental. White and Black the two poles of
  Spirituality. Rainbow astral colors. Whirlpools of flame. Flashes
  of astral light. A wonderful phenomena. Practice will enable
  almost everyone to perceive plainly the outlines of the Prana
  Aura.


