CHAPTER X.

THE PROTECTIVE AURA.


Among the very oldest of the teachings of occultism, we find
instructions regarding the building up and maintenance of the protective
aura of the individual, whereby he renders himself immune to undesirable
physical, mental, psychic or spiritual influences. So important is this
teaching, that it is to be regretted that there has not been more said
on the subject by some of the writers of recent years. The trouble with
many of these recent writers is that they seem to wish to close their
eyes to the unpleasant facts of life, and to gaze only upon the pleasant
ones. But this is a mistake, for ignorance has never been a virtue, and
to shut one's eyes to unpleasant facts does not always result in
destroying them. I consider any teaching unfinished and inadequate which
does not include instruction along protective lines.

Physical auric protection consists in charging the aura with vital
magnetism and color, which will tend to ward off not only the physical
contagion of ill persons, but, what is often still more important, the
contagion of their mind and feelings.

The student who has really studied the preceding chapters will at once
realize that this protection is afforded by filling the aura with the
vibrations of health and physical strength, by means of the mental
imaging of the life-preserving reds, and the exercise of the mind in the
direction of thought of strength and power. These two things will tend
to greatly increase the resistive aura of anyone, and enable him to
throw off disease influences which affect others.

The aura of the successful physician and healer, in the presence of
disease, will invariably show the presence of the bright, positive red
in the aura, accompanied by the mental vibrations of strength, power and
confidence, and the absence of fear. This in connection with the Auric
Circle, which shall be described presently, will be of great value to
healers, physicians, nurses, etc., as well as to those who are brought
into intimate contact with sick persons.

Of practically the same degree of importance, is the charging of the
aura with the vibrations of mental protection, viz, the vibrations of
orange, yellow and similar colors. These are the colors of intellect,
you will remember, and when the aura is charged and flooded with them it
acts as a protection against the efforts of others to convince one
against his will, by sophistical arguments, plausible reasoning,
fallacious illustrations, etc. It gives to one a sort of mental
illumination, quickening the perceptive faculties, and brightening up
the reasoning and judging powers, and finally, giving a sharp edge to
the powers of repartee and answer.

If you will assume the right positive mental attitude, and will flood
your aura with the vibrations of the mental orange-yellow, the mental
efforts of other persons will rebound from your aura, or, to use another
figure of speech, will slip from it like water from the back of the
proverbial duck. It is well to carry the mental image of your head being
surrounded by a golden aura or halo, at such times--this will be found
especially efficacious as a protective helmet when you are assaulted by
the intellect or arguments of others.

And, again, there is a third form of protective aura, namely protection
of one's emotional nature--and this is highly important, when one
remembers how frequently we are moved to action by our emotions, rather
than by our intellect or reason. To guard one's emotions, is to guard
one's very inmost soul, so to speak. If we can protect our feeling and
emotional side, we will be able to use our reasoning powers and
intellect far more effectively, as all know by experience.

What color should we use in this form of auric protection? Can anyone be
in doubt here, if he has read the preceding chapters? What is the
emotional protective color?--why, blue, of course. Blue controls this
part of the mind or soul, and by raising ourselves into the vibrations
of positive blue, we leave behind us the lower emotions and feelings,
and are transported into the higher realms of the soul where these low
vibrations and influences cannot follow us. In the same way, the blue
colored aura will act as an armor to protect us from the contagion of
the low passions and feelings of others.

If you are subjected to evil influences, or contagion of those harboring
low emotions and desires, you will do well to acquire the art of
flooding your aura with the positive blue tints. Make a study of bright,
clear blues, and you will instinctively select the one best suited for
your needs. Nature gives us this instinctive knowledge, if we will but
seek for it, and then apply it when found. The aura of great moral
teachers, great priests and preachers, advanced occultists, in fact all
men of lofty ideals working among those lower on the moral scale, are
always found to be charged with a beautiful, clear blue, which acts as a
protection to them when they are unduly exposed to moral or emotional
contagion. Ignorance of the occult laws have caused the downfall of many
a great moral teacher, who could have protected himself in this way, in
times of strong attack of low vibrations, had he but known the truth.
The individual who knows this law, and who applies it, is rendered
absolutely immune from evil contagion on the emotional plane of being.


THE GREAT AURIC CIRCLE.

But no occult instruction on this subject would be complete without a
reference to the Great Auric Circle of Protection, which is a shelter to
the soul, mind, and body, against outside psychic influences, directed,
consciously or unconsciously against the individual. In these days of
wide spread though imperfect, knowledge of psychic phenomena, it is
especially important that one should be informed as to this great shield
of protection. Omitting all reference to the philosophy underlying it,
it may be said that this Auric Circle is formed by making the mental
image, accompanied by the demand of will, of the aura being surrounded
by a great band of PURE CLEAR WHITE LIGHT. A little perseverance will
enable you to create this on the astral plane, and, though (unless you
have the astral vision) you cannot see it actually, yet you will
actually FEEL its protective presence, so that you will know that it is
there guarding you.

This White Auric Circle will be an effective and infallible armor
against all forms of psychic attack or influence, no matter from whom it
may emanate, or whether directed consciously or unconsciously. It is a
perfect and absolute protection, and the knowledge of its protective
power should be sufficient to drive fear from the heart of all who have
dreaded psychic influence, "malicious animal magnetism" (so-called), or
anything else of the kind, by whatever name known. It is also a
protection against psychic vampirism, or draining of magnetic strength.

The Auric Circle is, of course, really egg-shaped, or oval, for it
fringes the aura as the shell cases the egg. See yourself, mentally, as
surrounded by this Great White Auric Circle of Protection, and let the
idea sink into your consciousness. Realize its power over the influences
from outside, and rejoice in the immunity it gives you.

The Auric Circle, however, will admit any outside impressions that you
really desire to come to you, while shutting out the others. That is,
with this exception, that if your inner soul recognizes that some of
these desired influences and impressions are apt to harm you (though
your reason and feeling know it not) then will such impressions be
denied admittance. For the White Light is the radiation of Spirit, which
is higher than ordinary mind, emotion, or body and is Master of All. And
its power, even though we can but imperfectly represent it even
mentally, is such that before its energy, and in its presence, in the
aura, all lower vibrations are neutralized and disintegrated.

The highest and deepest occult teaching is that the White Light must
never be used for purpose of attack or personal gain, but that it may
properly be used by anyone, at any time, to protect against outside
psychic influences against which the soul protests. It is the armor of
the soul, and may well be employed whenever or wherever the need
arises.

Throughout the pages of this little book have been scattered crumbs of
teaching other than those concerning the aura alone. Those for whom
these are intended will recognize and appropriate them--the others will
not see them, and will pass them by. One attracts his own to him. Much
seed must fall on waste places, in order that here and there a grain
will find lodgment in rich soil awaiting its coming. True occult
knowledge is practical power and strength. Beware of prostituting the
higher teachings for selfish ends and ignoble purposes. To guard and
preserve your own will is right; to seek to impose your will upon that
of another is wrong. Passive resistance is often the strongest form of
resistance--this is quite different from non-resistance.


THE END.







