CHAPTER VIII.

AURIC MAGNETISM.


The phenomenon of human magnetism is too well recognized by the general
public, to require argument at this time. Let the scientists dispute
about it as much as they please, down in the heart of nearly all of the
plain people of the race is the conviction that there is such a thing.
The occultists, of course, are quite familiar with the wonderful
manifestations of this great natural force, and with its effect upon the
minds and bodies of members of the race, and can afford to smile at the
attempts of some of the narrow minds in the colleges to pooh-pooh the
matter.

But the average person is not familiar with the relation of this human
magnetism to the human aura. I think that the student should familiarize
himself with this fundamental relation, in order to reason correctly on
the subject of human magnetism. Here is the fundamental fact in a
nutshell: The human aura is the great storehouse, or reservoir, of human
magnetism, and is the source of all human magnetism that is projected by
the individual toward other individuals. Just how human magnetism is
generated, is, of course, a far deeper matter, but it is enough for our
purpose at this time to explain the fact of its storage and
transmission.

In cases of magnetic healing, etc., the matter is comparatively simple.
In such instances the healer by an effort of the will (sometimes
unconsciously applied) projects a supply of his pranic aura vibrations
into the body of his patient, by way of the nervous system of the
patient, and also by means of what may be called the induction of the
aura itself.

The mere presence of a person strongly charged with prana, is often
enough to cause an overflow into the aura of other persons, with a
resulting feeling of new strength and energy. By the use of the hands of
the healer, a heightened effect is produced, by reason of certain
properties inherent in the nervous system of both healer and patient.

There is even a flow of etheric substance from the aura of the healer to
that of the patient, in cases where the vitality of the latter is very
low. Many a healer has actually, and literally, pumped his life force
and etheric substance into the body of his patient, when the latter was
sinking into the weakness which precedes death, and has by so doing been
able to bring him back to life and strength. This is practically akin
to the transfusion of blood--except that it is on the psychic plane
instead of the physical.

But the work of the magnetic healer does not stop here, if he be well
informed regarding his science. The educated healer realizing the potent
effect of mental states upon physical conditions--of mental vibrations
upon the physical nerve centers and organs of the body--endeavors to
arouse the proper mental vibrations in the mind of his patient.
Ordinarily, he does this merely by holding in his mind the corresponding
desired mental state, and thus arousing similar vibrations in the mind
of the patient. This of itself is a powerful weapon of healing, and
constitutes the essence of mental healing as usually practiced. But
there is a possible improvement even upon this, as we shall see in a
moment.

The advanced occultist, realizing the law of action and reaction in the
matter of the auric colors, turns the same to account in healing work,
as follows: He not only holds in his mind the strong feeling and thought
which he wishes to transmit to the patient, but (fix this in your mind)
he also pictures in his imagination the particular kind of color which
corresponds with the feeling or thought in question.

A moment's thought will show you that by this course he practically
multiplies the effect. Not only do his own thought vibrations (1) set up
corresponding vibrations in the mind of the patient, by the laws of
thought transference, but (2) his thought of the certain colors will set
up corresponding vibrations not only (a) in his own aura, and thence (b)
to that of the patient, but will also (3) act directly upon the aura of
the patient and reproduce the colors there, which (4) in turn will
arouse corresponding vibrations in the mind of the patient, by the law
of reaction.

The above may sound a little complicated at first reading, but a little
analysis will show you that it is really quite a simple process, acting
strictly along the lines of Action and Reaction, which law has been
explained to you in preceding chapters of this book. The vibrations
rebound from mind to aura, and from aura to mind, in the patient,
something like a billiard ball flying from one side of the table to
another, or a tennis ball flying between the two racquets over the net.

The principle herein mentioned may be employed as well in what is called
"absent treatment" as in treatments where the patient is present. By
the laws of thought transference, not only the thought but also the
mental image of the appropriate astral color, is transmitted over space,
and then, impinging on the mind of the patient, is transmitted into
helpful and health-giving vibrations in his mind. The healer of any
school of mental or spiritual healing will find this plan very helpful
to him in giving absent as well as present treatments. I recommend it
from years of personal experience, as well as that of other advanced
occultists.

Of course the fact that the ordinary healer is not able to distinguish
the finer shades of astral color, by reason of his not having actually
perceived them manifested in the aura, renders his employment of this
method less efficacious than that of the developed and trained
occultist. But, nevertheless, he will find that, from the knowledge of
the auric or astral colors given in this little book, he will be able to
obtain quite satisfactory and marked results in his practice. The
following table, committed to memory, will be of help to him in the
matter of employing the mental image of the auric colors in his healing
work.


TABLE OF HEALING COLORS.

Nervous System--
  Cooling and soothing: Shades of violet, lavender, etc.
  Resting and invigorating effect: Grass greens.
  Inspiring and illuminating: Medium yellows, and orange.
  Stimulating and exciting: Reds (bright).

Blood and Organs--
  Cooling and soothing: Clear dark blues.
  Resting and invigorating: Grass greens.
  Inspiring and illuminating: Orange yellows.
  Stimulating and exciting: Bright reds.

The following additional suggestions will be found helpful to the
healer: In cases of impaired physical vitality; also chilliness, lack of
bodily warmth, etc., bright, warm reds are indicated. In cases of
feverishness, overheated blood, excessive blood pressure, inflammation,
etc., blue is indicated. Red has a tendency to produce renewed and more
active heart action; while violets and lavenders tend to slow down the
too rapid beating of the heart. A nervous, unstrung patient, may be
treated by bathing her, mentally, in a flood of violet or lavender
auric color; while a tired, used up, fatigued person may be invigorated
by flooding him with bright reds, followed by bright, rich yellows,
finishing the treatment with a steady flow of warm orange color.

To those who are sufficiently advanced in occult philosophy, I would say
that they should remember the significance of the Great White Light, and
accordingly conclude their treatment by an effort to indicate an
approach to that clear, pure white color in the aura--mentally, of
course. This will leave the patient in an inspired, exalted, illuminated
state of mind and soul, which will be of great benefit to him, and will
also have the effect of reinvigorating the healer by cosmic energy or
para-prana.

Everything that has been said in this chapter regarding the use of color
in magnetic treatments, is equally applicable to cases of self-healing,
or self-treatment. Let the patient follow the directions above given for
the healer, and then turn the healing current, or thought, inward--and
the result will be the same as if he were treating another. The
individual will soon find that certain colors fit his requirements
better than others, in which case let him follow such experience in
preference to general rules, for the intuition generally is the safest
guide in such cases. However, it will be found that the individual
experience will usually agree with the tables given above, with slight
personal variations.




