V

MACHIAVELISM




V

MACHIAVELISM


=Mendacity and Faithlessness.=

(BEFORE THE WAR.)

362. A stock of inherited conceptions of integrity and morality is a
necessity for government.--H. v. TREITSCHKE, P., Vol. i., p. 317.

363. When one really meditates a war, one must say no word about it;
one must envelop one's designs in a profound mystery; then, suddenly
and without warning, one leaps like a thief in the night--as the
Japanese destroyers leapt upon the unsuspecting Port Arthur, as
Frederick II. threw himself upon Silesia.[35]--A. WIRTH, U.A.P., p.
36.

364. The brilliant Florentine was the first to infuse into politics
the great idea that the State is Power. The consequences of this
thought are far-reaching. It is the truth, and those who dare not face
it had better leave politics alone.--H. v. TREITSCHKE, P., Vol. i., p.
85.

365. As real might can alone guarantee the endurance of peace and
security, and as war is the best test of real might, war contains the
promise of future peace. But it must if possible [_womöglich_] be a
righteous and honourable war, something in the nature of a war of
defence.--J. BURCKHARDT, W.B., p. 164.

366. It was Machiavelli who first laid down the maxim that when the
State's salvation is at stake there must be no enquiry into the purity
of the means employed; only let the State be secured and no one will
condemn them.--H. v. TREITSCHKE, P., Vol. i., p. 83.

367. The relations between two States must often be termed a latent
war, which is provisionally being waged in peaceful rivalry. Such a
position justifies the employment of hostile methods, cunning and
deception, just as war itself does.--GENERAL v. BERNHARDI, G.N.W., p.
49.

368. The statesman has no right to warm his hands with smug
self-laudation at the smoking ruins of his Fatherland, and comfort
himself by saying, "I have never lied"; this is the monkish type of
virtue.--H. v. TREITSCHKE, P., Vol i., p. 104.

369. Belligerent States are always and exclusively in a pure state of
nature, in which there cannot possibly be any question or right [or
law].--E. v. HARTMANN, quoted by EIN DEUTSCHER, W.K.B.M., p. 12.

370. How markedly Bismarck's grand frankness in large matters stands
out amidst all his craft in single instances.[36]--H. V. TREITSCHKE,
P., Vol. i., p. 90.

371. Let it be the task of our diplomacy so to shuffle the cards that
we may be attacked by France, for then there would be reasonable
prospect that Russia for a time would remain neutral.... But we must
not hope to bring about this attack by waiting passively. Neither
France, nor Russia, nor England need to attack in order to further
their interests.... If we wish to bring about an attack by our
opponents, we must initiate an active policy which, without attacking
France, will so prejudice her interests or those of England, that both
these States would feel themselves compelled to attack us.
Opportunities for such procedure are offered both in Africa and in
Europe.--GENERAL v. BERNHARDI, G.N.W., p. 280.

372. When an unconscientious speculator is telling lies upon the Stock
Exchange he is thinking only of his own profit, but when a diplomat is
guilty of obscuring facts in a diplomatic negotiation he is thinking
of his country.--H. v. TREITSCHKE, P., Vol i., p. 91.

373. It is natural, and within certain limits, politically a matter of
course, that the German Emperor should have thought that, until
Germany had a strong fleet, we must try to keep on good terms with
England, and even, on occasion, to make concessions.--GRAF E. V.
REVENTLOW, D.A.P., p. 60.

374. No State can pledge its future to another. It knows no arbiter,
and draws up all its treaties with this implied reservation....
Moreover, every sovereign State has the undoubted right to declare war
at its pleasure, and is consequently entitled to repudiate its
treaties.--H. v. TREITSCHKE, p. i., 28.

375. The question of alliances in war is always an open one, for
circumstances may at any moment arise such as Bismarck referred to
when he said: "No power is bound [or, we will add, entitled][37] to
sacrifice important interests of its own on the altar of faithfulness
to an alliance!"--GRAF E. v. REVENTLOW, D.A.P., p. 22.

376. It was a most serious mistake in German policy that a final
settling of accounts with France was not effected at a time when the
state of international affairs was favourable and success might
confidently have been expected.... This policy somewhat resembles the
supineness for which England has herself to blame, when she refused
her assistance to the Southern States in the American War of
Secession.--GENERAL v. BERNHARDI, G.N.W., p. 239.

377. Since England committed the unpardonable blunder, from her point
of view, of not supporting the Southern States in the American War of
Secession, a rival to England's world-wide Empire has appeared on the
other side of the Atlantic.--GENERAL v. BERNHARDI, G.N.W., p. 95.


(AFTER JULY, 1914.)

378. Perhaps the greatest danger for us Germans--greatest because it
does not threaten us from without, but within our own hearts--is our
magnanimity. O, there is something glorious about this virtue, and we
Germans may be quite particularly proud of possessing it.... But woe
to the people which does not stand as one man behind the statesman
who, by dint of hard struggles with his own soul, has fought his way
to the only true standpoint--namely, that _in international relations
magnanimity is wholly out of place_, and that here the voice of
expediency can alone be heard.--EIN DEUTSCHER, W.K.B.M., p. 12.

379. Through our policy of peace ... we deprive ourselves of the right
of determining the time for bringing about a decision by force of
arms, as Bismarck did in three wars, in which, thanks to his
diplomatic adroitness, he forced upon his adversaries the outward
appearance of declaring war, while in reality Prussia-Germany was the
assailant. Bismarck is quoted in Germany as having discouraged
preventive wars.... But we must not forget that the three great wars
which Bismarck waged were in fact preventive. Even in 1870 the
outbreak of war might have been stayed. It was only the brilliant
manipulation (_geniale Fassung_) of the Ems telegram that put France
in the wrong and drove her into war, just as Bismarck had
foreseen.--K. v. STRANTZ, E.S.V., p. 38.

380. For the will of the State, no other principle exists but that of
_expediency_ (_Zweckmässigkeit_), which is at the same time
_selfishness_; not, however, the short-sighted selfishness commended by
Machiavelli, but _far-seeing, shrewdly-calculating_ selfishness.--EIN
DEUTSCHER, W.K.B.M., p. 11.

381. Far-seeing selfishness does not exclude the endeavour to win the
confidence of other nations, which can be won only by honesty. _But
this honesty, at any rate on vital questions, ought on no account to
be carried to the pitch of inexpedient Quixotism._ EIN DEUTSCHER,
W.K.B.M., p. 11.

382. War was in our eyes the most honourable and the holiest means of
awakening the people from its dazed condition. Whether this war came
as an aggressive or as a defensive war was, in principle, a matter of
indifference. That it came to us in the form of a war of defence was
one of those historical strokes of luck which God vouchsafes to those
peoples whom He loves. The time has not yet come to enquire whether
the leaders of German foreign policy took deliberate measures to place
us in the attitude of defence which the masses always regard as more
moral. It may perhaps be so; but it is far from impossible that the
disinclination for war which placed certain high dignitaries of the
German Empire in constant opposition to the will of the people may
have so far imposed upon our adversaries as to induce them to attack
us.--K.A. KUHN, W.U.W., p. 9.

383. Treaties under international law are no more than _the formulated
expression of the existent relations of power between States_. If
these relations of power have so far changed that the real or
imaginary vital interests of one of the States demand and render
possible the alteration of such treaties, it is the simple duty of the
leader of that State to effect the alteration by all conceivable
means, so long as the risk does not appear greater than the
anticipated advantage.--EIN DEUTSCHER, W.K.B.M., p. 7.


=Might is Right.=

(BEFORE THE WAR.)

384. The law of the strong holds good everywhere.--GENERAL V.
BERNHARDI, G.N.W., p. 18.

385. What does right matter to me? I have no need of it. What I can
acquire by force, that I possess and enjoy; what I cannot obtain, I
renounce, and I set up no pretensions to indefeasible right.... I have
the right to do what I have the power to do.--M. STIRNER, D.E.S.E., p.
275.

386. Might is the supreme right, and the dispute as to what is right
is decided by the arbitrament of war. War gives a biologically just
decision.--GENERAL v. BERNHARDI, G.N.W., p. 23.

387. Let it not be said that every people has a right to its existence
(_Bestand_), its speech, &c. By making play with this principle, one
may put on a cheap appearance of civilization, but only so long as the
people in question ... does not stand in the way of any more powerful
people.--J.L. REIMER, E.P.D., p. 129.

388. It is a persistent struggle for possessions, power and
sovereignty that primarily governs the relations of one nation to
another, and right is respected so far only as it is compatible with
advantage.--GENERAL v. BERNHARDI, G.N.W., p. 19.

389. The earth is constantly being divided anew among the strong and
powerful. The smaller peoples disappear; they are necessarily absorbed
by their larger neighbours.--PROF. E. HASSE, D.G., p. 169.


(AFTER JULY, 1914.)

390. It is a base calumny to attribute to us the brutal principle that
might is equivalent to right.--PROF. F. MEINECKE, D.R.S.Z., No. 29,
p. 23.

391. In the age of the most tremendous mobilization of physical and
spiritual forces the world has ever seen, we proclaim--no, we do not
proclaim it, but it reveals itself--the Religion of Strength.--PROF.
A. DEISSMANN, D.R.S.Z., No. 9, p. 24.

_See also Nos. 84, 499._

FOOTNOTES:

[35] Frederick the Great's principle was: "When kings want war they
begin it, and leave learned professors to come after and prove that it
was just."

[36] In other words, Bismarck always told the truth when it was
absolutely convenient.

[37] Reventlow's interpolation.




