I

"DEUTSCHLAND ÜBER ALLES"




I

"DEUTSCHLAND ÜBER ALLES"

=German Humility.=

(BEFORE THE WAR.)


1. No people ever attains to national consciousness without
over-rating itself. The Germans are always in danger of enervating
their nationality through possessing too little of this rugged
pride.--H. v. TREITSCHKE, P., Vol. i., p. 19.

_For further testimonies to German humility see Nos. 17, 20, 23, 36,
51, 106, 122, 206, 206b, 394._

2. The German people must rise as a master-folk above the inferior
peoples of Europe and the primitive peoples of the colonies.--G.U.M.,
p. 8.

2a. The German people is always right, because it is the German
people, and numbers 87 million souls.--O.R. TANNENBERG, G.D., p. 231.

3. The French, under Napoleon, wanted to sacrifice the whole world to
their insatiable thirst for glory, and the English treat every barrier
opposed to their hunger for exploitation as a challenge to their
superiority. Great is the gulf that separates these cupidities from
the hitherto unrivalled moral elevation of the sense of honour in the
German people.--F. LANGE, R.D., p. 220 (1901).

_Compare Section V., "Machiavelism."_

4. My soul is heavy when I see the many enemies surrounding
Germany.... And my thoughts fly forward into the far future, and ask,
"Will there ever be a time when there is no more Germany?" ... How
poor and empty would the rich world then become! Then all men would
ask themselves, "How comes it that the peoples no longer understand
each other? Whither has that great, serene power departed, that
brought near the souls of the peoples, each to each? Who has shattered
the marvellous mirror from which the countenance of the world was
thoughtfully reflected?" Then they would strike their heads and their
breasts in despair, crying: "We have criminally robbed ourselves of
our wealth! The world, the great, rich world, has grown waste, poor,
and empty: the world has no longer a soul, she has no longer a
Germany!"--E. v. WILDENBRUCH (1889), quoted in D.R.S.Z., No. 12.

5. The proud conviction forces itself upon us with irresistible power
that a high, if not the highest, importance for the entire development
of the human race is ascribable to this German people.--GENERAL v.
BERNHARDI, G.N.W., p. 72.

6. The German is a hero born, and believes that he can hack and hew
his way through life.--H. v. TREITSCHKE, P., Vol. i., p. 230.

7. We are still child-like in our inmost feelings, innocent in our
pleasures, simple in our inclinations, in spite of individual
aberrations; we are still prolific, and our race multiplies, so that
our own soil has long been insufficient to support us all. It is
therefore doubly imperative for us to remain heroes, for who knows
whether the Germanic migrations are destined to remain isolated
phenomena in history! The peoples around us are either overripe fruits
which the next storm may bring to the ground, such as the Turks,
Greeks, Spaniards, Portuguese, and a great part of the Slavs; or they
are, indeed, proud of their race, but senile and artificial in their
Kultur, slow in their increase and boundless in their ambition, like
the French; or, confident in the unassailability of their country,
like the English and the Americans, they have forgotten justice and
made their selfishness the measure of all things. Who knows whether we
Germans are not the rod predestined for the chastening of these
degeneracies, who knows whether we may not again, like our fathers in
dim antiquity, have to gird on our swords and go forth to seek
dwelling-places for our increase?--F. LANGE, R.D., p. 159 (1893).

8. We are distinguished from other nations by our honourable love for
outspoken convictions, which would make a cut-and-dried party system
distasteful to us.--H. v. TREITSCHKE, P., Vol. i., p. 148.

9. The surest means of serving the ends of humanity is to work at the
elaboration of our national personality, and to develop the full
strength of its crystalline radiance.--F. BLEY, W.D.D., p. 23.

10. We have forced ourselves, though the last-comers, the virtual
upstarts, between the States which have earlier gained their place, and
now claim our share in the dominion of the world, after we have for
centuries been paramount only in the realm of the intellect.--GENERAL
v. BERNHARDI, G.N.W., p. 13.

11. Why must teachers and schoolboys, year out, year in, worry about
the old Greeks and Romans? To foster idealism in the young, we are
told! But for that there is no need to go to Rome and Athens. Our
German history offers us ideals enough, and is richer in deeds of
heroism than Rome and Athens put together.--GENERAL KEIM, at meeting
of the German Defence League, Cassel, Feb., 1913; NIPPOLD, D.C., p.
82.

12. History teaches us that supreme treasure of humanity, German
idealism, can be preserved only in the stout bark of national
development.--F. BLEY, W.D.D., p. 23.

_On Idealism, see also Nos. 45, 276, 442, 464._

13. A war fought and lost would destroy our laboriously gained
political importance ... would shake the influence of German thought
in the civilized world, and thus check the general progress of mankind
in its healthy development, for which a flourishing Germany is the
essential condition. Our next war will be fought for the highest
interests of our country and of mankind. This will invest it with
importance in the world's history. "World-power or downfall!" will be
our rallying-cry.--GENERAL v. BERNHARDI, G.N.W., p. 154.

14. In our German people, peaceful dispositions and war-like prowess
are so happily mixed that in this respect no other people on the
earth can rival us, and none seems so clearly predestined to light
humanity on the way to true progress.--F. LANGE, R.D., p. 158 (1893).

15. The Latin has no feeling for the beauty of a forest; when he takes
his repose in it he lies upon his stomach, while we rest upon our
backs.--H. v. TREITSCHKE, P., Vol. i., p. 206.


(AFTER JULY, 1914.)

16. If we compare our time with the great eras of our fathers, we are
perfectly capable of a sober self-criticism. We have no use for
illusions and self-deceptions on the way to our indispensable
victory.--PROF. F. MEINECKE, D.D.E., p. 10.

17. Where in the whole world can a people be found who have such cause
for manly pride as we? But we are equally far removed from presumption
and from arrogance.--"War Devotions," by PASTOR J. RUMP, quoted in
H.A.H., p. 117.

18. As the German bird, the eagle, hovers high over all the creatures
of the earth, so also should the German feel that he is raised high
above all other nations who surround him, and whom he sees in the
limitless depth beneath him.--PROF. W. SOMBART, H.U.H., p. 143.

19. Germany is our existence, our faith, the meaning and depth of the
world.--"On the German God," by PASTOR W. LEHMANN, quoted in H.A.H.,
p. 84.

20. It is not only our enemies who, by their underground intrigues,
have sought to divert from us the sympathies of other peoples. If we
would speak frankly, we must admit that we ourselves are partly to
blame in the matter. A great part of the blame is due to our
insufficient self-esteem and self-valuation--an inveterate German
failing.--PROF. DR. R. JANNASCH, W.D.U.S., p. 22.

21. Germany is the future of humanity.--"On the German God," by PASTOR
W. LEHMANN, quoted in H.A.H., p. 78.

21a. God defend the noble cause of Deutschtum. There is no other hope
for the future of humanity.--H.S. CHAMBERLAIN, in _Hamburger
Nachrichten_, September, 1914.

21b. We must vanquish, because the downfall of Germanism would mean
the downfall of humanity.--"Six War Sermons," by PASTOR K. KÖNIG,
quoted in H.A.H., p. 99.

22. When the German stands leaning on his mighty sword, clad in steel
from top to toe, whosoever will may, down below, dance round his
feet--they may rail at him and throw mud at him, as the
"intellectuals" ... of England, France, Russia and Italy are now
doing--in his lofty repose he will not allow himself to be disturbed,
and will only reflect as did his ancestors. _Oderint dum
metuant._--PROF. W. SOMBART, H.U.H., p. 131.

23. We will not conceal from ourselves that these victories for which
our bells ring and our flags wave, and for which we thank our God, may
become a danger to us, should they make us vain and arrogant,
boastful and indolent! God forbid! We will hold fast to our old
modesty, with which we have so often been reproached, and which has
indeed often enough degenerated into the undervaluing of ourselves and
overvaluing of that which is foreign and despicable.--K. ENGELBRECHT,
D.D.D.K., p. 53.

24. We must develop, not into "Europeans,'" but into ever higher
Germans.... What sort of a European would be formed by a mixture of
the heroic German with the calculating Englishman? If the result was a
man who thought half calculatingly and half heroically, it would be an
exaltation for the Englishman, but a degradation for the
German.--O.A.H. SCHMITZ, D.W.D., p. 125.

25. If we come victorious out of this war, we shall be the first
people on the earth, a rich stream of gold will pour over our land,
and this greatness, these riches, may be a blessing to us if we always
remember that true greatness, true riches, lie only in the possession
of _moral_ advantages, and that to the fact of our possessing such
advantages we owe our success.--W. HELM, W.W.S.M., p. 33.

26. Do you not see, Albion, that the German Michel,[8] on whom you
looked down with such contempt, is now transformed into the Archangel
Michael, and, encountering you with his flaming sword, triumphs over
the race of the fallen angels and all the offspring of hell.--F.
DELITZSCH, D.R.S.Z., No. 13, p. 21.

27. We must win, because, if we were defeated, no one in the _whole
world_ could any longer cherish any remnant of belief in truth and
right, in the Good, or, indeed, in any higher Power which wisely and
justly guides the destinies of humanity.--W. HELM, W.W.S.M., p. 8.

28. Every great artistic achievement of France and Italy since the
time of the Romans can be traced to families and classes with a strong
mixture of German blood, and, especially in earlier times, to the
descendants of Germanic stocks, who had kept their blood, or at any
rate their nature (_Art_) pure.--H.A. SCHMID, D.R.S.Z., No. 25, p. 21.

29. Germany is precisely--who would venture to deny it--the
representative of the highest morality, of the purest humanity, of the
most chastened Christianity. He, therefore, who fights for its
maintenance, its victory, fights for the highest blessings of humanity
itself, and for human progress. Its defeat, its decline, would mean a
falling back to the worst barbarism.--"War Sermons," by PASTOR H.
FRANCKE, quoted in H.A.H., p. 68.

30. No nation in the world can give us anything worth mentioning in
the field of science or technology, art or literature, which we would
have any trouble in doing without. Let us reflect on the inexhaustible
wealth of the German character, which contains in itself everything of
real value that the Kultur of man can produce.--PROF. W. SOMBART,
H.U.H., p. 135.

31. We have in Germany the best Press in the world, and are in that
respect superior to all other countries.--PROF. A.V. HARNACK,
W.W.S.G., p. 19.

32. Germany's fight against the whole world is in reality the battle
of the spirit against the whole world's infamy, falsehood, and
devilish cunning.--"On the German God," by PASTOR W. LEHMANN, quoted
in H.A.H., p. 81.

33. German patriotism strikes its deep roots into the fruitful soil of
a heroic view of the world, and around its crown there gleam the rays
of the highest spiritual and artistic culture.--PROF. W. SOMBART,
H.U.H., p. 71.

34. This combination of clearness of purpose and heroic spirit of
sacrifice was unknown in world-history before August, 1914. Not till
then was the new German human being born.... Is this new creation to
be the human being of the future?--O.A.H. SCHMITZ, D.W.D., p. 103.

35. Verily it has long been an honour and a joy, a source of renown
and of happiness, to be a German--the year 1914 has made it a title
of nobility.--"War Devotions," by PASTOR J. RUMP, quoted in H.A.H., p.
133.

36. When Luther, in the domain of religion, characterized as
unevangelical the conception of merit and reward, and energetically
banished the huckster-spirit from religious feeling, he opened to the
German thought the widest possibilities of victory.... A specially
Germanic way of feeling, a Germanic modesty and distinction of
thought, was here powerfully promoted by means of the Gospel. True
distinction is always modest, in the sense of being unobtrusive and
not bragging of deserts!--K. ENGELBRECHT, D.D.D.K., p. 56.

37. Since the great German Renaissance of the new humanism, the
Hellenic has become the truly German.... As the Peloponnesian War
divided the States of Hellas into two camps, so this war has divided
the States of Europe. But this time it will be Athens and her
spiritual power that will conquer.--PROF. A. LASSON, D.R.S.Z., No. 4,
p. 40.

38. After the conclusive victories for which we may confidently hope
... the whole habitable earth will far more than hitherto bend its
gaze upon us, to marvel at (_anzustaunen_) our standard-setting
[artistic] achievements.--G.E. PAZAUREK, P.K.U.K., p. 23.

39. A theory of the origin of species remained in England a series of
isolated observations, which pointed to certain conjectures; in
Germany it was transformed with resolute daring into an all-embracing
whole. PROF. A. LASSON, D.R.S.Z., No. 4, p. 33.

40. Never have ye seen a strong people and Empire in whiter garments
of peace. We offered you palm branches, we offered you justice, ye
offered us envy and hate.--J. HORT, quoted in H.A.H., p. 51.

41. Take heed that ye be counted among the blessed, who show declining
England, depraved Belgium, licentious France, uncouth Russia, the
unconquerable youthful power and manhood of the German people, in a
manner never to be forgotten.--"War Devotions," by PASTOR J. RUMP,
quoted in H.A.H., p. 131.

42. We may be sure that our French adversaries, when at Metz and St.
Quentin our hosts hurled themselves upon them, saw above us in the
clouds the Germans of 1870, and even the Prussians of 1813, once more
swooping down upon them, and shuddered at the spectacle. And, in spite
of all the boasting of Sir John [Bull], our cousins from beyond the
sea must long ago have recognized that it is better to fight _with_
Prussians against the French, than _vice versa_.--PROF. G. ROETHE,
D.R.S.Z., No. 1, p. 29.

43. He who, in these days, sets forth to defend the German hearth,
sets forth in a holy fight ... in which one stakes life itself, this
single, sweet, beloved life, for the life of a whole nation, a nation
which is God's seed-corn for the future.--"On the German God," by
PASTOR W. LEHMANN, quoted in H.A.H., p. 78.

44. Our enemies are fighting us in order to restore to the world the
freedom, the Kultur, which we threaten. What monstrous mendacity!
Reproduce if you can the German national school teacher, the German
upper-master, the German university professor! You have lagged far
behind us, you are hopelessly inferior! Hence your chagrin, your envy,
your fear! Powerless to rival us, you foam with hate and rage, you
make unblushing calumny your weapon, and would like to exterminate us,
to wipe us off the face of the earth, in order to free yourselves from
your burden of shame.--PROF. A. LASSON, D.R.S.Z., No. 4, p. 38.

45. We take refuge in our quite peculiar idealism, and dream--alas,
aloud!--of our ideal mission for the saving (_Heil_) of mankind.
Foreign countries turn away enraged from such unheard-of
self-glorification and are quite certain that, behind the
high-sounding words, the arrogance of "Prussian militarism" is
concealed.--H. v. WOLZOGEN, G.Z.K., p. 64.

46. The future must lead France once again to our side, we will heal
it of its aberrations, and, in brotherly subordination to us, it may
share with us the task of guiding the fate of the world.... As we feel
ourselves free from hatred toward the kindred Kultur-people of France,
we have taken up the gauntlet with Teutonic pride, and we will use our
weapons so that the admiration of the world, and of our enemies
themselves, shall be accorded to us.--K.A. KUHN, W.U.W., p. 26.

47. When we were attacked, our German wrath awakened, and when we
could not but recognize in the attack a long-plotted treason against
our love of peace, our wrath became fierce and wild. Then, no doubt,
some of us spoke, in our first excitement, of hatred; but this was a
misinterpretation of our feeling. Seeing ourselves hated, we imagined
that hate must be answered with hate; but our German spirit (_Gemüt_)
was incapable of that passion. Lienhard rightly ... deplores the form
of the popular Hymn of Hate against England, which, characteristically
enough, proceeds from a poet of Jewish race.--H. v. WOLZOGEN, G.Z.K.,
p. 68.

48. Under the protection of the greatest of armies, we have laboured
at scientific, social, and economic progress; our enemies trusted to
the rule of force and to chatter.--O.A.H. SCHMITZ, D.W.D., p. 44.

49. Work as untiringly as we, think with as much energy, and we will
welcome you as equals at our side.... Imitate us and we will honour
you. Seek to constrain us by war, and we will thrash you to
annihilation, and despise you as a robber pack.--PROF. A. LASSON,
D.R.S.Z., No. 4, p. 38.


=The Gentle German.=

(AFTER JULY, 1914.)

50. The German Army (in which I of course include the Navy) is to-day
the greatest institute for moral education in the world.--H.S.
CHAMBERLAIN, K.A., p. 78.

51. It is true that the breast of every soldier swelled with a noble
pride at the thought that he was privileged to wear the German
uniform, which history has made a garb of honour above all others; but
as for arrogance, not one of them, thank God, was capable of the
stupidity which alone can engender it.--K. ENGELBRECHT, D.D.D.K., p.
32.

52. From all sides testimonies are flowing in as to the noble manner
in which our troops conduct the war.--"War Devotions," by PASTOR J.
RUMP, quoted in H.A.H., p. 124.

52a. We thank our German Army that it has kept spotless the shield of
humanity and chivalry. It is true we believe that every bone of a
German soldier, with his heroic heart and immortal soul, is worth more
than a cathedral.--PROF. W. KAHL, D.R.S.Z., No. 6, p. 5.

52b. We see everywhere how our soldiers respect the sacred
defencelessness of woman and child.--PROF. G. ROETHE, D.R.S.Z., No. 1,
p. 23.

52c. The German soldiers alone are thoroughly disciplined, and have
never so much as hurt a hair of a single innocent human being.--H.S.
CHAMBERLAIN, K.A., p. 69.

53. The depth of the German spirit displays itself also in _respect
for morality and discipline_.... How often, in these days, has the
German soldier been subjected to the temptation to treat the
inhabitants of foreign countries with violence and brutality. But
everywhere he has obeyed the law, and shown that even in war he knows
how to distinguish between the enemy to be crushed and defenceless
women and children. The officials and clergy of conquered territory
have frequently borne express testimony to this fact.--PASTOR M.
HENNIG, D.K.U.W., p. 57.

54. The losses we suffer are--even if the losses of the enemy were ten
times more numerous--infinitely greater in value and infinitely more
painful.--PROF. A. LASSON, D.R.S.Z., No. 4, p. 8.

54a. One single highly cultured German warrior, of those who are, alas!
falling in thousands, represents a higher intellectual and moral
life-value than hundreds of the raw children of nature (_Naturmenschen_)
whom England and France, Russia and Italy, oppose to them.--PROF. E.
HAECKEL, E.W., p. 36.

54b. When one of our ships has to sink, its going-down is even more
glorious than a victory.--PROF. U. v. WILAMOWITZ-MÖLLENDORF, R., pt.
iii., p. 48.

55. Where German soldiers had to seize the incendiary torch, or even
to proceed to the slaughter of citizens, it was only in pursuance of
the rights of war, and for protection in real need. Had they obeyed
the dictates of their hearts, they would rather have shared their soup
and bread with the defenceless foe.... This spirit of humanity we will
preserve and cherish to the end.--PROF. W. KAHL, D.R.S.Z., No. 6, p.
5.

56. Lastly, we must not forget the German humour.... It sometimes
proceeds from a firm faith in God, sometimes from a cheerful optimism,
always from a serenity of spirit which nothing can disturb. Thus
German soldiers out in the field, the moment there is a pause in the
fighting, set about trying to ride on the camel which they have taken
from the Zouaves.... So, too, a non-commissioned officer, during a
fight, admonishes a soldier: "Shoot quietly, Kowalski, shoot quietly!
You'll frighten away the whole French Army of the North with your
confounded banging!"--PASTOR M. HENNIG, D.K.U.W., p. 59.

57. Apart from the fighting quality of these troops, their peaceful
work behind all the fronts bears witness to a thorough spiritual
culture (_Bildung_) and a living organization such as the world has
never seen, and this again indicates an average level of culture in
all grades--of spiritual development and moral responsibility--to
which no people in the world can show anything in the smallest degree
comparable.--H.S. CHAMBERLAIN, D.Z., p. 19.

58. Even when, for once, a Latin writer is favourably disposed towards
Germany ... he can see in what moves his admiration nothing but animal
vitality. "This terrible Germany," he says, "like a wonderful beast of
the jungle, springs upon all its foes and fixes its fangs in them."
How sadly he here misinterprets the nature of German heroism!--G.
MISCH, V.G.D.K., p. 9.

59. It is characteristic that our cruiser _Wilhelm der Grosse_, in
order to spare the women and children on board, let an English
merchant ship pass unharmed,[9] which by International Law it has the
right to sink ... and then come Messieurs the English and repay this
act of magnanimity by sinking the same cruiser in a neutral harbour,
contrary to all International Law.--PROF. G. ROETHE, D.R.S.Z., No. 1,
p. 23.

60. The absence of any sort of animosity towards other people is a
striking characteristic of the Germans--and of the Germans
alone.[10]--H.S. CHAMBERLAIN, K.A., p. 12.

_See also No. 497._


=The Great Misunderstood.=

(AFTER JULY, 1914.)

61. It has been said that it is un-German to wish to be only German.
That again is a consequence of our spiritual wealth. We understand all
foreign nations; none of them understands us, and none of them can
understand us.--PROF. W. SOMBART, H.U.H., p. 135.

62. The historian and economist Sombart has said: "We understand all
foreign nations, no foreign nation understands or can understand us."
In these words he rejects all community of Kultur with other peoples,
and especially the so-called "Western European Ideas."--O.A.H.
SCHMITZ, D.W.D., p. 124.

63. In the world of the spirit, the victory of German thought seemed
already almost decided. For it was able to comprehend the others, but
they could not comprehend it.--G. MISCH, V.G.D.K., p. 19.

64. We are still the most wide-hearted and receptive of people, a
people that cannot live if it does not make its own the spiritual
values of the other peoples. We can already say that we know the outer
world better than they know us.--PROF. F. MEINECKE, D.D.E., p. 35.

65. Whole-hearted understanding for another people can be fully
attained only by treason to one's own nature, to one's own national
personality. That is what makes the renegade so hateful, and those
unpatriotic half-men, the intellectuals and æsthetes.--PROF. M. V.
GRUBER, D.R.S.Z., No. 30, p. 14.

66. The German is docile and eager to learn. His interest embraces
everything, and most of all what is foreign. He is disposed to admire
everything foreign and to underrate what is his own. With foreigners
it is just the other way. We Germans know about them, but they know
absolutely nothing about us.--PROF. A. LASSON, D.R.S.Z., No. 4, p. 34.

67. Apart from what Professor Larsen has said in Denmark, and Dr. Gino
Bertolini in Italy, about German militarism ... we may designate as
nonsense everything that foreigners, in low or in high estate, have
recently said on this subject. This is a new proof of the fact that
foreigners cannot understand us, apart from a few outstanding
personalities whom a kind fate has borne aloft to the heights of the
German spirit.--PROF. W. SOMBART, H.U.H., p. 82.

_See also Nos. 136-145._


=Kultur.=

(BEFORE THE WAR.)

68. The _Kultur_ of the Germans [_Germanen_] is actually the stimulus
to our present European _Civilization_ with which we are conquering
the world.--J.L. REIMER, E.P.D., p. 31.

69. Germanism, when it rightly understands itself, and remains true to
its nature, is childlike and manlike, at once tender and strong, full
of genuinely human simplicity, and therefore of irreplaceable value to
Kultur.--F. LANGE, R.D., p. 27 (1890).

70. The champions of the so-called race-idea are clear as to the
importance of the Germanic race for our civilization and Kultur....
Their meritorious work has converted the dim divinings of instinct
into the certainty of knowledge; and yet a sense of oppression steals
upon us when we think of what still remains to be done (as they all
agree) against a hostile world in arms, both of the flesh and of the
spirit--a world of treachery and hypocrisy, of error and of
fanaticism, of stupidity and of craft.--J.L. REIMER, E.P.D., p. 50.

70a. Kultur is best promoted when the strongest individual Kultur,
that of a given nation, enlarges its field of activity at the expense
of the other national Kulturs. If we one day come into conflict with
the Martians, then humanity--all the peoples of the earth--will have
common interests: but not until then.--K. WAGNER, K., p. 46.

71. I cannot accept the definition of Kultur which identifies it with
"form," with the harmonious "rhythm" which, in the English, for
example, permeates and unifies everything, from the highest spiritual
life to clothes, footwear and table manners.... I am of opinion that
we shall apply to this care for "form," for "rhythm," and whatever
results from it, the name of "civilization," reserving the nobler word
"Kultur" for higher values, and that we should look to our army and
the corps of officers to endow us with, and educate us in, these
higher values.--F. LANGE, R.D., p. 217 (1901).


(AFTER JULY, 1914.)

72. Our belief is that the salvation of the whole Kultur of Europe
depends upon the victory which German "militarism" is about to
achieve.--Manifesto signed by 3,500 "Hochschullehreren" (professors
and lecturers), quoted by PROF. U. v. WILAMOWITZ-MÖLLENDORF, R., pt.
ii, p. 33.

73. If Fate has selected us to assume the leadership in the
Kultur-life of the peoples, we will not shrink from this great and
lofty mission.--G.E. PAZAUREK, P.K.U.K., p. 23.

74. At bottom we Germans are fighting for the same thing which the
Greeks defended against the Persians, the Romans against the
Carthaginians and Egyptians, the Franks against Islam: namely, the
chivalrous European way of thinking, which is ever being threatened by
brutal force and puling baseness. We stand once more at a watershed of
Kultur.--O.A.H. SCHMITZ, D.W.D., p. 119.

75. If we are beaten--which God and our strong arm forbid--all the
higher Kultur of our hemisphere, which it was our mission to guard,
sinks with us into the grave.--PROF. A. v. HARNACK, I.M., 1st October,
1914, p. 26.

76. That it will be German Kultur that will send forth its rays from
the centre of our continent, there can be no possible doubt.--PROF. O.
v. GIERKE, D.R.S.Z., No. 2, p. 19.

77. We are indeed entrusted here on earth with a doubly sacred
mission: not only to protect Kultur ... against the narrow-hearted
huckster-spirit of a thoroughly corrupted and inwardly rotten
commercialism (_Jobbertum_), but also to impart Kultur in its most
august purity, nobility and glory to the whole of humanity, and
thereby contribute not a little to its salvation.--EIN DEUTSCHER,
W.K.B.M., p. 40.

78. [Germany has neglected] the highest duty of every Kultur-State--to
carry its Kultur into foreign parts, and to win the confidence and
affection of other peoples.--F. v. LISZT, E.M.S., p. 12.

79. The idea of the exclusive justification of one's own Kultur which
is innate in the French and English, is foreign to us. But we are
conscious of the incomparable value of German Kultur, and will for the
future guard it against being adulterated by less valuable imports.
We do not force it upon any one, but we believe that its own inner
greatness will everywhere procure it the recognition which is its
due.--PROF. O. v. GIERKE, D.R.S.Z., No. 2, p. 25.

80. The more German Kultur remains faithful to itself, the better will
it be able to enlighten the understanding of the foreign races
absorbed, incorporated into the Empire, and to make them see that only
from German Kultur can they derive those treasures which they need for
the fertilizing of their own particular life.--PROF. O. V. GIERKE,
D.R.S.Z., No. 2, p. 19.

81. We will not in the future let foreign idols be forced upon us, but
will serve our own Gods.--PROF. RUDOLF EUCKEN, I.M., 1st October,
1914, p. 74.

82. Germanism was for several decades, in spite of the mighty and
over-towering height of its Kultur, hindered in the imparting of this
Kultur to other nations. In the first years after the war [of 1870]
this was not painfully felt, as a powerful _exchange of Kultur_ was
still in progress between different parts of the German Empire.... But
when this exchange of Kultur between the German stocks had run its
course, and the Germanization of the frontier districts [Poland,
Alsace] had reached its limit, then the spiritual need of the German
victor and conqueror began to make itself felt. He became a teacher
without scholars, he had no longer an audience.--K.A. KUHN, W.U.W., p.
11.

_See also No. 235a._

83. Our German Kultur has, in its unique depth, something shrinking
and severe (_Sprödes und Herbes_), it does not obtrude itself, or
readily yield itself up; it must be earnestly sought after and
lovingly assimilated from within. This love[11] was lacking in our
neighbours; wherefore they easily came to look upon us with the eyes
of hatred.--PROF. R. EUCKEN, I.M., 1st October, 1914, p. 74.

84. And the graves which border the path to glory of the Romans, the
Germans, the British and the French, the stench of robbery, plunder
and theft which hangs around these millions of graves? Must Kultur
rear its domes over mountains of corpses, oceans of tears, and the
death-rattle of the conquered? YES, IT MUST! [There follows an image
too grotesquely indecent to be quoted.] Either one denies altogether
the beneficent effect of Kultur upon humanity, and confesses oneself
an Arcadian dreamer, or one allows to one's people the right of
domination--in which case the might of the conqueror is the highest
law of morality, before which the conquered must bow. _Væ
victis!_--K.A. KUHN, W.U.W., p. 10.

85. The whole of European Kultur ... is brought to a focus on this
German soil and in the hearts of the German people. It would be
foolish to express oneself on this point with modesty and reserve. We
Germans represent the latest and the highest achievement of European
Kultur.--PROF. A. LASSON, D.R.S.Z., No. 4, p. 13.

86. The Kultur-mission of a people is fulfilled when there are no
longer any people of the same race and kindred to which their Kultur
has still to be imparted.... Our Kultur-mission has in view some
hundred millions of Slavs, and draws its geographical frontier-line at
the Ural Mountains.--K.A. KUHN, W.U.W., p. 13.

87. The attempt of Napoleon to graft the Kultur of Western Europe upon
the empire of the Muscovite ended in failure. To-day history has made
us Germans the inheritors of the Napoleonic idea.--K.A. KUHN, W.U.W.,
p. 17.

87a. It is perhaps the stupidest of the suspicions under which we
labour that we aim at a world-empire after the Roman fashion, and wish
to thrust our Kultur on the conquered peoples.--PROF. F. MEINECKE,
D.R.S.Z., No. 29, p. 26.

88. We, however, will not let ourselves be diverted by all this hatred
and envy from our striving towards a world-Kultur. We will busily and
cheerfully work on at the elevation of the whole human race.--PROF.
R. EUCKEN, I.M., 1st October, 1914, p. 74.

89. More than a hundred years ago (1808) Johan Gottlieb Fichte, in his
ever-memorable _Speeches to the German Nation_, proclaimed the German
people to be the only people in Europe which had preserved its
primitive genuineness (_ursprüngliche Echtheit_), and therefore its
spiritual creative faculty, and found the transition from his previous
cosmopolitan way of thinking to flaming national enthusiasm, in the
idea that this people was called to be the upholder of world-Kultur,
and that it was therefore its duty to humanity to look to its own
preservation.--PROF O. v. GIERKE, D.R.S.Z., No. 2, p. 23.

90. We claim only the free development of our individuality, and are
only fighting against the attempt to throttle it, while contrariwise
our enemies are conducting an aggressive war, which they have to
disguise as a Kultur-war in order to make it appear defensive.--PASTOR
E. TROELTSCH, D.R.S.Z., No. 27, p. 27.

91. The highest steps of Kultur have not been mounted by peaceable
nations in long periods of peace, but by warlike peoples in the time
of their greatest combativeness.--R. THEUDEN, W.M.K.B., p. 4.

92. German Kultur is moral Kultur. Its superiority is rooted in the
unfathomable depth of its moral constitution. Should it forfeit its
moral purity, it would cease to be German.--PROF. O. V. GIERKE,
D.R.S.Z., No. 2, p. 23.

92a. The further we can carry our Kultur into the East, the more, and
the more profitable, outlets shall we find for our wares. Economic
profit is of course not the main motive of our Kultur-activity, but it
is no unwelcome by-product.--C.L. POEHLMANN, G.D.W., p. 35.

93. The individual Frenchman may fight as heroically as he pleases,
his cause is nevertheless lost, because he does not believe that where
the German element has never penetrated, or has penetrated only to
disappear again, no development of Kultur, in the true sense of the
word, is possible.--K.A. KUHN, W.U.W., p. 26.

94. But what about Louvain and Rheims? Has not war, the rude and
ruthless destroyer, trodden down glorious cities and priceless
buildings that might claim to rank among the greatest Kultur-treasures
of humanity? Exactly the opposite may be said: war has in these cases
led the way to a really clear recognition of the value to humanity of
these Kultur-treasures! The cry of indignation which went up against
us had long before made itself heard in our own breasts in view of the
thoughtlessness and indifference, nay, the frivolity with which these
immeasurable values had been ruthlessly exposed to destruction by
nations which have always plumed themselves excessively on their
western Kultur.--K. ENGELBRECHT, D.D.D.K., p. 14.

94a. The fury of our gunners at the enemy's unprincipled use of the
cathedral of Rheims as a means of defence, was doubtless mingled with
indignation and disgust at being _compelled_ to do injury to a
priceless work of art. But no phrase-making æstheticism, thank God,
such as our neighbours cultivate, rendered us untrue to the conviction
that, when all is said and done, every drop of blood of the meanest of
our brave soldiers is worth more than any individual work of artistic
Kultur.--K. ENGELBRECHT, D.D.D.K., p. 14.

_See also Nos. 7, 30, 46, 62, 115, 123, 151, 160, 186, 187, 232, 239a,
242, 248a, 262-268._


=Der deutsche Gott.=[12]

(AFTER JULY, 1914.)

95. If God is for us, who can be against us? It is enough for us to be
a part of God.--"On the German God," by PASTOR W. LEHMANN, quoted in
H.A.H., p. 77.

96. We have become a nation of wrath; we think only of the war.... We
execute God's Almighty will, and the edicts of His justice we will
fulfil, imbued with holy rage, in vengeance upon the ungodly. God
calls us to murderous battles, even if worlds should thereby fall to
ruins.... We are woven together like the chastening lash of war; we
flame aloft like the lightning; like gardens of roses our wounds
blossom at the gates of Heaven.--F. PHILIPPI, quoted in H.A.H., p. 52.

97. The principle which the Kaiser impressed on his soldiers lives in
his own soul: "Each must so do his duty that, when he shall one day
answer the heavenly bugle-call, he may stand forth with a good
conscience before his God and his old Kaiser."--PASTOR M. HENNIG,
D.K.U.W., p. 21.

_Compare No. 247._

98. Thou who dwellest high in Thy Heaven, above Cherubim, Seraphim,
and Zeppelins, Thou who art enthroned as a God of thunder in the midst
of lightning from the clouds, and lightning from sword and cannon,
send thunder, lightning, hail and tempest hurtling upon our enemy ...
and hurl him down to the dark burial-pits.--_Battle Prayer_, by
PASTOR D. VORWERK, quoted in H.A.H., p. 40.

99. Is the living God, the God whom one can only have and understand
in the spirit of Jesus Christ, is He the God of those others? No; they
serve at best Satan, the father of lies!--"War Sermons," by PASTOR H.
FRANCKE, quoted in H.A.H., p. 72.

100. England is our worst enemy, and we will fight her till we have
overthrown her! So may it please our Great Ally, who stands behind the
German battalions, behind our ships and U-boats, and behind our
blesséd "militarism"!--E. v. HEYKING, D.W.E., p. 23.

101. The German soul is the world's soul, God and Germany belong to
one another.--"On the German God," by PASTOR W. LEHMANN, quoted in
H.A.H., p. 83.

102. On this planet, as a result of millenniums of development, has it
come to this, that Germany--and in a wider sense _Germanism_, within
and without the Empire--has become an instrument of God, an
indispensable, irreplaceable instrument of God? This question I ask,
and I answer it in the affirmative.--H.S. CHAMBERLAIN, D.Z., p. 15.

103. The French, of course, count on the possibility that Germany may
be weakened in the further course of the war, and at last beaten by
the Russian Army and the English Fleet. This we do not believe,
because we know Germany and hold the alliance between Providence and
our people to be a matter of necessity.--F. NAUMANN, Member of the
Reichstag, D.U.F., p. 19.

104. The difficult Christian commandment, "Love your enemies," is
nowhere more easily obeyed than in war! There is much talk about
"hate" against England. But how do our warriors greet each other?
"Gott strafe England!" They thus invoke God, but not the God of
hatred, of vengeance, but the God of justice. It is the just God at
whose hands we hope for the punishment of the unjust man or
nation.--H. v. WOLZOGEN, G.Z.K., p. 19.

105. It might come to pass that we succumbed in this fight of
righteousness and purity against falsehood and deceit. That could only
happen, I am sure, over the dead body of the last German--but should
it happen, I assert that we should all die happy in the consciousness
of having defended God against the world.--"On the German God," by
PASTOR W. LEHMANN, quoted in H.A.H., p. 79.

106. We are beginning slowly, humbly, and yet with a deep gladness, to
divine God's intentions. It may sound proud, my friends, but we are
conscious that it is also in all humbleness that we say it: the German
soul is God's soul: it shall and will rule over mankind.--"On the
German God," by PASTOR W. LEHMANN, quoted in H.A.H., p. 83.

107. The German God is not only the theme of some of our poets and
prophets, but also a historian like Max Lenz has, with fiery tongue
and in deep thankfulness, borne witness to the revelation of the
German God in our holy war. The German, the national, God!... Has war
in this case impaired, or has it steeled religion? I say it has
steeled it.... This is no relapse to a lower level, but a mounting up
to God Himself.--PROF. A. DEISSMANN, D.R.S.Z., No. 9, p. 16.

108. [Extract from a letter[13] to Chamberlain.] "It is my firm belief
that the country to which God gave Luther, Goethe, Bach, Wagner,
Moltke, Bismarck and William I., has still a great mission before it,
to work for the welfare of humanity. God has put us to a hard
probation ... that we may the better serve as His instrument for the
saving of mankind; for we were on the point of becoming untrue to our
old-established nature (_Wesen_). He who has imposed upon us this
ordeal will also help us out of it."--H.S. CHAMBERLAIN, D.Z., p. 13.

109. What a difference is there between armies, one of which carries
its God in its heart, whilst the others think they can conquer by the
weight of their numbers, by cunning tricks of devilish cruelty, by
shameless contempt for the provisions of International Law.--"War
Devotions," by PASTOR J. RUMP, quoted in H.A.H., p. 121.

110. Even the Crusaders with their cry of "God wills it!" were not so
penetrated by the Christian spirit as our warriors whose motto is, "As
God will!"--H. v. WOLZOGEN, G.Z.K., p. 19.

111.

    Ortelsburg und Gilgenburg,
    Dazu als Sieger Hindenburg,
    Das sind der Burgen drei,
    Die vierte, die ist auch dabei:
    Die macht der Feinde Tun zu Spott,
    Ein' feste Burg ist unser Gott.

Translation: Ortelsburg and Gilgenburg [two places in East Prussia]
with victory for Hindenburg--that makes three "Burgs" in all. Nor is a
fourth "Burg" wanting: one that puts to shame the efforts of our
enemies: for "Ein' feste Burg ist unser Gott."--Quoted by M. HENNIG,
D.K.U.W., p. 82.

112. On us Germans the eye of God, we take it, must especially rest in
this war: we must be His ultimate purpose.--"On the German God," by
PASTOR W. LEHMANN, quoted in H.A.H., p. 89.

113. For a just cause, the German is ready to sacrifice life, blood,
gold and goods. Once more, as of old, David goes forth against
Goliath. The German people says with David: "Thou comest to me with a
sword and with a spear and with a javelin; but I come to thee in the
name of the Lord of Hosts," in the name of faith, right and truth.
Great is his might who has these powers on his side; for the living
God stands behind him.--PASTOR M. HENNIG, D.K.U.W., p. 65.

114. The kingdom of God must now assert itself against the kingdom of
all that is base, evil and vile: the kingdom of light against the
kingdom of darkness. Against a world of superhuman evil ... the power
of superhuman justice, truth and love goes out to battle.--"War
Devotions," by PASTOR J. RUMP, quoted in H.A.H., p. 125.

115. One thing, I think, is clear, God must stand on our side. We
fight for right and truth, for Kultur and civilization, and human
progress, and true Christianity, against untruthfulness and hypocrisy
and falseness, and un-Kultur and barbarism and brutality. All human
blessings, aye, and humanity itself, stand under the protection of our
bright weapons.--"War Sermons," by PASTOR H. FRANCKE, quoted in H. &.
H., p. 65.

116. There lurks in our people something of the God-consciousness
which inspired the Old Testament prophets. Very childlike indeed, but
of far deeper meaning than he could guess, was the saying of a little
boy to his playmate at the outbreak of war: "I am not in the least
afraid! The good God will help us, for he is German!"--K. ENGELBRECHT,
D.D.D.K., p. 45.

_See also Nos. 43, 145, 312, 316._


=The Chosen People and its Mission.=

(AFTER JULY, 1914.)

117. He who does not believe in the Divine mission of Germany had
better hang himself, and rather to-day than to-morrow.--H.S.
CHAMBERLAIN, D.Z., p. 17.

118. Now we understand why the other nations pursue us with their
hatred: they do not understand us, but they are sensible of our
enormous spiritual superiority. So the Jews were hated in antiquity,
because they were the representatives of God on earth.--PROF. W.
SOMBART, H.U.H., p. 142.

119. God has in Luther practically chosen the German people, and that
can never be altered, for is it not written in Romans xi., 29, "For
the gifts and calling of God are without repentance."--DR. PREUSS,[14]
quoted in H.A.H., p. 223.

120. I want first to make it clear in what sense we may say, without
extravagance or the least trace of self-exaltation: Germany is chosen.
Germany is chosen, for her own good and that of other nations, to
undertake their guidance. Providence has placed the appointed people,
at the appointed moment, ready for the appointed task.--H.S.
CHAMBERLAIN, P.I., p. 25.

121. There is a gospel saying which bursts the bonds of its original
historical meaning and takes new wings in the storm of the world-war,
a saying which we may well take as the consecration of our German
mission: "Ye are the salt of the earth! ye are the light of the
world!"[15]--PROF. A. DEISSMANN, D.R.S.Z., p. 24.

122. It is no foolish over-valuation of ourselves, no aggressive
arrogance, no want of humility, when we more and more let Bismarck's
faith prevail within us, that God has taken the German nation under
His special care, or in any case has some special purpose in view for
it.--"On the German God," by PASTOR W. LEHMANN, quoted in H.A.H., p.
86.

123. Then a newly purified and newly strengthened German folk-soul
would arise out of the war, to new thoughts and new deeds, to a new
sense of its world-mission--that of imparting to the other peoples, in
a pure spirit, the achievements of its Kultur, so that all lands may
be filled with the glory of God.--PASTOR M. HENNIG, D.K.U.W., p. 63.

124. As heralds of God's will, messengers of His word, witnesses of
His benefactions to the world, we shall take up our work after the
war, and with German endurance and German industry, with German
competence and German faithfulness, with German faith and German
piety, we shall permeate, in the name of God, a world which has become
poor and desolate.--"War Devotions," by PASTOR J. RUMP, quoted in
H.A.H., p. 128.

125. When these storms have done their work, Germany's purest mission
begins: to become a place of refuge, a holy grove for all the seekers
of the earth, a central land, a land of wisdom, a land of morals.--F.
LIENHARDT, quoted in H.A.H., p. 51.

126. The divination or the assurance of this special calling [on the
part of God] has long been present to the best among the German
people; many quotations to this effect (for example, Geibel's lines)
are to-day in everybody's mouth. Deeper thoughts are aroused by a
less-known remark of Richard Wagner's: "A great mission, scarcely
comprehensible to other nations, is unquestionably reserved for the
whole German character (_Anlage_)"; this character he defines as "the
spirit of pure humanity," and the mission of the Germans as "the
ennoblement of the world...." Not to believe in this mission is folly,
is treason.--H.S. CHAMBERLAIN, D.Z., p. 14.

127. God's people will come forth from this war strengthened and
crowned with victory, because they stand on the side of God; but all
God's adversaries will find out that God will not be mocked, and that
He rules the history of the nations according to His will.--"War
Devotions," by PASTOR J. RUMP, quoted in H.A.H., p. 134.

128. A good Providence watches over the fate of the German people,
which is destined to the highest things on this earth.--PROF. W.
SOMBART, H.U.H., p. 67.

129. Brethren and sisters! in a moment we ... have become the heirs of
Israel, the people of the Old Testament covenant. We shall be the
bearers of God's promises.--"War Devotions," by PASTOR J. RUMP, quoted
in H.A.H., p. 116.

130. As was Israel among the heathen, so is Germany among the modern
nations--the pious heart of Europe.--"My German Fatherland," by PASTOR
TOLZIEN, quoted in H.A.H., p. 136.

131. We hope that a great mission will be allotted to us Germans ...
and this German mission is: to look after the world (_zu sorgen für
die Welt_). Is it arrogance to write such a phrase? Is it vanity in
the disguise of a moral idea? No, no, and again no.--PASTOR G. TRAUB,
D.K.U.S., p. 23.

132. Friedrich Nietzsche was but the last of the singers and seers
who, coming down from the height of heaven, brought to us the tidings
that there should be born from us the Son of God, whom in his language
he called the Superman.--PROF. W. SOMBART, H.U.H., p. 53.

133. Verily the Bible is our book.... It was given and assigned to us,
and we read in it the original text of our destiny, which proclaims to
mankind salvation or disaster--according as _we_ will it!--"War
Devotions," by PASTOR J. RUMP, quoted in H.A.H., p. 134.

134. We want to become a world-people. Let us remind ourselves that
the belief in our mission as a world-people has arisen from our
originally purely spiritual impulse to absorb the world into
ourselves.--PROF. F. MEINECKE, D.D.E., p. 37.

135. Germany is the centre of God's plans for the world.--"On the
German God," by PASTOR W. LEHMANN, quoted in H.A.H., p. 78.

_See also Nos. 75, 77, 239._


"=Other Peoples.="

(AFTER JULY, 1914.)

136. We had greatly over-valued all other nations, even the French.
The French are a people on the down grade.--THE KAISER, to HERR A.
FENDRICH, quoted in H.A.H., p. 55.

137. All the deep things: courage, patriotism, faithfulness, moral
purity, conscience, the sense of duty, activity on a moral basis,
inward riches, intellect, industry, and so forth [!]--no other nation
possesses all these things in such high perfection as we do.--"On the
German God," by PASTOR W. LEHMANN, quoted in H.A.H., p. 76.

138. Fichte was right in calling us the people of the soul (_Gemüt_)
... [in the sense that] the depth of feeling common to us Germans has
become a power controlling our activity and permeating our history, to
a degree unknown to any other people. In this sense we have a right to
say that we form the soul of humanity, and that the destruction of the
German nature (_Art_) would rob world-history of its deepest
meaning.--PROF. R. EUCKEN, W.B.D.G., p. 23.

139. Bach, Goethe, Schiller, Beethoven, these men signify for us a
spiritual rebirth, such as never happens to other peoples, all of whom
only grow old, and can never become young again.--H. V. WOLZOGEN,
G.Z.K., p. 49.

139a. Other peoples are young, grow to maturity and then begin to
age.... We Germans have often been old, but, thank God, we have as
often been _quite_ young.... How young do we not feel ourselves in
contradistinction to these Englishmen and Frenchmen.--PROF. G. ROETHE,
D.R.S.Z., No. 1, p. 25.

140. No other people, not even the Greeks, have so understood
childhood as the Germans. It is we who, in the work of Campe ["The
Swiss Family Robinson"] have created children's literature,[16] and
still hold the lead in that department; it is we who provide the
whole world with children's toys. That is possible only because we
have the power of identifying ourselves with the child-soul, and this
we could not do if we had not in our own innermost soul something
childlike, simple, primitive.--PROF. R. EUCKEN, W.B.D.G., p. 13.

141. The identical ring that we put into the singing of "Ein'feste
Burg ist unser Gott" and "Deutschland, Deutschland über Alles," is
something that cannot be found among the other peoples, because they
lack the freshness of national feeling, because they are
degenerate.--K. ENGELBRECHT, D.D.D.K., p. 68.

142. I look upon it as absolutely the deepest feature of the German
character, this passionate love of right, of justice, of morality.
This is something which the other nations have not got.--"On the
German God," by PASTOR W. LEHMANN, quoted in H.A.H., p. 79.

143. The period of political chaos a hundred years ago was a blessing
for the Germans, who at that time were able to grow deep, while other
nations were growing superficial.--PROF. W. SOMBART, H.U.H., p. 129.

144. Our German peace is an essential factor in our Kultur. Such a
love of peace is itself of moral value, but in the person of the
Kaiser it finds a consciously religious expression ... and when the
Kaiser has to summon his people to a war which he has not willed,
there at once awakes in the whole people the religious spirit peculiar
to itself, of which the other peoples--unless it be the Turks!--have
no conception, it matters not whether they have already dethroned
"Dieu" or have "the Lord" forever in their mouths!--H. V. WOLZOGEN,
D.Z.K., p. 46.

145. But this same Demon of Baseness, who has subdued the other
peoples, was busily at work in Germany as well: ten years more, and
God would perhaps have found no one in the world to fight for
him.--H.S. CHAMBERLAIN, D.Z., p. 11.

_See also Nos. 7, 8, 14, 31, 44, 321._


=Christ.=

(AFTER JULY, 1914.)

146. The soldier who spat in the face of the thorn-crowned Saviour did
not act more shamelessly than does England now.--"The True Unity," by
PASTOR TOLZIEN, quoted in H.A.H., p. 146.

147. Is there anyone who does not know why England declared war?
Why?... From jealousy. From shopkeeper-spite. Because she wanted to
earn the thirty pieces of silver.--"The World-Politics of England," by
PASTOR G. TOLZIEN, quoted in H.A.H., p. 143.

148. We could draw many instructive parallels: we could say that as
Jesus was treated so also have the German people been treated.--"War
Sermons," by PASTOR H. FRANCKE, quoted in H.A.H., p. 63.

149. In this solemn hour, when we lament over our dead heroes, we
experience, more deeply than ever before, the passion of our Lord....
Is not Germany itself transformed into a suffering Christ? We, too,
have gone through our hour of trial on the Mount of Olives, when with
our Kaiser we prayed that the cup of suffering might pass away from
us; and we, too, obeying the unfathomable will of God, have begun to
drain it.... We, too, were betrayed by those to whom we had shown
nothing but justice and kindness; and around us, too, resounded, in
accents of hatred and envy, the cry of "Crucify him!"--PASTOR F.X.
MÜNCH, reported by SVEN HEDIN, "With the German Armies in the West,"
p. 336.

150. We assert the view that ... what once happened to Luther is now
happening to our people: it is experiencing a repetition of the
Passion of Christ.--DR. PREUSS, quoted in H.A.H., p. 206.

151. A hard and steep _Via Crucis_ lies before the great benefactor
and magnanimous liberator of the Kultur-world, the German people.
Although it looks beyond the gloom of Good Friday to the dawn of
Easter morn, beyond the dark days of war to the beacons of
triumph--yet the cross still rests on its shoulders, and the Golgotha
of the hardest decision still awaits it.--HOFPRÄDIKANT STIPBERGER,
quoted in "False Witness" (_Klokke Roland_), p. 17.

152. It was the hidden meaning of God that He made Israel the
forerunner (_Vordeuter_) of the Messiah, and in the same way He has by
His hidden intent designated the German people to be His
successor.--DR. PREUSS, quoted in H.A.H., p. 214.

153. German craving for truth and German strength of faith, working
along Biblical paths, have attained to the true faith, the pure
religiousness, whose first and greatest spokesman is Jesus Christ.
Thus the Germans are the very nearest to the Lord, and may claim for
themselves that they have "continued His word".... We fight, then, for
Christianity[17] as against degeneration and barbarism.... God must
be with us and victory ours. This is guaranteed us by the truth of our
nature, which is as German as it is Christian.--"War Sermons," by
PASTOR H. FRANCKE, quoted in H.A.H., p. 71.

154. A Jesusless horde, a crowd of the Godless, are in the field
against us.... May God surround us with His protection ... since our
defeat would also mean the defeat of His Son in humanity.--"War
Devotions," by PASTOR J. RUMP, quoted in H.A.H., p. 119.

155. The German people, bearing forward in victory the Evangel of the
Cross of Christ,[18] is the great Christophorus in the world of the
nations.--"The Christianity of the Belligerent Nations," by PASTOR F.
ERDMANN, quoted in H.A.H., p. 148.

156. Let us rejoice that Envy has risen up against us; it only shows
that God has exalted and richly blessed us. Think of Him who was
hanged on the Cross and seemed forsaken of God, and had to tread in
such loneliness His path to victory. My German people, even if thy
road be strewn with thorns and beset by enemies, press onward, full of
defiance and confidence.... Thou and thy God, ye are the
majority.--PASTOR D. VORWERK, quoted in H.A.H., p. 38.

157. Kant and Jesus go through our people, seeking their
disciples.--PASTOR G. TRAUB, D.K.U.S., p. 22.

158. We are fighting--thanks and praise be to God--for the cause of
Jesus within mankind.--"War Devotions," by PASTOR J. RUMP, quoted in
H.A.H., p. 126.

159. Christianity is possessed of potent spiritual energies, since it
inspires our minds, not only with patience, but also with dignified
pride. "Blessed are ye when men shall reproach you, and persecute you,
and say all manner of evil against you falsely, for my sake." I quite
understand Friedrich Naumann's declaration that this text has meant
much to him in these days.--PROF. A. DEISSMANN, D.R.S.Z., No. 9, p. 24.

160. On the paths of commerce and intercourse, we shall go forth to
all nations, and, after the fierce fight is over, carry Jesus to them
in the quiet, peaceful work of a true Kultur. England, in these paths,
has lowered herself to become a nation of hucksters, who have long
abandoned the service of God for that of Mammon.--"War Devotions," by
PASTOR J. RUMP, quoted in H.A.H., p. 130.

161. It is on account of its admirable qualities that Germany has so
many enemies. Friedrich v. Schiller says: "The world loves to blacken
whatever is radiant and shining, and to drag what is exalted in the
dust.... Socrates had to drain the bowl of poison, Columbus was cast
into fetters, Christ was nailed to the cross,"--FELDMARSCHALLEUTNANT
FRANZ RIEGER, quoted by KR. NYROP, _Er Krig Kultur?_ (Copenhagen).

162. The thief who expiated a sinful past by his repentance in the
last hour, and was outwardly subjected to the same suffering as our
Lord, is the type of the Turkish nation, which now puts Christianity
(outside Germany) to shame.--DR. PREUSS, quoted in H.A.H., p. 211.

_See also Nos. 428, 444._


=Die Deutsche Wahrheit (German Truth).=

(AFTER JULY, 1914.)

163. The International Lie-Press has risen up as a fourth Great Power
against Germany, and deluges the world with lies against our
magnificent and strictly moral (_sittenstrenges_) Army, and slanders
everything that is German. I propose that in the treaty of peace we
should claim a special milliard as indemnity for lies.[19]--PROF. A.
v. HARNACK, W.W.S.G., p. 4.

164. The Germans demand truth, even from orators. It would be quite
impossible to entangle the Germans in a network of impudent lies, as
the other nations have been entangled.--PROF. A. LASSON, D.R.S.Z.,
No. 4, p. 23.

165. There was no war party in Germany; that is a _Times_ lie; but
there doubtless were responsible statesmen and soldiers who rightly
said: "If England and her gang want war at any price, then the sooner
the better."--H.S. CHAMBERLAIN, K.A., p. 13.

166. [The sailors of the British Fleet are] a gang of adventurers and
criminals who serve only for filthy lucre ... and among whom
desertions and mutinies belong to the order of the day.--W. HELM,
W.W.S.M., p. 20.

167. I have travelled at midsummer through the length and breadth of
England, from London to Glasgow and Edinburgh, and to Wales; but I
have not seen a single cornfield.--K.L.A. SCHMIDT, D.E.E., p. 29.

168. Not only were the most monstrous untruths as to the violent
proceedings of Germany disseminated by the Press, but care was taken
to suppress all mention of the twice repeated _generous offer of
Germany to compensate Belgium in every respect_, if she would permit
the transit of German troops.--"GERMANUS," B.U.D.K., p. 31.

169. If, apart from one or two acts of rascality (_ein paar
Bubenstreichen_), we have as yet seen nothing of the British Fleet, it
is [among other reasons] because John Bull knows that the crews of his
ships are simply not to be trusted.--W. HELM, W.W.S.M., p. 20.

170. We know, for example, that English prisoners and wounded passing
through [Cologne] ... could scarcely believe their eyes when they saw
that our noble cathedral was not a heap of ruins, as their papers had
assured them!--PROF. A. SCHRÖER, Z.C.E., p. 55.

171. The French soldiers thought they were only going to manoeuvres.
Not until they were face to face with the enemy, had come under the
fire of our rifles and seen our bayonets, did they find out that they
had been deceived, that they had been lied into the war.--"War
Devotions," by PASTOR J. RUMP, quoted in H. & H., p. 126.

172. What homage does not the stupid world pay to Carnegie; and now we
learn that, through his endowments for professors and students, he has
enslaved the universities, imposing upon them hard-and-fast doctrines,
as, for example, the worship of England and hostility to
Germany.--H.S. CHAMBERLAIN, P.I., p. 56.

173. When we [in 1870-71] bombarded the fortress of Paris, that was an
outrage upon a sacred spot. But when the English battered to the
ground the defenceless Alexandria[20]--that was of course quite in
order.--PROF. U. v. WILAMOWITZ-MÖLLENDORF, R., pt. i., p. 27.

173a. When our Zeppelins drop bombs on the fortress of Antwerp, there
are loud protests. But how have not French prisoners boasted of the
burning by their bombs of the open city of Nürnberg. The will was
there; only the power was lacking.[21]--PROF. U. V.
WILAMOWITZ-MÖLLENDORF, R., pt. i., p. 27.


=German Insight and Foresight.=

(BEFORE THE WAR.)

174. [Of the "militia" of the British self-governing Dominions.] They
can be completely ignored so far as concerns any European theatre of
war. [Of the British Territorial Army.] For a Continental European war
it may be left out of account.--GENERAL v. BERNHARDI, G.N.W., p. 135.

175. As soon as we have won our first victory, we may be sure that
Italy will unconditionally accord us her armed cooperation.--K. V.
STRANTZ, E.S.V., p. 21.

176. If, in case of war, England should join the Dual Alliance
against us, our military position will be in no way prejudiced, if we,
on our side, take care to kindle fires at the points where her
world-power is threatened. In that case, too, oversea prizes beckon us
on, which will be well worth the winning.--K. v. STRANTZ, E.S.V., p.
39.

177. I do not at all believe that Zeppelins have anything to fear from
aeroplanes, as their critics assert.--A. WIRTH, T.O.D., p. 52.


(AFTER JULY, 1914.)

178. The far-seeing English politician expects the present war greatly
to improve the position of England as against the United States. Any
injury that England may conceivably inflict on its best customer,
Germany ... will be as nothing in comparison with the direct and
indirect losses the war must inflict on America.--DR. A. ZIMMERMANN,
quoted by P. HEINSICK, W.U.G., p. 21.

179. There can be no possible doubt that England, in secret, heartily
rejoices in every Russian defeat.--P. HEINSICK, W.U.G., p. 21.


=German Freedom.=

(AFTER JULY, 1914.)

180. An un-German freedom is no freedom.--H.S. CHAMBERLAIN, K.A., p.
21.

180a. Germany has been for centuries the true and only home of a
freedom worthy of humanity and elevating to humanity.--H.S.
CHAMBERLAIN, K.A., p. 15.

181. German freedom is thus not a natural human right, but an
elevation of humanity above the despotism of its own personal
inclinations.--O.A.H. SCHMITZ, D.W.D., p. 46.

182. We should be in an evil case if we were to barter for these
[English] "liberties," however praiseworthy in themselves, our
individual many-sidedness, our temperament in constant touch with
life, in short our Deutschtum.--KARL HECKEL, E.B., p. 384.

183. Ah, Milton, wert thou living at this hour!... Thou would'st
understand German championship of freedom, care for justice, and love
of truth.--PROF. A. BRANDL, D.R.S.Z., No. 20.

_On English Freedom, see Nos. 401a, 467._


=The German Language.=

(AFTER JULY, 1914.)

184. Fichte expresses in simple words a positively decisive truth ...
of all the languages of Europe, German is the only living one.--H.S.
CHAMBERLAIN, K.A., p. 26.

185. The German ... _must_ conquer; and when once he has
conquered--to-day or in a hundred years...--no duty is more urgent
than that of forcing the German language upon the world.--H.S.
CHAMBERLAIN, K.A., p. 33.

186. If German Kultur and the German spirit are to march victorious
through the world, not to oppress other peoples, but to aid them in
their own development, an essential preliminary will be the spread of
the German language. For only he who knows the German language, and
can read the works of our spiritual heroes in the original, can
really penetrate into the German spirit, and feel himself at home
there.--C.L. POEHLMANN, G.D.W., p. 48.

187. Chance brings to my hands to-day a copy of _Jugend_ for May 28,
1900, containing an article by me in which I read: "I have no firmer
or more sacred conviction than this, that the higher Kultur of
humanity depends upon the spreading of the German language." I go on
to explain that this language is the indispensable interpreter of the
German nature (_Wesen_), which is what I chiefly prize; and for the
spreading of the language it is necessary that the German Empire
should develop into the leading State of the world.--H.S. CHAMBERLAIN,
D.Z., p. 9.

188. A defeat for Germany I could regard only as a deferred victory. I
should say to myself: The time, then, is not yet ripe; the sacred
treasure must yet awhile be guarded and cherished in the circle of the
narrower Fatherland. For alone among all nations Germany possesses
to-day a living, developing, sacred treasure.--H.S. CHAMBERLAIN,
K.A., p. 24.

189. Germanism (_Was wir "deutsch" nennen_) is the secret through
which the inner man is illuminated; and the instrument of this
illumination is the [German] language.--H.S. CHAMBERLAIN, K.A., p. 25.

190. If Montaigne were living to-day, he would have to remain
silent--or to learn German.--H.S. CHAMBERLAIN, K.A., p. 29.

191. Men must come to realize that whoever cannot speak German is a
pariah.--H.S. CHAMBERLAIN, K.A., p. 35.

FOOTNOTES:

[8] A common expression for the ordinary, average German.

[9] This address was delivered, 9th September, 1914. The _Lusitania_
was sunk 7th May, 1915.

[10] Though this was written in the second month of the war, we must in
fairness assume that Herr Chamberlain is thinking of the German state
of mind before the war. But as he has lived thirty years in Germany he
must have been there during the South African War, when the German
feeling towards England was too mildly described by the term
"animosity."

[11]

    And you must love him ere to you
    He will seem worthy of your love

[12] M. Dumont, writing of the Albanians (_Rev. des Deux Mondes_, vi.,
120, 1872), supplies a pertinent comment on German piety: "_Ce qui fait
qu'une tribu croit à son dieu, c'est la haine de la tribu voisine._"

[13] Chamberlain says that this letter was addressed to him in
November, 1914, by a correspondent whom he refuses to name, but of whom
he will say that "few men can form such well-informed judgment upon all
phases in the life of present-day Germany, and no one deserves to be
listened to with higher respect." These expressions, and the mention of
William I., may perhaps justify the conjecture that the writer is none
other than Chamberlain's warm admirer, William II.

[14] The same author explains that "of course the German people have
not in themselves deserved this calling: it proceeds from the sheer
grace of God, so we can maintain it without any Pharisaism whatever."

[15] This saying had already "burst its bonds" and been appropriated to
Germany by the Kaiser:--"We are the salt of the earth, but we must also
be worthy to be so." (Bremen, 22nd March, 1905.)

[16] It is odd that the "creator of children's literature" should have
taken the very name of his work from an English book which had been the
delight of children for half a century before he wrote.

[17] Compare with this the following:--"In our struggle with the Triple
Entente, we look for the most valuable aid from Pan-Islamism, from the
living sense of solidarity between all Muslims of the whole world,
dependent on their common religion.... If all accounts be true, the
whole Muslim world is flocking round the Sultan-Kalif, and regards this
war as a 'Holy War,' That would be the first and perhaps the greatest
triumph of the Pan-Islamic movement."--DR. E. HUBER, in _Das Grössere
Deutschland_, Christmas Eve, 1914.

[18] The particular injunction of the Evangel of Christ which inspired
the sinking of the _Lusitania_ was no doubt "Suffer little children to
come unto me."

[19] After making this proposal on p. 4, Professor v. Harnack, on p. 6,
gives the following account of the Battle of the Marne:--"We have,
without any defeat, partly withdrawn our troops to form an iron line of
battle from Arras and Noyon to Verdun."

[20] "The defenceless Alexandria" was defended by an elaborate system
of forts mounting hundreds of guns. It was these forts that the fleet
bombarded, in the face of considerable resistance. The conflagrations
in the city were the work of escaped or liberated convicts.

[21] If any French soldiers actually believed that Nürnberg had been
bombed, it can only have been because the German Government spread the
report, through the mouth of its Ambassador in Paris, as an excuse for
declaring war. (French Yellow Book, No. 159.) It is possible that some
Frenchmen may have incautiously believed the German Government. The
report has been shown by German investigation to be entirely
groundless.




