IV

RUTHLESSNESS




IV

RUTHLESSNESS


(BEFORE THE WAR.)

326. War is an act of violence whose object is to constrain the enemy,
to accomplish our will.... Insignificant limitations, hardly worthy of
mention, which it imposes on itself, under the name of the law of
nations, accompany this violence without notably enfeebling
it.--GENERAL C v. CLAUSEWITZ, V.K., Vol. i., p. 4.

327. I warn you against pity: from it will one day arise a heavy cloud
for men. Verily, I am weatherwise!--FR. NIETZSCHE, Z. _Of the
Pitiful._

328. The Germans let the primitive Prussian tribes decide whether they
should be put to the sword or thoroughly Germanized. Cruel as these
processes of transformation may be, they are a blessing for humanity.
It makes for health that the nobler race should absorb the inferior
stock.--H. v. TREITSCHKE, P., Vol. i, p. 121.

329. Much that is dreadful and inhuman in history, much that one
hardly likes to believe, is mitigated by the reflection that the one
who commands and the one who carries out are different persons--the
former does not behold the sight, therefore does not experience the
strong impression on the imagination; the latter obeys a superior and
therefore feels no responsibility.--FR. NIETZSCHE, H.T.H., section
101.

330. The warrior has need of passion. It must not ... be regarded as a
necessary evil; nor condemned as a regrettable consequence of physical
contact; nor must we seek to restrain it and curb it as a savage and
brutal force.--GENERAL v. HARTMANN, D.R., Vol. XIII., p. 122.

331. One must ... resist all sentimental weakness: life is _in its
essence_ appropriation, injury, the overpowering of whatever is
foreign to us and weaker than ourselves, suppression, hardness, the
forcing upon others of our own forms, the incorporation of others,
or, at the very least and mildest, their exploitation.--FR. NIETZSCHE,
B.G.E., section 259.

332. We may depend upon the re-Germanizing of Alsace, but not of
Livonia and Kurland. There no other course is open to us but to keep
the subject race in as uncivilized a condition as possible, and thus
prevent them from becoming a danger to their handful of
conquerors.--H. v. TREITSCHKE, P., Vol. i, p. 122.

333. A morality of the ruling class [has for] its principle that one
has duties only to one's equals; that one may act towards beings of a
lower rank, towards all that is foreign, just as seems good to one ...
and in any case "beyond good and evil."--FR. NIETZSCHE, B.G.E.,
section 260.

334. The "argument of war" permits every belligerent State to have
recourse to all means which enable it to attain the object of the war;
still, practice has taught the advisability of allowing in one's own
interest the introduction of a limitation in the use of certain
methods of war, and a total renunciation of the use of others.... If
in the following work the expression "the law of war" is used, it must
be understood that by it is meant only ... a limitation of arbitrary
behaviour which custom and conventionality, human friendliness and a
calculating egoism have erected, but for the observance of which there
exists no express sanction, but only "the fear of reprisals"
decides.--G.W.B., pp. 52, 53.

335. A new type of philosophers and commanders will some time or other
be needed, at the very idea of which everything that has existed in
the way of occult, terrible and benevolent [!] beings might look pale
and dwarfed. The image of such leaders hovers before our eyes.... The
conditions which one would have partly to create and partly to utilize
for their genesis [include] a transvaluation of values, under the new
pressure and hammer of which a conscience should be steeled and a
heart transformed to brass, so as to bear the weight of such
responsibility.--FR. NIETZSCHE, B.G.E., section 203.

336. Since the tendency of thought of the last century was dominated
essentially by humanitarian considerations which not infrequently
degenerated into sentimentality and weak emotionalism, there have not
been wanting attempts to influence the development of the usages of
war in a way which was in fundamental contradiction with the nature of
war and its object. Attempts of this kind will also not be wanting in
the future, the more so as these agitations have found a kind of moral
recognition in some provisions of the Geneva Convention and the
Brussels and Hague Conferences.... The danger can only be met by a
thorough study of war itself. By steeping himself in military history
an officer will be able to guard himself against excessive
humanitarian notions, it will teach him that certain severities are
indispensable to war, nay, more, that the only true humanity very
often lies in a ruthless application of them.--G.W.B., pp. 54, 55.

337. Those very men who are so strictly kept within bounds by good
manners ... who, in their behaviour to one another, show themselves so
inventive in consideration, self-control, delicacy, loyalty, pride and
friendship--those very men are to the outside world, to things foreign
and to foreign countries, little better than so many uncaged beasts of
prey. Here they enjoy liberty from all social restraint ... and become
rejoicing monsters, who perhaps go on their way, after a hideous
sequence of murder, conflagration, violation, torture, with as much
gaiety and equanimity as if they had merely taken part in some student
gambols.... Deep in the nature of all these noble races there lurks
unmistakably the beast of prey, the _blond beast_, lustfully roving in
search of booty and victory.--FR. NIETZSCHE, G.M., i., II.

338. However much it may ruffle human feeling to compel a man to do
harm to his own Fatherland, and indirectly to fight his own troops,
none the less no army operating in an enemy's country will altogether
renounce this expedient.--G.W.B., p. 117.

339. A still more severe measure is the compulsion of the inhabitants
to furnish information about their own army, its strategy, its
resources, and its military secrets. The majority of writers of all
nations are unanimous in their condemnation of this measure.
Nevertheless it cannot be entirely dispensed with; doubtless it will
be applied with regret, but the argument of war will frequently make
it necessary.--G.W.B., p. 118.

340. That the lambs should bear a grudge against the great birds of
prey is in no way surprising; but that is no reason why we should
blame the great birds of prey for picking up the lambs.... To demand
of strength that it should _not_ manifest itself as strength, that it
should _not_ be a will for overcoming, for overthrowing, for mastery,
a thirst for enemies, for struggles and triumphs, is as absurd as to
demand of weakness that it should manifest itself as strength.--FR.
NIETZSCHE, G.M., i., 13.

341. It is a gratuitous illusion to suppose that modern war does not
demand far more brutality, far more violence, and an action far more
general than was formerly the case.--GENERAL v. HARTMANN, D.R., Vol.
xiv., p. 89.

342. The enemy State must not be spared the want and wretchedness of
war; these are particularly useful in shattering its energy and
subduing its will.--GENERAL v. HARTMANN, D.R., Vol. xiii., p. 459.

343. We ... believe that [man's] Will to Life had to be intensified
into unconditional Will to Power; we hold that hardness, violence,
slavery, danger in the street and in the heart, secrecy, stoicism,
arts of temptation and devilry of all kinds; that everything evil,
terrible, tyrannical, wild-beast-like and serpent-like in man
contributes to the elevation of the species just as much as its
opposite--and in saying this we do not even say enough.--FR.
NIETZSCHE, B.G.E., section 44.

344. Even if there were no question of vengeance, even if we were not
demanding reparation for ancient wrongs ... the crime (_Frevel_) of
opposing the development of Germany is so great that the most
trenchant measures are scarcely a sufficient punishment for
it!--D.B.B., p. 214.

345. Whoever enters upon a war in future, will do well to look only to
his own interests, and pay no heed to any so-called international law.
He will do well to act without consideration and without scruple, and
this holds good in the case of a war with England.[31]--D.B.B., p.
214.

346. Hatred, delight in mischief, rapacity and ambition, and whatever
else is called evil, belong to the marvellous economy of the
conservation of the race.--FR. NIETZSCHE, J.W., section 1.

347. Individual persons may be harshly dealt with when an example
is made of them, intended to serve as a warning.... Whenever a
national war breaks out, terrorism becomes a necessary military
principle.--GENERAL v. HARTMANN, D.R., Vol. XIII, p. 462.

348. Terrorism is seen to be a relatively gentle procedure, useful to
keep in a state of obedience the masses of the people.--GENERAL V.
HARTMANN, D.R., Vol. XIII, p. 462.

349. To protect oneself against attack and injuries from the
inhabitants, and to employ ruthlessly the necessary means of defence
and intimidation is obviously not only a right but a duty of the staff
of the army.--G.W.B., p. 120.

350. The more pitiless is the _væ victis_, the greater is the security
of the ensuing peace. In the days of old, conquered peoples were
completely annihilated. To-day this is _physically_ impracticable, but
one can imagine conditions which should approach very closely to total
destruction.--D.B.B., p. 214.

_Compare Nos. 196, 197._

351. International law is in no way opposed to the exploitation of the
crimes of third parties (assassination, incendiarism, robbery and the
like) to the prejudice of the enemy.--G.W.B., p. 85.

352. In reality the evil impulses are just in as high a degree
expedient, indispensable, and conservative of the species as the
good--only, their function is different.--FR. NIETZSCHE, J.W., section
4.

353. If the [small] nations in question have nothing Germanic in them,
and are therefore foreign to our Kultur, the question at once arises:
Do they stand in the way of our expansion, or do they not? In the
latter case, let them develop as their nature prescribes; in the
former case, it would be folly to spare them, for they would be like a
wedge in our flesh, which we refrained from extracting only for their
own sake. If we found ourselves forced to break up the historical form
of the nation, in order to separate its racial elements, taking what
belongs to our race[32] and rejecting what is foreign to it, we ought
not therefore to have any moral scruples or to think ourselves
inhuman. (In this connection I refer the reader to my later chapter on
humanity[33]).--J.L. REIMER, E.P.D., p. 130.

354. Article 40 of the Declaration of Brussels requires that
requisitions ... shall bear a direct relation to the capacity and
resources of a country, and, indeed, the justification for this
condition would be willingly recognized by every one in theory, but it
will scarcely ever be observed in practice. In cases of necessity, the
needs of an army will alone decide.--G.W.B., p. 134.

355. In spite of his delight in mere success, in spite of his
recklessness in the choice of men and methods, in spite of all the
harshness and brutality which his nature must acquire, the true
statesman displays a disinterestedness which cannot fail to
impress.--H. v. TREITSCHKE, P., Vol. i., p. 58.

356. Verily, ye good and just; much in you is laughable, and most of
all your fear of what hath hitherto been called "devil"! ... I guess
that you will call my Superman "devil"!--FR. NIETZSCHE, Z. _Of Manly
Prudence_.


(AFTER JULY, 1914.)

357. Our troops are assured of their mission; and they recognize
clearly, too, that the truest compassion lies in taking the sternest
measures, in order to bring the war itself to an early close.--PASTOR
G. TRAUB, D.K.U.S., p. 6.

358. How much further would Germany have got in Alsace-Lorraine, if it
had modelled its policy on Cromwell's treatment of Ulster, and had not
been misled by weak humanitarianism!--H.S. CHAMBERLAIN, K.A., p. 93.

359. In the midst of this bewildering uproar, the soul again learns
the truth of the old doctrine: it is the whole man that matters, and
not his individual acts; it is the soul that gives value to the deeds,
not the deeds to the soul.--PASTOR G. TRAUB, D.K.U.S., p. 6.

_Compare Nietzsche, passim._

360. We are not only compelled to accept the war that is forced upon
us ... but are even compelled to carry on this war with a cruelty, a
ruthlessness, an employment of every imaginable device, unknown in any
previous war.--PASTOR D. BAUMGARTEN, D.R.S.Z., No. 24, p. 7.

361. Whoever cannot prevail upon himself to approve from the bottom of
his heart the sinking of the _Lusitania_--whoever cannot conquer his
sense of the gigantic cruelty (_ungeheure Grausamkeit_) to unnumbered
perfectly innocent victims ... and give himself up to honest delight
at this victorious exploit of German defensive power--him we judge to
be no true German.--PASTOR D. BAUMGARTEN, D.R.S.Z., No. 24, p. 7.[34]

_See also No. 423._

FOOTNOTES:

[31] Observe that these two utterances are not shrieks of the war
frenzy, but are the reflections of a German patriot in the year of
grace 1900.

[32] The author does not explain how Germanic elements are to be
discovered in peoples which he has assumed to have nothing Germanic in
them.

[33] This chapter is an ingenious disquisition to prove that humanity
may be all very well for inferior races, but that Germanism cannot be
hampered by its restraints.

[34] This and the previous extract are taken from an address on the
Sermon on the Mount!




