VI

THE PRESENT STATUS OF MORALITY


We must now consider, in conclusion, the position of Morality in our
day. Let us see what profit and loss accrues to morality from the
present, and what its prospects are for the future. There can be no
doubt about the fact that great changes are being effected--changes not
only in the world of thought, but in the whole range of life and work.
These changes at first result in manifold losses to morality. The
pillars which used to support it began to totter, or gave way
altogether; new ones arose, but are as yet too weak to offer an adequate
substitute for what is lost. We cannot therefore look upon the present
status of morality as a satisfactory one.

The weakening of religious conviction and practice is unfavourable to
morality. Imperfect as the influence of religion often was on mankind at
large, and excessive as was the importance attached to the idea of
reward and punishment, men yet recognised a power superior to all human
action and all arbitrary human decision. This power was to be an object
of reverence; and life was raised above the care for purely material
possessions. It was also a gain for moral culture, that religion
established the inner solidarity of man, and facilitated mutual
understanding. Thus it is a loss for morality, that religion no longer
maintains its former ruling position.

The general condition of our intellectual life is unfavourable to
morality, inasmuch as this intellectual life lacks a uniform aim which
could unite scattered aspirations, strengthen every single undertaking,
and counteract, as a whole, the interests of mere individuals. These
interests at all times made themselves felt, and life was always in
danger of being dominated by petty human considerations. But the
difference between period and period depends on whether or not this
danger is counteracted and man is raised above himself by some high aim.
In our day, such counteraction is lacking. Where have we an aim
embracing the whole man, which is common to us all and binds us together
to inner communion? Every party and faction preaches some ideal of its
own, the attainment of which will, it believes, unite men, making them
good and happy. But these individual aims are very different in
character; they are a cause of mutual hindrance, and they divide mankind
in that which should be a means of union.

Another disadvantage for inner culture is the rapid pace of life, as
compared to former times. While we are hastening from moment to moment,
we have neither repose nor leisure for the culture of our inner man, for
the development of a character, a personality. We are more and more in
danger of being absorbed by the whirlpool of life, and robbed of all
possibility of self-conscious action. Other perils also beset us. In
our thirst for achievement and success, our moral judgment is often
repressed; the accentuation of the battle of life can even make us
indifferent to the moral quality of the ways and means employed by us.
All this necessarily weakens morality, and makes it appear unimportant
and shadowy.

To these dangers arising from the general conduct of life, we must add
others, which originate in the modern development of work in the
community. In former times, the conditions of life were at once narrower
and less subject to change. Social environment exercised a stricter and
more exclusive control over the individual, holding him within the
bounds of law and custom. This influence was often only an external one;
correct behaviour was frequently mistaken for moral integrity. This gave
rise to much unreality and pharisaical hypocrisy. Still, a certain
result was attained in the direction of moral culture; certain
restraints were acknowledged, which cannot, without impunity, be
dispensed with. Restraints play an important part in the life of the
soul, as well as in that of the body. Modern freedom of action makes the
individual depend on himself alone, and we must be very optimistic to
believe him able to completely withstand, unaided, all the temptations
of life.

We cannot omit one characteristic modern development: the change of
men's mutual relation from a personal to an impersonal one. We have but
to think of the difference between the cordial community of life
established by the old arts and crafts, and the cool, almost hostile
manner in which, in our great labour complexes, "employers" and
"employees" nowadays associate. There is no longer the slightest
personal relation or personal sympathy between them.


If we survey all these losses, the balance of the day will hardly appear
to be in favour of morality. But we must not forget that the present age
has also supplied morality with new and valuable impulses. This is
above all the case with labour--the modern form of work to which we have
just alluded. There is a strong moral element in the ever increasing
formation and organisation of great labour complexes, not only in the
factory, but also in science, state organisation, education, and so
forth. The individual is thereby obliged to work in close union with
others, and in accordance with objective requirements. He must adapt his
own activity to the general character of the work; and yet he must do
his own part conscientiously, so that the mass of separate achievements
may blend harmoniously and ensure the steady progress of the whole. This
requires such loyalty, self-control, and sacrifice of personal taste and
opinion, that a strong moral effect is undeniable. In this respect, man
now learns more implicit obedience than at any former period. Another
moral element in modern labour is the concentration of man's whole
strength on his work, to the exclusion of all inert repose.

If the impersonal element predominates in work, the social side of
modern life offers, on the other hand, more direct union and more
reciprocal action between man and man. This was, at first, mainly
theoretical. It was pointed out how much one man depends on his
fellow-men. People realised that the individual develops with other
individuals and as part of the community, with which his aspirations are
indissolubly connected, even when he imagines he is striking out a path
for himself. But such theories could only have so much influence,
because they were in harmony with the realities of life. Modern life,
with its technical developments, brought individuals into close touch
and created new opportunities of mutual intercourse, uniting men both in
success and in failure. Thus grew up the consciousness of human
solidarity, the recognition of men's interdependence, the idea of mutual
obligation. The result is a wealth of humane activity, which penetrates
into all the ramifications of life, attacking and seeking to eradicate
all forms of want and misery, instead of merely helping to relieve
individual cases. We encounter the earnest endeavour to impart material
and spiritual possessions, as far as possible, to all men; to help and
strengthen the less favoured section of humanity; to further the
interests of aspiring spirits. These efforts are but various aspects of
one great duty, which we feel we cannot ignore; we can no longer look
upon them as works of mercy, which it is a virtue to perform. This is at
the root of the social idea. And this social idea is, in our day, the
greatest bond of union between human beings; not only does it stir
individuals, but it also exercises a strong influence on law, education,
and so forth. In this respect our time has a right to claim undoubted
superiority over all former times.

These moral achievements of the present, valuable as they are, yet have
their inner limitations. Nearly all movement here proceeds outward, and
is directed towards distinct single achievements, while the culture and
welfare of the inner man are mostly treated as of secondary importance.
Zeal for surface ends leads to the neglect of the central values of
life. Yet all outer achievement only means real gain for us, if it
promotes the growth of the whole man, of his soul, of his personality,
making him nobler, greater, and happier. If there is no development and
strengthening of the centre of life, achievement on the surface is apt
to result in grave complications, and all that is great in the present
may thereby be driven into the wrong channels. Another danger grows out
of the ever increasing tendency to organise work. Owing to the necessity
of specialising and differentiating, the amount of work is restricted
which the individual can comprehend and master. He is tempted to
concentrate his interest on his own little province, to be indifferent
to everything outside it, and to lose all consciousness of a leading
idea and of a great whole. He thus falls a prey to the narrow conceit of
the specialist, and finally pushes aside as worthless accessories all
matters of general interest, all the questions and sorrows of humanity
at large.

By furthering a spirit of pity for human want and misery, without giving
to life an inner value and a higher aim, we are in danger of becoming
sentimental and of producing inner languor in spite of all outer
activity. We are often more anxious to procure for man a comfortable and
pleasant life, than to promote inner growth; and our care for the weak,
which is quite justified, leads us to take such weak individuals as a
criterion and to lower life to their level.

Modern life often lacks the necessary hardness and vigour; in our care
for the rights of individuals, we are inclined to neglect the rights and
requirements of the whole and also of the spiritual life. So we are in
danger of losing that which according to Goethe, "No one brings with him
into the world, yet which is all important if a man is to become a man
in every respect: reverence."

If we review the whole and consider the balance of moral profit and
loss in our day, the result cannot be a favourable one. No full
substitute is offered for what is lost. We have gained in breadth, but
we have lost in depth and strength. Above all, morality is in danger of
losing its former ruling position, and of having a subordinate one
assigned to it. It can therefore no longer call forth reverence, or be
treated as an independent aim and ideal. We realise at once the gravity
of this loss.

But this unfavourable aspect only holds good, if we consider the present
time as something complete and incapable of further development. If, on
the contrary, we seek to grasp all that is struggling into life, all the
requirements of our time that yet await fulfilment: then the situation
is quite different and far more favourable. What mainly told against
morality was the prevalent over-estimation of everything pertaining to
the visible life which surrounds us in nature and in human society. The
invisible realms of religion and the ideal have, as we have seen, often
grown dim and shadowy. Many of our contemporaries deny them altogether,
and look to the visible world for full satisfaction of all man's wants,
even of his spiritual and intellectual requirements. This could only
appear possible because, in reality, the invisible world of spiritual
values continued to influence even those who denied it, and because it
supplemented and completed the achievements of the visible world. It is,
however, characteristic of our time, that the old fusion is no longer
possible, and the irreconcilable antithesis between these two
conceptions of life stands out in bold relief. With increasing zeal, the
movement in favour of the visible world--that is to say,
Naturalism--tries to eradicate everything appertaining to the invisible
world, and to fashion the whole of life in accordance with its own
principles. Naturalism tolerates no rival, and declares war to the death
to Idealism.

We now see the truth of Bacon's words: "_Veritas potius emergit ex
errore quam ex confusione_" (Truth can more easily emerge from error
than from confusion). For if we accept naturalism as the only valid
conception of life, and develop it consistently in all its bearings, we
cannot but see its incapacity to embrace the whole of life. The apparent
victory of naturalism thus contains the germ of a defeat, the beginning
of a great reaction. What becomes of man and of human life, if the
visible world means to him the only form of reality? He is then but part
of nature--dark and soulless nature. The vast expansion and range of
nature overwhelms him with the consciousness of his own insignificance,
while, at the same time, nature is absolutely indifferent to his wishes
and aspirations. What he makes of himself and his life has not the very
slightest significance for this world of nature. All aspiration which
transcends his natural instinct of self-preservation must appear to be
mere folly. Such ideals as personality and character are but held to be
illusions.

If man turns away from the outer world and takes refuge in his own
sphere, in the social life among his fellows, naturalism there shows him
a mere juxtaposition, but no inner community which could offer new aims
or develop new values. What remains is only a number of individuals
inhabiting the same little corner of the universe. Each of these
individuals strives to gain recognition of his own merits, and to assert
himself, to the detriment of others. Much sordidness and hypocrisy
become rampant, and it is impossible to counteract them within so narrow
a range, or to hope for the growing up of a nobler and purer race of
men. The individual remains bound to the condition of society, which
also determines his own nature; he appears to be but a product of the
social environment. Having no deeper source of life within himself, how
should he be able to escape from the trammels of society, to rise above
it or oppose it? Society and environment thus become the destiny of man;
and there is no scope for freedom, for initiative, for independent
action.

If we survey and appreciate all this with unbiassed minds, this life
must appear empty and meaningless and scarcely worth living. At the same
time, we shall discern a development of mankind far transcending these
narrow limits, as indeed has already been pointed out in this our study
of morality. The degradation of life effected by naturalism might be
endured in feeble and senile periods conscious of no great tasks, but
not in our time, which teems with stupendous tasks it is earnestly
striving to carry out. These great tasks and problems can only be
grappled with, if we are fully conscious of concentrated energy and
increased spiritual power. Modern life has developed in various and
opposite directions. Its expansion is greater than its concentration,
and this threatens it with disintegration. There is an increasing and
imperative need of more unity and cohesion, of some universal and
harmonious character of the whole. How should this be attained without a
vigorous deepening of life, without the development of invisible
values? We observe, in our day, the encounter of an older and a newer
age, of a conception of life hallowed by the traditions of history, and
a new one that is struggling into existence; there is a sharp conflict
between the past and the present. We cannot but admit in the old an
imperishable germ of truth, and in the new, an inalienable right to
impress and influence us. We must prove and sift, separate and unite.
But how were any progress in this direction possible, could we not find
a superior point of view, such as can be offered only by a world of
thought, not by the visible life? This problem gains vastly in
significance by extending to the social life of all humanity. We see
here a struggle between an older, more aristocratic form of society, and
a newer, more democratic one. This struggle engenders violent passions,
especially in the province of economics. We are here placed before a
grave question: shall we be able to impart the benefits of civilisation
to all men alike, and thus broaden every individual soul, without
injury to its inner depths?

These are problems which do not originate in ourselves, but which are
forced upon us by the movement of history. Their very necessity bids us
hope for progression, in spite of all impediments. The power which has
imposed these problems on us will enable us to solve them. But we shall
also need to put forth our uttermost strength, and to quicken all our
latent spiritual forces; we must grasp our life as a whole, must
acknowledge its high aims with all our heart and soul, and must find our
real self in these ideals. Only thus can we gain the sense of inner
necessity which alone can lead us onward.

In this manner, our aspiration becomes closely linked to morality. Let
us see wherein we have already recognised the quintessence of morality.
Life and aspiration are detached from the little Ego, and take root in a
spiritual world in which we find our own essential being, so that while
working for this spiritual world, we are at the same time working for
our own depth and spiritual self-preservation. Such a change and
reaction, such identification with the movement of the spiritual life,
means only that our aspiration has gained a moral character. This moral
character brings us, at all points, into touch with our time. By means
of our own aspiration, we can now grasp, unite, and deepen all the
goodwill, genuine feeling, and untiring activity of our day, which was
hitherto inadequate only because it lacked inner unity and quickening
spiritual power.

We can thus face the future with courage and confidence. Humanity has by
no means exhausted its vital power; it is full of new possibilities
which demand realisation; and therefore we may expect an inner
progression of life and a rejuvenation of morality.

What is true of mankind in general, is especially true of America. The
multitude of grave problems cannot discourage a nation which feels in
itself so much youthful vigour, that it will not submit to a dark fate,
but is able and ready to mould its own fate, and to aspire to yet
greater heights than it has hitherto attained. But to achieve this,
moral force is as necessary as unshaken confidence in the power of the
spirit. We believe in a bright future for this great country. We believe
also in the development in America of such moral strength as will
successfully overcome all conflicts and lead to splendid results, for
the benefit not only of the American nation, but of all mankind.


THE END




ADVERTISEMENTS


Works by Dr. Rudolf Eucken

Professor of Philosophy, University of Jena

In 1908, Dr. Eucken was awarded the Nobel Prize for literature. His
books have been translated into many languages and their influence is
widespread.

Through his sustained and heroic appeal to what is most spiritual in
man, Eucken has ennobled the significance and the mission of philosophy.
He aims at developing, not a new category, but a new culture, and holds
that it is the privilege of philosophy, by penetrating to what is most
inward in human nature, to bring a religious inspiration to bear upon
the problems of the world of human labor. Eucken's philosophy is a
philosophy of life. It is a philosophy of reality as well. It treats of
the sources of man's strength, and the meaning and purpose of his
spiritual endeavor. And can there be anything more real than the
activity of a life that has consciously realized the true sources of its
power and the goal of its ultimate aspirations?

New York  G. P. Putnam's Sons  London


Works by Dr. Rudolf Eucken

_In the Crown Theological Library Series_

The Life of the Spirit

An Introduction to Philosophy

Translated by F. L. Pogson, M.A.

_12º, $1.50 net. By mail, $1.65_

_Second Edition. With Introductory Note by Author_

"Germany has again given us a great constructive philosopher, whose
influence has gone out through all the thinking world.... No one can
read these powerful pages without understanding that a strong thinker
has arisen among us, and without enlargement and deepening of his own
thought."--_Congregationalist._

"With Bergson of France, he is the most influential personal factor in
arming contemporary thinkers for the fray against materialism and
irreligion."--_Christian Science Monitor._


Knowledge and Life

_12º._

"No one is having more influence upon the spiritual life and religious
thought of Europe, at the present time, than Prof. Rudolf Eucken. His
books ... are making a deep impress upon thinking people."--_Christian
Work._


Religion and Life

_16º. Frontispiece. 50 cts. net. By mail, 60 cts._

"The work is able, as may naturally be expected of Prof. Eucken. But it
is more. The author is very much in earnest and he is anxious for men to
see the great need of religion in their lives. In this book we have the
best of his mind and heart."

_Boston Transcript._

"The philosophy of Eucken shares with that of Bergson the keenest living
interest of thoughtful men of all classes at the present day.... Eucken
has endeavored in this book to put his constructive system into the
clearest and most elaborate form."--_Continent._

New York  G. P. Putnam's Sons  London


Works by Dr. Rudolf Eucken

_In the Theological Translations Series_


The Truth of Religion

Translated by W. Tudor Jones, Ph.D.

_Second English Edition. Translated from the Third and Revised German
Edition with a special Preface by the Author_

_8º. $3.50 net. By mail, $3.75_

"When a book of really original thought appears it constitutes an epoch
in literature. Such a new era is introduced by this work. The ideas of
Prof. Eucken are startling, and revolutionary in some respects, but are
at the same time inspiring and reassuring to all the essential features
of Christianity as the true, the supreme and the final
religion."--_Watchman._


Contest for the Spiritual Life

_8º._

"In Professor Eucken, we have the philosopher as preacher. He not only
handles life, he would spread, enrich, and fortify it, and he is a great
force for the restoration of idealism in his own land. He is a preacher
equipped with philosophy and an inspired lecturer on the spiritual life
and its integration in the Whole."--_The Nation._


An Interpretation of Rudolf Eucken's Philosophy

By W. Tudor Jones, Ph.D. (Jena)

_12º. With Portrait. $1.50 net. By mail, $1.65_

The main aim of the volume is to present the essentials of Eucken's
teaching, to show its genesis and growth, its connection with Science,
Philosophy, Sociology, History and Religion. The whole volume is an
attempt to present the nucleus of Eucken's teaching, and to show its
fundamental importance in the individual life, the society and the
religion of the future.

New York  G. P. Putnam's Sons  London


_Only Authorized Edition_

An Introduction to Metaphysics

By Henri Bergson

Member of the Institute and Professor of the Collège de France

Translated by T. E. Hulme

Authorized Edition, Revised by the Author, with Additional Material

_12º. 75 cts. net. By mail, 85 cts._


"I certify that the translation of my volume _Introduction to
Metaphysics_, which has been prepared by Mr. T. E. Hulme, is the only
English version to which I have given my authorization. I may add that
Mr. Hulme was excellently well qualified for his task by the careful
study that he has made of the whole series of my writings. I have
examined his translation with care and am able to say that it renders
with remarkable accuracy the thought and the conclusions presented in my
volume."

HENRI BERGSON.

This volume forms the best introduction to M. Bergson's philosophy. In
it the author explains with a thoroughness not attempted in his other
books the precise meaning he wishes to convey by the word intuition. A
reading of this book is, therefore, indispensable to a proper
understanding of Bergson's position. German, Italian, Hungarian,
Swedish, and Russian translations of it have already appeared,
testifying to its intrinsic importance and indicating the scope of its
appeal.

G. P. Putnam's Sons
New York  London





End of Project Gutenberg's Ethics and Modern Thought, by Rudolf Eucken

