II

YOUTH'S STRATEGIC PLACES


III

THE WORSHIP OF LUCK


IV

A DEVIL'S TRINITY


V

TEMPTATION AND RESPONSIBILITY


VI

SELF-RESPECT AND COMPANIONSHIPS


VII

THE ROYAL LAW


VIII

'HE WAS DESPISED AND REJECTED'


IX

'WHAT MUST I DO TO BE SAVED?'


X

DOES GOD HAVE FAIR-PLAY?




YOUTH AND AFTER


"And Terah died in Haran."--Gen. xi. 32.


YOUTH AND AFTER

"And Terah died in Haran."  This bit of prosaic information becomes
suggestive by the emphasis of one word: "And Terah _died_ in Haran."
This was not his birthplace, but here he ended his days, and that for a
reason over which it is worth our while to pause.  "And Terah died in
Haran."  What of that?  All people have died somewhere, who have lived
and are dead.

When we first meet this man, he was a citizen of no mean city.  Ur of
the Chaldees was a great and representative centre in its day.  Rising
sheer from the midst of it, we are told, was an immense tower, or
observatory, from the height of which men, reputed wise, watched the
movements of the heavenly bodies; and especially the moon, for the moon
was worshipped in Ur of the Chaldees as the great tutelary deity of
this people.  Here it was that Terah lived, at this time an old man,
and "to trade," as the Scotch people would say, a maker of images.  His
craft was in things which symbolized some form of this lunar worship,
and which people bought to put in their houses.

Terah had a son called Abram, who, as he came to years of thought, did
not fall in very readily with this worship of the moon.  He appears to
have become very early in life one of an order of doubters to whom the
world owes much; to have suspected, at least, that the moon was not, as
the priests taught, a cause in itself, but the effect of a cause.  What
was that cause?  What was the fashioning hand behind the effect?  In
other words, he had come upon the doubt which explains much of the
faith and achievement of the reformers and path-finders of the world.
Neither doubt nor belief has any virtue in itself; we must determine
the moral quality by its expression in action.  Had Abram merely begun
and ended with his doubts about the moon, he would have died and been
as soon forgotten as any other commonplace sceptic before or since his
day.  The trouble is not that men doubt, but that they are often
content to do nothing else.  It may be better that they should believe
wrong things, than that they should cease to believe in anything.

Abram began, we imagine, to talk to his father about his misgivings,
and notwithstanding the fact that Terah's trade was dependent on the
popular religion, he seems to have yielded with something like
enthusiasm to the greater personality of his son.  Eventually they
determined to leave Ur of the Chaldees and go, no matter how far, until
they came to some place where they could worship in the new light which
had come to them, or, as we should say, according to conscience.

It was a formidable undertaking, for they knew not their
destination--if even, indeed, they knew their direction.  Some one--I
forget who--has traced their route through Larsa, where men worshipped
the sun; through Erech, where they worshipped the planet Venus--the
bright evening star; through Nipur, where they bowed the knee to Baal;
through Borsippa, where they worshipped the planet Jupiter; and on and
on until they came to Haran, where the people worshipped--the moon!  It
was not until they came to Haran, that they touched, as it were, their
first footprints, and found the old religion.

And this was the finish for the poor old father Terah.  Whatever the
motives with which he had set out on this pilgrimage, whether of
conviction more or less, or parental affection entirely, he was now
weary.  There had been little temptation to pause before on the score
of a people's worship.  That of the sun, of Venus, of Baal, of Jupiter,
probably did not arouse in him even a passing interest.  But when, worn
out in body and mind, he suddenly came upon the old religion, his
journeyings after another faith and form of worship were at an end.
This powerful appeal to his past, with its resurrection of old
memories, old prejudices, and the pathos of old associations, was too
much for the old man.  No second call came to him; or if it did, he had
neither heart nor ear for it.  It was Abram the younger man who
withstood the temptations of Haran and with the faithful went on to a
land they knew not of.  It was the younger who had the staying power
which, when acquired early, goes through life, and rejoins it in
eternity sure as ever it came to it in time.  Terah travelled some six
hundred miles--a big journey in those days--to get away from the
worship of the moon, and in the worship of the moon he ended his years.
His evening and his morning were the same day: "And Terah died in
Haran."

You see the thought underlying this bit of prosaic information.  It
simply means that the years close down the possibilities of a certain
kind of moral exodus.  It is in the days of your youth that you must
make the "legs of iron," as Emerson calls them, for the journey which
lies before you.  If you wait until you get into years before you find
right principles, and form good resolutions--well, even then it is
better to make some start in the right direction.  But why pile up the
odds, that start you never will; or that you will not go far if you do?
The enthusiasms of old men are as rare as they are short-lived, unless
they are evolved out of earlier and worthy days.

There may be exceptions.  If there are, I have never known one.  The
rule is practically a law, that old men, who are nothing more than old
men, cannot make mighty resolves and carry them through.  They may, for
many reasons, start out from Ur of the Chaldees; but it is not often
they get past Haran, if, indeed, they ever get so far.  More likely
will it end in the old defeat: "I will return into the house whence I
came out," which is much the same, or, in some cases, is even worse,
than if they had never left it.  The old man Terah would get an
interesting tour; although very probably people would hear from him
more about it at the end than he had ever seen on the way.  He would be
a much-travelled man for those days, but he never found the new
religion.  It was the old religion that re-found him.

Understand me: I am far from saying that old age necessarily blocks the
way to great attempts, or to conspicuous success in them.  All history
would cry out against such a statement.  There is an old age we delight
to honour, and which reverses the ordinary attitude to it in the
general world.  Instead of considering it a legitimate matter for lying
about, and polite not to be aware of its presence, we make our boast in
the virility which, in some men, accompanies their years until they
quite shade out in a mellow maze of glory.

Take some of our statesmen.  Were not the mighty men of the great
nineteenth century aged men, if we count age only by shadows on the
dial?  At a time of life when most men are honoured with a natural
right to senility, Mr. Gladstone was girding on his armour for one of
the biggest conflicts ever waged in the arena of our Parliament.  And
years after, as the struggle still raged--to see him, almost blind and
deaf, looking like so much vitalized parchment rather than a figure of
flesh and blood, as night after night he stood up to the agility of a
Chamberlain, and the subtlety of a Balfour--each perfected to a fine
art--surely never gamer, grander sight ever challenged the imagination
of poet, patriot, or historian.  It was a testimony to all time of what
can come out of the brain and soul of a man, when the body that houses
them is written and re-written over with the hieroglyphics of age.  It
was a fitting termination to what may be, and ought to be, the great
and sacred processes of life.

But Mr. Gladstone was great at the end, because all the way had been a
preparation for it.  This is the secret, if secret it be, which young
men cannot know and master too soon.  To end well, you must begin well;
and you must fill in well the distance between the one and the other.
Study carefully the triumph of old age in statesmanship, in science,
and in affairs, and you will have to connect them with years of stern
discipline and strenuous endeavour.  In no case will you find strength
where there has been no strain, or palm where there has been no dust.
There are levels on which the truth, that "we reap what we sow," admits
of no qualification.  Omnipotence itself cannot make it possible for us
to gather grapes of thorns, or figs of thistles.  To attempt after a
given age, and on the strength of a chance impulse, to leave Ur of the
Chaldees with its old habits and associations, its old moral settings,
will carry us far as the impulse lasts, but that in all probability
will be only as far as Haran.  And as Terah died at Haran, so shall we.
It will be from moon to moon.  Youth is the time to determine whether
old age shall be a beautiful consummation, or a bitter regret.  The
threshold of manhood is the place to form resolutions that will have
some chance of being kept, to cultivate the thoughts you would have
ultimately become things.  The serious danger is that, with the
impression of a long future before you, you should merely drift in the
present, and forget how inextricably the texture of to-day will be
woven into the fabric of to-morrow.

I am quite aware that what I have so far said is more likely to hinder
than help the purpose I have in saying it.  You will not question that
a clear nexus runs through our years, but my teaching about it, you
tell me, is needlessly severe.  If as the beginning is, so must the end
be, what are we to say of a man's will?  What are we to say about the
power and working of divine grace?  While there is life, does there
ever come a time when it is no longer true to say that out of it can
pass the old, or into it can come the new?

Surely to affirm that such a time can be is to give the lie to religion
and experience.  Many a young man is having what is called his "fling,"
who is yet quite sure in his own mind that when the time comes to
accept the more serious responsibilities of life, he will change his
habits and turn to ways that befit the new occasion.  So we are told.
And is it not true?  Have we not known young men cover a considerable
space of life with questionable, and even more than questionable
courses, and yet settle down into exemplary domestic men and admirable
citizens?

Yes, we have known them, and, whatever influences have brought about
the change, let us be thankful for it.  But what proportion do they
bear to the legions who, once in Ur of the Chaldees, have neither
thought nor desire for a better country?  While, again, they may leave
it from anything but worthy motives.  Men may be compelled to change
their habits without changing their natures.  It is really to multiply
words to no profit to debate the question.  Your instinct tells you
that it would be wickedness to encourage you to take your "fling" in Ur
of the Chaldees on the risk that you can get away from it when prudence
speaks the word.  Settle it, then, as true for you, that out of to-day
walks a to-morrow; and that what you shall do with to-morrow is
practically determined by what you are doing to-day.

This counsel, or admonition, cannot be over-emphasized.  I assume that
I am talking to young men who do not intend to make a failure of life;
then, I tell you again, that you must seize the one great chance you
have, to make it a success.

Permit me now to apply very briefly what has been so far advanced,
first, to your pleasures; and, secondly, to something more important to
you than old age, and that is--middle life.

To everything, says the Preacher, there is a time and a season, and it
must be that youth is the time for amusements and pleasures, which are
not so much the privileges of youth as native to it.  We are told that
Darwin in his old age expressed regret that he had deprived himself of
so many of the pleasures and resources of life by his concentration
upon that study, the results of which have made his name so justly
famous.  He gave to get; but he lived to doubt his own right to pay the
price.  And no young man should give place, no not for a moment, to a
doctrine of work which excludes his right to the joys and abandon of
his years.  There is danger, and very real danger, lest we should take
for granted what the "Grad-grinds" tell us, that the only thing which
matters is that we do work, and are not idle.  Work for its own sake is
not enough.  It may turn men into machines--all clatter and monotony;
or it may make them fussy nuisances.  "A soulless activity," says Canon
Ainger, "may save a man from vagrancy only by turning him into a thing;
or it may keep him from idleness by making him an egotist."  There is
the man who, to use the common phrase, "sticks at it" with scarcely a
competing thought or interest.  He scorns ease, and lives laborious
days.  For what?  I once heard it said, and I believe it was true, of a
prosperous Yorkshireman, that the real pleasure he had in his money,
for which he had toiled hard, was in a kind of mental calculation as to
how many of his neighbours he could buy up.

"I do all things that I may honour the Father," said Jesus: and work
which is not under this impulse, has in it no element of permanent
satisfaction.  In some way every work has to be brought into a
conscious relation to God, or we only swell the crowd either of
self-seekers, or of the men whose toil leaves no such impression upon
their character as gives sign or evidence of a sane or worthy aim and
end.

To give to work its essential dignity, and preserve it from mechanical
routine we must bring motive into it--high and worthy purpose.  There
is no virtue necessarily in being always at work, but there is
tremendous power in being able to work when we do work.  Do not
discount the old advice because it is commonplace: "work when you work,
and play when you play."  Master the distinction there is between
having what is called your "fling," and having your really "good time."
Get all the rational pleasure you can out of your young days.  Let your
religion be no dog Cerberus, snarling at the heels of innocent
enjoyment.  But never lose sight of the fact that unless you have a
definite and worthy purpose, to attain which you keep your good time
subordinate, that good time will have the same relation to genuine
pleasure that the throbbings of an ulcer have to the healthy action of
the heart.  And a very plain word is needed here.  Our trouble to-day
is not that young people will have their pleasures and amusements; it
is that so many of them will have nothing else.  One who knows his day
has told us, that were it not for the sporting intelligence in the
evening paper, not a few of our young men would forget how to read.  It
is a common experience to meet young men who have been decently
educated, as things go, and yet they are ignorant as babies about the
social and political questions which so vitally affect the welfare of
the State.  Decently educated, I say, as things go.  But how far is
that?  "I have five clerks in my office," said a Bradford merchant
lately, "who probably could tell me all I want to know and more, about
a horse race, a cricket, or a football match; and not one of them could
translate for me a foreign business letter.  This is one principal
reason," he added, "why Bradford is overrun with Germans, and why the
Germans are getting hold of so much of our trade."  On what is called
the practical side of life, the first duty of a young man is to be
efficient in whatever honest thing he is doing to earn his bread; and
at the same time be preparing himself for whatever surprise or
opportunity the future may have in store for him.  A few hours in the
week given seriously to the latter, will leave an ample margin of time
for recreation and amusement; and who knows what he may need, until the
need is there to test what he knows?  To be great on sport, and a
"stick" at one's business; to be an authority on amusements, and an
ignoramus about almost everything else that is anything, is the
surrender of manhood, and that in a day which has no need comparable
with its need of capable men.

And such surrender has consequences that lie nearer than those which
make themselves manifest in old age.  Your next step is into middle
life; and it is here where the question is finally decided whether it
is, or is not, well for us that we are here at all.  If a man has put
little more than the rubbish of a selfish existence into his years he
will, by the time he is old in them, be the victim of a callous
insensibility which will carry him over into the stage beyond our human
ken.  An unworthy old age rarely feels much moral suffering; that but
waits its awakening in the fires which shall try every man's work of
what sort it is.

But when a man begins to sight the middle years, he learns to know
himself as never before or after.  This is the stage where increase of
knowledge often means increase of sorrow.  It is, in truth, the sorrow
of finding out our limitations which, on their first acquaintance,
often seem more appalling than they actually are.  While youth may be
saved by hope, by what is to be, middle life is often lost in the drab
reality of what is.  Every youth, who is not as indifferent to his
possibilities as though he were nothing more than a lump of flesh, is
about to become a numeral in the world.  The tragedy enters when he
knows himself to be what in a sense he must remain--a cipher, merely
giving value to the men who do represent the numerals.  When the youth,
who used to talk about having the "ball at his feet," seems to have
become very much the ball itself, to be kicked hither and thither as
circumstances may determine, what then?  Will he show that kicked he
may be, but ball he is not?  That circumstances may use him, but they
shall not make him?  The answer to this question will very much depend
upon the stuff he put into his years, while as yet he knew not his
limitations.

And even where middle life has won success in the things men covet, and
for which they strive, it may be the success that is just deadly in its
reaction of monotony.  How often do we hear it said of a prosperous
man, who in middle years is giving place to unworthy habits, or to
ill-humour and chronic depression: "Would he had something to take him
out of himself; some interest in anything, if it were but a harmless
hobby."  Think of a man being reduced to the need of a "hobby" to keep
him out of moral mischief!  What such a man, if man he can be called,
really needs is some higher interest or a coffin.  A hobby is well
enough in its place, and much can be said for it, but when it becomes a
man's only peradventure between himself and the devil, the world can
probably spare him to its own advantage.  The young have no little
safety in their years, in the temporary buoyancy of the blood.  It is
when the former draw in, and the latter thins out, that dangerous
things get their more obvious and, too often, fatal chance with men.
It is when the first fires of passion have slowed down, and the ties of
early friendship have relaxed, and the outlook appears to leave us with
the problem, not how to live, but how to exist.  I tremble at times
when my experience suggests the dangers of those long stretches of
emptiness, that so easily fill with the sinister and the unspeakable.
I would pray, as a man in mortal terror, against the bottomless pit of
a motiveless existence.

This is why I put emphasis upon the threshold of manhood; not that I
believe it to be the most dangerous part of human life, but because I
believe it is the time to safeguard the part that is.  It is the time
when habits can be cultivated, and resources acquired, which can make
middle life as crowded with interest and good to enjoy as any of the
earlier years, and infinitely more useful.  But this is possible only
when the middle years can command their own.  Just as many of us
"postpone life until after our funeral," so may we find ourselves in
middle life discouraged and sullen because we cannot do what we would,
only because we have not done what we ought.  Men do not always go
under because they cannot do things.  They fail, not because they do
not know what it is well to do, but because they do not choose to
attempt it.  And why do they not choose?  So far as this question
affects middle life, it is largely because so few of us have the grit
to face its difficulties, and attack them, when we have to do it with
the serious handicap of self-made disadvantages.  It is while you are
young that you must lay up these stores of living material for the
after years; and this is the significance of it all--you can only do
it, or you can do it most effectually, when you are young.  As touching
certain advantages, "the day after to-morrow is the only day that never
comes."

Have your good time, I say, and in it fear God, and fear nothing else.
Keep a clean youth, and enjoy it to the full.  But let the thought have
its place as a goad when required, or as a steadying influence when the
spirits would gallop too fast--the thought in the question: How will it
be with me when my years are thirty-five or forty?  That trying, and in
so many cases, that fatal forty!  When the youth of "rose-light and
romance has faded into the light of common day, and the horizon of life
has shrunk incalculably, and when the flagging spirit no longer answers
to the spur of external things, but must find its motive and energy
from within, or find them not at all."  See to it while you may, that
these forces, when needed, are there, or whatever else you may gain
will be but a mocking remembrancer of the greater thing you have lost.

I have but another word to add.  If there are, as I trust there are,
middle-aged, or even old men, who would leave this Ur of the Chaldees,
with all its unworthy past, and make for a better country, do not, I
plead with you, be discouraged by anything I have said.  Remember, I
have been talking to the young; but God forbid that what I have said to
them should seem to exclude hope for you.  Make your start, though you
should get no further than Haran.  In a matter so supreme, it is better
to have tried and failed, than never to have tried at all.  But you
need not fail in any degree that success is possible to you; and a
success is possible to you in which are issues of everlasting life.
Whatever the past, build up with courage and humility what you can do.
God willing, and by His grace, you have time yet to prove how a
consecrated determination can stretch out life's limits, and wondrously
redeem no little of past failure.




YOUTH'S STRATEGIC PLACES


"I have written unto you, young men, because ye are strong."--1 St.
John ii. 14.

