II

YOUTH'S STRATEGIC PLACES

"I have written unto you, young men, because ye are strong."  This
description "young men" probably indicates that those to whom this part
of St. John's letter was addressed were seriously engaged in the work
of grounding their character, forming their habits, disciplining their
inclinations, and confirming the election all must make between good
and evil.  He was not writing to those who had failed in the struggle,
and had accepted their defeat.  He was not writing to those who,
beaten, knew that they did not intend to try again, and had thus
written themselves out of the progressive forces of the human world.
He was writing to those who had shown promise of better things, who
were evidently pressing "toward the mark for the prize of the high
calling of God in Christ Jesus."  I do not take it that the Apostle
credits the young men to whom he wrote with having won a victory which
is never finally decided on this side the grave, or with having
attained to a moral altitude outside the reach of their years.  When he
says, "I have written unto you, young men, because ye are strong," he
may be understood as referring to a strength consistent with, and yet
peculiar to, their years--a strength the whole force of which was set
in a right and healthy direction.

I want now to deal with the first part of this particular reference to
the strength of young men.  It would be away from my present purpose to
weight this address with any attempt to say what the writer means when
he tells them that, "The word of God abideth in you, and ye have
overcome the wicked one."  I shall take the words of our text out of
their context, and use them as a topic: "I have written unto you, young
men, because ye are strong."  Strong in what sense?  How may we give
the words a useful setting, as a remembrancer and a call to the young
men of to-day?

In the first place, one great constituent of strength which is, or
ought to be, the special possession of young life is--Hope.  It is a
common remark that as we grow older we become chary of convictions, and
content ourselves with opinions.  I should be sorry to believe it, but
I am obliged to admit that age, even with good people, changes to a
large extent their centre of gravity from hope to faith.

It is suggestive to mark the order of these in St. Paul's famous
procession--faith, hope, love.  Love, he says, is the greatest.  But he
ranks hope before faith.  Why?  The passage in which this
classification occurs is part of the distinctive literature of the
Bible.  Hence terms are not used carelessly.  What is the difference
between the two?  "Hope," says David Hume, "is the real riches of human
life; as fear is the real poverty."

Hope is that which is "at the bottom of the vase," as the ancients
said, when "every other thing has gone out of it"--by which, as it has
been suggested, they probably meant the human heart.  "While hope
trembles in expectation, faith is quiet in possession.  Hope leaps out
towards what will be; faith holds on to what is.  Hope idealizes; faith
realizes.  Faith sees; hope foresees." [1]  In other words, faith is
apt to be content with what it has; hope ventures out to annex the
wider provinces of the imagination.  Faith is the prose of our
religious life, hope is its poetry.

Unless you think about it, this will glance off your mind as a
distinction without a difference.  It is more than that, in the sense I
am using the distinction.  The loss of youth is not so much in the
flight of years, as in the stealing away of our hopes.  We may be
justified by faith, but we are saved by hope, in theology and in life.
There are twenty men who have faith in Christ for one man who has hope
that His Spirit will ever incarnate itself in the life of the world.
As we get older, most of us, I am afraid, are only too glad to keep our
faith in great principles, without hoping much for them.  The usual
product of experience, and more especially experience gained in
attempting some great reform, is, as Dr. Martineau remarks, "a certain
caution and lowering of hope.  When the spent enthusiast looks back
upon the riches of his early hopes, and the poverty of his
achievements, he is tempted to regret the magnitude of his aims, and
advise a zeal too temperate to live through the frosts of inevitable
disappointments."

Nothing more damps the ardour of young people with good stuff in them
than this caution called wisdom, which so often creeps over us as we
advance in years.  Then it is so frequently the case that the precepts
that most naturally flow from our lips are the negatives that stifle
hope.  "I can no longer afford convictions," said a man to me once, "I
have come to limit myself to opinions; they can be held at less risk,
and changed at less cost."  And the disposition to regard both faith
and hope in great things as subject to the same insecure and miserable
tenure, is apt to grow with the growing years, until we come to
sympathize with nothing which cannot take out a policy of assurance.

When we are young we may be susceptible to the new, only because it is
new to us.  We are ready to welcome in book or speech anything which
charms us with a novelty we readily mistake for originality.  After we
have crossed a line it may be well that most of us should become a bit
obstinate, a little stiff in our beliefs, lest we be blown about by
every wind of doctrine.[2]  At the same time, there is always the
danger of becoming so rigid in our opinions and faith as to permit no
horizon of hope.  There are multitudes, in our churches and outside
them, who, from want of the hope that saves, are dying from the top
downwards.

And among them is an increasing proportion of young men.  I hear them
boast that they have no ideals, no hopes or aspirations that are above
the earth earthy.  For once, at any rate, they have a conviction, and
it is, that man lives by bread alone, that his life is in the abundance
of the things which he possesses.  They are too "knowing" to be caught
prisoners by ideas, too much "men of the world" to concern themselves
about the "Utopias of religion."  And they call it strength.  Strength!
It reminds one of the bitter remark of an historian on the march of the
Roman legions: "They make a solitude, and call it peace."  Strength!
There are those in perdition at this moment who could tell them that
what they call strength is the stupidity which adds to sin the
increment of a huge blunder.

The young man who is strong is he who has the moral genius of his
years.  He does not deny that man lives by bread, but he does deny that
man lives by bread alone.  He has faith in the upward trend of the
world; and he has the hope which can give to faith its adequate
translation.  He does not believe that there are two Almighties in the
world and that the devil is the greater; that sin shall breed sin for
ever.  He does not believe that the many must drudge to the limit of
endurance and starve their higher nature as long as the world lasts,
that the few may taste the sweets of culture and opulence.  He does not
believe that brute force shall for ever trample splendid intelligence
underfoot, or that we must always stand on the margin of the dark river
of wrong, in the unfathomed depths of which lie mysteries of
terror--the despair of man, the sorrow of God.  He has hope, that
mighty dynamic--God's pledge to the young and unspoiled soul of a
coming day when all that is false and unbelieving and wicked shall be
cast into the consuming fire of divine holiness.  He has faith in the
great day of the Lord; and with the splendid optimism, the hope
peculiar to his years, he cries: "I can, and I will, hasten the coming
of my Lord."  This is one great element of a young man's strength--hope
in goodness, which goes so far to sustain the toil that can realize it.
"I have written unto you, young men, because ye are strong."

Another factor in this strength is--Freedom.  I hardly like the word,
but I want to express by it immunity from certain responsibilities.
Young men, up to a given period, are, as never again, free to sacrifice
for what look like the forlorn hopes and apparently lost causes of
humanity.  "My six reasons for taking no risks," said a man in the
American Civil War, "are a wife and five children."  The reasons which
in one man may resolve themselves into prudence, in the case of another
man, differently circumstanced, may be nothing better than cowardice.
Some years ago four men stood on the cage at the mouth of the shaft
that penetrated to the workings of a Yorkshire coal-mine.  There had
been an explosion, and over forty men were imprisoned in what seemed
likely to be their grave.  The brave fellows on the cage knew they were
taking their lives in their hands, but they stood calmly waiting the
signal which should lower them into a possible death.  While some
detail of the machinery was being adjusted, a fine stalwart young man,
some three-and-twenty years of age, forced his way through the crowd,
and, seizing one of the rescue-party, literally flung him out of the
cage to the pit-bank, and before the people could recover from their
astonishment the men were being lowered through the pathway of the
deep.  Then they realized the meaning of the action.  "He did it," said
the man who had been so summarily handled, and his voice shook with
emotion, "because I have a wife and bairns."  The younger man was free
from responsibility; he could better afford the risk.

There is a very real sense in which the same consideration tells in the
warfare against sin and wrong.  Some of us have less to risk in taking
up the challenge which the powers of death and hell throw down to every
true man.  I write unto you, young men, because from your relationship
to circumstances you are more free to accept risks.

We often hear men lament, and it may be sincerely, that they cannot
afford to face the practical logic of their social, political, and
religious beliefs.  They shrink from the consequences of the good fight
of faith.  "Had I only myself to consider," says one, "how gladly would
I sacrifice myself to attack this wrong or that iniquity."  We need
offer no opinion about the moral quality of such a position; enough to
say that it is idle to ignore, or even to underrate, the force of it.

There are circumstances which are too strong for most men after they
have put themselves in a given relation to circumstances.

Let me say a word here about circumstances, which will seem to
contradict some things you will find in this book, if you have interest
enough in it to read it through.  A Glasgow minister some time ago made
a stand against a considerable minority in his church over some matter
that, as he said, involved a principle for which he should fight.  It
cost him many of his more wealthy members and adherents.  "Not many of
us," I said to him after, "have your courage to take so serious a
risk."  "Nor should I have had it," he answered, "had I not means that
make me independent of my salary."  It was a candid admission, and it
reaches a long way.  The strength of this man was in his position quite
as much as in himself; and this is probably true of the great average
of us.  Circumstances may mean possibilities, more often than
possibilities mean, or create, circumstances.  What we can do is not
only determined by what we bring into the world, but by what we find
when we get here.  Give, then, whatever courage is native to you its
full purchase, by whatever favour you have in circumstances.  It is
here the young man has a great advantage; he is at an age when he can
afford risks; let him use it before his years are mortgaged by other
demands.

In public life he can base his efforts on the fact that there are
tremendous evils that need resistance, that there are sacred causes
which need assistance.  He can afford, as never again, to close with
the truth that there is a corporate life, a public virtue, a humanity
of the body politic, with laws, responsibilities, and duties.  In
social life he can refuse to bow to an arbitrary and often empty
fashion, or to immolate himself on the altar of mammon.  He can be a
living protest against the tyranny and lust of money, which are eating
away the heart and destroying the soul of Christendom.  He can stand
for the sane and rational ideas and habits of life, without which
society but personifies the unscrupulous and vulgar parvenu.  And in
religion he can accept the teaching and obey the commands of Christ
without any overwhelming temptation to escape them behind some
exegetical device or the plea of expediency.  He can devote the rose
bloom of his years to great principles, before he has had time to catch
the infection of a commonplace belief in God.  He can be a soldier of
the Cross, and have himself placed in the forefront of the battle.  He
can go down into the pit to rescue the perishing, and take daring,
awful risks for the Captain of his salvation and the race of which he
forms a part.  I have written unto you, young men, because you can
afford to be strong.

A third, and for my present purpose a closing consideration in a young
man's strength is--Audacity.  I might call it courage, but it is that
plus something else.  It is courage carried to a point of daring that
amounts to what I have called it, audacity, or, as the world would call
it, foolhardiness.  It is the merciful blindness which will not see
difficulties; it is the glorious recklessness which will not be stopped
by them.  It is neither blindness nor recklessness; it is the baptism
with which a young man must be baptized whose life is penalized for the
Cross.

When a certain woman came into the presence of Jesus, and anointed Him
with an ointment very precious, He answered the selfish criticism of
some of the disciples with the unqualified remark that "long as His
Gospel should be preached, this that she had done would be told for a
memorial of her."  To these disciples it is probable that the answer
sounded like a benediction on waste.  Jesus saw in the deed an abandon
on the side of good, which on the side of evil makes evil so popular
and, as it seems at times, almost universal.  No one but a woman,
unless it were a young man of true fibre, would have broken the vessel.
Your middle-aged or old man would have cautiously taken out the
stopper, that the costly unguent might have been expended economically,
even on the Saviour.  But this woman, in her uncalculating devotion,
broke the vessel, that all its contents might issue forth in one
consecrated gift of love.  And it was what this broken vase symbolized
that explains, or does something to explain, the unmeasured recognition
of the action.

This is the moral temper of the young man whom St. John describes as
strong.  He does not fumble with the stopper in the vase-held forces of
good.  "If you believe," he cries, "what Christ lived believing and
died believing, then break the vase, and do not keep as a private
possession powers that are meant for the world.  Do not keep as a
personal luxury what is meant to be the family treasure."  Such a young
man is the living exegesis of Christ's revolutionary word: "The kingdom
of heaven suffereth violence, and the violent take it by force."

When he is warned not to expect too much from human nature, not to put
too much trust in men, not to waste his strength in trying to remove
mountains, not to jeopardize his chances on the threshold of manhood in
trying to serve a world which, so far from thanking him, will very
effectually resent his most disinterested efforts on its behalf; when
he is reminded of some once aspirant who, young and confident as he,
set out to reform the world, and now cynically affirms that the only
wisdom is to let the world go to the devil in its own way--the young
man who is strong says: "I acknowledge your facts, such as they are,
but they are not facts for me.  I, too, may be beaten in the right, but
I would rather be that a thousand times over than succeed in the wrong.
It is the temptation of the wicked one to conclude that, because
history is said to have repeated itself hitherto, it must needs repeat
itself for ever.  I do not live on history; I live to make history.  I
believe that I was sent into the world new from the fashioning hand of
the Creator, and that I have a new man's work to do.  If my life of
faith on the Son of God seem recklessness to you, wanting in proportion
and eccentric, hold your opinions for all they are worth; but you shall
not influence me by your abandoned hopes, you shall not even chill me
with the east wind of your selfish ethics."

These are the young men we need to-day.  Strong in hope, in position,
and in daring; strong in the strength which they find in their years,
and the strength they put into them.

And the Church has a right, society has a right, the nation has a right
to look to young men for a greater and a better future.  We who are
older have a claim to look to you to confirm our faith in the survival
of Christianity as the living force of the future.  We need fresh
leaders and men who incarnate new forces.  We need, in fact, a certain
style of man--we never needed him more.  We want young men who are
inspired by the truth that ideas are realities, and that scepticism
about high principles is the most destructive form of ignorance.

We want young men of vision in business.  Not cranks, not men who are
responsible for their own failure in whatsoever their hand findeth to
do; but men who see that the institution of business is God's present
plan for distributing wealth, comfort, and intelligence.  We want men
in law who shall realize that the function of the legal profession is
to build up justice and ensphere it in the will of the people.  We want
men in politics who have a clear conception of what the kingdom of God
is, who recognize that the work of legislation and legislators is to
think and speak and act for the interests of that kingdom--in the
spirit and on the basis of Divine Fatherhood and human brotherhood.
And in the pulpit we want men who have in them the vision of an Isaiah,
a Paul, a John, and a Luther; men who shall make themselves felt as
perennial gifts to their day--to tell us what we can do and what we
ought to do, to lift up a voice for the eternally true, amid the
clamour of self-interest and cries of craven fear.

"The world needs nothing more; the great English-speaking race has no
need comparable with this need of men who can carry the spirit of
vision, which is really the power of achievement, into every phase of
our individual and collective life." [3]

Many of you represent great possibilities.  You are, or you ought to
be, at the flow-tide of an untainted enthusiasm.  Your life should be a
moral heat, which radiates in ever-enlarging circles of hope and
service.  But there are fires which, once they are allowed to slow
down, can never be rekindled.  There are large and generous beliefs at
twenty-five years of age which, unless we cultivate and keep ourselves
in the love of them, thin out like wasting magic, and no necromancy can
ever conjure them back again.  You young men have potencies of hope and
enthusiasm which, if denied expression, strike inwardly and corrupt the
source out of which they came.

And now, I repeat, is the time when you can give a true man's best
hostages to the future.  Now is the time to make the most of your
strategic places in life.  Almost before you know it, your power to
determine many things will have merged into obligations that not one
man in fifty is free to disregard.  While it is called your day--before
you are compassed behind and before with a commonplace that locks up so
many lives like a numbing fate--signalize your record by some bit of
heroism.  If you would have posterity call you wise, seize your chance,
while you have it, to be God's fool.  Find the faith that can help you
to play a man's part in the world; find in your faith the power which
can grasp you by your weakness and sin, and lift you into strength and
achievement.  The Church needs you.  For of all the institutions in
Christendom the Church is stifled with safety, propriety, and
conventional wisdom.  It is the world which seems to monopolize the
sparkle, the daring, and the picturesque.  Respect us, your seniors in
years, if we have done anything worthy in the past; but do not let it
influence you unduly if now we seem to you perhaps timid and
conservative.  Time will bring most of you to the same place.  But
if--which God forbid--you do little after, do at least something now to
redeem your career from impotence or from miserable aims that all end
in selfishness.  Find, I say again, on the threshold of your years, the
power that can grasp you by your real requirement.  Your first need is
not wisdom, but grace; it is not education, but regeneration; it is not
an ideal even, but a Saviour.  Wisdom, education, and moral enthusiasms
are but the machinery of our uplifting, the driving-power is Life.  You
know the Source of this power; you know the way to Him of Whom it is
written: "In Him was life; and the life was the light of men."  Now is
your accepted time--

  "Are you in earnest?  Seize this very minute:
  What you can do, or dream you can, begin it;
  Boldness has genius, power, and magic in it.
  Only engage, and then the mind grows heated;
  Begin, and then the work will be completed."



[1] Robert Collyer.

[2] Dr. Maclaren.

[3] Dr. Lyman Abbot.




THE WORSHIP OF LUCK


"The lot is cast into the lap; but the whole disposing thereof is of
the Lord."--Proverbs xvi. 33.

