VIII

'HE WAS DESPISED AND REJECTED'

Some two or three years ago the picture, "He was despised and
rejected," by Sigismund Goeetze, was on view in Glasgow.  In this
address I shall try to tell you something about the impression it made
on me; and the reason will be given at the end why I include it in this
series.  Some of you may have seen the picture; others may have read or
heard about it.

The conception of it appears to have formed itself in the mind of the
artist out of what ordinarily is a very commonplace circumstance.  He
had attended a Sunday service at St. Paul's Cathedral, and heard a
sermon that made a deep impression upon him; which found his higher
being with something like the touch of an immortal influence.  He
thought within himself: "What a real difference a word like this must
make in the thoughts and life of those who have been privileged to
listen to it.  Never again, surely, can they be as though they had not
heard it."  It was a message, so he felt, to shake men, to arouse them,
and make them turn on one another and cry: "Men and brethren, what must
we do?"

Under the impact of his own emotions and sensitive to his surroundings,
he was eager at the close of the service to share with others what he
virtually demanded they should impart to him.  But he was grievously
disappointed.  Not a word did he hear, not a look did he see on the
face of a departing worshipper which so much as betrayed the transient
emotion stirred by dream or romance.  If they had listened to the
discourse, they had evidently forgotten what they had been at no pains
to remember.  No new experience befell this man of artistic and
impulsive temperament.  I heard a sermon a short time ago preached in a
seaside church, which deeply moved me; a sermon I was thankful to have
heard, and the like of which I would walk a long way to hear again.  As
I stood outside the building waiting for a friend, the congregation
came out, and I heard the usual interchange of verbal nothings.  The
only reference I did hear to the service was from a well-dressed young
man to a girl by his side, and this is what he said: "A long-winded
fellow, that; let us go on the parade."  The remark did not unduly
surprise me.  "I wonder," said a man to me lately, "why some people go
to a place of worship at all; they appear to be as indifferent to what
is said, sung, or prayed, as the dog that barks is indifferent about
the dog-star."  In every congregation of fair size there is a strange
mixture.  But it always includes those whose attention and evident
interest do something to compensate for others who show neither.  There
are elect souls who hear the Word and receive it.  You may not trace
the fact by what they say, but you know it by the holiness of
helpfulness, which radiates from them like light, and is made by them
as an atmosphere.  God has not ordained the foolishness of
preaching--which does not mean foolish preaching--to thin out in the
miserable anti-climax of a remark like that of the young man I have
just quoted.  Fortunately, however, our artist had not sufficient
experience of the conventional congregation at a place of worship to
have become philosophic about it--which usually amounts to
indifference.  Judging others by what he himself felt, he thought they
must be equally moved.  But instead of having received the preached
Word, there was nothing, so far as he could discern, to indicate that
they had even heard it, while there was much to lead to the conclusion
that they had not.  Hence he resolved to repeat the sermon through the
translation of his art.  They should, if he could accomplish it,
receive through the eyes what they would not hear with the ears.

Something like this, we are told, was the genesis of this picture, with
its central Figure of the Crucified One close by an ancient altar, yet
immediately outside a modern building called a Christian church.  There
He stands unregarded and silent, but so far as His anguish speaks the
eternal Passion of God, while there stream past Him the clearly-defined
types of a twentieth-century multitude--each, with one doubtful
exception, as indifferent about who, and whence, and why He is, as if
He were one of the stone pillars that support the vestibule of the
temple dedicated to His worship.  Poverty sits at His very feet and it
is not even curious; fashion and vice, toil and sport, science and
ruin, culture and ignorance, want and opulence pass by, and do not so
much as despise and reject Him--for that at least would argue some form
of interest.  It is the indifference which, as Confucius says, is the
"night of the mind--night without a star."  I need not linger over the
types.  You may see them any day in a characteristic London throng; you
may see them in a less emphasized form in a city like Glasgow.  If I
may make one reference to them, let it be where the artist attempts to
represent the attitude of the Churches to the Man of Sorrows.  We have,
for example, a high ecclesiastic in one of the sacerdotal communions,
and by his side there is some order of Nonconformist minister.  The
latter is evidently in earnest, not to entreat the attention of the
crowd to Him whom they pass by, but to convict his companion of error
out of their commonly-received Scriptures.  And the great ecclesiastic,
sleek, debonair, and well preserved, has a bored look on his capacious
face which says: "My dear good man, why excite yourself?  I readily
make you a present of your contention.  You take your truth and I will
keep my position.  As we can settle nothing but ourselves, why not
settle ourselves as comfortably as we can?"

According to the artist, each in his own way is in the crowd and of it.
It is anything and everything except the Crucified One, as in St.
Paul's it was anything and everything except the message spoken to
those who, having ears, heard not.  How do we explain it, then, from
his point of view, that this stream of people, representative of a
widespread society, is utterly indifferent to that Figure so pathetic
in its loneliness, so tragic in its appeal, and almost aggressive in
its sorrow?  It is possible that not a type on the canvas is to be
interpreted as quite ignorant of the letter of the claims made for Him
who is yet the Object of the world's indifference.  There is a sense in
which it is true that Christ was never better known than He is in your
day and mine.  We have the well-authenticated Scriptures which testify
of Him.  We are more sure that we possess many of His sayings than we
are sure that the writings known as Shakespeare's plays were written by
a man called William Shakespeare.  In these Scriptures He is reported
to have said:

"Before Abraham was, I am."  And in another word, that falls like a
beam of light on everything He did and said, He tells us that "the Son
of Man is come to seek and to save the lost."  We have the key-word of
the Father's message to the race in the wondrous declaration that "God
so loved the world, that He gave His only-begotten Son, that whosoever
believeth on Him should not perish, but have everlasting life."

We have a mighty Christian literature which, if it be evolved out of a
myth, resolves itself into a miracle.  We have the fact that never
before was Christ so admired, so much quoted, and so generally
applauded as He is at the opening of the twentieth century.  We have
accredited thinkers who reject, as they think, all dogmatic theologies
about Christ, and yet tell us that the spirit which Christ incarnated
in His words and actions reveals a God humanity cannot improve upon.
We have, moreover, an army of men who are set apart by training, and
what they believe to be their "calling," to preach Christ by precept,
and to teach Him by a life derived, as they declare, from Him whom they
preach and teach.  And amid many failures, and motives of the earth
earthy, these men do not all fail, nor do they all live by bread alone.
Was there no place in that canvas-crowd for one of those devoted men
who, ill-paid, half-starved, and overwrought, toil night and day in
that most awful work on this earth, the attempt to rescue and raise the
lapsed masses of our large populations?  Was there no room for the man
who penalizes body and soul to straining-point for words and thoughts
that shall inspire and hearten men to steer their lives by the higher
stars, those eternal principles of truth and right?  Was there no room
for a woman of the Salvation Army who is out of some hideous slum for a
moment's breathing, before returning to it with a great self-renouncing
life of love and healing?

But take the picture as the artist's impression of the ail-but
universal indifference about Him who is yet declared to be the soul and
centre of our Scriptures, our creeds, and our religious life, and how
do we explain it?  Or if we put the artist's impression aside, and on
our own account face the truth which, for the purposes of constructive
art, he may have exaggerated, is there any less need that we should
ask: Why is Christ despised and rejected of men?  Why is it that they
do not come unto Him that they may have life?  The answers are legion.
To my thinking, they resolve themselves into practically one.  Before
we can know Christ, before we can understand Christ, before we can come
to Christ, we must come to ourselves.  And not a face on that crowded
canvas suggests a hope that he, or she, had taken an honest step in
this all-determining direction.  Before I can look to Christ as my
Saviour I must know that I need a Saviour.  Before I can realize my
need of salvation from sin I must realize that I am a sinner.  So much,
if not all, turns there.  It is not every man who feels that he is a
sinner because he talks about being one.  But let him feel it, and out
of the knowledge will come his saving health, or the death that dies.

It is declared to be the work of the Holy Spirit to convince men of
sin, and the unbelief growing out of sin.  Analyse the causes of
indifference about the things that belong to our peace, and you find
that for the most part they resolve themselves into sin, and the
unbelief that follows sin, as consequence comes out of cause.  I know
with what impatience the world turns from what is called the
evangelical teaching about the nature and effects of sin.  And we need
not go outside the Church to find the same impatience, not to say
contempt.  We have in our pulpits men who represent sin to us as good
in the making.  It is in some sense a necessary means to an end.  They
speak of arrested development, of defect of will, of inheritances and
surroundings, of a vacancy as yet unfilled by virtue.  It is hard to
think that people held by a half-sceptical pantheism, and the
relativity of evil, have ever been face to face with the awful deeps
and disobediences of their own heart, or have felt the hot breath of
the devil on their own cheek.  If we have any worth-discerning faculty,
we know when a man is handling certain subjects whether he knows what
he is talking about; whether or not, to use an expressive
colloquialism, "he has been there."  No man who with the eyes of the
soul has looked down that awful cleft that separates between the carnal
mind and the holy will of God, can use words here under the wasting
impression that he knows things.  If Christ only died to save us from
something which, after all, is only good in the making, then the Cross
of Calvary is the supreme irony of time.  We shall never find a Saviour
by the road that, at the most, leads but to a martyr.

Here is a man--and he is not an imaginary case--who is married, and has
young people growing up in the home.  He is wealthy, with a reputable
position in society.  But there is a sinister something in the
background of his life, and he sets himself to do what he knows full
well is an irreparable wrong to an inexperienced and defenceless
creature.  He makes no fight against the wicked prompting, and does the
hurt which if another man were to do to one of his own family he would
willingly shoot him dead.  And say when the hurt is done, a
searchlight--he knows not whence it comes--is flashed across his soul
and he sees himself as he is, a base scoundrel before God and man, will
it help him to think of his sin as good in the making?  For whatever he
may become, he has done his part to damn another.  And let his
conscience become, as it can become, and woe to him if it do not
become, as real as the wicked thing he has done, and his first and
devastating question will be, not can God forgive him, but can he ever
forgive himself?  Let his one hope come to be in some means of
expiation, which can give him a degree of rest from the sin by paying
what he can of its wages, and he will begin to realize what is meant,
not by the remission of the consequences of sin, but by the remission
of sin.  He will know the need, where the need is agony, which God in
Christ has met for us, and which, had He not met, would have left the
need something greater than God Himself.  It is when a man must have
peace with himself or die to all that is immortal in him--it is then I
will trust him never again to pass by with unconcern the anguish of Him
who bore our sin in His own body on the tree.

Sometimes we look at the Lamb of God without feeling that we are
sinners, and then we have a thousand difficult questions to ask.  At
other times the burden of sin is so heavy upon us, we see the
sinfulness of sin so vividly, that we get away from the mere accident
of place and time as far as it relates to sin, we see sin as God saw
it, and must ever see it--then it is we look to the Crucified One.
"When I feel myself in my heart of hearts a sinner," I once heard Dr.
Parker say, "a trespasser against God's law and God's love; when I feel
that a thought may overwhelm me in destruction, that a secret,
unexpressed desire may shut me out of heaven and make me glad to go to
hell to be away from the face of Him that sitteth upon the throne--then
when I am told that Jesus Christ was wounded for my transgressions,
that upon Him was laid the chastisement of my peace, I press my way
through all the difficulties and say: If I perish I will pray and
perish at the Cross; for if this be not sufficient, it hath not entered
into the heart of man to solve the problem of human depravity, and the
human consciousness of sin."

I am not seeking to explain or defend what I am saying.  I may try to
make it a little more clear before I close.  For the moment I am
putting before you what I believe to be the truth of very truth.  To
some I may be speaking in an unknown tongue, but not to all.  If there
is one here who, with some years behind him, has ever been in serious
conference with himself, he knows that there is something radically
wrong with himself, which calls for something he is powerless to
supply.  He knows that the springs of his being have been poisoned, and
he has no detergent to make them sweet.  It is the fashion in our day
to speak of the old description of "hell-deserving sinner" as marred by
exaggeration, if not to say morbid.  I do not fall into that fashion,
for it expresses just what I am--a hell-deserving sinner.  When the
great Puritan, John Newton, saw a man taken out to be hanged, he said:
"But for the grace of God there goes John Newton."  It is when the true
idea of sin is realized under the convincing power of the Holy Spirit,
that the "necessity of the sacrificial work of Christ will be felt,
understood, and become the one foundation of human hope."

Do you say that you have felt nothing of this convicting and convincing
power?  Then I ask: Have you ever passed through an hour of serious
inquest with your own soul?  Have you ever tried to know yourself even
as you are known?  The debate cannot be all on one side.  A man only
knows that he is ignorant through the need of a knowledge he has not
got.  Before I can persuade you that Christ is your Saviour, you must
realize that it is a Saviour you need.  Before you can start out for
Christ you must come to yourself.  And while men make a mock of sin,
while they regard it as a matter of indifference, or profess to explain
it away under the terms of science and philosophy, we need not wonder
that they have so little faith in higher things.  We need go no further
for an explanation of the thoughtless unbelief which is eating its way
like a festering sore to the heart of our modern world.  If the lusts
of the flesh and the pride of life sum up the totality of our being
here, why should that crowd on the artist's canvas be represented as
moved by an anguish that touches no chord in its soul; which is,
indeed, foreign to its every thought, sympathy, and pursuit?  So long
as men are indifferent about the very question, Why that anguish? vain
is the appeal, "To you is it nothing your Saviour should die?"  So long
as men are utterly unconcerned about the fact, and nature, and effects
of moral evil, then selfishness will remain for men the only recognized
law of self-preservation.

And here is where I come into line with the practical side of the
Christian evangel.  The Cross of Christ is no arbitrary arrangement.
It is not the expedient of a system cunningly devised by priest,
theologian, or Church.  It is the grimmest, sanest, divinest thing ever
set up in this human world.  The Cross is symbol of the only Power that
can enter the lists against selfishness, and enter to throw it.  And
let me plead with you to think about this: every wrong in the world has
selfishness, if not for its root, yet at its root.  Cast out the
selfishness which is sin, and you cast out the first and the last thing
that stands between us and the new heaven and the new earth.  Think of
this, and you will better understand the anguish of Him who carries the
sorrow, and is wounded in the wounds made by man's inhumanity to man.
Refuse to think of it, and cease to wonder why countless thousands
mourn; why the strong oppress the weak; why might is worshipped as
right; why men seem to fear nothing but the hell of not making money.
Think of it, and cease to wonder why men's bodies and souls are
sacrificed in what is little better than a murderous struggle to exist;
why one man has so much more than he earns, and others earn so much
more than they have.  Think of it and cease to wonder why our age is
distinguished by a bad pre-eminence of restlessness, by feverishness, a
panting for excitement, and a poisonous atmosphere of pessimism.

The Cross of Christ means the life that lives in unselfish service as
against the selfishness that is death and defeat.  It means not only
individuals and Churches, but the race, redeemed and lifted from the
dark and narrow life of self, into the life and light of the kingdom of
God.  Can we wonder, then, that the rejection of the Cross blasts our
beliefs in everything divine and hopeful, and is accompanied everywhere
by a "melancholy introspection and lack-lustre view of human life?"
Recall then in this connection what I have said about sin, and the
relation of Christ's death to the forgiveness of sin.  What I am saying
now does not include all that is implied in that relation; but see in
it what I have just put before you, and you will realize that I am not
talking in mere morbid terms, nor in those of theology except so far as
it is the theology of life.  Long as men are willingly in their
sin--which means selfishness in all its deadly forms--can we wonder at
the unbelief portrayed on that canvas?  Can we marvel why the Christ is
still despised and rejected?

It may be asked, and justly, what are the professed followers of Christ
doing to convince men of their need of Him as their Saviour; to
convince them by lives that are the evidence of triumph over sin?  What
are Christian people, what are the Churches doing to fight down the
wrongs, the hurtful conditions, the curse-centres that degrade men,
keep them ignorant, and as by a satanic ingenuity hide the real Christ
from those who most need to find Him, and are the least able to oppose
the things that make Him so misunderstood and even unknown?  How far
are we responsible, not only for the deliberately cultivated wickedness
of men who choose evil as their good, but for the indifference that
passes by only because our lives have never compelled its attention?
The Church is a Church but to the extent that it is the organic
expression of Christ's life, the visible Body of His soul.  What, I ask
in all faithfulness, are we doing to make real and living to men the
presence of a Lord who is ever suffering in their sin and for it?  The
artist was well inspired to give his picture a twentieth-century
setting.  What an amount of grim Calvary there is in Glasgow every day
under the shadow of our Churches; ah! and behind the sanction of their
power.  That is the word that should smite us; it is the word that must
be said--behind the sanction of their power.

The world would begin to see Christ, if we ourselves would see Him
crucified, not merely in the remote Palestine of the first century,
but, I say once more, in this Glasgow of to-day.  In the foul slum, in
the haunt of shame, in the abode of crime and wretchedness, in the
places where children are robbed of their birthright before they know
what things mean; in the sweater's den, in the heartless side of
business competition, in the drink hells, in frivolous pursuits and
brainless amusements, in the insolence of wealth, and the sullenness of
poverty--in every place or thing where despite is done to the Divine
Humanity.  Let us feel that whatever wrong is done to a single human
being, throughout the world-wide family of man, is literally done to
Jesus Christ, and we shall better understand that central Figure in the
artist's picture.  Let us see Christ crucified in whatever evil is
done, in whatever good is left undone that we could do, and sin will
become to us not a term only, not a thing to be excused and explained
away, but a real and tremendous horror.  We shall feel it to be what it
is, a stab struck at the living heart of Jesus Christ.  As it has been
truly said: "Fellowship with Christ's sufferings will become less of a
mystical phrase, and more of a vital fact."

"To you is it nothing, all ye that pass by?"  As I sat and looked at
that picture, this was the question that oppressed my thoughts.  And
then the further question forced itself--Why, in so many cases, and to
all human seeming, is it just that--nothing?  It is not enough to talk
of sin, and unbelief, and indifference, outside our life: they are real
enough, but do they suggest no responsibility on our part?  Let it be a
call to prayer, an incentive to unceasing watchfulness lest one should
be passing by because there is nothing in us which constrains him, or
persuades her, to look and be saved, to look and live.

I said at the opening of this address that I would tell you later why I
include it in this series.  I am not sure that I can keep my word.
What has been said will glance from your mind unless you have, like
Luther, and for the same reason, wrestled with the question: "How shall
a man be just with God?"  But assuming that as yet this is outside your
experience, still you know the difference between what may but
arbitrarily be called sin, and sin that is what it is called.  Believe
me when I say that the first, and worst, and nearest of all problems
for each man of us, and for societies, is the fact of sin; and that
with it no one deals, or can deal, save Him upon whom the chastisement
of our peace was laid, and with whose stripes we are healed.  What is
the exact relation between the death of Christ and the forgiveness of
sin no one can tell us; but that there is a relation charged with
redeeming power is not a theory about Christianity--it is Christianity.

I read some time ago that a "Van Missioner," who was preaching
Unitarianism in the villages of Hampshire, found himself at one of them
interrupted by a number of farm labourers, who began to sing--

  "What can wash away my sin?
    Nothing but the blood of Jesus!
  What can make me whole again?
    Nothing but the blood of Jesus.
      It washes white as snow,
      No other fount I know."


To the modern enlightenment which patronizes Jesus as a teacher and
rejects Christ as a Saviour, the theology, or sentiment, in these lines
is not so much crude as grotesque.  At the best it is but curiously
reminiscent of the ignorance of a by-gone day.  Doubtless this
well-meaning man had much to say worth hearing; but he was talking in
the name of religion, and to these villagers there was in it the lack
of the one thing, which is the lack of all.  Theology apart, these
simple folk found in these crude lines the heart of saving truth.  It
is my conviction that they were right.  In this conviction I live, and
in it, by God's grace, I trust I may die and live again.

"I do not despise Jesus: with all that is best in me do I reverence Him
as one of the world's supreme teachers; but I cannot regard Him as more
than that," said a friend to me after reading over the manuscript of
this address.  "And yet," he added quietly, "if there is anything in
Christianity which distinguishes it from any other great religion, it
must be near to the place you have been trying to get at."




'WHAT MUST I DO TO BE SAVED?'


"What must I do to be saved?"--Acts xvi. 30.

"If any man will do his will, he shall know."--St. John vii. 17.

