IX

'WHAT MUST I DO TO BE SAVED?'

"When I was well into my teens," said a very intelligent woman to me
some time ago, "and for long after I had left them, I listened to
preachers and preaching; and such powers as I had I put into my
listening, for I wanted to get at something I could hold for sure and
real in the promises of religion.  I was told Sunday by Sunday to
believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, to trust in Him, and commit to His
keeping my soul's welfare.  And as far as I knew what belief meant I
believed; and tried to persuade myself that I was trusting Christ.  But
I was not conscious that it made any real difference in my life; that
it gave me anything I had not before.  Hence I gradually came to the
conclusion that either the preachers could not tell me what it was on
which I had specifically to lay hold, or it was useless for me to
prosecute my attempt to grasp it."

This woman said what many think, who are as yet within listening
distance of our pulpits.  They want to understand what they must do and
believe, to lay hold of that which can make a difference in their life;
which can find in it, or bring into it, something that answers in very
truth to what the Bible calls "the power of God unto salvation."

It is, surely, a reasonable thing to ask.  As religious teachers we can
have no right to plead with people to believe what we are not prepared
to help them to understand.  Some of you may have reason, as you think,
to endorse this woman's testimony as a fair statement of your own
experience.  Can I help you?  Most gladly will I do so if I can.

One thing should be said, as I come closer to the attempt.  If you are
really anxious to find help, guard against mistaken impressions of what
that help should be, or can be.  In religion, as in all the deeper
places of human life, one great teacher is experience; and you can
neither anticipate nor rush experience.  A mother says in answer to
certain questions of her child: "Wait until you are older and you will
find out."  That, to the child, is no answer at all; but, while the
child is a child, it is the only answer there is.

Divine truth is infallible; but, as it has often been pointed out,
there is no human infallible apprehension of divine truth.  We have to
admit that there may be, and indeed must be, many phases and aspects of
saving truth which we cannot comprehend.  There are others, again, of
which we get only distant and fugitive glimpses as we study the Word of
God.  But we shall also admit, that these higher reaches of truth are
not those alone on which our faith is called to repose.  It may seem to
many of you, that in my treatment of the subject now before us, I
overlook much that is essential to the Christian doctrine of salvation.
I may even seem to eliminate the supernatural element from it.  A
little thought, however, should correct the latter impression.  In
passing I have only to say, that I am not trying to exhaust this theme,
but simply to give it a setting which, I venture to think, is worth
consideration.

"What must I do to be saved?"--a question which may be put in two very
different states of moral being.  It may be asked in a temper merely
curious and academic; or it may, as in the case of the text, voice a
profound sense of need.  If we would be saved, we must realize that we
need to be saved.  It was when the prodigal "came to himself" that he
said: "I will arise and go to my father."

We are to be saved from what? and into what are we to be saved?  In
other words, not only must old things pass away, but all things must
become new.  From what, I repeat, are we to be saved?  There is but one
answer to the question: We are to be saved from sin by being delivered
from the power of evil; and sin is the wilful assertion of our
self-will against the holy will of God.  The sense of sin may vary in
different people; it may vary with the moods of the same personal
experience.  There are people who appear to be quite callous about the
evil within them and the evil they do.  But just as our moral nature is
educated, just as we grow in sympathy with the divine will, do we
become increasingly sensitive to the distance there is between what we
are, and do, and the holiness of Him who is a consuming fire.  We feel
that the Apostle was neither morbid, nor did he exaggerate the actual
situation when he cried: "O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver
me from the body of this death?"

It has been said that the "only way to be saved from sin is to cease to
sin."  And it is true that a man cannot, at the same time, sin in any
given direction, and cease from that sin.  But it is also true that he
may cease from sin in the sense of not doing certain things, and yet be
the greater sinner in the sight of God, because of the motive which
acts as his deterrent or restraining force.  I have seen men repent of
their sin, as the process was called, when I have had no faith in it
whatever.  They were not repenting of their sin, but lamenting the cost
of its indulgence.

We must do more than cease to do evil things only because evil has its
price; we must learn to do well by learning to love all that is meant
by well.  There is no escape from evil except through love of good.
The Christian salvation, which means the saving of the whole self-hood
of man, is a positive thing from its inception into its endless
development.  Where it is repression it is that there may be
expression.  This, I imagine, is what Robert L. Stevenson must have
meant when he said "We are not damned for doing wrong, but for not
doing right."  Christ, he contends, "would never hear of negative
morality; 'thou shalt' was ever His word, with which He superseded,
'thou shalt not.'"  According to Stevenson--I do not say he is right,
but I do quote his words as worth attention--we are not damned so much
for yielding to evil, as for not getting into our life its oppositive
virtue; some content vital enough to cast out the evil, and to keep it
out.  To go on fighting some besetting sin is only to repeat, for the
most part, an experience many of us know but too well.  It almost
invariably ends one way.  In weariness and despair we ask: "Why should
we war with evil?  It is more than our test, it is our fate; let us
take what sweet we can before it becomes all bitter."  Which is but
another way of saying: "Evil, be thou my good."

Mark well, then, our next step.  It is not enough to tell us that we
must conquer the wrong by doing the right.  The question is this: Is
there any power, anything in what is called saving grace, which is
adequate to the struggle on our part, and which appropriated can make
us, to use the Apostle's description, "more than conquerors"?

There is; and I will try, first, to tell you what it is, and, secondly,
how we may realize it.  It is--call it by what name we may for the
moment--that which casts out the mean, the ignoble, and the selfish, by
filling out life with the great, the noble, and the unselfish.  It is,
in a word, the salvation which means the "highest character and
blessedness, which we, individually and collectively, are capable of
reaching and realizing."  Let us, then, call it what it is--the power
of God unto salvation.  And how are we to get it into our possession?
The answer is, it needs no getting in.  Potentially it is there.  "The
kingdom of God is within you," says Jesus, and it is ours to bring it
out in all its actual reality.  It is the greater which includes the
less, of the gracious possessions God has put in our being, and of
which we know so little because we do not work these inward mines:
"Work out your own salvation, for it is God that worketh in you."

Some one makes a great inventor say: "Anybody might have done it, but
the secret came to me."  Do you believe the first part of this
statement?  Would you hold me true in saying that anybody might have
anticipated the discovery of wireless telegraphy?  There are times when
the world appears to halt for want of some new thing, or for want of
some one to put new meaning into the old.  And when the fulness of time
has come, the secret, which has been sleeping through centuries of men,
awakes in a man.  He is the chosen of Providence to deliver unto us
that which he also has received.

What is true of a few in the endowment of what we call genius, may be
true of us all in the power of God unto salvation.  When we were "made
in secret, and curiously wrought in the lowest parts of the earth," the
Maker of us all put a part of Himself into the mysterious substance.
"Let each man," says Browning, "think himself a thought, an act, a
breath of God."  There is evil in our nature; but evil can mar us only
so far as we allow it to become sin.  It is in victory over evil that
we find character and make.  There is evil in our nature, but there is
also a germ of God which He can touch into immortality and glorify with
the very splendour of His own image and being.  When that germ is
quickened into life, we are, in the language of theology, converted; as
it develops and becomes the more life and the fuller, we are, in the
same language, sanctified and made meet for the Master's use.

Is there anything mysterious in this; anything we may not understand?
Christ did not think so, if we may judge from His conversation with
Nicodemus.  "Marvel not that I said unto thee, Ye must be born again."
Our Lord, if I understand Him aright, tells this master of Israel that
there is nothing more wonderful about this new birth than there is
about a new affection or a new love.  And what cannot love do?  No one
enters our life except through love.  They may influence it profoundly,
but that of itself gives no admittance to the heart.  What, I ask
again, cannot love do?  Have we never known lives changed, and indeed
transformed by a new affection?  I have seen love work miracles; and so
far from not believing in such miracles within their sphere, I believe
in nothing else.  But does that which wakes love put it there?  Is some
new thing added to life?  Rather let us say that it is life coming to
its own; just finding what was already there.  This may be what the
Psalmist means when he speaks of deep calling to deep.  The deep in man
answers to the deep of attraction which appeals to it.  If man was
conceived in the image of God, then God is immanent in man.  This is
not to say that this immanence is equal to, or implies the whole
content of what is known as Christian salvation.  It is true that the
"eye and the brain must be there before the light can be perceived or
any object interpreted."  But it has been pointed out with equal truth
that the "eye would be useless did not the light come to it, and that
the brain would have nothing to work on, were not objects from without
brought for our perception." [1]  Which means that immanence alone
would be powerless apart from some transcendent influence.  Unless this
be so, what are we to say of the multitudes which sit in darkness and
the shadow of death?  Our salvation is in the answer of the life
immanent to the life transcendent, and the connecting and combining
power is the Holy Spirit.

But what, in the next place, is our part in this matter?  How is this
power to come?  How, to use a better term, are we to realize it?  Have
we to wait for something, or have we to do something to make it a real
experience?

A youth, let us say, or a girl, is beginning to learn music, to play
the violin or the piano.  At first it is drudgery, and its immediate
results are a trial unto all that are in the house.  The parent or
teacher says: "Persevere, obey instructions, and as you pass through
routine into the soul, the task will soon be lost in the pleasure."
The beginner may not believe it; but granted the facility is there, and
determination to bend to the task of learning, and the reward comes.
That which is within is brought out, and by the only way it can be
brought out: "Stir up the gift that is in thee."

This hints to us the answer to the question, Have we to do something
that salvation may become a known and felt reality?  We have to do
something.  We have _to do_, as we are told by Him who only can tell us
what it is we have to do: "Will to do the will," says the Christ, "and
ye shall know."  And if we are really seeking a basis of assurance in
His saving power, we ought surely to take Him at His word, when He
tells us how to find it.  It is not first through assured belief that
we become sure of Christ, it is by doing Christ's will that we become
sure of our belief.  Have we to explain to a child the mechanism of its
limbs before it can attempt to walk?  The impulse comes, and the child
walks, that is all.  But the child has to walk to know that it can walk.

But what, you ask me, are we to say about sudden conversions, of which
we once heard so much, and which we are still taught to seek and
expect?  What, I ask you, about those sudden flashes of insight which
at times seem to reveal in a moment a way out of difficulties which for
years we have sought in vain?  A man told me lately about a period in
his life when through drink and betting he was reduced from a
prosperous man to a wreck in body and means.  "I was down," he said,
"low as a human creature could get in this world."  He was converted to
God, and from the very hour his change came, he declared that his
craving for drink, and mania for gambling, dropped out of his being, as
a piece of dead matter falls away from a living organism.  And there
are such cases, thank God, but we must not make our teaching about them
misleading by making it despotic.  As in the instances of sudden
insight, we do not because we dare not say they are general, deny that
they occur.  The soul-development on its immortal side is, for the most
part, gradual and slow.  The life-faculty is there, but it often means
hard work, patient waiting, and great faith, to realize its presence
and bring out its power.

[2] It has been said that modern psychology confirms scientifically
this method of seeking and finding the truth.  It teaches that action
has often to precede thought and feeling.  If this is the word of
psychology, it is really in accord with the method of Jesus.
Practically all His teaching is addressed, not so much to the intellect
or to the emotions, but to the will.  He does not put doing and
believing in opposition; in actual life they are really
indistinguishable parts of a healthy spiritual growth.  But our Lord
does put doing before knowing, as He puts religion before theology, and
life before the understanding of life.  His unmistakable object is to
constrain men to take action, rather than to wait for emotion, or even
for intellectual confidence and conviction.

As a matter of experience, we find at every turn on the road of life we
have to do things we do not want to do, to secure the things we want to
have.  Necessity does not humour us, and that is the reason the world
owes so much to necessity.  We may be very "superior" about dogmatism
in theology, but well for us that dogmatism will have no such nonsense
in life.  It is just doing the duty that tasks us most, whatever our
feeling about it, which makes the difference between the worthy and the
unworthy in character; between the numerals and the ciphers in the
human world.  It is doing, not what we would, but as we ought which
changes reluctance into interest, and the sense of futility into the
joy of achievement.  It is doing what we know to be true which
illumines its ever-lasting significance.  "You could write stories
which people would read," said Lecky repeatedly to George Eliot.  She
did not believe him, and, strange as it may seem, she had almost a
morbid shrinking from making the attempt.  But she did make it, and we
know with what results.  The attempt to write a story had not only to
precede the belief that she could write one, it had to reveal the gift.

And so Jesus, who came to manifest God, says to you and me: My brother,
My sister, there is that in you which, brought out and cultivated, can
achieve in you the highest order and quality of life in this world, and
fit you for whatever environment lies beyond.  Believe me.  Just take
me at my word when I say to you, will to do my will, and doing it you
shall come to love it--and that is to be saved; for it is to be at one
with the Father in me.  Leave your past, however unworthy it may be.
What I have done and suffered for you has atoned for all.  Do your
part, and you, too, shall testify: "I live, and yet not I, but Christ
that liveth in Me."

This, then, is my position; and whether or not it answer to fact and to
Scripture, I leave with your judgment.  I ought to have accomplished
something if I have made myself understood.  It probably overlooks much
that many of you hold to be integral to the nature and meaning of
salvation.  I have only to repeat, that what has been advanced is a
setting of this great subject; and I venture to urge it upon your
consideration.  It now remains for me to notice very briefly one or two
further questions as I draw to a close.

What, I may be asked, are we expected, as young people, to understand
about the doctrines and dogmas of Christianity as necessary to an
intelligent religious faith?  And what about feeling or emotion, which
is usually represented as a vital part of the driving power of
Christian life and conduct?  Well, speaking for myself, I make no
pretension to the lofty disregard of doctrine which in so many quarters
seems to be regarded as the hall-mark of enlightened thinking.  We do
well to beware of a so-called "breadth," which is but a pet euphemism
for thinness.

But after all, we can hold a thing for true, and yet find no
explanation of it which quite satisfies us.  Theories about the heavens
have come and gone, but the stars remain.  Christ was, before creeds
gathered about Him; and it is because He is, that men must formulate
doctrine to explain Him.  I have long had the conviction that in
religion nothing really matters but the Spirit of Christ.  This is not
to say that if we have, or claim to have, the Spirit of Christ, it
makes no difference whether we do, or do not, believe in the
"historical Christ."  To my thinking such a position is nonsense.  We
may as well talk about an effect without a cause.  Spirit must needs
clothe itself with body.  The "external may come in at different points
of the process, but the internal without the external cannot exist."  I
am simply saying, that everything we need to know in a general sense
about Christian doctrine becomes intelligible and reasonable, not when
we approach Christ through our doubts and difficulties about doctrines,
but our doubts and difficulties through Christ.  In Him is life, and
the life is the light of men.  I care not for the moment what dogmas
about Christ you accept or reject; I ask you to think, and then say,
what heaven worth entering, of state or place, could close against us,
were we in the Spirit of Christ walking in the footsteps of Christ?

Then about feeling: Is there one of us who can say, that he, or she,
has never had the impulse that should lead to Christian decision?  Long
as we make it possible for God to appeal to us, He will find His own
way.  From Him is the impulse, whichever way it comes, but it is ours
to put it in practice.  But just as we do not wait for feeling to take
us out to earn our bread, and keep a roof over our head, so it is a far
nobler thing to turn to God from a sense of duty, and conscience, and
spiritual need, than it is to depend upon feeling to make us do, what
not to do, with or without feeling, is our loss and our shame.

Do not wait for feeling.  Begin your part in the work of your own
salvation.  If feeling carry you into decision, and it sometimes does,
well and good.  But for one case where feeling leads to decision there
are probably a score where feeling must be made by what follows
decision.  Take care of doing, and feeling will take care of itself;
and as we rejoice in its inspiration, we shall realize that, perhaps
for the most part, it can come no other way.  To have the joy of doing
good, we must do good.  We cannot have the tonic and bracing sense of
vigour by saying we will climb the mountain.  It is when we have scaled
its heights that we have the experience of a new physical creation.

Why wait, then, for what is waiting for us?  The Divine Spirit is
universal and infinite.  It is the mother-soul of the universe, with
eternal power and sweetness and beauty, and glory, shining down upon
all men, stimulating them to be nobler, to go up higher.  And when we
accept the influence of the Holy Spirit seeking the divine in us, and
co-operate with it, we have found the answer to the question: What must
I do to be saved?

Does any one say, I ask again, that he has never had this impulse?  As
truly can he say that he has never felt the sun.  Let him take heed.
The sun sets, and it is night.  There can be a night of the soul--the
darkest, blackest, most hopeless night of all.

"He that hath the Son hath life; and he that hath not the Son of God
hath not life."  To be saved is to live; and only to the life above us
can the life within us respond.  Out of Christ we do not live; we but
exist.  And existence at its highest estate has no power inherent in it
to cast out the selfishness and death that build a hell's despair, in
what might be the kingdom of heaven in our human life and world.  Do we
want to be saved?  Do we desire life?  Then pray, and begin at once to
do what our heart and conscience tell us the Christ would have us do.
Will to do the will, and doing it we shall enter, gradually at first,
and then with more royal progress and joy unspeakable, into the truth
of His word: "Because I live, ye shall live also."



[1] Rev. W. L. Walker.

[2] Dr. Lyman Abbot.




DOES GOD HAVE FAIR-PLAY?


"Know therefore that the Lord thy God, he is God, the faithful
God."--Deut. vii. 9.

