VII

THE ROYAL LAW

What St. James calls the Royal Law, is mentioned as far back as the
time of Moses.  It is one of the two commands to which our Lord gave
new incidence, into which He put fresh meaning.

There has been, I hardly need remind you, endless debate about the
source of some of Christ's most characteristic sayings.  Was He
original in His teaching, as we use the word, or was He eclectic,
gathering together the most luminous things that had been said?  Jewish
scholars, as we might expect, have not been slow to point out that many
of the sayings attributed to Jesus, and certainly many of His ideas,
are to be found in the old Rabbinical writings; that many of His
highest truths had been announced by saints and seers of His race long
before He came.

We need not question that there is truth in this representation.  But
we must question the inference from these words, "long before He came."
For time has known no such solitude.  He, which is, and was, and is to
come, has ever been in the world teaching men how to pray, inspiring
them what to say.  He had taught "them of old time."  "Before Abraham
was," He says, "I am."  And St. John tells us that "He was in the
world, and the world was made by Him, and the world knew Him not."
Originality is no mere traffic with words however skilfully
manipulated.  There is a language of God transcending all words, and
intelligible only when we meet Him spirit to spirit in the secret
places of His eternity.

"Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself."  Observe the setting of
this admonition when first given: "Thou shalt not avenge, nor bear
grudge against the children of thy people, but thou shalt love thy
neighbour as thyself."  This word "neighbour" connoted something that
was a distinct advance in the upward trend of the race.  It did, at any
rate, a little to lift the Israelite out of himself into the lives of
others.  But it meant to him, at the most, only those who were of the
same tribe or nation.  In the fulness of time--when the world was
ready--Jesus took up His own word spoken through Moses, and limited in
its interpretation by the moral intelligence of that day; took up His
own word, and made it co-extensive with humanity.

This is what I mean by a language of God transcending all speech.  "You
have been told," says Jesus, "to love your neighbour"; and to the
question, "Who is my neighbour?" He makes the answer reach out to its
full circumference--"Thy neighbour is he or she who bears thy nature."
By the law which declares that God has made of one blood all the
nations of the earth, the physical unity of the race is implied; so by
the operation of the law of love the moral unity, or, what we now call
the "solidarity of humanity," is intended.

"Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself."  And I hardly need point
out, that it is this little word _as_ in the text which gives us pause.
Is it possible, then, to bring down this command and incarnate it in
our daily life?  It does not say, "Thou shalt love thy neighbour with
certain arbitrary qualifications of thy own."  It evidently means what
it says: "Thou shalt love thy neighbour _as thyself_."  Is it possible
to do it?  And many of us are ready to answer, It is not.  Either there
has been some mistake in the way it is reported, we tell ourselves, or
it is useless to try to fulfil it with such natures as ours in such a
world as this.

Put it in this way: granted we loved others as we love ourselves--this
should be good and pleasant for those who possessed our love, if it had
genuine strength in it.  Granted, again, we had the fulness of the
strong love of others, that should be helpful to us.  If we may
condition the Royal Law in some such manner as this, "Love them who
love us;" or, "love them who are worthy of our love," the difficulty is
obviously lessened, if not in fact removed.  But such a limit, while it
might amount to prudence, would not reach up to beatitude.  "If ye love
them who love you, what do ye more than others?"  "Thou shalt love thy
neighbour as thyself."  But who is thy neighbour?  And Jesus answers,
"thy neighbour is he who bears thy nature."  This is iteration, but I
venture it because I want us to confront the real insistence of this
text.  They who share our nature may be, and often are, those who hate
us with or without a cause.  There are people who perpetuate an
existence on others which is little better than a moral and physical
calamity.  To tell us to tolerate them, not to speak about loving them,
is like telling us to attempt the impossible.  And yet Jesus did not
forget these people when He said: "Love your enemies, bless them that
curse you, pray for them who despitefully use you and persecute you."

We, then, who say we accept Christ's teaching must accept it.  This is
one of the places where we cannot escape behind some ingenuity of
exegesis or manipulation of text.  The command is plain.  We can take
it or leave it.  One thing we cannot do, we cannot re-write it.  "Thou
shalt love thy neighbour as thyself."  As thyself.  If this but fixes a
hard standard; or simply indicates the measurement of neighbourly love,
then we may almost as well close the discussion--its practical
attainment is out of our reach.

But, as some one has very wisely said: "Love of self must become a
medium before it becomes a measure." [1]  In other words, we cannot
love our neighbour as we ought until we love ourselves as we should.
Out of love of self "flow the ingredients which must enter into
neighbour love."

The text, then, lays down a twofold obligation: to cultivate a right
love of self, and to translate this love of self into love for others.

As touching the first part of this obligation, it is useless to ask
what it is in our neighbour we are to love as ourselves, until we know
what it is in ourselves we are to love.  In what sense is a man to love
himself?  Because there is a radical difference between self-love as
taught and practised in the world, and the love of self sanctioned and
regulated by the Royal Law.  Love of self is a right anxiety to secure
the things we need in this world.  It is based upon the principle that
life is not to be unclothed but clothed upon.  The fact that we are in
the world and have to fulfil its desired ends should carry with it
reverence for our manhood, and the demand for space to work out its
full equation.  While the Apostle Paul was always ready to subject his
rights to the law of love, he was equally careful to assert that they
were his rights before he yielded them.  In his care for the weak
brethren, he did not become a weak brother.  One of the first things we
have to learn, is how to take wise care of ourselves; and then, step by
step, a true life is a growth in the knowledge of how so to take care
of ourselves as to promote the best interests of others.  In this
matter of a right love of self, the point of transition at which it
passes into beneficence is the victory over a self-love which is
selfishness.  It is really the basal principle of moral government in
the world.

But when this is said, the surest and simplest answer to the question,
What is it in ourselves we are to love? is to say--We are to love that
which God loves in us.  And what does God love in us?  From all we know
of the divine nature as revealed in Jesus Christ, we are surely right
in thinking that God loves in us what is most like Himself.  No man can
stand at Calvary reverently and thoughtfully for five minutes without
being impressed with the truth of a wondrous self-sacrifice.  I met
with a remark lately in a story I was reading which fastened itself on
my mind.  It was made by a poor, toiling woman who had scarcely
sufficient means to keep body and soul together: "I never, somehow,"
she said, "seem to think a thing is mine until I have given it away."

This is the spirit that God loves, a spirit ever getting further away
from "miserable aims that end with self."  God loves in us the
self-mastery that scorns to compromise with self-indulgence.  God loves
in us that which cannot find its true home in the things seen and
temporal, but must ever soar out to the things unseen and eternal; the
things that live in and wait upon the earnest man and after which he
must ceaselessly aspire.  God loves in us the strenuous effort which
proceeds from the conviction that there is sacred power in every life
which must not be wasted in "egotistical pride, or in a narrowing
self-love."  From instinct, from the moral consciousness, from the
Scriptures--these we know to be representative of the things that God
loves.  And we know we are right in loving in ourselves what God loves
in us.  We also know that no man can wisely love himself until he knows
the purifying power of a love that is divine.

If now I may assume that this exposition of the text shows the ground,
and defines the sphere of a right love of self, I may further say that
the Royal Law does not require us to love in others what it does not
permit us to love in ourselves.  And we do well to be clear about this.
Many of us stumble over this text because, not getting at its true
inwardness, we have an uneasy feeling that it carries us too far.
Others try to work up an artificial sentiment, and profess to exercise
a charity which is not theirs to extend.

Here is a man, let us say, who calls himself a religious man, who yet
notoriously is a mean and shabby creature.  I once heard this man, well
placed and prosperous, boast of having that day become richer by some
twelve hundred pounds through an oversight of a solicitor in winding up
the affairs of a late client.  I afterwards learned that the mistake
was at the expense of a widow and her young children, who, because of
it, were brought within very measurable distance of want.  Must my love
for my neighbour include one callous enough, not only to do a thing
like that, but to boast about it?  Must it annex the whole low plane of
such a squalid disposition?  God forbid.  What I hope I should hate in
myself I am not asked to love in another.  If a man is base and
unworthy we are to recognize the fact, however ugly; we are to look the
devil in him in the face, and say it is the devil.

But, on the other side, Christianity admonishes us that our judgments
of our neighbours are neither infallible nor final.  It has been well
pointed out, that if we "have found any part of the secret of God's
mercy shown to us, we shall not find it hard to believe in God's mercy
for our neighbours."  To realize that the essential thing the Redeemer
saw in us and deemed it worth dying for, He sees in them, will help us,
however weary at times in their service, not to weary of it.

In this command, then, we have the ground and motive for the sacrifice
of each for the good of all.  We see that it is possible to love our
neighbour in the sense we are to love ourselves.  We see that the
command which, on the surface of it, seems to urge an unattainable
experience, is, in truth, what St. James calls it, the Royal Law that
binds us together not only as neighbours, but as children of the same
All-Father.

"Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself."  Should any one ask, "Who
does it?" I answer, That is not the question.  To deny that we can love
our neighbour in this sense is to deny that we can love ourselves.  Yet
I know what fate, especially for young men, may lurk in this cold,
faithless question.  And I want it to be understood, that my single aim
in this address--the reason why I have wrestled at this length for the
meaning of the passage before us--is to show, that _whether we choose
to do it or not, it can be done_.  I affirm that this text is a simple
statement of the principle of the only rational, helpful life man can
live.  And to prevail upon you to admit this, would be to accomplish
much.  To accept it as the truth, that you can love your neighbour as
yourself, is to win intellectual confidence in the service which your
day demands of you.  It is to take the sting of death out of the old
evil question: "Who does it?"  Once recognize that Christ asks for
nothing impossible, when He gave a new and ever-abiding authority to
this ancient precept, and the question will not be, Who does it?
Rather will it be, Who can afford not to do it?  For not to do it is
selfishness, and selfishness is self-defeat.  He who exists only for
himself, exists only to injure himself.  It is the fashion now to get
rid of a judgment to come by telling us that we are our own judgment
here.  The latter part of the statement is not the whole truth, but
there is truth in it.  The strain brings out the strength there is, but
shirk it and we have weakness.  Do as we like rather than do as we
ought, and the price must be paid in loss of manhood.  Everything we
gain for selfishness we must steal from ourselves.

"Ah me," said Goethe once, "that the yonder is never here."  Go deep
enough into every wrong and sin and you find at its root this
selfishness.  So many of us degrade life into a heartless scramble.  We
fight each other because each man, dissatisfied himself, is convinced
that his neighbour is getting more than his share.  It may be doubted
whether there has ever been a day in the Western world when more people
were dominated by the conviction that gain is godliness.  So many about
us have virtually ceased to put their trust in anything about which
they cannot lace their fingers.  With them, dreamers about anything
else are cranks, and martyrs for anything else are nuisances.  And this
reacts upon such apology as they have for more serious thinking.  We
seem in many ways to be returning to the pagan condition when judgment
was not feared and spiritual influences were unfelt.  In novel, drama,
and much that passes for science, we have the monotonous iteration that
man is the creature of blind chance under an indifferent sky.

But this, thank God, is not the whole story.  There is another and
brighter side.  If we take a very subdued estimate of our modern day
and world, I am yet persuaded that never were the saving ideas of the
Saviour more potent, never have His high aspirations been more ardently
welcomed or more strenuously followed than they are now.

Past all human speculations about Christ, men hopelessly divided in
creed are yet getting nearer to what He lived believing and died
believing.  In the weariness of so much of the modern world, and in the
hopelessness of its outlook, I see an age ready to receive anew the
baptism of the Holy Spirit.  I see a temper ready to grasp with fresh
earnestness the thoughts of the "Living Lord and Supreme Teacher of our
race."  Men to-day are dreaming like dreams as shone before the souls
of the ancient prophets, and in the visions of men who have wrought for
human progress since the first days even until now.  Waking dreams of a
new and diviner order of society.  A state marked by righteousness,
peace, and happiness for the whole people; the golden age, when man,
knowing what it is in himself he ought to love, loves that in his
neighbour as in himself.

And Christianity, which came into the world to fulfil these heaven-born
dreams, is being openly challenged as never before to substantiate them.

In the larger aims of our spiritual ideals the "yonder is never here,"
nor, indeed, can it be.  There must always be above us something better
than our best.  When we cease to make progress we die, and that, in the
language of Scripture, is the second death.

If, therefore, the searching demand of the text confronts us with the
weakness of our nature, we need not wonder and we need not be
discouraged.  It is the purpose it has in view.  "It discloses an
ideal, and it reveals an end."  If in seeking to realize the ideal and
gain the end we are forced to know how insufficient we are in our own
strength--this, I repeat, is the end it seeks to accomplish in us and
for us.  Until our life is in Christ linked on to God, we cannot love
our neighbour as we ought, because we have not the higher power to love
ourselves as we should.

But the power is offered us.  And it is for you young men to lay fast
hold of it, and accept the world's challenge in a way it has never been
handled and faced before.  "Do not talk about the things you believe,"
says the world to us who name the name of Christ; "convince me that you
believe by what you do."  And this is said, not from an indifference to
dogma, as some would have us think.  It means that a man's beliefs are
between himself and God.  It is what comes out of his belief, that can
be reckoned with amid the forces of our everyday life.

You place in cold sheet one of the loftiest passages of a great
composer before a man sensitive to music, but who does not know one
note from the other, and he looks at it with indifference.  You put the
sheet before a gifted organist seated at his instrument; and as the
melody rolls forth in swells of power, then in cadences of persuasive
pathos, the indifference of the man vanishes as he catches his breath
like a sob, and feels a prayer he cannot speak.  We say we believe in
Christ, and men turn aside with indifference.  We live Christ, and men
love Him.  It is common enough to find this indifference about
religion, and a marked want of what I have called intellectual
confidence in Christianity as we preach it from the pulpit.  But I have
never yet found a man infidel to the fruits of its spirit, which are,
love, peace, goodness, a living faith, and a genuine self-sacrifice.
Before men can be expected to become Christ-like, they must know what
Christ is like, and how far are we prepared to put our lives before men
as an answer to the question: "What think ye of Christ?"

Preach Christ by living Christ.  "All men," says the Koran, "are
commanded by the Saint."  And no man ever casts the wealth of his life
and the crown of his devotion at the feet of Jesus without "quickening
the earth with a diviner life, and uplifting it with a new courage."
One of the most brilliant of the eighteenth-century poets said: "The
lapse of time changes all but man, who ever has been, and ever will be,
just what he is."  Which means that man is by make incurably selfish.
This is a lie.  And it is the worst kind of lying, for it represents
not only the inability to find good in man, but the inability to
believe that there is good to be found.  My own stand is where thought
and experience have forced me.  From human nature left to itself I hope
for nothing; with that nature remade in Christ I despair of nothing.
It all turns on the remake.  And it can be remade: "As many as received
Him, to them gave He power to become sons of God: who were born not of
blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of
God."

Let us, therefore, by divine grace, refashion our lives on the mighty
principle of divine love.  And let us settle it as one of the truths
never to be questioned, that nothing is worthy to be called love that
cannot be affirmed of God.  We know what God loves; or we know enough
for the practical ordering of our daily life.  Let us love in ourselves
what God loves in us.  This will include for ourselves and others all
things which are good for us to have and enjoy; and because it will
exclude all things that are narrow, mean, and selfish, it will go far
to raise the world to a power of a new day.  Then, through hearts and
homes, through Churches and societies, the Royal Law, made royal life,
will solve the problem of the new earth wherein dwelleth righteousness.
It will become the touch of omnipotence that casts out of our life the
unworthy, by bringing in the opposite virtues, resolving all into
character which shall transform mankind into one realm over which the
right and the might of Christ shall at last prevail--

  "From creed and scheme the light goes out,
    The saintly fact survives,
  The Blessed Master who can doubt,
    Revealed in human lives?"



[1] Two or three sentences in this chapter are memorized from a sermon
I heard years ago, preached by Rev. H. E. Michie, M.A., of Stonehaven.




'HE WAS DESPISED AND REJECTED'


"He is despised and rejected of men."--Isaiah liii. 3.

