The Project Gutenberg eBook of Men in the Making
    
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Men in the Making

Author: Ambrose Shepherd


        
Release date: August 31, 2007 [eBook #22482]

Language: English

Other information and formats: www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/22482

Credits: E-text prepared by Al Haines




E-text prepared by Al Haines



MEN IN THE MAKING

by

AMBROSE SHEPHERD, D.D.

Author of
"The Gospel and Social Questions," Etc.







Hodder and Stoughton
London
MCMIX




I INSCRIBE THIS BOOK


TO

TWO VALUED FRIENDS

JOHN GLAISTER, M.D.

PROFESSOR OF FORENSIC MEDICINE

UNIVERSITY OF GLASGOW


AND

CHARLES SCARTH, ESQ., J.P.

OF MORLEY, YORKS.




PREFACE


The addresses which make up this book are printed, almost exactly, as
they were spoken from my pulpit in Glasgow.  I have yielded to repeated
requests that I would put them in a more permanent form than memory, or
notes, can supply.  There is always room for a book to young men; whether
or not the book I now offer them is worth its room, is a matter about
which I, possibly, am not the best judge.  This I can say: There was a
time in my life when I should have been helped, had I met through the
spoken word, or printed page, some of the things I have tried to say as
faithfully as I know how to say them, within the limits of taste and
discretion.  Whatever these addresses lack in thought, and in the
handling of the subjects discussed, I have done my best to make them
readable.  In the case of the average young man of to-day, if a book does
not interest him in the matter of style, any other merits it may possess
will have a weakened chance of making themselves felt.  If I have failed
to meet this one condition of securing his attention--provided he give me
a fair trial--I shall be disappointed and, to be candid, surprised.
Should, however, his interest be tolerably well sustained through the
ethical part of these addresses, say to the end of the chapter on "The
Royal Law," I shall, perhaps, have no reason to complain.  At the same
time I would advise him to persevere with the rest, even at the cost of
some effort.

There are one or two things which should be said by way of introduction
to these addresses.  When the manuscript was out of my hands and in those
of the printer, I was informed that Archdeacon Wilberforce had, in one of
his books, a sermon on much the same lines that are found in my chapter
entitled "A Devil's Trinity."   I have only to say that, so far as I
know, I have never seen a line from the pen of Archdeacon Wilberforce.
And in this connection I should like to quote a sentence or two from the
Preface to my book on _The Gospel and Social Questions_.  I remark there
that, fortunately or otherwise for me, I have a tenacious memory which
retains for long, not only a thought which arrests me, but the form in
which it is expressed.  Where I have made use of a quotation, or tried to
paraphrase something I have read--and this applies to the following
addresses--I have indicated the circumstances in the usual way.

The concluding chapter of this series is, in the main, a transcript of my
booklet on _The Responsibility of God_, published by Oliphant, Anderson
and Ferrier, of Edinburgh.  I have to thank these gentlemen, and I do so
heartily, for their permission to make this further use of it.
Considerable changes are made in the reproduction; but I think this
admission is due to any buyers the book may secure.  I have also to
mention my great indebtedness to Rev. J. F. Shepherd, M.A., of
Manchester, for his help with the proofs, and for some valuable
suggestions as to emendations of expression.

AMBROSE SHEPHERD.

6, Thornville Terrace,
  Glasgow.




CONTENTS


I

YOUTH AND AFTER


