CHAPTER IV


We have spoken of that supreme self-dictation which keeps varying from
hour to hour in its dictates with the variation of events and
circumstances.  Now, for us, that is ultimate.  It may be founded on some
reasonable process, but it is not a process which we can follow or
comprehend.  And moreover the dictation is not continuous, or not
continuous except in very lively and well-living natures; and
between-whiles we must brush along without it.  Practice is a more
intricate and desperate business than the toughest theorising; life is an
affair of cavalry, where rapid judgment and prompt action are alone
possible and right.  As a matter of fact, there is no one so upright but
he is influenced by the world’s chatter; and no one so headlong but he
requires to consider consequences and to keep an eye on profit.  For the
soul adopts all affections and appetites without exception, and cares
only to combine them for some common purpose which shall interest all.
Now, respect for the opinion of others, the study of consequences, and
the desire of power and comfort, are all undeniably factors in the nature
of man; and the more undeniably since we find that, in our current
doctrines, they have swallowed up the others and are thought to conclude
in themselves all the worthy parts of man.  These, then, must also be
suffered to affect conduct in the practical domain, much or little
according as they are forcibly or feebly present to the mind of each.

Now, a man’s view of the universe is mostly a view of the civilised
society in which he lives.  Other men and women are so much more grossly
and so much more intimately palpable to his perceptions, that they stand
between him and all the rest; they are larger to his eye than the sun, he
hears them more plainly than thunder, with them, by them, and for them,
he must live and die.  And hence the laws that affect his intercourse
with his fellow-men, although merely customary and the creatures of a
generation, are more clearly and continually before his mind than those
which bind him into the eternal system of things, support him in his
upright progress on this whirling ball, or keep up the fire of his bodily
life.  And hence it is that money stands in the first rank of
considerations and so powerfully affects the choice.  For our society is
built with money for mortar; money is present in every joint of
circumstance; it might be named the social atmosphere, since, in society,
it is by that alone that men continue to live, and only through that or
chance that they can reach or affect one another.  Money gives us food,
shelter, and privacy; it permits us to be clean in person, opens for us
the doors of the theatre, gains us books for study or pleasure, enables
us to help the distresses of others, and puts us above necessity so that
we can choose the best in life.  If we love, it enables us to meet and
live with the loved one, or even to prolong her health and life; if we
have scruples, it gives us an opportunity to be honest; if we have any
bright designs, here is what will smooth the way to their accomplishment.
Penury is the worst slavery, and will soon lead to death.

But money is only a means; it presupposes a man to use it.  The rich can
go where he pleases, but perhaps please himself nowhere.  He can buy a
library or visit the whole world, but perhaps has neither patience to
read nor intelligence to see.  The table may be loaded and the appetite
wanting; the purse may be full, and the heart empty.  He may have gained
the world and lost himself; and with all his wealth around him, in a
great house and spacious and beautiful demesne, he may live as blank a
life as any tattered ditcher.  Without an appetite, without an
aspiration, void of appreciation, bankrupt of desire and hope, there, in
his great house, let him sit and look upon his fingers.  It is perhaps a
more fortunate destiny to have a taste for collecting shells than to be
born a millionaire.  Although neither is to be despised, it is always
better policy to learn an interest than to make a thousand pounds; for
the money will soon be spent, or perhaps you may feel no joy in spending
it; but the interest remains imperishable and ever new.  To become a
botanist, a geologist, a social philosopher, an antiquary, or an artist,
is to enlarge one’s possessions in the universe by an incalculably higher
degree, and by a far surer sort of property, than to purchase a farm of
many acres.  You had perhaps two thousand a year before the transaction;
perhaps you have two thousand five hundred after it.  That represents
your gain in the one case.  But in the other, you have thrown down a
barrier which concealed significance and beauty.  The blind man has
learned to see.  The prisoner has opened up a window in his cell and
beholds enchanting prospects; he will never again be a prisoner as he
was; he can watch clouds and changing seasons, ships on the river,
travellers on the road, and the stars at night; happy prisoner! his eyes
have broken jail!  And again he who has learned to love an art or science
has wisely laid up riches against the day of riches; if prosperity come,
he will not enter poor into his inheritance; he will not slumber and
forget himself in the lap of money, or spend his hours in counting idle
treasures, but be up and briskly doing; he will have the true alchemic
touch, which is not that of Midas, but which transmutes dead money into
living delight and satisfaction.  _Être et pas avoir_—to be, not to
possess—that is the problem of life.  To be wealthy, a rich nature is the
first requisite and money but the second.  To be of a quick and healthy
blood, to share in all honourable curiosities, to be rich in admiration
and free from envy, to rejoice greatly in the good of others, to love
with such generosity of heart that your love is still a dear possession
in absence or unkindness—these are the gifts of fortune which money
cannot buy and without which money can buy nothing.  For what can a man
possess, or what can he enjoy, except himself?  If he enlarge his nature,
it is then that he enlarges his estates.  If his nature be happy and
valiant, he will enjoy the universe as if it were his park and orchard.

But money is not only to be spent; it has also to be earned.  It is not
merely a convenience or a necessary in social life; but it is the coin in
which mankind pays his wages to the individual man.  And from this side,
the question of money has a very different scope and application.  For no
man can be honest who does not work.  Service for service.  If the farmer
buys corn, and the labourer ploughs and reaps, and the baker sweats in
his hot bakery, plainly you who eat must do something in your turn.  It
is not enough to take off your hat, or to thank God upon your knees for
the admirable constitution of society and your own convenient situation
in its upper and more ornamental stories.  Neither is it enough to buy
the loaf with a sixpence; for then you are only changing the point of the
inquiry; and you must first have _bought the sixpence_.  Service for
service: how have you bought your sixpences?  A man of spirit desires
certainty in a thing of such a nature; he must see to it that there is
some reciprocity between him and mankind; that he pays his expenditure in
service; that he has not a lion’s share in profit and a drone’s in
labour; and is not a sleeping partner and mere costly incubus on the
great mercantile concern of mankind.

Services differ so widely with different gifts, and some are so
inappreciable to external tests, that this is not only a matter for the
private conscience, but one which even there must be leniently and
trustfully considered.  For remember how many serve mankind who do no
more than meditate; and how many are precious to their friends for no
more than a sweet and joyous temper.  To perform the function of a man of
letters it is not necessary to write; nay, it is perhaps better to be a
living book.  So long as we love we serve; so long as we are loved by
others, I would almost say that we are indispensable; and no man is
useless while he has a friend.  The true services of life are inestimable
in money, and are never paid.  Kind words and caresses, high and wise
thoughts, humane designs, tender behaviour to the weak and suffering, and
all the charities of man’s existence, are neither bought nor sold.

Yet the dearest and readiest, if not the most just, criterion of a man’s
services, is the wage that mankind pays him or, briefly, what he earns.
There at least there can be no ambiguity.  St. Paul is fully and freely
entitled to his earnings as a tentmaker, and Socrates fully and freely
entitled to his earnings as a sculptor, although the true business of
each was not only something different, but something which remained
unpaid.  A man cannot forget that he is not superintended, and serves
mankind on parole.  He would like, when challenged by his own conscience,
to reply: ‘I have done so much work, and no less, with my own hands and
brain, and taken so much profit, and no more, for my own personal
delight.’  And though St. Paul, if he had possessed a private fortune,
would probably have scorned to waste his time in making tents, yet of all
sacrifices to public opinion none can be more easily pardoned than that
by which a man, already spiritually useful to the world, should restrict
the field of his chief usefulness to perform services more apparent, and
possess a livelihood that neither stupidity nor malice could call in
question.  Like all sacrifices to public opinion and mere external
decency, this would certainly be wrong; for the soul should rest
contented with its own approval and indissuadably pursue its own calling.
Yet, so grave and delicate is the question, that a man may well hesitate
before he decides it for himself; he may well fear that he sets too high
a valuation on his own endeavours after good; he may well condescend upon
a humbler duty, where others than himself shall judge the service and
proportion the wage.

And yet it is to this very responsibility that the rich are born.  They
can shuffle off the duty on no other; they are their own paymasters on
parole; and must pay themselves fair wages and no more.  For I suppose
that in the course of ages, and through reform and civil war and
invasion, mankind was pursuing some other and more general design than to
set one or two Englishmen of the nineteenth century beyond the reach of
needs and duties.  Society was scarce put together, and defended with so
much eloquence and blood, for the convenience of two or three
millionaires and a few hundred other persons of wealth and position.  It
is plain that if mankind thus acted and suffered during all these
generations, they hoped some benefit, some ease, some wellbeing, for
themselves and their descendants; that if they supported law and order,
it was to secure fair-play for all; that if they denied themselves in the
present, they must have had some designs upon the future.  Now, a great
hereditary fortune is a miracle of man’s wisdom and mankind’s
forbearance; it has not only been amassed and handed down, it has been
suffered to be amassed and handed down; and surely in such a
consideration as this, its possessor should find only a new spur to
activity and honour, that with all this power of service he should not
prove unserviceable, and that this mass of treasure should return in
benefits upon the race.  If he had twenty, or thirty, or a hundred
thousand at his banker’s, or if all Yorkshire or all California were his
to manage or to sell, he would still be morally penniless, and have the
world to begin like Whittington, until he had found some way of serving
mankind.  His wage is physically in his own hand; but, in honour, that
wage must still be earned.  He is only steward on parole of what is
called his fortune.  He must honourably perform his stewardship.  He must
estimate his own services and allow himself a salary in proportion, for
that will be one among his functions.  And while he will then be free to
spend that salary, great or little, on his own private pleasures, the
rest of his fortune he but holds and disposes under trust for mankind; it
is not his, because he has not earned it; it cannot be his, because his
services have already been paid; but year by year it is his to
distribute, whether to help individuals whose birthright and outfit have
been swallowed up in his, or to further public works and institutions.

At this rate, short of inspiration, it seems hardly possible to be both
rich and honest; and the millionaire is under a far more continuous
temptation to thieve than the labourer who gets his shilling daily for
despicable toils.  Are you surprised?  It is even so.  And you repeat it
every Sunday in your churches.  ‘It is easier for a camel to pass through
the eye of a needle than for a rich man to enter the kingdom of God.’  I
have heard this and similar texts ingeniously explained away and brushed
from the path of the aspiring Christian by the tender Great-heart of the
parish.  One excellent clergyman told us that the ‘eye of a needle’ meant
a low, Oriental postern through which camels could not pass till they
were unloaded—which is very likely just; and then went on, bravely
confounding the ‘kingdom of God’ with heaven, the future paradise, to
show that of course no rich person could expect to carry his riches
beyond the grave—which, of course, he could not and never did.  Various
greedy sinners of the congregation drank in the comfortable doctrine with
relief.  It was worth the while having come to church that Sunday
morning!  All was plain.  The Bible, as usual, meant nothing in
particular; it was merely an obscure and figurative school-copybook; and
if a man were only respectable, he was a man after God’s own heart.

Alas! I fear not.  And though this matter of a man’s services is one for
his own conscience, there are some cases in which it is difficult to
restrain the mind from judging.  Thus I shall be very easily persuaded
that a man has earned his daily bread; and if he has but a friend or two
to whom his company is delightful at heart, I am more than persuaded at
once.  But it will be very hard to persuade me that any one has earned an
income of a hundred thousand.  What he is to his friends, he still would
be if he were made penniless to-morrow; for as to the courtiers of luxury
and power, I will neither consider them friends, nor indeed consider them
at all.  What he does for mankind there are most likely hundreds who
would do the same, as effectually for the race and as pleasurably to
themselves, for the merest fraction of this monstrous wage.  Why it is
paid, I am, therefore, unable to conceive, and as the man pays it
himself, out of funds in his detention, I have a certain backwardness to
think him honest.

At least, we have gained a very obvious point: that _what a man spends
upon himself_, _he shall have earned by services to the race_.  Thence
flows a principle for the outset of life, which is a little different
from that taught in the present day.  I am addressing the middle and the
upper classes; those who have already been fostered and prepared for life
at some expense; those who have some choice before them, and can pick
professions; and above all, those who are what is called independent, and
need do nothing unless pushed by honour or ambition.  In this particular
the poor are happy; among them, when a lad comes to his strength, he must
take the work that offers, and can take it with an easy conscience.  But
in the richer classes the question is complicated by the number of
opportunities and a variety of considerations.  Here, then, this
principle of ours comes in helpfully.  The young man has to seek, not a
road to wealth, but an opportunity of service; not money, but honest
work.  If he has some strong propensity, some calling of nature, some
over-weening interest in any special field of industry, inquiry, or art,
he will do right to obey the impulse; and that for two reasons: the first
external, because there he will render the best services; the second
personal, because a demand of his own nature is to him without appeal
whenever it can be satisfied with the consent of his other faculties and
appetites.  If he has no such elective taste, by the very principle on
which he chooses any pursuit at all he must choose the most honest and
serviceable, and not the most highly remunerated.  We have here an
external problem, not from or to ourself, but flowing from the
constitution of society; and we have our own soul with its fixed design
of righteousness.  All that can be done is to present the problem in
proper terms, and leave it to the soul of the individual.  Now, the
problem to the poor is one of necessity: to earn wherewithal to live,
they must find remunerative labour.  But the problem to the rich is one
of honour: having the wherewithal, they must find serviceable labour.
Each has to earn his daily bread: the one, because he has not yet got it
to eat; the other, who has already eaten it, because he has not yet
earned it.

Of course, what is true of bread is true of luxuries and comforts,
whether for the body or the mind.  But the consideration of luxuries
leads us to a new aspect of the whole question, and to a second
proposition no less true, and maybe no less startling, than the last.

At the present day, we, of the easier classes, are in a state of surfeit
and disgrace after meat.  Plethora has filled us with indifference; and
we are covered from head to foot with the callosities of habitual
opulence.  Born into what is called a certain rank, we live, as the
saying is, up to our station.  We squander without enjoyment, because our
fathers squandered.  We eat of the best, not from delicacy, but from
brazen habit.  We do not keenly enjoy or eagerly desire the presence of a
luxury; we are unaccustomed to its absence.  And not only do we squander
money from habit, but still more pitifully waste it in ostentation.  I
can think of no more melancholy disgrace for a creature who professes
either reason or pleasure for his guide, than to spend the smallest
fraction of his income upon that which he does not desire; and to keep a
carriage in which you do not wish to drive, or a butler of whom you are
afraid, is a pathetic kind of folly.  Money, being a means of happiness,
should make both parties happy when it changes hands; rightly disposed,
it should be twice blessed in its employment; and buyer and seller should
alike have their twenty shillings worth of profit out of every pound.
Benjamin Franklin went through life an altered man, because he once paid
too dearly for a penny whistle.  My concern springs usually from a deeper
source, to wit, from having bought a whistle when I did not want one.  I
find I regret this, or would regret it if I gave myself the time, not
only on personal but on moral and philanthropical considerations.  For,
first, in a world where money is wanting to buy books for eager students
and food and medicine for pining children, and where a large majority are
starved in their most immediate desires, it is surely base, stupid, and
cruel to squander money when I am pushed by no appetite and enjoy no
return of genuine satisfaction.  My philanthropy is wide enough in scope
to include myself; and when I have made myself happy, I have at least one
good argument that I have acted rightly; but where that is not so, and I
have bought and not enjoyed, my mouth is closed, and I conceive that I
have robbed the poor.  And, second, anything I buy or use which I do not
sincerely want or cannot vividly enjoy, disturbs the balance of supply
and demand, and contributes to remove industrious hands from the
production of what is useful or pleasurable and to keep them busy upon
ropes of sand and things that are a weariness to the flesh.  That
extravagance is truly sinful, and a very silly sin to boot, in which we
impoverish mankind and ourselves.  It is another question for each man’s
heart.  He knows if he can enjoy what he buys and uses; if he cannot, he
is a dog in the manger; nay, it he cannot, I contend he is a thief, for
nothing really belongs to a man which he cannot use.  Proprietor is
connected with propriety; and that only is the man’s which is proper to
his wants and faculties.

A youth, in choosing a career, must not be alarmed by poverty.  Want is a
sore thing, but poverty does not imply want.  It remains to be seen
whether with half his present income, or a third, he cannot, in the most
generous sense, live as fully as at present.  He is a fool who objects to
luxuries; but he is also a fool who does not protest against the waste of
luxuries on those who do not desire and cannot enjoy them.  It remains to
be seen, by each man who would live a true life to himself and not a
merely specious life to society, how many luxuries he truly wants and to
how many he merely submits as to a social propriety; and all these last
he will immediately forswear.  Let him do this, and he will be surprised
to find how little money it requires to keep him in complete contentment
and activity of mind and senses.  Life at any level among the easy
classes is conceived upon a principle of rivalry, where each man and each
household must ape the tastes and emulate the display of others.  One is
delicate in eating, another in wine, a third in furniture or works of art
or dress; and I, who care nothing for any of these refinements, who am
perhaps a plain athletic creature and love exercise, beef, beer, flannel
shirts and a camp bed, am yet called upon to assimilate all these other
tastes and make these foreign occasions of expenditure my own.  It may be
cynical: I am sure I shall be told it is selfish; but I will spend my
money as I please and for my own intimate personal gratification, and
should count myself a nincompoop indeed to lay out the colour of a
halfpenny on any fancied social decency or duty.  I shall not wear gloves
unless my hands are cold, or unless I am born with a delight in them.
Dress is my own affair, and that of one other in the world; that, in fact
and for an obvious reason, of any woman who shall chance to be in love
with me.  I shall lodge where I have a mind.  If I do not ask society to
live with me, they must be silent; and even if I do, they have no further
right but to refuse the invitation!  There is a kind of idea abroad that
a man must live up to his station, that his house, his table, and his
toilette, shall be in a ratio of equivalence, and equally imposing to the
world.  If this is in the Bible, the passage has eluded my inquiries.  If
it is not in the Bible, it is nowhere but in the heart of the fool.
Throw aside this fancy.  See what you want, and spend upon that;
distinguish what you do not care about, and spend nothing upon that.
There are not many people who can differentiate wines above a certain and
that not at all a high price.  Are you sure you are one of these?  Are
you sure you prefer cigars at sixpence each to pipes at some fraction of
a farthing?  Are you sure you wish to keep a gig?  Do you care about
where you sleep, or are you not as much at your ease in a cheap lodging
as in an Elizabethan manor-house?  Do you enjoy fine clothes?  It is not
possible to answer these questions without a trial; and there is nothing
more obvious to my mind, than that a man who has not experienced some ups
and downs, and been forced to live more cheaply than in his father’s
house, has still his education to begin.  Let the experiment be made, and
he will find to his surprise that he has been eating beyond his appetite
up to that hour; that the cheap lodging, the cheap tobacco, the rough
country clothes, the plain table, have not only no power to damp his
spirits, but perhaps give him as keen pleasure in the using as the
dainties that he took, betwixt sleep and waking, in his former callous
and somnambulous submission to wealth.

The true Bohemian, a creature lost to view under the imaginary Bohemians
of literature, is exactly described by such a principle of life.  The
Bohemian of the novel, who drinks more than is good for him and prefers
anything to work, and wears strange clothes, is for the most part a
respectable Bohemian, respectable in disrespectability, living for the
outside, and an adventurer.  But the man I mean lives wholly to himself,
does what he wishes, and not what is thought proper, buys what he wants
for himself, and not what is thought proper, works at what he believes he
can do well and not what will bring him in money or favour.  You may be
the most respectable of men, and yet a true Bohemian.  And the test is
this: a Bohemian, for as poor as he may be, is always open-handed to his
friends; he knows what he can do with money and how he can do without it,
a far rarer and more useful knowledge; he has had less, and continued to
live in some contentment; and hence he cares not to keep more, and shares
his sovereign or his shilling with a friend.  The poor, if they are
generous, are Bohemian in virtue of their birth.  Do you know where
beggars go?  Not to the great houses where people sit dazed among their
thousands, but to the doors of poor men who have seen the world; and it
was the widow who had only two mites, who cast half her fortune into the
treasury.

But a young man who elects to save on dress or on lodging, or who in any
way falls out of the level of expenditure which is common to his level in
society, falls out of society altogether.  I suppose the young man to
have chosen his career on honourable principles; he finds his talents and
instincts can be best contented in a certain pursuit; in a certain
industry, he is sure that he is serving mankind with a healthy and
becoming service; and he is not sure that he would be doing so, or doing
so equally well, in any other industry within his reach.  Then that is
his true sphere in life; not the one in which he was born to his father,
but the one which is proper to his talents and instincts.  And suppose he
does fall out of society, is that a cause of sorrow?  Is your heart so
dead that you prefer the recognition of many to the love of a few?  Do
you think society loves you?  Put it to the proof.  Decline in material
expenditure, and you will find they care no more for you than for the
Khan of Tartary.  You will lose no friends.  If you had any, you will
keep them.  Only those who were friends to your coat and equipage will
disappear; the smiling faces will disappear as by enchantment; but the
kind hearts will remain steadfastly kind.  Are you so lost, are you so
dead, are you so little sure of your own soul and your own footing upon
solid fact, that you prefer before goodness and happiness the countenance
of sundry diners-out, who will flee from you at a report of ruin, who
will drop you with insult at a shadow of disgrace, who do not know you
and do not care to know you but by sight, and whom you in your turn
neither know nor care to know in a more human manner?  Is it not the
principle of society, openly avowed, that friendship must not interfere
with business; which being paraphrased, means simply that a consideration
of money goes before any consideration of affection known to this
cold-blooded gang, that they have not even the honour of thieves, and
will rook their nearest and dearest as readily as a stranger?  I hope I
would go as far as most to serve a friend; but I declare openly I would
not put on my hat to do a pleasure to society.  I may starve my appetites
and control my temper for the sake of those I love; but society shall
take me as I choose to be, or go without me.  Neither they nor I will
lose; for where there is no love, it is both laborious and unprofitable
to associate.

But it is obvious that if it is only right for a man to spend money on
that which he can truly and thoroughly enjoy, the doctrine applies with
equal force to the rich and to the poor, to the man who has amassed many
thousands as well as to the youth precariously beginning life.  And it
may be asked, Is not this merely preparing misers, who are not the best
of company?  But the principle was this: that which a man has not fairly
earned, and, further, that which he cannot fully enjoy, does not belong
to him, but is a part of mankind’s treasure which he holds as steward on
parole.  To mankind, then, it must be made profitable; and how this
should be done is, once more, a problem which each man must solve for
himself, and about which none has a right to judge him.  Yet there are a
few considerations which are very obvious and may here be stated.
Mankind is not only the whole in general, but every one in particular.
Every man or woman is one of mankind’s dear possessions; to his or her
just brain, and kind heart, and active hands, mankind intrusts some of
its hopes for the future; he or she is a possible well-spring of good
acts and source of blessings to the race.  This money which you do not
need, which, in a rigid sense, you do not want, may therefore be returned
not only in public benefactions to the race, but in private kindnesses.
Your wife, your children, your friends stand nearest to you, and should
be helped the first.  There at least there can be little imposture, for
you know their necessities of your own knowledge.  And consider, if all
the world did as you did, and according to their means extended help in
the circle of their affections, there would be no more crying want in
times of plenty and no more cold, mechanical charity given with a doubt
and received with confusion.  Would not this simple rule make a new world
out of the old and cruel one which we inhabit?

                                * * * * *

          [_After two more sentences the fragment breaks off_.]




FATHER DAMIEN
AN OPEN LETTER TO THE REVEREND DR. HYDE OF HONOLULU


                                                                   SYDNEY,
                                                      _February_ 25, 1890.

Sir,—It may probably occur to you that we have met, and visited, and
conversed; on my side, with interest.  You may remember that you have
done me several courtesies, for which I was prepared to be grateful.  But
there are duties which come before gratitude, and offences which justly
divide friends, far more acquaintances.  Your letter to the Reverend H.
B. Gage is a document which, in my sight, if you had filled me with bread
when I was starving, if you had sat up to nurse my father when he lay
a-dying, would yet absolve me from the bonds of gratitude.  You know
enough, doubtless, of the process of canonisation to be aware that, a
hundred years after the death of Damien, there will appear a man charged
with the painful office of the _devil’s advocate_.  After that noble
brother of mine, and of all frail clay, shall have lain a century at
rest, one shall accuse, one defend him.  The circumstance is unusual that
the devil’s advocate should be a volunteer, should be a member of a sect
immediately rival, and should make haste to take upon himself his ugly
office ere the bones are cold; unusual, and of a taste which I shall
leave my readers free to qualify; unusual, and to me inspiring.  If I
have at all learned the trade of using words to convey truth and to
arouse emotion, you have at last furnished me with a subject.  For it is
in the interest of all mankind, and the cause of public decency in every
quarter of the world, not only that Damien should be righted, but that
you and your letter should be displayed at length, in their true colours,
to the public eye.

To do this properly, I must begin by quoting you at large: I shall then
proceed to criticise your utterance from several points of view, divine
and human, in the course of which I shall attempt to draw again, and with
more specification, the character of the dead saint whom it has pleased
you to vilify: so much being done, I shall say farewell to you for ever.

                                                                ‘HONOLULU,
                                                        ‘_August_ 2, 1889.

    ‘Rev. H. B. GAGE.

    ‘Dear Brother,—In answer to your inquiries about Father Damien, I can
    only reply that we who knew the man are surprised at the extravagant
    newspaper laudations, as if he was a most saintly philanthropist.
    The simple truth is, he was a coarse, dirty man, head-strong and
    bigoted.  He was not sent to Molokai, but went there without orders;
    did not stay at the leper settlement (before he became one himself),
    but circulated freely over the whole island (less than half the
    island is devoted to the lepers), and he came often to Honolulu.  He
    had no hand in the reforms and improvements inaugurated, which were
    the work of our Board of Health, as occasion required and means were
    provided.  He was not a pure man in his relations with women, and the
    leprosy of which he died should be attributed to his vices and
    carelessness.  Others have done much for the lepers, our own
    ministers, the government physicians, and so forth, but never with
    the Catholic idea of meriting eternal life.—Yours, etc.,

                                                        ‘C. M. HYDE.’ {65}

To deal fitly with a letter so extraordinary, I must draw at the outset
on my private knowledge of the signatory and his sect.  It may offend
others; scarcely you, who have been so busy to collect, so bold to
publish, gossip on your rivals.  And this is perhaps the moment when I
may best explain to you the character of what you are to read: I conceive
you as a man quite beyond and below the reticences of civility: with what
measure you mete, with that shall it be measured you again; with you, at
last, I rejoice to feel the button off the foil and to plunge home.  And
if in aught that I shall say I should offend others, your colleagues,
whom I respect and remember with affection, I can but offer them my
regret; I am not free, I am inspired by the consideration of interests
far more large; and such pain as can be inflicted by anything from me
must be indeed trifling when compared with the pain with which they read
your letter.  It is not the hangman, but the criminal, that brings
dishonour on the house.

You belong, sir, to a sect—I believe my sect, and that in which my
ancestors laboured—which has enjoyed, and partly failed to utilise, an
exceptional advantage in the islands of Hawaii.  The first missionaries
came; they found the land already self-purged of its old and bloody
faith; they were embraced, almost on their arrival, with enthusiasm; what
troubles they supported came far more from whites than from Hawaiians;
and to these last they stood (in a rough figure) in the shoes of God.
This is not the place to enter into the degree or causes of their
failure, such as it is.  One element alone is pertinent, and must here be
plainly dealt with.  In the course of their evangelical calling, they—or
too many of them—grew rich.  It may be news to you that the houses of
missionaries are a cause of mocking on the streets of Honolulu.  It will
at least be news to you, that when I returned your civil visit, the
driver of my cab commented on the size, the taste, and the comfort of
your home.  It would have been news certainly to myself, had any one told
me that afternoon that I should live to drag such matter into print.  But
you see, sir, how you degrade better men to your own level; and it is
needful that those who are to judge betwixt you and me, betwixt Damien
and the devil’s advocate, should understand your letter to have been
penned in a house which could raise, and that very justly, the envy and
the comments of the passers-by.  I think (to employ a phrase of yours
which I admire) it ‘should be attributed’ to you that you have never
visited the scene of Damien’s life and death.  If you had, and had
recalled it, and looked about your pleasant rooms, even your pen perhaps
would have been stayed.

Your sect (and remember, as far as any sect avows me, it is mine) has not
done ill in a worldly sense in the Hawaiian Kingdom.  When calamity
befell their innocent parishioners, when leprosy descended and took root
in the Eight Islands, a _quid pro quo_ was to be looked for.  To that
prosperous mission, and to you, as one of its adornments, God had sent at
last an opportunity.  I know I am touching here upon a nerve acutely
sensitive.  I know that others of your colleagues look back on the
inertia of your Church, and the intrusive and decisive heroism of Damien,
with something almost to be called remorse.  I am sure it is so with
yourself; I am persuaded your letter was inspired by a certain envy, not
essentially ignoble, and the one human trait to be espied in that
performance.  You were thinking of the lost chance, the past day; of that
which should have been conceived and was not; of the service due and not
rendered.  Time was, said the voice in your ear, in your pleasant room,
as you sat raging and writing; and if the words written were base beyond
parallel, the rage, I am happy to repeat—it is the only compliment I
shall pay you—the rage was almost virtuous.  But, sir, when we have
failed, and another has succeeded; when we have stood by, and another has
stepped in; when we sit and grow bulky in our charming mansions, and a
plain, uncouth peasant steps into the battle, under the eyes of God, and
succours the afflicted, and consoles the dying, and is himself afflicted
in his turn, and dies upon the field of honour—the battle cannot be
retrieved as your unhappy irritation has suggested.  It is a lost battle,
and lost for ever.  One thing remained to you in your defeat—some rags of
common honour; and these you have made haste to cast away.

Common honour; not the honour of having done anything right, but the
honour of not having done aught conspicuously foul; the honour of the
inert: that was what remained to you.  We are not all expected to be
Damiens; a man may conceive his duty more narrowly, he may love his
comforts better; and none will cast a stone at him for that.  But will a
gentleman of your reverend profession allow me an example from the fields
of gallantry?  When two gentlemen compete for the favour of a lady, and
the one succeeds and the other is rejected, and (as will sometimes
happen) matter damaging to the successful rival’s credit reaches the ear
of the defeated, it is held by plain men of no pretensions that his mouth
is, in the circumstance, almost necessarily closed.  Your Church and
Damien’s were in Hawaii upon a rivalry to do well: to help, to edify, to
set divine examples.  You having (in one huge instance) failed, and
Damien succeeded, I marvel it should not have occurred to you that you
were doomed to silence; that when you had been outstripped in that high
rivalry, and sat inglorious in the midst of your wellbeing, in your
pleasant room—and Damien, crowned with glories and horrors, toiled and
rotted in that pigsty of his under the cliffs of Kalawao—you, the elect
who would not, were the last man on earth to collect and propagate gossip
on the volunteer who would and did.

I think I see you—for I try to see you in the flesh as I write these
sentences—I think I see you leap at the word pigsty, a hyperbolical
expression at the best.  ‘He had no hand in the reforms,’ he was ‘a
coarse, dirty man’; these were your own words; and you may think it
possible that I am come to support you with fresh evidence.  In a sense,
it is even so.  Damien has been too much depicted with a conventional
halo and conventional features; so drawn by men who perhaps had not the
eye to remark or the pen to express the individual; or who perhaps were
only blinded and silenced by generous admiration, such as I partly envy
for myself—such as you, if your soul were enlightened, would envy on your
bended knees.  It is the least defect of such a method of portraiture
that it makes the path easy for the devil’s advocate, and leaves for the
misuse of the slanderer a considerable field of truth.  For the truth
that is suppressed by friends is the readiest weapon of the enemy.  The
world, in your despite, may perhaps owe you something, if your letter be
the means of substituting once for all a credible likeness for a wax
abstraction.  For, if that world at all remember you, on the day when
Damien of Molokai shall be named Saint, it will be in virtue of one work:
your letter to the Reverend H. B. Gage.

You may ask on what authority I speak.  It was my inclement destiny to
become acquainted, not with Damien, but with Dr. Hyde.  When I visited
the lazaretto, Damien was already in his resting grave.  But such
information as I have, I gathered on the spot in conversation with those
who knew him well and long: some indeed who revered his memory; but
others who had sparred and wrangled with him, who beheld him with no
halo, who perhaps regarded him with small respect, and through whose
unprepared and scarcely partial communications the plain, human features
of the man shone on me convincingly.  These gave me what knowledge I
possess; and I learnt it in that scene where it could be most completely
and sensitively understood—Kalawao, which you have never visited, about
which you have never so much as endeavoured to inform yourself; for,
brief as your letter is, you have found the means to stumble into that
confession.  ‘_Less than one-half_ of the island,’ you say, ‘is devoted
to the lepers.’  Molokai—‘_Molokai ahina_,’ the ‘grey,’ lofty, and most
desolate island—along all its northern side plunges a front of precipice
into a sea of unusual profundity.  This range of cliff is, from east to
west, the true end and frontier of the island.  Only in one spot there
projects into the ocean a certain triangular and rugged down, grassy,
stony, windy, and rising in the midst into a hill with a dead crater: the
whole bearing to the cliff that overhangs it somewhat the same relation
as a bracket to a wall.  With this hint you will now be able to pick out
the leper station on a map; you will be able to judge how much of Molokai
is thus cut off between the surf and precipice, whether less than a half,
or less than a quarter, or a fifth, or a tenth—or, say, a twentieth; and
the next time you burst into print you will be in a position to share
with us the issue of your calculations.

I imagine you to be one of those persons who talk with cheerfulness of
that place which oxen and wain-ropes could not drag you to behold.  You,
who do not even know its situation on the map, probably denounce
sensational descriptions, stretching your limbs the while in your
pleasant parlour on Beretania Street.  When I was pulled ashore there one
early morning, there sat with me in the boat two sisters, bidding
farewell (in humble imitation of Damien) to the lights and joys of human
life.  One of these wept silently; I could not withhold myself from
joining her.  Had you been there, it is my belief that nature would have
triumphed even in you; and as the boat drew but a little nearer, and you
beheld the stairs crowded with abominable deformations of our common
manhood, and saw yourself landing in the midst of such a population as
only now and then surrounds us in the horror of a nightmare—what a
haggard eye you would have rolled over your reluctant shoulder towards
the house on Beretania Street!  Had you gone on; had you found every
fourth face a blot upon the landscape; had you visited the hospital and
seen the butt-ends of human beings lying there almost unrecognisable, but
still breathing, still thinking, still remembering; you would have
understood that life in the lazaretto is an ordeal from which the nerves
of a man’s spirit shrink, even as his eye quails under the brightness of
the sun; you would have felt it was (even to-day) a pitiful place to
visit and a hell to dwell in.  It is not the fear of possible infection.
That seems a little thing when compared with the pain, the pity, and the
disgust of the visitor’s surroundings, and the atmosphere of affliction,
disease, and physical disgrace in which he breathes.  I do not think I am
a man more than usually timid; but I never recall the days and nights I
spent upon that island promontory (eight days and seven nights), without
heartfelt thankfulness that I am somewhere else.  I find in my diary that
I speak of my stay as a ‘grinding experience’: I have once jotted in the
margin, ‘_Harrowing_ is the word’; and when the _Mokolii_ bore me at last
towards the outer world, I kept repeating to myself, with a new
conception of their pregnancy, those simple words of the song—

    ‘’Tis the most distressful country that ever yet was seen.’

And observe: that which I saw and suffered from was a settlement purged,
bettered, beautified; the new village built, the hospital and the
Bishop-Home excellently arranged; the sisters, the doctor, and the
missionaries, all indefatigable in their noble tasks.  It was a different
place when Damien came there and made his great renunciation, and slept
that first night under a tree amidst his rotting brethren: alone with
pestilence; and looking forward (with what courage, with what pitiful
sinkings of dread, God only knows) to a lifetime of dressing sores and
stumps.

You will say, perhaps, I am too sensitive, that sights as painful abound
in cancer hospitals and are confronted daily by doctors and nurses.  I
have long learned to admire and envy the doctors and the nurses.  But
there is no cancer hospital so large and populous as Kalawao and
Kalaupapa; and in such a matter every fresh case, like every inch of
length in the pipe of an organ, deepens the note of the impression; for
what daunts the onlooker is that monstrous sum of human suffering by
which he stands surrounded.  Lastly, no doctor or nurse is called upon to
enter once for all the doors of that gehenna; they do not say farewell,
they need not abandon hope, on its sad threshold; they but go for a time
to their high calling, and can look forward as they go to relief, to
recreation, and to rest.  But Damien shut-to with his own hand the doors
of his own sepulchre.

I shall now extract three passages from my diary at Kalawao.

_A_.  ‘Damien is dead and already somewhat ungratefully remembered in the
field of his labours and sufferings.  “He was a good man, but very
officious,” says one.  Another tells me he had fallen (as other priests
so easily do) into something of the ways and habits of thought of a
Kanaka; but he had the wit to recognise the fact, and the good sense to
laugh at’ [over] ‘it.  A plain man it seems he was; I cannot find he was
a popular.’

_B_.  ‘After Ragsdale’s death’ [Ragsdale was a famous Luna, or overseer,
of the unruly settlement] ‘there followed a brief term of office by
Father Damien which served only to publish the weakness of that noble
man.  He was rough in his ways, and he had no control.  Authority was
relaxed; Damien’s life was threatened, and he was soon eager to resign.’

_C_.  ‘Of Damien I begin to have an idea.  He seems to have been a man of
the peasant class, certainly of the peasant type: shrewd, ignorant and
bigoted, yet with an open mind, and capable of receiving and digesting a
reproof if it were bluntly administered; superbly generous in the least
thing as well as in the greatest, and as ready to give his last shirt
(although not without human grumbling) as he had been to sacrifice his
life; essentially indiscreet and officious, which made him a troublesome
colleague; domineering in all his ways, which made him incurably
unpopular with the Kanakas, but yet destitute of real authority, so that
his boys laughed at him and he must carry out his wishes by the means of
bribes.  He learned to have a mania for doctoring; and set up the Kanakas
against the remedies of his regular rivals: perhaps (if anything matter
at all in the treatment of such a disease) the worst thing that he did,
and certainly the easiest.  The best and worst of the man appear very
plainly in his dealings with Mr. Chapman’s money; he had originally laid
it out’ [intended to lay it out] ‘entirely for the benefit of Catholics,
and even so not wisely; but after a long, plain talk, he admitted his
error fully and revised the list.  The sad state of the boys’ home is in
part the result of his lack of control; in part, of his own slovenly ways
and false ideas of hygiene.  Brother officials used to call it “Damien’s
Chinatown.”  “Well,” they would say, “your China-town keeps growing.”
And he would laugh with perfect good-nature, and adhere to his errors
with perfect obstinacy.  So much I have gathered of truth about this
plain, noble human brother and father of ours; his imperfections are the
traits of his face, by which we know him for our fellow; his martyrdom
and his example nothing can lessen or annul; and only a person here on
the spot can properly appreciate their greatness.’

I have set down these private passages, as you perceive, without
correction; thanks to you, the public has them in their bluntness.  They
are almost a list of the man’s faults, for it is rather these that I was
seeking: with his virtues, with the heroic profile of his life, I and the
world were already sufficiently acquainted.  I was besides a little
suspicious of Catholic testimony; in no ill sense, but merely because
Damien’s admirers and disciples were the least likely to be critical.  I
know you will be more suspicious still; and the facts set down above were
one and all collected from the lips of Protestants who had opposed the
father in his life.  Yet I am strangely deceived, or they build up the
image of a man, with all his weaknesses, essentially heroic, and alive
with rugged honesty, generosity, and mirth.

Take it for what it is, rough private jottings of the worst sides of
Damien’s character, collected from the lips of those who had laboured
with and (in your own phrase) ‘knew the man’;—though I question whether
Damien would have said that he knew you.  Take it, and observe with
wonder how well you were served by your gossips, how ill by your
intelligence and sympathy; in how many points of fact we are at one, and
how widely our appreciations vary.  There is something wrong here; either
with you or me.  It is possible, for instance, that you, who seem to have
so many ears in Kalawao, had heard of the affair of Mr. Chapman’s money,
and were singly struck by Damien’s intended wrong-doing.  I was struck
with that also, and set it fairly down; but I was struck much more by the
fact that he had the honesty of mind to be convinced.  I may here tell
you that it was a long business; that one of his colleagues sat with him
late into the night, multiplying arguments and accusations; that the
father listened as usual with ‘perfect good-nature and perfect
obstinacy’; but at the last, when he was persuaded—‘Yes,’ said he, ‘I am
very much obliged to you; you have done me a service; it would have been
a theft.’  There are many (not Catholics merely) who require their heroes
and saints to be infallible; to these the story will be painful; not to
the true lovers, patrons, and servants of mankind.

And I take it, this is a type of our division; that you are one of those
who have an eye for faults and failures; that you take a pleasure to find
and publish them; and that, having found them, you make haste to forget
the overvailing virtues and the real success which had alone introduced
them to your knowledge.  It is a dangerous frame of mind.  That you may
understand how dangerous, and into what a situation it has already
brought you, we will (if you please) go hand-in-hand through the
different phrases of your letter, and candidly examine each from the
point of view of its truth, its appositeness, and its charity.

Damien was _coarse_.

It is very possible.  You make us sorry for the lepers, who had only a
coarse old peasant for their friend and father.  But you, who were so
refined, why were you not there, to cheer them with the lights of
culture?  Or may I remind you that we have some reason to doubt if John
the Baptist were genteel; and in the case of Peter, on whose career you
doubtless dwell approvingly in the pulpit, no doubt at all he was a
‘coarse, headstrong’ fisherman!  Yet even in our Protestant Bibles Peter
is called Saint.

Damien was _dirty_.

He was.  Think of the poor lepers annoyed with this dirty comrade!  But
the clean Dr. Hyde was at his food in a fine house.

Damien was _headstrong_.

I believe you are right again; and I thank God for his strong head and
heart.

Damien was _bigoted_.

I am not fond of bigots myself, because they are not fond of me.  But
what is meant by bigotry, that we should regard it as a blemish in a
priest?  Damien believed his own religion with the simplicity of a
peasant or a child; as I would I could suppose that you do.  For this, I
wonder at him some way off; and had that been his only character, should
have avoided him in life.  But the point of interest in Damien, which has
caused him to be so much talked about and made him at last the subject of
your pen and mine, was that, in him, his bigotry, his intense and narrow
faith, wrought potently for good, and strengthened him to be one of the
world’s heroes and exemplars.

Damien _was not sent to Molokai_, _but went there without orders_.

Is this a misreading? or do you really mean the words for blame?  I have
heard Christ, in the pulpits of our Church, held up for imitation on the
ground that His sacrifice was voluntary.  Does Dr. Hyde think otherwise?

Damien _did not stay at the settlement_, _etc._

It is true he was allowed many indulgences.  Am I to understand that you
blame the father for profiting by these, or the officers for granting
them?  In either case, it is a mighty Spartan standard to issue from the
house on Beretania Street; and I am convinced you will find yourself with
few supporters.

Damien _had no hand in the reforms_, _etc._

I think even you will admit that I have already been frank in my
description of the man I am defending; but before I take you up upon this
head, I will be franker still, and tell you that perhaps nowhere in the
world can a man taste a more pleasurable sense of contrast than when he
passes from Damien’s ‘Chinatown’ at Kalawao to the beautiful Bishop-Home
at Kalaupapa.  At this point, in my desire to make all fair for you, I
will break my rule and adduce Catholic testimony.  Here is a passage from
my diary about my visit to the Chinatown, from which you will see how it
is (even now) regarded by its own officials: ‘We went round all the
dormitories, refectories, etc.—dark and dingy enough, with a superficial
cleanliness, which he’ [Mr. Dutton, the lay-brother] ‘did not seek to
defend.  “It is almost decent,” said he; “the sisters will make that all
right when we get them here.”’  And yet I gathered it was already better
since Damien was dead, and far better than when he was there alone and
had his own (not always excellent) way.  I have now come far enough to
meet you on a common ground of fact; and I tell you that, to a mind not
prejudiced by jealousy, all the reforms of the lazaretto, and even those
which he most vigorously opposed, are properly the work of Damien.  They
are the evidence of his success; they are what his heroism provoked from
the reluctant and the careless.  Many were before him in the field; Mr.
Meyer, for instance, of whose faithful work we hear too little: there
have been many since; and some had more worldly wisdom, though none had
more devotion, than our saint.  Before his day, even you will confess,
they had effected little.  It was his part, by one striking act of
martyrdom, to direct all men’s eyes on that distressful country.  At a
blow, and with the price of his life, he made the place illustrious and
public.  And that, if you will consider largely, was the one reform
needful; pregnant of all that should succeed.  It brought money; it
brought (best individual addition of them all) the sisters; it brought
supervision, for public opinion and public interest landed with the man
at Kalawao.  If ever any man brought reforms, and died to bring them, it
was he.  There is not a clean cup or towel in the Bishop-Home, but dirty
Damien washed it.

Damien _was not a pure man in his relations with women_, _etc._

How do you know that?  Is this the nature of the conversation in that
house on Beretania Street which the cabman envied, driving past?—racy
details of the misconduct of the poor peasant priest, toiling under the
cliffs of Molokai?

Many have visited the station before me; they seem not to have heard the
rumour.  When I was there I heard many shocking tales, for my informants
were men speaking with the plainness of the laity; and I heard plenty of
complaints of Damien.  Why was this never mentioned? and how came it to
you in the retirement of your clerical parlour?

But I must not even seem to deceive you.  This scandal, when I read it in
your letter, was not new to me.  I had heard it once before; and I must
tell you how.  There came to Samoa a man from Honolulu; he, in a
public-house on the beach, volunteered the statement that Damien had
‘contracted the disease from having connection with the female lepers’;
and I find a joy in telling you how the report was welcomed in a
public-house.  A man sprang to his feet; I am not at liberty to give his
name, but from what I heard I doubt if you would care to have him to
dinner in Beretania Street.  ‘You miserable little—’ (here is a word I
dare not print, it would so shock your ears).  ‘You miserable little—,’
he cried, ‘if the story were a thousand times true, can’t you see you are
a million times a lower—for daring to repeat it?’  I wish it could be
told of you that when the report reached you in your house, perhaps after
family worship, you had found in your soul enough holy anger to receive
it with the same expressions; ay, even with that one which I dare not
print; it would not need to have been blotted away, like Uncle Toby’s
oath, by the tears of the recording angel; it would have been counted to
you for your brightest righteousness.  But you have deliberately chosen
the part of the man from Honolulu, and you have played it with
improvements of your own.  The man from Honolulu—miserable, leering
creature—communicated the tale to a rude knot of beach-combing drinkers
in a public-house, where (I will so far agree with your temperance
opinions) man is not always at his noblest; and the man from Honolulu had
himself been drinking—drinking, we may charitably fancy, to excess.  It
was to your ‘Dear Brother, the Reverend H. B. Gage,’ that you chose to
communicate the sickening story; and the blue ribbon which adorns your
portly bosom forbids me to allow you the extenuating plea that you were
drunk when it was done.  Your ‘dear brother’—a brother indeed—made haste
to deliver up your letter (as a means of grace, perhaps) to the religious
papers; where, after many months, I found and read and wondered at it;
and whence I have now reproduced it for the wonder of others.  And you
and your dear brother have, by this cycle of operations, built up a
contrast very edifying to examine in detail.  The man whom you would not
care to have to dinner, on the one side; on the other, the Reverend Dr.
Hyde and the Reverend H. B. Gage: the Apia bar-room, the Honolulu manse.

But I fear you scarce appreciate how you appear to your fellow-men; and
to bring it home to you, I will suppose your story to be true.  I will
suppose—and God forgive me for supposing it—that Damien faltered and
stumbled in his narrow path of duty; I will suppose that, in the horror
of his isolation, perhaps in the fever of incipient disease, he, who was
doing so much more than he had sworn, failed in the letter of his
priestly oath—he, who was so much a better man than either you or me, who
did what we have never dreamed of daring—he too tasted of our common
frailty.  ‘O, Iago, the pity of it!’  The least tender should be moved to
tears; the most incredulous to prayer.  And all that you could do was to
pen your letter to the Reverend H. B. Gage!

Is it growing at all clear to you what a picture you have drawn of your
own heart?  I will try yet once again to make it clearer.  You had a
father: suppose this tale were about him, and some informant brought it
to you, proof in hand: I am not making too high an estimate of your
emotional nature when I suppose you would regret the circumstance? that
you would feel the tale of frailty the more keenly since it shamed the
author of your days? and that the last thing you would do would be to
publish it in the religious press?  Well, the man who tried to do what
Damien did, is my father, and the father of the man in the Apia bar, and
the father of all who love goodness; and he was your father too, if God
had given you grace to see it.




THE PENTLAND RISING
A PAGE OF HISTORY
1666


    ‘A cloud of witnesses lyes here,
    Who for Christ’s interest did appear.’

                            _Inscription on Battlefield at Rullion Green_.



