CHAPTER III—THE MARCH OF THE REBELS


    ‘Stay, passenger, take notice what thou reads,
    At Edinburgh lie our bodies, here our heads;
    Our right hands stood at Lanark, these we want,
    Because with them we signed the Covenant.’

                                _Epitaph on a Tombstone at Hamilton_. {93}

On Friday the 16th, Bailie Irvine of Dumfries came to the Council at
Edinburgh, and gave information concerning this ‘horrid rebellion.’  In
the absence of Rothes, Sharpe presided—much to the wrath of some members;
and as he imagined his own safety endangered, his measures were most
energetic.  Dalzell was ordered away to the West, the guards round the
city were doubled, officers and soldiers were forced to take the oath of
allegiance, and all lodgers were commanded to give in their names.
Sharpe, surrounded with all these guards and precautions,
trembled—trembled as he trembled when the avengers of blood drew him from
his chariot on Magus Muir,—for he knew how he had sold his trust, how he
had betrayed his charge, and he felt that against him must their chiefest
hatred be directed, against him their direst thunder-bolts be forged.
But even in his fear the apostate Presbyterian was unrelenting,
unpityingly harsh; he published in his manifesto no promise of pardon, no
inducement to submission.  He said, ‘If you submit not you must die,’ but
never added, ‘If you submit you may live!’ {94a}

Meantime the insurgents proceeded on their way.  At Carsphairn they were
deserted by Captain Gray, who, doubtless in a fit of oblivion, neglected
to leave behind him the coffer containing Sir James’s money.  Who he was
is a mystery, unsolved by any historian; his papers were evidently
forgeries—that, and his final flight, appear to indicate that he was an
agent of the Royalists, for either the King or the Duke of York was heard
to say, ‘That, if he might have his wish, he would have them all turn
rebels and go to arms.’ {94b}

Upon the 18th day of the month they left Carsphairn and marched onwards.

Turner was always lodged by his captors at a good inn, frequently at the
best of which their halting-place could boast.  Here many visits were
paid to him by the ministers and officers of the insurgent force.  In his
description of these interviews he displays a vein of satiric severity,
admitting any kindness that was done to him with some qualifying souvenir
of former harshness, and gloating over any injury, mistake, or folly,
which it was his chance to suffer or to hear.  He appears,
notwithstanding all this, to have been on pretty good terms with his
cruel ‘phanaticks,’ as the following extract sufficiently proves:

‘Most of the foot were lodged about the church or churchyard, and order
given to ring bells next morning for a sermon to be preached by Mr.
Welch.  Maxwell of Morith, and Major M‘Cullough invited me to heare “that
phanatick sermon” (for soe they merrilie called it).  They said that
preaching might prove an effectual meane to turne me, which they
heartilie wished.  I answered to them that I was under guards, and that
if they intended to heare that sermon, it was probable I might likewise,
for it was not like my guards wold goe to church and leave me alone at my
lodgeings.  Bot to what they said of my conversion, I said it wold be
hard to turne a Turner.  Bot because I founde them in a merrie humour, I
said, if I did not come to heare Mr. Welch preach, then they might fine
me in fortie shillings Scots, which was double the suome of what I had
exacted from the phanatics.’ {95}

This took place at Ochiltree, on the 22nd day of the month.  The
following is recounted by this personage with malicious glee, and
certainly, if authentic, it is a sad proof of how chaff is mixed with
wheat, and how ignorant, almost impious, persons were engaged in this
movement; nevertheless we give it, for we wish to present with
impartiality all the alleged facts to the reader:

‘Towards the evening Mr. Robinsone and Mr. Crukshank gaue me a visite; I
called for some ale purposelie to heare one of them blesse it.  It fell
Mr. Robinsone to seeke the blessing, who said one of the most bombastick
graces that ever I heard in my life.  He summoned God Allmightie very
imperiouslie to be their secondarie (for that was his language).  “And
if,” said he, “thou wilt not be our Secondarie, we will not fight for
thee at all, for it is not our cause bot thy cause; and if thou wilt not
fight for our cause and thy oune cause, then we are not obliged to fight
for it.  They say,” said he, “that Dukes, Earles, and Lords are coming
with the King’s General against us, bot they shall be nothing bot a
threshing to us.”  This grace did more fullie satisfie me of the folly
and injustice of their cause, then the ale did quench my thirst.’ {96a}

Frequently the rebels made a halt near some roadside alehouse, or in some
convenient park, where Colonel Wallace, who had now taken the command,
would review the horse and foot, during which time Turner was sent either
into the alehouse or round the shoulder of the hill, to prevent him from
seeing the disorders which were likely to arise.  He was, at last, on the
25th day of the month, between Douglas and Lanark, permitted to behold
their evolutions.  ‘I found their horse did consist of four hundreth and
fortie, and the foot of five hundreth and upwards. . . . The horsemen
were armed for most part with suord and pistoll, some onlie with suord.
The foot with musket, pike, sith (scythe), forke, and suord; and some
with suords great and long.’  He admired much the proficiency of their
cavalry, and marvelled how they had attained to it in so short a time.
{96b}

At Douglas, which they had just left on the morning of this great
wapinshaw, they were charged—awful picture of depravity!—with the theft
of a silver spoon and a nightgown.  Could it be expected that while the
whole country swarmed with robbers of every description, such a rare
opportunity for plunder should be lost by rogues—that among a thousand
men, even though fighting for religion, there should not be one Achan in
the camp?  At Lanark a declaration was drawn up and signed by the chief
rebels.  In it occurs the following:

‘The just sense whereof ’—the sufferings of the country—‘made us choose,
rather to betake ourselves to the fields for self-defence, than to stay
at home, burdened daily with the calamities of others, and tortured with
the fears of our own approaching misery.’ {97}

The whole body, too, swore the Covenant, to which ceremony the epitaph at
the head of this chapter seems to refer.

A report that Dalzell was approaching drove them from Lanark to Bathgate,
where, on the evening of Monday the 26th, the wearied army stopped.  But
at twelve o’clock the cry, which served them for a trumpet, of ‘Horse!
horse!’ and ‘Mount the prisoner!’ resounded through the night-shrouded
town, and called the peasants from their well-earned rest to toil onwards
in their march.  The wind howled fiercely over the moorland; a close,
thick, wetting rain descended.  Chilled to the bone, worn out with long
fatigue, sinking to the knees in mire, onward they marched to
destruction.  One by one the weary peasants fell off from their ranks to
sleep, and die in the rain-soaked moor, or to seek some house by the
wayside wherein to hide till daybreak.  One by one at first, then in
gradually increasing numbers, at every shelter that was seen, whole
troops left the waning squadrons, and rushed to hide themselves from the
ferocity of the tempest.  To right and left nought could be descried but
the broad expanse of the moor, and the figures of their fellow-rebels,
seen dimly through the murky night, plodding onwards through the sinking
moss.  Those who kept together—a miserable few—often halted to rest
themselves, and to allow their lagging comrades to overtake them.  Then
onward they went again, still hoping for assistance, reinforcement, and
supplies; onward again, through the wind, and the rain, and the
darkness—onward to their defeat at Pentland, and their scaffold at
Edinburgh.  It was calculated that they lost one half of their army on
that disastrous night-march.

Next night they reached the village of Colinton, four miles from
Edinburgh, where they halted for the last time. {98}



