CHAPTER V—A RECORD OF BLOOD


    ‘They cut his hands ere he was dead,
    And after that struck of his head.
    His blood under the altar cries
    For vengeance on Christ’s enemies.’

                         _Epitaph on Tomb at Longcross of Clermont_. {104}

Master Andrew Murray, an outed minister, residing in the Potterrow, on
the morning after the defeat, heard the sounds of cheering and the march
of many feet beneath his window.  He gazed out.  With colours flying, and
with music sounding, Dalzell, victorious, entered Edinburgh.  But his
banners were dyed in blood, and a band of prisoners were marched within
his ranks.  The old man knew it all.  That martial and triumphant strain
was the death-knell of his friends and of their cause, the rust-hued
spots upon the flags were the tokens of their courage and their death,
and the prisoners were the miserable remnant spared from death in battle
to die upon the scaffold.  Poor old man! he had outlived all joy.  Had he
lived longer he would have seen increasing torment and increasing woe; he
would have seen the clouds, then but gathering in mist, cast a more than
midnight darkness over his native hills, and have fallen a victim to
those bloody persecutions which, later, sent their red memorials to the
sea by many a burn.  By a merciful Providence all this was spared to
him—he fell beneath the first blow; and ere four days had passed since
Rullion Green, the aged minister of God was gathered to is fathers.
{105a}

When Sharpe first heard of the rebellion, he applied to Sir Alexander
Ramsay, the Provost, for soldiers to guard his house.  Disliking their
occupation, the soldiers gave him an ugly time of it.  All the night
through they kept up a continuous series of ‘alarms and incursions,’
‘cries of “Stand!” “Give fire!”’ etc., which forced the prelate to flee
to the Castle in the morning, hoping there to find the rest which was
denied him at home. {105b}  Now, however, when all danger to himself was
past, Sharpe came out in his true colours, and scant was the justice
likely to be shown to the foes of Scottish Episcopacy when the Primate
was by.  The prisoners were lodged in Haddo’s Hole, a part of St. Giles’
Cathedral, where, by the kindness of Bishop Wishart, to his credit be it
spoken, they were amply supplied with food. {105c}

Some people urged, in the Council, that the promise of quarter which had
been given on the field of battle should protect the lives of the
miserable men.  Sir John Gilmoure, the greatest lawyer, gave no
opinion—certainly a suggestive circumstance—but Lord Lee declared that
this would not interfere with their legal trial, ‘so to bloody executions
they went.’ {105d}  To the number of thirty they were condemned and
executed; while two of them, Hugh M‘Kail, a young minister, and Neilson
of Corsack, were tortured with the boots.

The goods of those who perished were confiscated, and their bodies were
dismembered and distributed to different parts of the country; ‘the heads
of Major M‘Culloch and the two Gordons,’ it was resolved, says Kirkton,
‘should be pitched on the gate of Kirkcudbright; the two Hamiltons and
Strong’s head should be affixed at Hamilton, and Captain Arnot’s sett on
the Watter Gate at Edinburgh.  The armes of all the ten, because they
hade with uplifted hands renewed the Covenant at Lanark, were sent to the
people of that town to expiate that crime, by placing these arms on the
top of the prison.’ {106}  Among these was John Neilson, the Laird of
Corsack, who saved Turner’s life at Dumfries; in return for which service
Sir James attempted, though without success, to get the poor man
reprieved.  One of the condemned died of his wounds between the day of
condemnation and the day of execution.  ‘None of them,’ says Kirkton,
‘would save their life by taking the declaration and renouncing the
Covenant, though it was offered to them. . . . But never men died in
Scotland so much lamented by the people, not only spectators, but those
in the country.  When Knockbreck and his brother were turned over, they
clasped each other in their armes, and so endured the pangs of death.
When Humphrey Colquhoun died, he spoke not like an ordinary citizen, but
like a heavenly minister, relating his comfortable Christian experiences,
and called for his Bible, and laid it on his wounded arm, and read John
iii. 8, and spoke upon it to the admiration of all.  But most of all,
when Mr. M‘Kail died, there was such a lamentation as was never known in
Scotland before; not one dry cheek upon all the street, or in all the
numberless windows in the mercate place.’ {107a}

The following passage from this speech speaks for itself and its author:

‘Hereafter I will not talk with flesh and blood, nor think on the world’s
consolations.  Farewell to all my friends, whose company hath been
refreshful to me in my pilgrimage.  I have done with the light of the sun
and the moon; welcome eternal light, eternal life, everlasting love,
everlasting praise, everlasting glory.  Praise to Him that sits upon the
throne, and to the Lamb for ever!  Bless the Lord, O my soul, that hath
pardoned all my iniquities in the blood of His Son, and healed all my
diseases.  Bless Him, O all ye His angels that excel in strength, ye
ministers of His that do His pleasure.  Bless the Lord, O my soul!’
{107b}

After having ascended the gallows ladder he again broke forth in the
following words of touching eloquence: ‘And now I leave off to speak any
more to creatures, and begin my intercourse with God, which shall never
be broken off.  Farewell father and mother, friends and relations!
Farewell the world and all delights!  Farewell meat and drink!  Farewell
sun, moon, and stars!—Welcome God and Father!  Welcome sweet Jesus
Christ, the Mediator of the new covenant!  Welcome blessed Spirit of
grace and God of all consolation!  Welcome glory!  Welcome eternal life!
Welcome Death!’ {107c}

At Glasgow, too, where some were executed, they caused the soldiers to
beat the drums and blow the trumpets on their closing ears.  Hideous
refinement of revenge!  Even the last words which drop from the lips of a
dying man—words surely the most sincere and the most unbiassed which
mortal mouth can utter—even these were looked upon as poisoned and as
poisonous.  ‘Drown their last accents,’ was the cry, ‘lest they should
lead the crowd to take their part, or at the least to mourn their doom!’
{108a}  But, after all, perhaps it was more merciful than one would
think—unintentionally so, of course; perhaps the storm of harsh and
fiercely jubilant noises, the clanging of trumpets, the rattling of
drums, and the hootings and jeerings of an unfeeling mob, which were the
last they heard on earth, might, when the mortal fight was over, when the
river of death was passed, add tenfold sweetness to the hymning of the
angels, tenfold peacefulness to the shores which they had reached.

Not content with the cruelty of these executions, some even of the
peasantry, though these were confined to the shire of Mid-Lothian,
pursued, captured, plundered, and murdered the miserable fugitives who
fell in their way.  One strange story have we of these times of blood and
persecution: Kirkton the historian and popular tradition tell us alike of
a flame which often would arise from the grave, in a moss near Carnwath,
of some of those poor rebels: of how it crept along the ground; of how it
covered the house of their murderer; and of how it scared him with its
lurid glare.

Hear Daniel Defoe: {108b}

    ‘If the poor people were by these insupportable violences made
    desperate, and driven to all the extremities of a wild despair, who
    can justly reflect on them when they read in the Word of God “That
    oppression makes a wise man mad”?  And therefore were there no other
    original of the insurrection known by the name of the Rising of
    Pentland, it was nothing but what the intolerable oppressions of
    those times might have justified to all the world, nature having
    dictated to all people a right of defence when illegally and
    arbitrarily attacked in a manner not justifiable either by laws of
    nature, the laws of God, or the laws of the country.’

Bear this remonstrance of Defoe’s in mind, and though it is the fashion
of the day to jeer and to mock, to execrate and to contemn, the noble
band of Covenanters—though the bitter laugh at their old-world religious
views, the curl of the lip at their merits, and the chilling silence on
their bravery and their determination, are but too rife through all
society—be charitable to what was evil and honest to what was good about
the Pentland insurgents, who fought for life and liberty, for country and
religion, on the 28th of November 1666, now just two hundred years ago.

                                * * * * *

EDINBURGH, 28_th November_ 1866.




THE DAY AFTER TO-MORROW


History is much decried; it is a tissue of errors, we are told, no doubt
correctly; and rival historians expose each other’s blunders with
gratification.  Yet the worst historian has a clearer view of the period
he studies than the best of us can hope to form of that in which we live.
The obscurest epoch is to-day; and that for a thousand reasons of
inchoate tendency, conflicting report, and sheer mass and multiplicity of
experience; but chiefly, perhaps, by reason of an insidious shifting of
landmarks.  Parties and ideas continually move, but not by measurable
marches on a stable course; the political soil itself steals forth by
imperceptible degrees, like a travelling glacier, carrying on its bosom
not only political parties but their flag-posts and cantonments; so that
what appears to be an eternal city founded on hills is but a flying
island of Laputa.  It is for this reason in particular that we are all
becoming Socialists without knowing it; by which I would not in the least
refer to the acute case of Mr. Hyndman and his horn-blowing supporters,
sounding their trumps of a Sunday within the walls of our individualist
Jericho—but to the stealthy change that has come over the spirit of
Englishmen and English legislation.  A little while ago, and we were
still for liberty; ‘crowd a few more thousands on the bench of
Government,’ we seemed to cry; ‘keep her head direct on liberty, and we
cannot help but come to port.’  This is over; _laisser faire_ declines in
favour; our legislation grows authoritative, grows philanthropical,
bristles with new duties and new penalties, and casts a spawn of
inspectors, who now begin, note-book in hand, to darken the face of
England.  It may be right or wrong, we are not trying that; but one thing
it is beyond doubt: it is Socialism in action, and the strange thing is
that we scarcely know it.

Liberty has served us a long while, and it may be time to seek new
altars.  Like all other principles, she has been proved to be
self-exclusive in the long run.  She has taken wages besides (like all
other virtues) and dutifully served Mammon; so that many things we were
accustomed to admire as the benefits of freedom and common to all were
truly benefits of wealth, and took their value from our neighbours’
poverty.  A few shocks of logic, a few disclosures (in the journalistic
phrase) of what the freedom of manufacturers, landlords, or shipowners
may imply for operatives, tenants, or seamen, and we not unnaturally
begin to turn to that other pole of hope, beneficent tyranny.  Freedom,
to be desirable, involves kindness, wisdom, and all the virtues of the
free; but the free man as we have seen him in action has been, as of
yore, only the master of many helots; and the slaves are still ill-fed,
ill-clad, ill-taught, ill-housed, insolently treated, and driven to their
mines and workshops by the lash of famine.  So much, in other men’s
affairs, we have begun to see clearly; we have begun to despair of virtue
in these other men, and from our seat in Parliament begin to discharge
upon them, thick as arrows, the host of our inspectors.  The landlord has
long shaken his head over the manufacturer; those who do business on land
have lost all trust in the virtues of the shipowner; the professions look
askance upon the retail traders and have even started their co-operative
stores to ruin them; and from out the smoke-wreaths of Birmingham a
finger has begun to write upon the wall the condemnation of the landlord.
Thus, piece by piece, do we condemn each other, and yet not perceive the
conclusion, that our whole estate is somewhat damnable.  Thus, piece by
piece, each acting against his neighbour, each sawing away the branch on
which some other interest is seated, do we apply in detail our
Socialistic remedies, and yet not perceive that we are all labouring
together to bring in Socialism at large.  A tendency so stupid and so
selfish is like to prove invincible; and if Socialism be at all a
practicable rule of life, there is every chance that our grand-children
will see the day and taste the pleasures of existence in something far
liker an ant-heap than any previous human polity.  And this not in the
least because of the voice of Mr. Hyndman or the horns of his followers;
but by the mere glacier movement of the political soil, bearing forward
on its bosom, apparently undisturbed, the proud camps of Whig and Tory.
If Mr. Hyndman were a man of keen humour, which is far from my conception
of his character, he might rest from his troubling and look on: the walls
of Jericho begin already to crumble and dissolve.  That great servile
war, the Armageddon of money and numbers, to which we looked forward when
young, becomes more and more unlikely; and we may rather look to see a
peaceable and blindfold evolution, the work of dull men immersed in
political tactics and dead to political results.

The principal scene of this comedy lies, of course, in the House of
Commons; it is there, besides, that the details of this new evolution (if
it proceed) will fall to be decided; so that the state of Parliament is
not only diagnostic of the present but fatefully prophetic of the future.
Well, we all know what Parliament is, and we are all ashamed of it.  We
may pardon it some faults, indeed, on the ground of Irish obstruction—a
bitter trial, which it supports with notable good humour.  But the excuse
is merely local; it cannot apply to similar bodies in America and France;
and what are we to say of these?  President Cleveland’s letter may serve
as a picture of the one; a glance at almost any paper will convince us of
the weakness of the other.  Decay appears to have seized on the organ of
popular government in every land; and this just at the moment when we
begin to bring to it, as to an oracle of justice, the whole skein of our
private affairs to be unravelled, and ask it, like a new Messiah, to take
upon itself our frailties and play for us the part that should be played
by our own virtues.  For that, in few words, is the case.  We cannot
trust ourselves to behave with decency; we cannot trust our consciences;
and the remedy proposed is to elect a round number of our neighbours,
pretty much at random, and say to these: ‘Be ye our conscience; make laws
so wise, and continue from year to year to administer them so wisely,
that they shall save us from ourselves and make us righteous and happy,
world without end.  Amen.’  And who can look twice at the British
Parliament and then seriously bring it such a task?  I am not advancing
this as an argument against Socialism: once again, nothing is further
from my mind.  There are great truths in Socialism, or no one, not even
Mr. Hyndman, would be found to hold it; and if it came, and did one-tenth
part of what it offers, I for one should make it welcome.  But if it is
to come, we may as well have some notion of what it will be like; and the
first thing to grasp is that our new polity will be designed and
administered (to put it courteously) with something short of inspiration.
It will be made, or will grow, in a human parliament; and the one thing
that will not very hugely change is human nature.  The Anarchists think
otherwise, from which it is only plain that they have not carried to the
study of history the lamp of human sympathy.

Given, then, our new polity, with its new waggon-load of laws, what
headmarks must we look for in the life?  We chafe a good deal at that
excellent thing, the income-tax, because it brings into our affairs the
prying fingers, and exposes us to the tart words, of the official.  The
official, in all degrees, is already something of a terror to many of us.
I would not willingly have to do with even a police-constable in any
other spirit than that of kindness.  I still remember in my dreams the
eye-glass of a certain _attaché_ at a certain embassy—an eyeglass that
was a standing indignity to all on whom it looked; and my next most
disagreeable remembrance is of a bracing, Republican postman in the city
of San Francisco.  I lived in that city among working folk, and what my
neighbours accepted at the postman’s hands—nay, what I took from him
myself—it is still distasteful to recall.  The bourgeois, residing in the
upper parts of society, has but few opportunities of tasting this
peculiar bowl; but about the income-tax, as I have said, or perhaps about
a patent, or in the halls of an embassy at the hands of my friend of the
eye-glass, he occasionally sets his lips to it; and he may thus imagine
(if he has that faculty of imagination, without which most faculties are
void) how it tastes to his poorer neighbours, who must drain it to the
dregs.  In every contact with authority, with their employer, with the
police, with the School Board officer, in the hospital, or in the
workhouse, they have equally the occasion to appreciate the light-hearted
civility of the man in office; and as an experimentalist in several
out-of-the-way provinces of life, I may say it has but to be felt to be
appreciated.  Well, this golden age of which we are speaking will be the
golden age of officials.  In all our concerns it will be their beloved
duty to meddle, with what tact, with what obliging words, analogy will
aid us to imagine.  It is likely these gentlemen will be periodically
elected; they will therefore have their turn of being underneath, which
does not always sweeten men’s conditions.  The laws they will have to
administer will be no clearer than those we know to-day, and the body
which is to regulate their administration no wiser than the British
Parliament.  So that upon all hands we may look for a form of servitude
most galling to the blood—servitude to many and changing masters, and for
all the slights that accompany the rule of jack-in-office.  And if the
Socialistic programme be carried out with the least fulness, we shall
have lost a thing, in most respects not much to be regretted, but as a
moderator of oppression, a thing nearly invaluable—the newspaper.  For
the independent journal is a creature of capital and competition; it
stands and falls with millionaires and railway bonds and all the abuses
and glories of to-day; and as soon as the State has fairly taken its bent
to authority and philanthropy, and laid the least touch on private
property, the days of the independent journal are numbered.  State
railways may be good things and so may State bakeries; but a State
newspaper will never be a very trenchant critic of the State officials.

But again, these officials would have no sinecure.  Crime would perhaps
be less, for some of the motives of crime we may suppose would pass away.
But if Socialism were carried out with any fulness, there would be more
contraventions.  We see already new sins ringing up like mustard—School
Board sins, factory sins, Merchant Shipping Act sins—none of which I
would be thought to except against in particular, but all of which, taken
together, show us that Socialism can be a hard master even in the
beginning.  If it go on to such heights as we hear proposed and lauded,
if it come actually to its ideal of the ant-heap, ruled with iron
justice, the number of new contraventions will be out of all proportion
multiplied.  Take the case of work alone.  Man is an idle animal.  He is
at least as intelligent as the ant; but generations of advisers have in
vain recommended him the ant’s example.  Of those who are found truly
indefatigable in business, some are misers; some are the practisers of
delightful industries, like gardening; some are students, artists,
inventors, or discoverers, men lured forward by successive hopes; and the
rest are those who live by games of skill or hazard—financiers,
billiard-players, gamblers, and the like.  But in unloved toils, even
under the prick of necessity, no man is continually sedulous.  Once
eliminate the fear of starvation, once eliminate or bound the hope of
riches, and we shall see plenty of skulking and malingering.  Society
will then be something not wholly unlike a cotton plantation in the old
days; with cheerful, careless, demoralised slaves, with elected
overseers, and, instead of the planter, a chaotic popular assembly.  If
the blood be purposeful and the soil strong, such a plantation may
succeed, and be, indeed, a busy ant-heap, with full granaries and long
hours of leisure.  But even then I think the whip will be in the
overseer’s hands, and not in vain.  For, when it comes to be a question
of each man doing his own share or the rest doing more, prettiness of
sentiment will be forgotten.  To dock the skulker’s food is not enough;
many will rather eat haws and starve on petty pilferings than put their
shoulder to the wheel for one hour daily.  For such as these, then, the
whip will be in the overseer’s hand; and his own sense of justice and the
superintendence of a chaotic popular assembly will be the only checks on
its employment.  Now, you may be an industrious man and a good citizen,
and yet not love, nor yet be loved by, Dr. Fell the inspector.  It is
admitted by private soldiers that the disfavour of a sergeant is an evil
not to be combated; offend the sergeant, they say, and in a brief while
you will either be disgraced or have deserted.  And the sergeant can no
longer appeal to the lash.  But if these things go on, we shall see, or
our sons shall see, what it is to have offended an inspector.

This for the unfortunate.  But with the fortunate also, even those whom
the inspector loves, it may not be altogether well.  It is concluded that
in such a state of society, supposing it to be financially sound, the
level of comfort will be high.  It does not follow: there are strange
depths of idleness in man, a too-easily-got sufficiency, as in the case
of the sago-eaters, often quenching the desire for all besides; and it is
possible that the men of the richest ant-heaps may sink even into
squalor.  But suppose they do not; suppose our tricksy instrument of
human nature, when we play upon it this new tune, should respond kindly;
suppose no one to be damped and none exasperated by the new conditions,
the whole enterprise to be financially sound—a vaulting supposition—and
all the inhabitants to dwell together in a golden mean of comfort: we
have yet to ask ourselves if this be what man desire, or if it be what
man will even deign to accept for a continuance.  It is certain that man
loves to eat, it is not certain that he loves that only or that best.  He
is supposed to love comfort; it is not a love, at least, that he is
faithful to.  He is supposed to love happiness; it is my contention that
he rather loves excitement.  Danger, enterprise, hope, the novel, the
aleatory, are dearer to man than regular meals.  He does not think so
when he is hungry, but he thinks so again as soon as he is fed; and on
the hypothesis of a successful ant-heap, he would never go hungry.  It
would be always after dinner in that society, as, in the land of the
Lotos-eaters, it was always afternoon; and food, which, when we have it
not, seems all-important, drops in our esteem, as soon as we have it, to
a mere prerequisite of living.

That for which man lives is not the same thing for all individuals nor in
all ages; yet it has a common base; what he seeks and what he must have
is that which will seize and hold his attention.  Regular meals and
weatherproof lodgings will not do this long.  Play in its wide sense, as
the artificial induction of sensation, including all games and all arts,
will, indeed, go far to keep him conscious of himself; but in the end he
wearies for realities.  Study or experiment, to some rare natures, is the
unbroken pastime of a life.  These are enviable natures; people shut in
the house by sickness often bitterly envy them; but the commoner man
cannot continue to exist upon such altitudes: his feet itch for physical
adventure; his blood boils for physical dangers, pleasures, and triumphs;
his fancy, the looker after new things, cannot continue to look for them
in books and crucibles, but must seek them on the breathing stage of
life.  Pinches, buffets, the glow of hope, the shock of disappointment,
furious contention with obstacles: these are the true elixir for all
vital spirits, these are what they seek alike in their romantic
enterprises and their unromantic dissipations.  When they are taken in
some pinch closer than the common, they cry, ‘Catch me here again!’ and
sure enough you catch them there again—perhaps before the week is out.
It is as old as _Robinson Crusoe_; as old as man.  Our race has not been
strained for all these ages through that sieve of dangers that we call
Natural Selection, to sit down with patience in the tedium of safety; the
voices of its fathers call it forth.  Already in our society as it
exists, the bourgeois is too much cottoned about for any zest in living;
he sits in his parlour out of reach of any danger, often out of reach of
any vicissitude but one of health; and there he yawns.  If the people in
the next villa took pot-shots at him, he might be killed indeed, but so
long as he escaped he would find his blood oxygenated and his views of
the world brighter.  If Mr. Mallock, on his way to the publishers, should
have his skirts pinned to a wall by a javelin, it would not occur to
him—at least for several hours—to ask if life were worth living; and if
such peril were a daily matter, he would ask it never more; he would have
other things to think about, he would be living indeed—not lying in a box
with cotton, safe, but immeasurably dull.  The aleatory, whether it touch
life, or fortune, or renown—whether we explore Africa or only toss for
halfpence—that is what I conceive men to love best, and that is what we
are seeking to exclude from men’s existences.  Of all forms of the
aleatory, that which most commonly attends our working men—the danger of
misery from want of work—is the least inspiriting: it does not whip the
blood, it does not evoke the glory of contest; it is tragic, but it is
passive; and yet, in so far as it is aleatory, and a peril sensibly
touching them, it does truly season the men’s lives.  Of those who fail,
I do not speak—despair should be sacred; but to those who even modestly
succeed, the changes of their life bring interest: a job found, a
shilling saved, a dainty earned, all these are wells of pleasure
springing afresh for the successful poor; and it is not from these but
from the villa-dweller that we hear complaints of the unworthiness of
life.  Much, then, as the average of the proletariat would gain in this
new state of life, they would also lose a certain something, which would
not be missed in the beginning, but would be missed progressively and
progressively lamented.  Soon there would be a looking back: there would
be tales of the old world humming in young men’s ears, tales of the tramp
and the pedlar, and the hopeful emigrant.  And in the stall-fed life of
the successful ant-heap—with its regular meals, regular duties, regular
pleasures, an even course of life, and fear excluded—the vicissitudes,
delights, and havens of to-day will seem of epic breadth.  This may seem
a shallow observation; but the springs by which men are moved lie much on
the surface.  Bread, I believe, has always been considered first, but the
circus comes close upon its heels.  Bread we suppose to be given amply;
the cry for circuses will be the louder, and if the life of our
descendants be such as we have conceived, there are two beloved pleasures
on which they will be likely to fall back: the pleasures of intrigue and
of sedition.

In all this I have supposed the ant-heap to be financially sound.  I am
no economist, only a writer of fiction; but even as such, I know one
thing that bears on the economic question—I know the imperfection of
man’s faculty for business.  The Anarchists, who count some rugged
elements of common sense among what seem to me their tragic errors, have
said upon this matter all that I could wish to say, and condemned
beforehand great economical polities.  So far it is obvious that they are
right; they may be right also in predicting a period of communal
independence, and they may even be right in thinking that desirable.  But
the rise of communes is none the less the end of economic equality, just
when we were told it was beginning.  Communes will not be all equal in
extent, nor in quality of soil, nor in growth of population; nor will the
surplus produce of all be equally marketable.  It will be the old story
of competing interests, only with a new unit; and, as it appears to me, a
new, inevitable danger.  For the merchant and the manufacturer, in this
new world, will be a sovereign commune; it is a sovereign power that will
see its crops undersold, and its manufactures worsted in the market.  And
all the more dangerous that the sovereign power should be small.  Great
powers are slow to stir; national affronts, even with the aid of
newspapers, filter slowly into popular consciousness; national losses are
so unequally shared, that one part of the population will be counting its
gains while another sits by a cold hearth.  But in the sovereign commune
all will be centralised and sensitive.  When jealousy springs up, when
(let us say) the commune of Poole has overreached the commune of
Dorchester, irritation will run like quicksilver throughout the body
politic; each man in Dorchester will have to suffer directly in his diet
and his dress; even the secretary, who drafts the official
correspondence, will sit down to his task embittered, as a man who has
dined ill and may expect to dine worse; and thus a business difference
between communes will take on much the same colour as a dispute between
diggers in the lawless West, and will lead as directly to the arbitrament
of blows.  So that the establishment of the communal system will not only
reintroduce all the injustices and heart-burnings of economic inequality,
but will, in all human likelihood, inaugurate a world of hedgerow
warfare.  Dorchester will march on Poole, Sherborne on Dorchester,
Wimborne on both; the waggons will be fired on as they follow the
highway, the trains wrecked on the lines, the ploughman will go armed
into the field of tillage; and if we have not a return of ballad
literature, the local press at least will celebrate in a high vein the
victory of Cerne Abbas or the reverse of Toller Porcorum.  At least this
will not be dull; when I was younger, I could have welcomed such a world
with relief; but it is the New-Old with a vengeance, and irresistibly
suggests the growth of military powers and the foundation of new empires.




COLLEGE PAPERS


