CHAPTER II—SALVINI’S MACBETH


Salvini closed his short visit to Edinburgh by a performance of
_Macbeth_.  It was, perhaps, from a sentiment of local colour that he
chose to play the Scottish usurper for the first time before Scotsmen;
and the audience were not insensible of the privilege.  Few things,
indeed, can move a stronger interest than to see a great creation taking
shape for the first time.  If it is not purely artistic, the sentiment is
surely human.  And the thought that you are before all the world, and
have the start of so many others as eager as yourself, at least keeps you
in a more unbearable suspense before the curtain rises, if it does not
enhance the delight with which you follow the performance and see the
actor ‘bend up each corporal agent’ to realise a masterpiece of a few
hours’ duration.  With a player so variable as Salvini, who trusts to the
feelings of the moment for so much detail, and who, night after night,
does the same thing differently but always well, it can never be safe to
pass judgment after a single hearing.  And this is more particularly true
of last week’s _Macbeth_; for the whole third act was marred by a
grievously humorous misadventure.  Several minutes too soon the ghost of
Banquo joined the party, and after having sat helpless a while at a
table, was ignominiously withdrawn.  Twice was this ghostly
Jack-in-the-box obtruded on the stage before his time; twice removed
again; and yet he showed so little hurry when he was really wanted, that,
after an awkward pause, Macbeth had to begin his apostrophe to empty air.
The arrival of the belated spectre in the middle, with a jerk that made
him nod all over, was the last accident in the chapter, and worthily
topped the whole.  It may be imagined how lamely matters went throughout
these cross purposes.

In spite of this, and some other hitches, Salvini’s Macbeth had an
emphatic success.  The creation is worthy of a place beside the same
artist’s Othello and Hamlet.  It is the simplest and most unsympathetic
of the three; but the absence of the finer lineaments of Hamlet is
redeemed by gusto, breadth, and a headlong unity.  Salvini sees nothing
great in Macbeth beyond the royalty of muscle, and that courage which
comes of strong and copious circulation.  The moral smallness of the man
is insisted on from the first, in the shudder of uncontrollable jealousy
with which he sees Duncan embracing Banquo.  He may have some northern
poetry of speech, but he has not much logical understanding.  In his
dealings with the supernatural powers he is like a savage with his
fetich, trusting them beyond bounds while all goes well, and whenever he
is crossed, casting his belief aside and calling ‘fate into the list.’
For his wife, he is little more than an agent, a frame of bone and sinew
for her fiery spirit to command.  The nature of his feeling towards her
is rendered with a most precise and delicate touch.  He always yields to
the woman’s fascination; and yet his caresses (and we know how much
meaning Salvini can give to a caress) are singularly hard and unloving.
Sometimes he lays his hand on her as he might take hold of any one who
happened to be nearest to him at a moment of excitement.  Love has fallen
out of this marriage by the way, and left a curious friendship.  Only
once—at the very moment when she is showing herself so little a woman and
so much a high-spirited man—only once is he very deeply stirred towards
her; and that finds expression in the strange and horrible transport of
admiration, doubly strange and horrible on Salvini’s lips—‘Bring forth
men-children only!’

The murder scene, as was to be expected, pleased the audience best.
Macbeth’s voice, in the talk with his wife, was a thing not to be
forgotten; and when he spoke of his hangman’s hands he seemed to have
blood in his utterance.  Never for a moment, even in the very article of
the murder, does he possess his own soul.  He is a man on wires.  From
first to last it is an exhibition of hideous cowardice.  For, after all,
it is not here, but in broad daylight, with the exhilaration of conflict,
where he can assure himself at every blow he has the longest sword and
the heaviest hand, that this man’s physical bravery can keep him up; he
is an unwieldy ship, and needs plenty of way on before he will steer.

In the banquet scene, while the first murderer gives account of what he
has done, there comes a flash of truculent joy at the ‘twenty trenchèd
gashes’ on Banquo’s head.  Thus Macbeth makes welcome to his imagination
those very details of physical horror which are so soon to turn sour in
him.  As he runs out to embrace these cruel circumstances, as he seeks to
realise to his mind’s eye the reassuring spectacle of his dead enemy, he
is dressing out the phantom to terrify himself; and his imagination,
playing the part of justice, is to ‘commend to his own lips the
ingredients of his poisoned chalice.’  With the recollection of Hamlet
and his father’s spirit still fresh upon him, and the holy awe with which
that good man encountered things not dreamt of in his philosophy, it was
not possible to avoid looking for resemblances between the two
apparitions and the two men haunted.  But there are none to be found.
Macbeth has a purely physical dislike for Banquo’s spirit and the ‘twenty
trenchèd gashes.’  He is afraid of he knows not what.  He is abject, and
again blustering.  In the end he so far forgets himself, his terror, and
the nature of what is before him, that he rushes upon it as he would upon
a man.  When his wife tells him he needs repose, there is something
really childish in the way he looks about the room, and, seeing nothing,
with an expression of almost sensual relief, plucks up heart enough to go
to bed.  And what is the upshot of the visitation?  It is written in
Shakespeare, but should be read with the commentary of Salvini’s voice
and expression:—‘O! _siam nell’ opra ancor fanciulli_’—‘We are yet but
young in deed.’  Circle below circle.  He is looking with horrible
satisfaction into the mouth of hell.  There may still be a prick to-day;
but to-morrow conscience will be dead, and he may move untroubled in this
element of blood.

In the fifth act we see this lowest circle reached; and it is Salvini’s
finest moment throughout the play.  From the first he was admirably made
up, and looked Macbeth to the full as perfectly as ever he looked
Othello.  From the first moment he steps upon the stage you can see this
character is a creation to the fullest meaning of the phrase; for the man
before you is a type you know well already.  He arrives with Banquo on
the heath, fair and red-bearded, sparing of gesture, full of pride and
the sense of animal wellbeing, and satisfied after the battle like a
beast who has eaten his fill.  But in the fifth act there is a change.
This is still the big, burly, fleshly, handsome-looking Thane; here is
still the same face which in the earlier acts could be superficially
good-humoured and sometimes royally courteous.  But now the atmosphere of
blood, which pervades the whole tragedy, has entered into the man and
subdued him to its own nature; and an indescribable degradation, a
slackness and puffiness, has overtaken his features.  He has breathed the
air of carnage, and supped full of horrors.  Lady Macbeth complains of
the smell of blood on her hand: Macbeth makes no complaint—he has ceased
to notice it now; but the same smell is in his nostrils.  A contained
fury and disgust possesses him.  He taunts the messenger and the doctor
as people would taunt their mortal enemies.  And, indeed, as he knows
right well, every one is his enemy now, except his wife.  About her he
questions the doctor with something like a last human anxiety; and, in
tones of grisly mystery, asks him if he can ‘minister to a mind
diseased.’  When the news of her death is brought him, he is staggered
and falls into a seat; but somehow it is not anything we can call grief
that he displays.  There had been two of them against God and man; and
now, when there is only one, it makes perhaps less difference than he had
expected.  And so her death is not only an affliction, but one more
disillusion; and he redoubles in bitterness.  The speech that follows,
given with tragic cynicism in every word, is a dirge, not so much for her
as for himself.  From that time forth there is nothing human left in him,
only ‘the fiend of Scotland,’ Macduff’s ‘hell-hound,’ whom, with a stern
glee, we see baited like a bear and hunted down like a wolf.  He is
inspired and set above fate by a demoniacal energy, a lust of wounds and
slaughter.  Even after he meets Macduff his courage does not fail; but
when he hears the Thane was not born of woman, all virtue goes out of
him; and though he speaks sounding words of defiance, the last combat is
little better than a suicide.

The whole performance is, as I said, so full of gusto and a headlong
unity; the personality of Macbeth is so sharp and powerful; and within
these somewhat narrow limits there is so much play and saliency that, so
far as concerns Salvini himself, a third great success seems indubitable.
Unfortunately, however, a great actor cannot fill more than a very small
fraction of the boards; and though Banquo’s ghost will probably be more
seasonable in his future apparitions, there are some more inherent
difficulties in the piece.  The company at large did not distinguish
themselves.  Macduff, to the huge delight of the gallery, out-Macduff’d
the average ranter.  The lady who filled the principal female part has
done better on other occasions, but I fear she has not metal for what she
tried last week.  Not to succeed in the sleep-walking scene is to make a
memorable failure.  As it was given, it succeeded in being wrong in art
without being true to nature.

And there is yet another difficulty, happily easy to reform, which
somewhat interfered with the success of the performance.  At the end of
the incantation scene the Italian translator has made Macbeth fall
insensible upon the stage.  This is a change of questionable propriety
from a psychological point of view; while in point of view of effect it
leaves the stage for some moments empty of all business.  To remedy this,
a bevy of green ballet-girls came forth and pointed their toes about the
prostrate king.  A dance of High Church curates, or a hornpipe by Mr. T.
P. Cooke, would not be more out of the key; though the gravity of a Scots
audience was not to be overcome, and they merely expressed their
disapprobation by a round of moderate hisses, a similar irruption of
Christmas fairies would most likely convulse a London theatre from pit to
gallery with inextinguishable laughter.  It is, I am told, the Italian
tradition; but it is one more honoured in the breach than the observance.
With the total disappearance of these damsels, with a stronger Lady
Macbeth, and, if possible, with some compression of those scenes in which
Salvini does not appear, and the spectator is left at the mercy of
Macduffs and Duncans, the play would go twice as well, and we should be
better able to follow and enjoy an admirable work of dramatic art.



