CHAPTER III—DEBATING SOCIETIES


A debating society is at first somewhat of a disappointment.  You do not
often find the youthful Demosthenes chewing his pebbles in the same room
with you; or, even if you do, you will probably think the performance
little to be admired.  As a general rule, the members speak shamefully
ill.  The subjects of debate are heavy; and so are the fines.  The Ballot
Question—oldest of dialectic nightmares—is often found astride of a
somnolent sederunt.  The Greeks and Romans, too, are reserved as sort of
_general-utility_ men, to do all the dirty work of illustration; and they
fill as many functions as the famous waterfall scene at the ‘Princess’s,’
which I found doing duty on one evening as a gorge in Peru, a haunt of
German robbers, and a peaceful vale in the Scottish borders.  There is a
sad absence of striking argument or real lively discussion.  Indeed, you
feel a growing contempt for your fellow-members; and it is not until you
rise yourself to hawk and hesitate and sit shamefully down again, amid
eleemosynary applause, that you begin to find your level and value others
rightly.  Even then, even when failure has damped your critical ardour,
you will see many things to be laughed at in the deportment of your
rivals.

Most laughable, perhaps, are your indefatigable strivers after eloquence.
They are of those who ‘pursue with eagerness the phantoms of hope,’ and
who, since they expect that ‘the deficiencies of last sentence will be
supplied by the next,’ have been recommended by Dr. Samuel Johnson to
‘attend to the History of Rasselas, Prince of Abyssinia.’  They are
characterised by a hectic hopefulness.  Nothing damps them.  They rise
from the ruins of one abortive sentence, to launch forth into another
with unabated vigour.  They have all the manner of an orator.  From the
tone of their voice, you would expect a splendid period—and lo! a string
of broken-backed, disjointed clauses, eked out with stammerings and
throat-clearings.  They possess the art (learned from the pulpit) of
rounding an uneuphonious sentence by dwelling on a single syllable—of
striking a balance in a top-heavy period by lengthening out a word into a
melancholy quaver.  Withal, they never cease to hope.  Even at last, even
when they have exhausted all their ideas, even after the would-be
peroration has finally refused to perorate, they remain upon their feet
with their mouths open, waiting for some further inspiration, like
Chaucer’s widow’s son in the dung-hole, after

    ‘His throat was kit unto the nekké bone,’

in vain expectation of that seed that was to be laid upon his tongue, and
give him renewed and clearer utterance.

These men may have something to say, if they could only say it—indeed
they generally have; but the next class are people who, having nothing to
say, are cursed with a facility and an unhappy command of words, that
makes them the prime nuisances of the society they affect.  They try to
cover their absence of matter by an unwholesome vitality of delivery.
They look triumphantly round the room, as if courting applause, after a
torrent of diluted truism.  They talk in a circle, harping on the same
dull round of argument, and returning again and again to the same remark
with the same sprightliness, the same irritating appearance of novelty.

After this set, any one is tolerable; so we shall merely hint at a few
other varieties.  There is your man who is pre-eminently conscientious,
whose face beams with sincerity as he opens on the negative, and who
votes on the affirmative at the end, looking round the room with an air
of chastened pride.  There is also the irrelevant speaker, who rises,
emits a joke or two, and then sits down again, without ever attempting to
tackle the subject of debate.  Again, we have men who ride pick-a-back on
their family reputation, or, if their family have none, identify
themselves with some well-known statesman, use his opinions, and lend him
their patronage on all occasions.  This is a dangerous plan, and serves
oftener, I am afraid, to point a difference than to adorn a speech.

But alas! a striking failure may be reached without tempting Providence
by any of these ambitious tricks.  Our own stature will be found high
enough for shame.  The success of three simple sentences lures us into a
fatal parenthesis in the fourth, from whose shut brackets we may never
disentangle the thread of our discourse.  A momentary flush tempts us
into a quotation; and we may be left helpless in the middle of one of
Pope’s couplets, a white film gathering before our eyes, and our kind
friends charitably trying to cover our disgrace by a feeble round of
applause.  _Amis lecteurs_, this is a painful topic.  It is possible that
we too, we, the ‘potent, grave, and reverend’ editor, may have suffered
these things, and drunk as deep as any of the cup of shameful failure.
Let us dwell no longer on so delicate a subject.

In spite, however, of these disagreeables, I should recommend any student
to suffer them with Spartan courage, as the benefits he receives should
repay him an hundredfold for them all.  The life of the debating society
is a handy antidote to the life of the classroom and quadrangle.  Nothing
could be conceived more excellent as a weapon against many of those
_peccant humours_ that we have been railing against in the jeremiad of
our last ‘College Paper’—particularly in the field of intellect.  It is a
sad sight to see our heather-scented students, our boys of seventeen,
coming up to College with determined views—_roués_ in speculation—having
gauged the vanity of philosophy or learned to shun it as the middle-man
of heresy—a company of determined, deliberate opinionists, not to be
moved by all the sleights of logic.  What have such men to do with study?
If their minds are made up irrevocably, why burn the ‘studious lamp’ in
search of further confirmation?  Every set opinion I hear a student
deliver I feel a certain lowering of my regard.  He who studies, he who
is yet employed in groping for his premises, should keep his mind fluent
and sensitive, keen to mark flaws, and willing to surrender untenable
positions.  He should keep himself teachable, or cease the expensive
farce of being taught.  It is to further this docile spirit that we
desire to press the claims of debating societies.  It is as a means of
melting down this museum of premature petrifactions into living and
impressionable soul that we insist on their utility.  If we could once
prevail on our students to feel no shame in avowing an uncertain attitude
towards any subject, if we could teach them that it was unnecessary for
every lad to have his _opinionette_ on every topic, we should have gone a
far way towards bracing the intellectual tone of the coming race of
thinkers; and this it is which debating societies are so well fitted to
perform.

We there meet people of every shade of opinion, and make friends with
them.  We are taught to rail against a man the whole session through, and
then hob-a-nob with him at the concluding entertainment.  We find men of
talent far exceeding our own, whose conclusions are widely different from
ours; and we are thus taught to distrust ourselves.  But the best means
of all towards catholicity is that wholesome rule which some folk are
most inclined to condemn—I mean the law of _obliged speeches_.  Your
senior member commands; and you must take the affirmative or the
negative, just as suits his best convenience.  This tends to the most
perfect liberality.  It is no good hearing the arguments of an opponent,
for in good verity you rarely follow them; and even if you do take the
trouble to listen, it is merely in a captious search for weaknesses.
This is proved, I fear, in every debate; when you hear each speaker
arguing out his own prepared _spécialité_ (he never intended speaking, of
course, until some remarks of, etc.), arguing out, I say, his own
_coached-up_ subject without the least attention to what has gone before,
as utterly at sea about the drift of his adversary’s speech as Panurge
when he argued with Thaumaste, and merely linking his own prelection to
the last by a few flippant criticisms.  Now, as the rule stands, you are
saddled with the side you disapprove, and so you are forced, by regard
for your own fame, to argue out, to feel with, to elaborate completely,
the case as it stands against yourself; and what a fund of wisdom do you
not turn up in this idle digging of the vineyard!  How many new
difficulties take form before your eyes? how many superannuated arguments
cripple finally into limbo, under the glance of your enforced
eclecticism!

Nor is this the only merit of Debating Societies.  They tend also to
foster taste, and to promote friendship between University men.  This
last, as we have had occasion before to say, is the great requirement of
our student life; and it will therefore be no waste of time if we devote
a paragraph to this subject in its connection with Debating Societies.
At present they partake too much of the nature of a _clique_.  Friends
propose friends, and mutual friends second them, until the society
degenerates into a sort of family party.  You may confirm old
acquaintances, but you can rarely make new ones.  You find yourself in
the atmosphere of your own daily intercourse.  Now, this is an
unfortunate circumstance, which it seems to me might readily be
rectified.  Our Principal has shown himself so friendly towards all
College improvements that I cherish the hope of seeing shortly realised a
certain suggestion, which is not a new one with me, and which must often
have been proposed and canvassed heretofore—I mean, a real _University
Debating Society_, patronised by the Senatus, presided over by the
Professors, to which every one might gain ready admittance on sight of
his matriculation ticket, where it would be a favour and not a necessity
to speak, and where the obscure student might have another object for
attendance besides the mere desire to save his fines: to wit, the chance
of drawing on himself the favourable consideration of his teachers.  This
would be merely following in the good tendency, which has been so
noticeable during all this session, to increase and multiply student
societies and clubs of every sort.  Nor would it be a matter of much
difficulty.  The united societies would form a nucleus: one of the
class-rooms at first, and perhaps afterwards the great hall above the
library, might be the place of meeting.  There would be no want of
attendance or enthusiasm, I am sure; for it is a very different thing to
speak under the bushel of a private club on the one hand, and, on the
other, in a public place, where a happy period or a subtle argument may
do the speaker permanent service in after life.  Such a club might end,
perhaps, by rivalling the ‘Union’ at Cambridge or the ‘Union’ at Oxford.



