CHAPTER I—THE PRINCE


That same night there was in the city of Avignon a young man in distress
of mind.  Now he sat, now walked in a high apartment, full of draughts
and shadows.  A single candle made the darkness visible; and the light
scarce sufficed to show upon the wall, where they had been recently and
rudely nailed, a few miniatures and a copper medal of the young man’s
head.  The same was being sold that year in London, to admiring
thousands.  The original was fair; he had beautiful brown eyes, a
beautiful bright open face; a little feminine, a little hard, a little
weak; still full of the light of youth, but already beginning to be
vulgarised; a sordid bloom come upon it, the lines coarsened with a touch
of puffiness.  He was dressed, as for a gala, in peach-colour and silver;
his breast sparkled with stars and was bright with ribbons; for he had
held a levee in the afternoon and received a distinguished personage
incognito.  Now he sat with a bowed head, now walked precipitately to and
fro, now went and gazed from the uncurtained window, where the wind was
still blowing, and the lights winked in the darkness.

The bells of Avignon rose into song as he was gazing; and the high notes
and the deep tossed and drowned, boomed suddenly near or were suddenly
swallowed up, in the current of the mistral.  Tears sprang in the pale
blue eyes; the expression of his face was changed to that of a more
active misery, it seemed as if the voices of the bells reached, and
touched and pained him, in a waste of vacancy where even pain was
welcome.  Outside in the night they continued to sound on, swelling and
fainting; and the listener heard in his memory, as it were their
harmonies, joy-bells clashing in a northern city, and the acclamations of
a multitude, the cries of battle, the gross voices of cannon, the stridor
of an animated life.  And then all died away, and he stood face to face
with himself in the waste of vacancy, and a horror came upon his mind,
and a faintness on his brain, such as seizes men upon the brink of
cliffs.

On the table, by the side of the candle, stood a tray of glasses, a
bottle, and a silver bell.  He went thither swiftly, then his hand
lowered first above the bell, then settled on the bottle.  Slowly he
filled a glass, slowly drank it out; and, as a tide of animal warmth
recomforted the recesses of his nature, stood there smiling at himself.
He remembered he was young; the funeral curtains rose, and he saw his
life shine and broaden and flow out majestically, like a river sunward.
The smile still on his lips, he lit a second candle and a third; a fire
stood ready built in a chimney, he lit that also; and the fir-cones and
the gnarled olive billets were swift to break in flame and to crackle on
the hearth, and the room brightened and enlarged about him like his
hopes.  To and fro, to and fro, he went, his hands lightly clasped, his
breath deeply and pleasurably taken.  Victory walked with him; he marched
to crowns and empires among shouting followers; glory was his dress.  And
presently again the shadows closed upon the solitary.  Under the gilt of
flame and candle-light, the stone walls of the apartment showed down bare
and cold; behind the depicted triumph loomed up the actual failure:
defeat, the long distress of the flight, exile, despair, broken
followers, mourning faces, empty pockets, friends estranged.  The memory
of his father rose in his mind: he, too, estranged and defied; despair
sharpened into wrath.  There was one who had led armies in the field, who
had staked his life upon the family enterprise, a man of action and
experience, of the open air, the camp, the court, the council-room; and
he was to accept direction from an old, pompous gentleman in a home in
Italy, and buzzed about by priests?  A pretty king, if he had not a
martial son to lean upon!  A king at all?

‘There was a weaver (of all people) joined me at St. Ninians; he was more
of a man than my papa!’ he thought.  ‘I saw him lie doubled in his blood
and a grenadier below him—and he died for my papa!  All died for him, or
risked the dying, and I lay for him all those months in the rain and
skulked in heather like a fox; and now he writes me his advice! calls me
Carluccio—me, the man of the house, the only king in that king’s race.’
He ground his teeth.  ‘The only king in Europe!’  Who else?  Who has done
and suffered except me? who has lain and run and hidden with his faithful
subjects, like a second Bruce?  Not my accursed cousin, Louis of France,
at least, the lewd effeminate traitor!’  And filling the glass to the
brim, he drank a king’s damnation.  Ah, if he had the power of Louis,
what a king were here!

The minutes followed each other into the past, and still he persevered in
this debilitating cycle of emotions, still fed the fire of his excitement
with driblets of Rhine wine: a boy at odds with life, a boy with a spark
of the heroic, which he was now burning out and drowning down in futile
reverie and solitary excess.

From two rooms beyond, the sudden sound of a raised voice attracted him.

‘By . . .




HEATHERCAT


CHAPTER I—TRAQUAIRS OF MONTROYMONT


The period of this tale is in the heat of the _killing-time_; the scene
laid for the most part in solitary hills and morasses, haunted only by
the so-called Mountain Wanderers, the dragoons that came in chase of
them, the women that wept on their dead bodies, and the wild birds of the
moorland that have cried there since the beginning.  It is a land of many
rain-clouds; a land of much mute history, written there in prehistoric
symbols.  Strange green raths are to be seen commonly in the country,
above all by the kirkyards; barrows of the dead, standing stones; beside
these, the faint, durable footprints and handmarks of the Roman; and an
antiquity older perhaps than any, and still living and active—a complete
Celtic nomenclature and a scarce-mingled Celtic population.  These rugged
and grey hills were once included in the boundaries of the Caledonian
Forest.  Merlin sat here below his apple-tree and lamented Gwendolen;
here spoke with Kentigern; here fell into his enchanted trance.  And the
legend of his slumber seems to body forth the story of that Celtic race,
deprived for so many centuries of their authentic speech, surviving with
their ancestral inheritance of melancholy perversity and patient,
unfortunate courage.

The Traquairs of Montroymont (_Mons Romanus_, as the erudite expound it)
had long held their seat about the head-waters of the Dule and in the
back parts of the moorland parish of Balweary.  For two hundred years
they had enjoyed in these upland quarters a certain decency (almost to be
named distinction) of repute; and the annals of their house, or what is
remembered of them, were obscure and bloody.  Ninian Traquair was
‘cruallie slochtered’ by the Crozers at the kirk-door of Balweary, anno
1482.  Francis killed Simon Ruthven of Drumshoreland, anno 1540; bought
letters of slayers at the widow and heir, and, by a barbarous form of
compounding, married (without tocher) Simon’s daughter Grizzel, which is
the way the Traquairs and Ruthvens came first to an intermarriage.  About
the last Traquair and Ruthven marriage, it is the business of this book,
among many other things, to tell.

The Traquairs were always strong for the Covenant; for the King also, but
the Covenant first; and it began to be ill days for Montroymont when the
Bishops came in and the dragoons at the heels of them.  Ninian (then
laird) was an anxious husband of himself and the property, as the times
required, and it may be said of him, that he lost both.  He was heavily
suspected of the Pentland Hills rebellion.  When it came the length of
Bothwell Brig, he stood his trial before the Secret Council, and was
convicted of talking with some insurgents by the wayside, the subject of
the conversation not very clearly appearing, and of the reset and
maintenance of one Gale, a gardener man, who was seen before Bothwell
with a musket, and afterwards, for a continuance of months, delved the
garden at Montroymont.  Matters went very ill with Ninian at the Council;
some of the lords were clear for treason; and even the boot was talked
of.  But he was spared that torture; and at last, having pretty good
friendship among great men, he came off with a fine of seven thousand
marks, that caused the estate to groan.  In this case, as in so many
others, it was the wife that made the trouble.  She was a great keeper of
conventicles; would ride ten miles to one, and when she was fined,
rejoiced greatly to suffer for the Kirk; but it was rather her husband
that suffered.  She had their only son, Francis, baptized privately by
the hands of Mr. Kidd; there was that much the more to pay for!  She
could neither be driven nor wiled into the parish kirk; as for taking the
sacrament at the hands of any Episcopalian curate, and tenfold more at
those of Curate Haddo, there was nothing further from her purposes; and
Montroymont had to put his hand in his pocket month by month and year by
year.  Once, indeed, the little lady was cast in prison, and the laird,
worthy, heavy, uninterested man, had to ride up and take her place; from
which he was not discharged under nine months and a sharp fine.  It
scarce seemed she had any gratitude to him; she came out of gaol herself,
and plunged immediately deeper in conventicles, resetting recusants, and
all her old, expensive folly, only with greater vigour and openness,
because Montroymont was safe in the Tolbooth and she had no witness to
consider.  When he was liberated and came back, with his fingers singed,
in December 1680, and late in the black night, my lady was from home.  He
came into the house at his alighting, with a riding-rod yet in his hand;
and, on the servant-maid telling him, caught her by the scruff of the
neck, beat her violently, flung her down in the passageway, and went
upstairs to his bed fasting and without a light.  It was three in the
morning when my lady returned from that conventicle, and, hearing of the
assault (because the maid had sat up for her, weeping), went to their
common chamber with a lantern in hand and stamping with her shoes so as
to wake the dead; it was supposed, by those that heard her, from a design
to have it out with the good man at once.  The house-servants gathered on
the stair, because it was a main interest with them to know which of
these two was the better horse; and for the space of two hours they were
heard to go at the matter, hammer and tongs.  Montroymont alleged he was
at the end of possibilities; it was no longer within his power to pay the
annual rents; she had served him basely by keeping conventicles while he
lay in prison for her sake; his friends were weary, and there was nothing
else before him but the entire loss of the family lands, and to begin
life again by the wayside as a common beggar.  She took him up very sharp
and high: called upon him, if he were a Christian? and which he most
considered, the loss of a few dirty, miry glebes, or of his soul?
Presently he was heard to weep, and my lady’s voice to go on continually
like a running burn, only the words indistinguishable; whereupon it was
supposed a victory for her ladyship, and the domestics took themselves to
bed.  The next day Traquair appeared like a man who had gone under the
harrows; and his lady wife thenceforward continued in her old course
without the least deflection.

Thenceforward Ninian went on his way without complaint, and suffered his
wife to go on hers without remonstrance.  He still minded his estate, of
which it might be said he took daily a fresh farewell, and counted it
already lost; looking ruefully on the acres and the graves of his
fathers, on the moorlands where the wild-fowl consorted, the low,
gurgling pool of the trout, and the high, windy place of the calling
curlews—things that were yet his for the day and would be another’s
to-morrow; coming back again, and sitting ciphering till the dusk at his
approaching ruin, which no device of arithmetic could postpone beyond a
year or two.  He was essentially the simple ancient man, the farmer and
landholder; he would have been content to watch the seasons come and go,
and his cattle increase, until the limit of age; he would have been
content at any time to die, if he could have left the estates
undiminished to an heir-male of his ancestors, that duty standing first
in his instinctive calendar.  And now he saw everywhere the image of the
new proprietor come to meet him, and go sowing and reaping, or fowling
for his pleasure on the red moors, or eating the very gooseberries in the
Place garden; and saw always, on the other hand, the figure of Francis go
forth, a beggar, into the broad world.

It was in vain the poor gentleman sought to moderate; took every test and
took advantage of every indulgence; went and drank with the dragoons in
Balweary; attended the communion and came regularly to the church to
Curate Haddo, with his son beside him.  The mad, raging, Presbyterian
zealot of a wife at home made all of no avail; and indeed the house must
have fallen years before if it had not been for the secret indulgence of
the curate, who had a great sympathy with the laird, and winked hard at
the doings in Montroymont.  This curate was a man very ill reputed in the
countryside, and indeed in all Scotland.  ‘Infamous Haddo’ is Shield’s
expression.  But Patrick Walker is more copious.  ‘Curate Hall Haddo,’
says he, _sub voce_ Peden, ‘or _Hell_ Haddo, as he was more justly to be
called, a pokeful of old condemned errors and the filthy vile lusts of
the flesh, a published whore-monger, a common gross drunkard, continually
and godlessly scraping and skirling on a fiddle, continually breathing
flames against the remnant of Israel.  But the Lord put an end to his
piping, and all these offences were composed into one bloody grave.’  No
doubt this was written to excuse his slaughter; and I have never heard it
claimed for Walker that he was either a just witness or an indulgent
judge.  At least, in a merely human character, Haddo comes off not wholly
amiss in the matter of these Traquairs: not that he showed any graces of
the Christian, but had a sort of Pagan decency, which might almost tempt
one to be concerned about his sudden, violent, and unprepared fate.



