CHAPTER I—THE CAUSES OF THE REVOLT


    ‘Halt, passenger; take heed what thou dost see,
    This tomb doth show for what some men did die.’

                        _Monument_, _Greyfriars’ Churchyard_,_ Edinburgh_,
                                                           1661–1668. {85}

Two hundred years ago a tragedy was enacted in Scotland, the memory
whereof has been in great measure lost or obscured by the deep tragedies
which followed it.  It is, as it were, the evening of the night of
persecution—a sort of twilight, dark indeed to us, but light as the
noonday when compared with the midnight gloom which followed.  This fact,
of its being the very threshold of persecution, lends it, however, an
additional interest.

The prejudices of the people against Episcopacy were ‘out of measure
increased,’ says Bishop Burnet, ‘by the new incumbents who were put in
the places of the ejected preachers, and were generally very mean and
despicable in all respects.  They were the worst preachers I ever heard;
they were ignorant to a reproach; and many of them were openly vicious.
They . . . were indeed the dreg and refuse of the northern parts.  Those
of them who arose above contempt or scandal were men of such violent
tempers that they were as much hated as the others were despised.’ {86}
It was little to be wondered at, from this account that the country-folk
refused to go to the parish church, and chose rather to listen to outed
ministers in the fields.  But this was not to be allowed, and their
persecutors at last fell on the method of calling a roll of the
parishioners’ names every Sabbath, and marking a fine of twenty shillings
Scots to the name of each absenter.  In this way very large debts were
incurred by persons altogether unable to pay.  Besides this, landlords
were fined for their tenants’ absences, tenants for their landlords’,
masters for their servants’, servants for their masters’, even though
they themselves were perfectly regular in their attendance.  And as the
curates were allowed to fine with the sanction of any common soldier, it
may be imagined that often the pretexts were neither very sufficient nor
well proven.

When the fines could not be paid at once, Bibles, clothes, and household
utensils were seized upon, or a number of soldiers, proportionate to his
wealth, were quartered on the offender.  The coarse and drunken privates
filled the houses with woe; snatched the bread from the children to feed
their dogs; shocked the principles, scorned the scruples, and blasphemed
the religion of their humble hosts; and when they had reduced them to
destitution, sold the furniture, and burned down the roof-tree which was
consecrated to the peasants by the name of Home.  For all this attention
each of these soldiers received from his unwilling landlord a certain sum
of money per day—three shillings sterling, according to _Naphtali_.  And
frequently they were forced to pay quartering money for more men than
were in reality ‘cessed on them.’  At that time it was no strange thing
to behold a strong man begging for money to pay his fines, and many
others who were deep in arrears, or who had attracted attention in some
other way, were forced to flee from their homes, and take refuge from
arrest and imprisonment among the wild mosses of the uplands. {87a}

One example in particular we may cite:

John Neilson, the Laird of Corsack, a worthy man, was, unfortunately for
himself, a Nonconformist.  First he was fined in four hundred pounds
Scots, and then through cessing he lost nineteen hundred and ninety-three
pounds Scots.  He was next obliged to leave his house and flee from place
to place, during which wanderings he lost his horse.  His wife and
children were turned out of doors, and then his tenants were fined till
they too were almost ruined.  As a final stroke, they drove away all his
cattle to Glasgow and sold them. {87b}  Surely it was time that something
were done to alleviate so much sorrow, to overthrow such tyranny.

About this time too there arrived in Galloway a person calling himself
Captain Andrew Gray, and advising the people to revolt.  He displayed
some documents purporting to be from the northern Covenanters, and
stating that they were prepared to join in any enterprise commenced by
their southern brethren.  The leader of the persecutors was Sir James
Turner, an officer afterwards degraded for his share in the matter.  ‘He
was naturally fierce, but was mad when he was drunk, and that was very
often,’ said Bishop Burnet.  ‘He was a learned man, but had always been
in armies, and knew no other rule but to obey orders.  He told me he had
no regard to any law, but acted, as he was commanded, in a military way.’
{88}

This was the state of matters, when an outrage was committed which gave
spirit and determination to the oppressed countrymen, lit the flame of
insubordination, and for the time at least recoiled on those who
perpetrated it with redoubled force.



CHAPTER II—THE BEGINNING


    I love no warres,
    I love no jarres,
    Nor strife’s fire.
    May discord cease,
    Let’s live in peace:
    This I desire.

    If it must be
    Warre we must see
    (So fates conspire),
    May we not feel
    The force of steel:
    This I desire.

                                                     T. JACKSON, 1651 {89}

Upon Tuesday, November 13th, 1666, Corporal George Deanes and three other
soldiers set upon an old man in the clachan of Dalry and demanded the
payment of his fines.  On the old man’s refusing to pay, they forced a
large party of his neighbours to go with them and thresh his corn.  The
field was a certain distance out of the clachan, and four persons,
disguised as countrymen, who had been out on the moors all night, met
this mournful drove of slaves, compelled by the four soldiers to work for
the ruin of their friend.  However, chided to the bone by their night on
the hills, and worn out by want of food, they proceeded to the village
inn to refresh themselves.  Suddenly some people rushed into the room
where they were sitting, and told them that the soldiers were about to
roast the old man, naked, on his own girdle.  This was too much for them
to stand, and they repaired immediately to the scene of this gross
outrage, and at first merely requested that the captive should be
released.  On the refusal of the two soldiers who were in the front room,
high words were given and taken on both sides, and the other two rushed
forth from an adjoining chamber and made at the countrymen with drawn
swords.  One of the latter, John M‘Lellan of Barscob, drew a pistol and
shot the corporal in the body.  The pieces of tobacco-pipe with which it
was loaded, to the number of ten at least, entered him, and he was so
much disturbed that he never appears to have recovered, for we find long
afterwards a petition to the Privy Council requesting a pension for him.
The other soldiers then laid down their arms, the old man was rescued,
and the rebellion was commenced. {90}

And now we must turn to Sir James Turner’s memoirs of himself; for,
strange to say, this extraordinary man was remarkably fond of literary
composition, and wrote, besides the amusing account of his own adventures
just mentioned, a large number of essays and short biographies, and a
work on war, entitled _Pallas Armata_.  The following are some of the
shorter pieces ‘Magick,’ ‘Friendship,’ ‘Imprisonment,’ ‘Anger,’
‘Revenge,’ ‘Duells,’ ‘Cruelty,’ ‘A Defence of some of the Ceremonies of
the English Liturgie—to wit—Bowing at the Name of Jesus, The frequent
repetition of the Lord’s Prayer and Good Lord deliver us, Of the
Doxologie, Of Surplesses, Rotchets, Canonnicall Coats,’ etc.  From what
we know of his character we should expect ‘Anger’ and ‘Cruelty’ to be
very full and instructive.  But what earthly right he had to meddle with
ecclesiastical subjects it is hard to see.

Upon the 12th of the month he had received some information concerning
Gray’s proceedings, but as it was excessively indefinite in its
character, he paid no attention to it.  On the evening of the 14th,
Corporal Deanes was brought into Dumfries, who affirmed stoutly that he
had been shot while refusing to sign the Covenant—a story rendered
singularly unlikely by the after conduct of the rebels.  Sir James
instantly dispatched orders to the cessed soldiers either to come to
Dumfries or meet him on the way to Dalry, and commanded the thirteen or
fourteen men in the town with him to come at nine next morning to his
lodging for supplies.

On the morning of Thursday the rebels arrived at Dumfries with 50 horse
and 150 foot.  Neilson of Corsack, and Gray, who commanded, with a
considerable troop, entered the town, and surrounded Sir James Turner’s
lodging.  Though it was between eight and nine o’clock, that worthy,
being unwell, was still in bed, but rose at once and went to the window.

Neilson and some others cried, ‘You may have fair quarter.’

‘I need no quarter,’ replied Sir James; ‘nor can I be a prisoner, seeing
there is no war declared.’  On being told, however, that he must either
be a prisoner or die, he came down, and went into the street in his
night-shirt.  Here Gray showed himself very desirous of killing him, but
he was overruled by Corsack.  However, he was taken away a prisoner,
Captain Gray mounting him on his own horse, though, as Turner naively
remarks, ‘there was good reason for it, for he mounted himself on a farre
better one of mine.’  A large coffer containing his clothes and money,
together with all his papers, were taken away by the rebels.  They robbed
Master Chalmers, the Episcopalian minister of Dumfries, of his horse,
drank the King’s health at the market cross, and then left Dumfries. {92}



