CHAPTER V—THE PHILOSOPHY OF NOMENCLATURE


    ‘How many Cæsars and Pompeys, by mere inspirations of the names, have
    been rendered worthy of them?  And how many are there, who might have
    done exceeding well in the world, had not their characters and
    spirits been totally depressed and Nicodemus’d into
    nothing?’—_Tristram Shandy_, vol. I. chap xix.

Such were the views of the late Walter Shandy, Esq., Turkey merchant.  To
the best of my belief, Mr. Shandy is the first who fairly pointed out the
incalculable influence of nomenclature upon the whole life—who seems
first to have recognised the one child, happy in an heroic appellation,
soaring upwards on the wings of fortune, and the other, like the dead
sailor in his shotted hammock, haled down by sheer weight of name into
the abysses of social failure.  Solomon possibly had his eye on some such
theory when he said that ‘a good name is better than precious ointment’;
and perhaps we may trace a similar spirit in the compilers of the English
Catechism, and the affectionate interest with which they linger round the
catechumen’s name at the very threshold of their work.  But, be these as
they may, I think no one can censure me for appending, in pursuance of
the expressed wish of his son, the Turkey merchant’s name to his system,
and pronouncing, without further preface, a short epitome of the
‘Shandean Philosophy of Nomenclature.’

To begin, then: the influence of our name makes itself felt from the very
cradle.  As a schoolboy I remember the pride with which I hailed Robin
Hood, Robert Bruce, and Robert le Diable as my name-fellows; and the
feeling of sore disappointment that fell on my heart when I found a
freebooter or a general who did not share with me a single one of my
numerous _prænomina_.  Look at the delight with which two children find
they have the same name.  They are friends from that moment forth; they
have a bond of union stronger than exchange of nuts and sweetmeats.  This
feeling, I own, wears off in later life.  Our names lose their freshness
and interest, become trite and indifferent.  But this, dear reader, is
merely one of the sad effects of those ‘shades of the prison-house’ which
come gradually betwixt us and nature with advancing years; it affords no
weapon against the philosophy of names.

In after life, although we fail to trace its working, that name which
careless godfathers lightly applied to your unconscious infancy will have
been moulding your character, and influencing with irresistible power the
whole course of your earthly fortunes.  But the last name, overlooked by
Mr. Shandy, is no whit less important as a condition of success.  Family
names, we must recollect, are but inherited nicknames; and if the
_sobriquet_ were applicable to the ancestor, it is most likely applicable
to the descendant also.  You would not expect to find Mr. M‘Phun acting
as a mute, or Mr. M‘Lumpha excelling as a professor of dancing.
Therefore, in what follows, we shall consider names, independent of
whether they are first or last.  And to begin with, look what a pull
_Cromwell_ had over _Pym_—the one name full of a resonant imperialism,
the other, mean, pettifogging, and unheroic to a degree.  Who would
expect eloquence from _Pym_—who would read poems by _Pym_—who would bow
to the opinion of _Pym_?  He might have been a dentist, but he should
never have aspired to be a statesman.  I can only wonder that he
succeeded as he did.  Pym and Habakkuk stand first upon the roll of men
who have triumphed, by sheer force of genius, over the most unfavourable
appellations.  But even these have suffered; and, had they been more
fitly named, the one might have been Lord Protector, and the other have
shared the laurels with Isaiah.  In this matter we must not forget that
all our great poets have borne great names.  Chaucer, Spenser,
Shakespeare, Milton, Pope, Wordsworth, Shelley—what a constellation of
lordly words!  Not a single common-place name among them—not a Brown, not
a Jones, not a Robinson; they are all names that one would stop and look
at on a door-plate.  Now, imagine if _Pepys_ had tried to clamber somehow
into the enclosure of poetry, what a blot would that word have made upon
the list!  The thing was impossible.  In the first place a certain
natural consciousness that men would have held him down to the level of
his name, would have prevented him from rising above the Pepsine
standard, and so haply withheld him altogether from attempting verse.
Next, the booksellers would refuse to publish, and the world to read
them, on the mere evidence of the fatal appellation.  And now, before I
close this section, I must say one word as to _punnable_ names, names
that stand alone, that have a significance and life apart from him that
bears them.  These are the bitterest of all.  One friend of mine goes
bowed and humbled through life under the weight of this misfortune; for
it is an awful thing when a man’s name is a joke, when he cannot be
mentioned without exciting merriment, and when even the intimation of his
death bids fair to carry laughter into many a home.

So much for people who are badly named.  Now for people who are _too_
well named, who go top-heavy from the font, who are baptized into a false
position, and find themselves beginning life eclipsed under the fame of
some of the great ones of the past.  A man, for instance, called William
Shakespeare could never dare to write plays.  He is thrown into too
humbling an apposition with the author of _Hamlet_.  Its own name coming
after is such an anti-climax.  ‘The plays of William Shakespeare’? says
the reader—‘O no!  The plays of William Shakespeare Cockerill,’ and he
throws the book aside.  In wise pursuance of such views, Mr. John Milton
Hengler, who not long since delighted us in this favoured town, has never
attempted to write an epic, but has chosen a new path, and has excelled
upon the tight-rope.  A marked example of triumph over this is the case
of Mr. Dante Gabriel Rossetti.  On the face of the matter, I should have
advised him to imitate the pleasing modesty of the last-named gentleman,
and confine his ambition to the sawdust.  But Mr. Rossetti has triumphed.
He has even dared to translate from his mighty name-father; and the voice
of fame supports him in his boldness.

Dear readers, one might write a year upon this matter.  A lifetime of
comparison and research could scarce suffice for its elucidation.  So
here, if it please you, we shall let it rest.  Slight as these notes have
been, I would that the great founder of the system had been alive to see
them.  How he had warmed and brightened, how his persuasive eloquence
would have fallen on the ears of Toby; and what a letter of praise and
sympathy would not the editor have received before the month was out!
Alas, the thing was not to be.  Walter Shandy died and was duly buried,
while yet his theory lay forgotten and neglected by his
fellow-countrymen.  But, reader, the day will come, I hope, when a
paternal government will stamp out, as seeds of national weakness, all
depressing patronymics, and when godfathers and godmothers will soberly
and earnestly debate the interest of the nameless one, and not rush
blindfold to the christening.  In these days there shall be written a
‘Godfather’s Assistant,’ in shape of a dictionary of names, with their
concomitant virtues and vices; and this book shall be scattered broadcast
through the land, and shall be on the table of every one eligible for
godfathership, until such a thing as a vicious or untoward appellation
shall have ceased from off the face of the earth.




CRITICISMS


