CHAPTER III


Although the world and life have in a sense become commonplace to our
experience, it is but in an external torpor; the true sentiment slumbers
within us; and we have but to reflect on ourselves or our surroundings to
rekindle our astonishment.  No length of habit can blunt our first
surprise.  Of the world I have but little to say in this connection; a
few strokes shall suffice.  We inhabit a dead ember swimming wide in the
blank of space, dizzily spinning as it swims, and lighted up from several
million miles away by a more horrible hell-fire than was ever conceived
by the theological imagination.  Yet the dead ember is a green,
commodious dwelling-place; and the reverberation of this hell-fire ripens
flower and fruit and mildly warms us on summer eves upon the lawn.  Far
off on all hands other dead embers, other flaming suns, wheel and race in
the apparent void; the nearest is out of call, the farthest so far that
the heart sickens in the effort to conceive the distance.  Shipwrecked
seamen on the deep, though they bestride but the truncheon of a boom, are
safe and near at home compared with mankind on its bullet.  Even to us
who have known no other, it seems a strange, if not an appalling, place
of residence.

But far stranger is the resident, man, a creature compact of wonders
that, after centuries of custom, is still wonderful to himself.  He
inhabits a body which he is continually outliving, discarding and
renewing.  Food and sleep, by an unknown alchemy, restore his spirits and
the freshness of his countenance.  Hair grows on him like grass; his
eyes, his brain, his sinews, thirst for action; he joys to see and touch
and hear, to partake the sun and wind, to sit down and intently ponder on
his astonishing attributes and situation, to rise up and run, to perform
the strange and revolting round of physical functions.  The sight of a
flower, the note of a bird, will often move him deeply; yet he looks
unconcerned on the impassable distances and portentous bonfires of the
universe.  He comprehends, he designs, he tames nature, rides the sea,
ploughs, climbs the air in a balloon, makes vast inquiries, begins
interminable labours, joins himself into federations and populous cities,
spends his days to deliver the ends of the earth or to benefit unborn
posterity; and yet knows himself for a piece of unsurpassed fragility and
the creature of a few days.  His sight, which conducts him, which takes
notice of the farthest stars, which is miraculous in every way and a
thing defying explanation or belief, is yet lodged in a piece of jelly,
and can be extinguished with a touch.  His heart, which all through life
so indomitably, so athletically labours, is but a capsule, and may be
stopped with a pin.  His whole body, for all its savage energies, its
leaping and its winged desires, may yet be tamed and conquered by a
draught of air or a sprinkling of cold dew.  What he calls death, which
is the seeming arrest of everything, and the ruin and hateful
transformation of the visible body, lies in wait for him outwardly in a
thousand accidents, and grows up in secret diseases from within.  He is
still learning to be a man when his faculties are already beginning to
decline; he has not yet understood himself or his position before he
inevitably dies.  And yet this mad, chimerical creature can take no
thought of his last end, lives as though he were eternal, plunges with
his vulnerable body into the shock of war, and daily affronts death with
unconcern.  He cannot take a step without pain or pleasure.  His life is
a tissue of sensations, which he distinguishes as they seem to come more
directly from himself or his surroundings.  He is conscious of himself as
a joyer or a sufferer, as that which craves, chooses, and is satisfied;
conscious of his surroundings as it were of an inexhaustible purveyor,
the source of aspects, inspirations, wonders, cruel knocks and
transporting caresses.  Thus he goes on his way, stumbling among delights
and agonies.

Matter is a far-fetched theory, and materialism is without a root in man.
To him everything is important in the degree to which it moves him.  The
telegraph wires and posts, the electricity speeding from clerk to clerk,
the clerks, the glad or sorrowful import of the message, and the paper on
which it is finally brought to him at home, are all equally facts, all
equally exist for man.  A word or a thought can wound him as acutely as a
knife of steel.  If he thinks he is loved, he will rise up and glory to
himself, although he be in a distant land and short of necessary bread.
Does he think he is not loved?—he may have the woman at his beck, and
there is not a joy for him in all the world.  Indeed, if we are to make
any account of this figment of reason, the distinction between material
and immaterial, we shall conclude that the life of each man as an
individual is immaterial, although the continuation and prospects of
mankind as a race turn upon material conditions.  The physical business
of each man’s body is transacted for him; like a sybarite, he has
attentive valets in his own viscera; he breathes, he sweats, he digests
without an effort, or so much as a consenting volition; for the most part
he even eats, not with a wakeful consciousness, but as it were between
two thoughts.  His life is centred among other and more important
considerations; touch him in his honour or his love, creatures of the
imagination which attach him to mankind or to an individual man or woman;
cross him in his piety which connects his soul with heaven; and he turns
from his food, he loathes his breath, and with a magnanimous emotion cuts
the knots of his existence and frees himself at a blow from the web of
pains and pleasures.

It follows that man is twofold at least; that he is not a rounded and
autonomous empire; but that in the same body with him there dwell other
powers tributary but independent.  If I now behold one walking in a
garden, curiously coloured and illuminated by the sun, digesting his food
with elaborate chemistry, breathing, circulating blood, directing himself
by the sight of his eyes, accommodating his body by a thousand delicate
balancings to the wind and the uneven surface of the path, and all the
time, perhaps, with his mind engaged about America, or the dog-star, or
the attributes of God—what am I to say, or how am I to describe the thing
I see?  Is that truly a man, in the rigorous meaning of the word? or is
it not a man and something else?  What, then, are we to count the
centre-bit and axle of a being so variously compounded?  It is a question
much debated.  Some read his history in a certain intricacy of nerve and
the success of successive digestions; others find him an exiled piece of
heaven blown upon and determined by the breath of God; and both schools
of theorists will scream like scalded children at a word of doubt.  Yet
either of these views, however plausible, is beside the question; either
may be right; and I care not; I ask a more particular answer, and to a
more immediate point.  What is the man?  There is Something that was
before hunger and that remains behind after a meal.  It may or may not be
engaged in any given act or passion, but when it is, it changes,
heightens, and sanctifies.  Thus it is not engaged in lust, where
satisfaction ends the chapter; and it is engaged in love, where no
satisfaction can blunt the edge of the desire, and where age, sickness,
or alienation may deface what was desirable without diminishing the
sentiment.  This something, which is the man, is a permanence which
abides through the vicissitudes of passion, now overwhelmed and now
triumphant, now unconscious of itself in the immediate distress of
appetite or pain, now rising unclouded above all.  So, to the man, his
own central self fades and grows clear again amid the tumult of the
senses, like a revolving Pharos in the night.  It is forgotten; it is
hid, it seems, for ever; and yet in the next calm hour he shall behold
himself once more, shining and unmoved among changes and storm.

Mankind, in the sense of the creeping mass that is born and eats, that
generates and dies, is but the aggregate of the outer and lower sides of
man.  This inner consciousness, this lantern alternately obscured and
shining, to and by which the individual exists and must order his
conduct, is something special to himself and not common to the race.  His
joys delight, his sorrows wound him, according as _this_ is interested or
indifferent in the affair; according as they arise in an imperial war or
in a broil conducted by the tributary chieftains of the mind.  He may
lose all, and _this_ not suffer; he may lose what is materially a trifle,
and _this_ leap in his bosom with a cruel pang.  I do not speak of it to
hardened theorists: the living man knows keenly what it is I mean.

‘Perceive at last that thou hast in thee something better and more divine
than the things which cause the various effects, and, as it were, pull
thee by the strings.  What is that now in thy mind? is it fear, or
suspicion, or desire, or anything of that kind?’  Thus far Marcus
Aurelius, in one of the most notable passages in any book.  Here is a
question worthy to be answered.  What is in thy mind?  What is the
utterance of your inmost self when, in a quiet hour, it can be heard
intelligibly?  It is something beyond the compass of your thinking,
inasmuch as it is yourself; but is it not of a higher spirit than you had
dreamed betweenwhiles, and erect above all base considerations?  This
soul seems hardly touched with our infirmities; we can find in it
certainly no fear, suspicion, or desire; we are only conscious—and that
as though we read it in the eyes of some one else—of a great and
unqualified readiness.  A readiness to what? to pass over and look beyond
the objects of desire and fear, for something else.  And this something
else? this something which is apart from desire and fear, to which all
the kingdoms of the world and the immediate death of the body are alike
indifferent and beside the point, and which yet regards conduct—by what
name are we to call it?  It may be the love of God; or it may be an
inherited (and certainly well concealed) instinct to preserve self and
propagate the race; I am not, for the moment, averse to either theory;
but it will save time to call it righteousness.  By so doing I intend no
subterfuge to beg a question; I am indeed ready, and more than willing,
to accept the rigid consequence, and lay aside, as far as the treachery
of the reason will permit, all former meanings attached to the word
righteousness.  What is right is that for which a man’s central self is
ever ready to sacrifice immediate or distant interests; what is wrong is
what the central self discards or rejects as incompatible with the fixed
design of righteousness.

To make this admission is to lay aside all hope of definition.  That
which is right upon this theory is intimately dictated to each man by
himself, but can never be rigorously set forth in language, and never,
above all, imposed upon another.  The conscience has, then, a vision like
that of the eyes, which is incommunicable, and for the most part
illuminates none but its possessor.  When many people perceive the same
or any cognate facts, they agree upon a word as symbol; and hence we have
such words as _tree_, _star_, _love_, _honour_, or _death_; hence also we
have this word _right_, which, like the others, we all understand, most
of us understand differently, and none can express succinctly otherwise.
Yet even on the straitest view, we can make some steps towards
comprehension of our own superior thoughts.  For it is an incredible and
most bewildering fact that a man, through life, is on variable terms with
himself; he is aware of tiffs and reconciliations; the intimacy is at
times almost suspended, at times it is renewed again with joy.  As we
said before, his inner self or soul appears to him by successive
revelations, and is frequently obscured.  It is from a study of these
alternations that we can alone hope to discover, even dimly, what seems
right and what seems wrong to this veiled prophet of ourself.

All that is in the man in the larger sense, what we call impression as
well as what we call intuition, so far as my argument looks, we must
accept.  It is not wrong to desire food, or exercise, or beautiful
surroundings, or the love of sex, or interest which is the food of the
mind.  All these are craved; all these should be craved; to none of these
in itself does the soul demur; where there comes an undeniable want, we
recognise a demand of nature.  Yet we know that these natural demands may
be superseded; for the demands which are common to mankind make but a
shadowy consideration in comparison to the demands of the individual
soul.  Food is almost the first prerequisite; and yet a high character
will go without food to the ruin and death of the body rather than gain
it in a manner which the spirit disavows.  Pascal laid aside mathematics;
Origen doctored his body with a knife; every day some one is thus
mortifying his dearest interests and desires, and, in Christ’s words,
entering maim into the Kingdom of Heaven.  This is to supersede the
lesser and less harmonious affections by renunciation; and though by this
ascetic path we may get to heaven, we cannot get thither a whole and
perfect man.  But there is another way, to supersede them by
reconciliation, in which the soul and all the faculties and senses pursue
a common route and share in one desire.  Thus, man is tormented by a very
imperious physical desire; it spoils his rest, it is not to be denied;
the doctors will tell you, not I, how it is a physical need, like the
want of food or slumber.  In the satisfaction of this desire, as it first
appears, the soul sparingly takes part; nay, it oft unsparingly regrets
and disapproves the satisfaction.  But let the man learn to love a woman
as far as he is capable of love; and for this random affection of the
body there is substituted a steady determination, a consent of all his
powers and faculties, which supersedes, adopts, and commands the other.
The desire survives, strengthened, perhaps, but taught obedience and
changed in scope and character.  Life is no longer a tale of betrayals
and regrets; for the man now lives as a whole; his consciousness now
moves on uninterrupted like a river; through all the extremes and ups and
downs of passion, he remains approvingly conscious of himself.

Now to me, this seems a type of that rightness which the soul demands.
It demands that we shall not live alternately with our opposing
tendencies in continual see-saw of passion and disgust, but seek some
path on which the tendencies shall no longer oppose, but serve each other
to a common end.  It demands that we shall not pursue broken ends, but
great and comprehensive purposes, in which soul and body may unite like
notes in a harmonious chord.  That were indeed a way of peace and
pleasure, that were indeed a heaven upon earth.  It does not demand,
however, or, to speak in measure, it does not demand of me, that I should
starve my appetites for no purpose under heaven but as a purpose in
itself; or, in a weak despair, pluck out the eye that I have not yet
learned to guide and enjoy with wisdom.  The soul demands unity of
purpose, not the dismemberment of man; it seeks to roll up all his
strength and sweetness, all his passion and wisdom, into one, and make of
him a perfect man exulting in perfection.  To conclude ascetically is to
give up, and not to solve, the problem.  The ascetic and the creeping
hog, although they are at different poles, have equally failed in life.
The one has sacrificed his crew; the other brings back his seamen in a
cock-boat, and has lost the ship.  I believe there are not many
sea-captains who would plume themselves on either result as a success.

But if it is righteousness thus to fuse together our divisive impulses
and march with one mind through life, there is plainly one thing more
unrighteous than all others, and one declension which is irretrievable
and draws on the rest.  And this is to lose consciousness of oneself.  In
the best of times, it is but by flashes, when our whole nature is clear,
strong and conscious, and events conspire to leave us free, that we enjoy
communion with our soul.  At the worst, we are so fallen and passive that
we may say shortly we have none.  An arctic torpor seizes upon men.
Although built of nerves, and set adrift in a stimulating world, they
develop a tendency to go bodily to sleep; consciousness becomes engrossed
among the reflex and mechanical parts of life; and soon loses both the
will and power to look higher considerations in the face.  This is ruin;
this is the last failure in life; this is temporal damnation, damnation
on the spot and without the form of judgment.  ‘What shall it profit a
man if he gain the whole world and _lose himself_?’

It is to keep a man awake, to keep him alive to his own soul and its
fixed design of righteousness, that the better part of moral and
religious education is directed; not only that of words and doctors, but
the sharp ferule of calamity under which we are all God’s scholars till
we die.  If, as teachers, we are to say anything to the purpose, we must
say what will remind the pupil of his soul; we must speak that soul’s
dialect; we must talk of life and conduct as his soul would have him
think of them.  If, from some conformity between us and the pupil, or
perhaps among all men, we do in truth speak in such a dialect and express
such views, beyond question we shall touch in him a spring; beyond
question he will recognise the dialect as one that he himself has spoken
in his better hours; beyond question he will cry, ‘I had forgotten, but
now I remember; I too have eyes, and I had forgot to use them!  I too
have a soul of my own, arrogantly upright, and to that I will listen and
conform.’  In short, say to him anything that he has once thought, or
been upon the point of thinking, or show him any view of life that he has
once clearly seen, or been upon the point of clearly seeing; and you have
done your part and may leave him to complete the education for himself.

Now, the view taught at the present time seems to me to want greatness;
and the dialect in which alone it can be intelligibly uttered is not the
dialect of my soul.  It is a sort of postponement of life; nothing quite
is, but something different is to be; we are to keep our eyes upon the
indirect from the cradle to the grave.  We are to regulate our conduct
not by desire, but by a politic eye upon the future; and to value acts as
they will bring us money or good opinion; as they will bring us, in one
word, _profit_.  We must be what is called respectable, and offend no one
by our carriage; it will not do to make oneself conspicuous—who knows?
even in virtue? says the Christian parent!  And we must be what is called
prudent and make money; not only because it is pleasant to have money,
but because that also is a part of respectability, and we cannot hope to
be received in society without decent possessions.  Received in society!
as if that were the kingdom of heaven!  There is dear Mr. So-and-so;—look
at him!—so much respected—so much looked up to—quite the Christian
merchant!  And we must cut our conduct as strictly as possible after the
pattern of Mr. So-and-so; and lay our whole lives to make money and be
strictly decent.  Besides these holy injunctions, which form by far the
greater part of a youth’s training in our Christian homes, there are at
least two other doctrines.  We are to live just now as well as we can,
but scrape at last into heaven, where we shall be good.  We are to worry
through the week in a lay, disreputable way, but, to make matters square,
live a different life on Sunday.

The train of thought we have been following gives us a key to all these
positions, without stepping aside to justify them on their own ground.
It is because we have been disgusted fifty times with physical squalls,
and fifty times torn between conflicting impulses, that we teach people
this indirect and tactical procedure in life, and to judge by remote
consequences instead of the immediate face of things.  The very desire to
act as our own souls would have us, coupled with a pathetic disbelief in
ourselves, moves us to follow the example of others; perhaps, who knows?
they may be on the right track; and the more our patterns are in number,
the better seems the chance; until, if we be acting in concert with a
whole civilised nation, there are surely a majority of chances that we
must be acting right.  And again, how true it is that we can never behave
as we wish in this tormented sphere, and can only aspire to different and
more favourable circumstances, in order to stand out and be ourselves
wholly and rightly!  And yet once more, if in the hurry and pressure of
affairs and passions you tend to nod and become drowsy, here are
twenty-four hours of Sunday set apart for you to hold counsel with your
soul and look around you on the possibilities of life.

This is not, of course, all that is to be, or even should be, said for
these doctrines.  Only, in the course of this chapter, the reader and I
have agreed upon a few catchwords, and been looking at morals on a
certain system; it was a pity to lose an opportunity of testing the
catchwords, and seeing whether, by this system as well as by others,
current doctrines could show any probable justification.  If the
doctrines had come too badly out of the trial, it would have condemned
the system.  Our sight of the world is very narrow; the mind but a
pedestrian instrument; there’s nothing new under the sun, as Solomon
says, except the man himself; and though that changes the aspect of
everything else, yet he must see the same things as other people, only
from a different side.

And now, having admitted so much, let us turn to criticism.

If you teach a man to keep his eyes upon what others think of him,
unthinkingly to lead the life and hold the principles of the majority of
his contemporaries, you must discredit in his eyes the one authoritative
voice of his own soul.  He may be a docile citizen; he will never be a
man.  It is ours, on the other hand, to disregard this babble and
chattering of other men better and worse than we are, and to walk
straight before us by what light we have.  They may be right; but so,
before heaven, are we.  They may know; but we know also, and by that
knowledge we must stand or fall.  There is such a thing as loyalty to a
man’s own better self; and from those who have not that, God help me, how
am I to look for loyalty to others?  The most dull, the most imbecile, at
a certain moment turn round, at a certain point will hear no further
argument, but stand unflinching by their own dumb, irrational sense of
right.  It is not only by steel or fire, but through contempt and blame,
that the martyr fulfils the calling of his dear soul.  Be glad if you are
not tried by such extremities.  But although all the world ranged
themselves in one line to tell you ‘This is wrong,’ be you your own
faithful vassal and the ambassador of God—throw down the glove and answer
‘This is right.’  Do you think you are only declaring yourself?  Perhaps
in some dim way, like a child who delivers a message not fully
understood, you are opening wider the straits of prejudice and preparing
mankind for some truer and more spiritual grasp of truth; perhaps, as you
stand forth for your own judgment, you are covering a thousand weak ones
with your body; perhaps, by this declaration alone, you have avoided the
guilt of false witness against humanity and the little ones unborn.  It
is good, I believe, to be respectable, but much nobler to respect oneself
and utter the voice of God.  God, if there be any God, speaks daily in a
new language by the tongues of men; the thoughts and habits of each fresh
generation and each new-coined spirit throw another light upon the
universe and contain another commentary on the printed Bibles; every
scruple, every true dissent, every glimpse of something new, is a letter
of God’s alphabet; and though there is a grave responsibility for all who
speak, is there none for those who unrighteously keep silence and
conform?  Is not that also to conceal and cloak God’s counsel?  And how
should we regard the man of science who suppressed all facts that would
not tally with the orthodoxy of the hour?

Wrong?  You are as surely wrong as the sun rose this morning round the
revolving shoulder of the world.  Not truth, but truthfulness, is the
good of your endeavour.  For when will men receive that first part and
prerequisite of truth, that, by the order of things, by the greatness of
the universe, by the darkness and partiality of man’s experience, by the
inviolate secrecy of God, kept close in His most open revelations, every
man is, and to the end of the ages must be, wrong?  Wrong to the
universe; wrong to mankind; wrong to God.  And yet in another sense, and
that plainer and nearer, every man of men, who wishes truly, must be
right.  He is right to himself, and in the measure of his sagacity and
candour.  That let him do in all sincerity and zeal, not sparing a
thought for contrary opinions; that, for what it is worth, let him
proclaim.  Be not afraid; although he be wrong, so also is the dead,
stuffed Dagon he insults.  For the voice of God, whatever it is, is not
that stammering, inept tradition which the people holds.  These truths
survive in travesty, swamped in a world of spiritual darkness and
confusion; and what a few comprehend and faithfully hold, the many, in
their dead jargon, repeat, degrade, and misinterpret.

So far of Respectability; what the Covenanters used to call ‘rank
conformity’: the deadliest gag and wet blanket that can be laid on men.
And now of Profit.  And this doctrine is perhaps the more redoubtable,
because it harms all sorts of men; not only the heroic and self-reliant,
but the obedient, cowlike squadrons.  A man, by this doctrine, looks to
consequences at the second, or third, or fiftieth turn.  He chooses his
end, and for that, with wily turns and through a great sea of tedium,
steers this mortal bark.  There may be political wisdom in such a view;
but I am persuaded there can spring no great moral zeal.  To look thus
obliquely upon life is the very recipe for moral slumber.  Our intention
and endeavour should be directed, not on some vague end of money or
applause, which shall come to us by a ricochet in a month or a year, or
twenty years, but on the act itself; not on the approval of others, but
on the rightness of that act.  At every instant, at every step in life,
the point has to be decided, our soul has to be saved, heaven has to be
gained or lost.  At every step our spirits must applaud, at every step we
must set down the foot and sound the trumpet.  ‘This have I done,’ we
must say; ‘right or wrong, this have I done, in unfeigned honour of
intention, as to myself and God.’  The profit of every act should be
this, that it was right for us to do it.  Any other profit than that, if
it involved a kingdom or the woman I love, ought, if I were God’s upright
soldier, to leave me untempted.

It is the mark of what we call a righteous decision, that it is made
directly and for its own sake.  The whole man, mind and body, having come
to an agreement, tyrannically dictates conduct.  There are two
dispositions eternally opposed: that in which we recognise that one thing
is wrong and another right, and that in which, not seeing any clear
distinction, we fall back on the consideration of consequences.  The
truth is, by the scope of our present teaching, nothing is thought very
wrong and nothing very right, except a few actions which have the
disadvantage of being disrespectable when found out; the more serious
part of men inclining to think all things _rather wrong_, the more jovial
to suppose them _right enough for practical purposes_.  I will engage my
head, they do not find that view in their own hearts; they have taken it
up in a dark despair; they are but troubled sleepers talking in their
sleep.  The soul, or my soul at least, thinks very distinctly upon many
points of right and wrong, and often differs flatly with what is held out
as the thought of corporate humanity in the code of society or the code
of law.  Am I to suppose myself a monster?  I have only to read books,
the Christian Gospels for example, to think myself a monster no longer;
and instead I think the mass of people are merely speaking in their
sleep.

It is a commonplace, enshrined, if I mistake not, even in school
copy-books, that honour is to be sought and not fame.  I ask no other
admission; we are to seek honour, upright walking with our own conscience
every hour of the day, and not fame, the consequence, the far-off
reverberation of our footsteps.  The walk, not the rumour of the walk, is
what concerns righteousness.  Better disrespectable honour than
dishonourable fame.  Better useless or seemingly hurtful honour, than
dishonour ruling empires and filling the mouths of thousands.  For the
man must walk by what he sees, and leave the issue with God who made him
and taught him by the fortune of his life.  You would not dishonour
yourself for money; which is at least tangible; would you do it, then,
for a doubtful forecast in politics, or another person’s theory in
morals?

So intricate is the scheme of our affairs, that no man can calculate the
bearing of his own behaviour even on those immediately around him, how
much less upon the world at large or on succeeding generations!  To walk
by external prudence and the rule of consequences would require, not a
man, but God.  All that we know to guide us in this changing labyrinth is
our soul with its fixed design of righteousness, and a few old precepts
which commend themselves to that.  The precepts are vague when we
endeavour to apply them; consequences are more entangled than a wisp of
string, and their confusion is unrestingly in change; we must hold to
what we know and walk by it.  We must walk by faith, indeed, and not by
knowledge.

You do not love another because he is wealthy or wise or eminently
respectable: you love him because you love him; that is love, and any
other only a derision and grimace.  It should be the same with all our
actions.  If we were to conceive a perfect man, it should be one who was
never torn between conflicting impulses, but who, on the absolute consent
of all his parts and faculties, submitted in every action of his life to
a self-dictation as absolute and unreasoned as that which bids him love
one woman and be true to her till death.  But we should not conceive him
as sagacious, ascetical, playing off his appetites against each other,
turning the wing of public respectable immorality instead of riding it
directly down, or advancing toward his end through a thousand sinister
compromises and considerations.  The one man might be wily, might be
adroit, might be wise, might be respectable, might be gloriously useful;
it is the other man who would be good.

The soul asks honour and not fame; to be upright, not to be successful;
to be good, not prosperous; to be essentially, not outwardly,
respectable.  Does your soul ask profit?  Does it ask money?  Does it ask
the approval of the indifferent herd?  I believe not.  For my own part, I
want but little money, I hope; and I do not want to be decent at all, but
to be good.



