The Project Gutenberg eBook, Lay Morals, by Robert Louis Stevenson, Edited
by Sidney Colvin


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org





Title: Lay Morals
       and Other Papers


Author: Robert Louis Stevenson

Editor: Sidney Colvin

Release Date: October 20, 2010  [eBook #373]
First Posted: November 1995

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LAY MORALS***


Transcribed from the Chatto and Windus 1911 edition by David Price, email
ccx074@pglaf.org





                                LAY MORALS


                             And Other Papers

                                    BY
                          ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON



                            [Picture: Graphic]

                              A NEW EDITION
                            WITH A PREFACE BY
                              MRS. STEVENSON

                                * * * * *

                                  LONDON
                             CHATTO & WINDUS
                                   1911

                                * * * * *

                          _All rights reserved._




PREFACE
BY MRS. ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON {0}


In our long voyage on the yacht _Casco_, we visited many islands; I
believe on every one we found the scourge of leprosy.  In the Marquesas
there was a regular leper settlement, though the persons living there
seemed free to wander where they wished, fishing on the beach, or
visiting friends in the villages.  I remember one afternoon, at Anaho,
when my husband and I, tired after a long quest for shells, sat down on
the sand to rest awhile, a native man stepped out from under some
cocoanut trees, regarding us hesitatingly as though fearful of intruding.
My husband waved an invitation to the stranger to join us, offering his
cigarette to the man in the island fashion.  The cigarette was accepted
and, after a puff or two, courteously passed back again according to
native etiquette.  The hand that held it was the maimed hand of a leper.
To my consternation my husband took the cigarette and smoked it out.
Afterwards when we were alone and I spoke of my horror he said, ‘I could
not mortify the man.  And if you think I _liked_ doing it—that was
another reason; because I _didn’t_ want to.’

Another day, while we were still anchored in Anaho Bay, a messenger from
round a distant headland came in a whale-boat with an urgent request that
we go to see a young white girl who was ill with some mysterious malady.
We had supposed that, with the beach-comber ‘Charley the red,’ we were
the only white people on our side of the island.  Though there was much
wind that day and the sea ran high, we started at once, impelled partly
by curiosity and partly by the pathetic nature of the message.
Fortunately we took our luncheon with us, eating it on the beach before
we went up to the house where the sick girl lay.  Our hostess, the girl’s
mother, met us with regrets that we had already lunched, saying, ‘I have
a most excellent cook; here he is, now.’  She turned, as she spoke, to an
elderly Chinaman who was plainly in an advanced stage of leprosy.  When
the man was gone, my husband asked if she had no fear of contagion.  ‘I
don’t believe in contagion,’ was her reply.  But there was little doubt
as to what ailed her daughter.  She was certainly suffering from leprosy.
We could only advise that the girl be taken to the French post at Santa
Maria Bay where there was a doctor.

On our return to the _Casco_ we confessed to each other with what alarm
and repugnance we touched the miserable girl.  We talked long that
evening of Father Damien, his sublime heroism, and his martyrdom which
was already nearing its sad end.  Beyond all noble qualities my husband
placed courage.  The more he saw of leprosy, and he saw much in the
islands, the higher rose his admiration for the simple priest of Molokai.
‘I must see Molokai,’ he said many times.  ‘I must somehow manage to see
Molokai.’

In January 1889, we arrived in Honolulu, settling in a pleasant cottage
by the sea to rest until we were ready to return to England.  The _Casco_
we sent back to San Francisco with the captain.  But the knowledge that
every few days some vessel was leaving Honolulu to cruise among islands
we had not seen, and now should never see, was more than we could bear.
First we engaged passage on a missionary ship, but changed our minds—my
husband would not be allowed to smoke on board, for one reason—and
chartered the trading schooner _Equator_.  This was thought too rough a
voyage for my mother-in-law, as indeed it would have been; so she was
sent, somewhat protesting, back to Scotland.

My husband was still intent on seeing Molokai.  After the waste of much
time and red tape, he finally received an official permission to visit
the leper settlement.  It did not occur to him it would be necessary to
get a separate official permission to _leave_ Molokai; hence he was
nearly left behind when the vessel sailed out.  He only saved himself by
a prodigious leap which landed him on board the boat, whence nothing but
force could dislodge him.  By the doctor’s orders he took gloves to wear
as a precautionary measure against contagion, but they were never worn.
At first he avoided shaking hands, but when he played croquet with the
young leper girls he would not listen to the Mother Superior’s warning
that he must wear gloves.  He thought it might remind them of their
condition.  ‘What will you do if you find you have contracted leprosy?’ I
asked.  ‘Do?’ he replied; ‘why, you and I would spend the rest of our
lives in Molokai and become humble followers of Father Damien.’  As Mr.
Balfour says in the Life of Stevenson, he was as stern with his family as
he was with himself, and as exacting.

He talked very little to us of the tragedy of Molokai, though I could see
it lay heavy on his spirits; but of the great work begun by Father Damien
and carried on by his successors he spoke fully.  He had followed the
life of the priest like a detective until there seemed nothing more to
learn.  Mother Mary Ann, the Mother Superior, he could never mention
without deep emotion.  One of the first things he did on his return to
Honolulu was to send her a grand piano for the use of her girls—the girls
with whom he had played croquet.  He also sent toys, sewing materials,
small tools for the younger children, and other things that I have
forgotten.  After his death a letter was found among his papers, of which
I have only the last few lines.  ‘I cannot suppose you remember me, but I
won’t forget you, nor God won’t forget you for your kindness to the blind
white leper at Molokai.’

During my husband’s absence I had made every preparation for our voyage
on the _Equator_, so but little time was lost before we found ourselves
on board, our sails set for the south.  The _Equator_, which had easily
lived through the great Samoan hurricane, made no such phenomenal runs as
the _Casco_, but we could trust her, and she had no ‘tricks and ways’
that we did not understand.  We liked the sailors, we loved the ship and
her captain, so it was with heart-felt regret we said farewell in the
harbour of Apia after a long and perfect cruise.

After reading the letters that awaited us in Apia, we looked over the
newspapers.  Our indignation may be imagined when we read in one item
that, owing to the publication of a letter by a well-known Honolulu
missionary, depicting Father Damien as a dirty old peasant who had
contracted leprosy through his immoral habits, the project to erect a
monument to his memory would be abandoned.  ‘I’ll not believe it,’ said
my husband, ‘unless I see it with my own eyes; for it is too damnable for
belief!’

But see it he did, in spite of his incredulity, for in Sydney, a month or
two later, the very journal containing the letter condemnatory of Father
Damien was among the first we chanced to open.  I shall never forget my
husband’s ferocity of indignation, his leaping stride as he paced the
room holding the offending paper at arm’s-length before his eyes that
burned and sparkled with a peculiar flashing light.  His cousin Mr.
Balfour, in his _Life of Robert Louis Stevenson_, says: ‘his eyes . . .
when he was moved to anger or any fierce emotion seemed literally to
blaze and glow with a burning light.’  In another moment he disappeared
through the doorway, and I could hear him, in his own room, pulling his
chair to the table, and the sound of his inkstand being dragged towards
him.

That afternoon he called us together—my son, my daughter, and
myself—saying that he had something serious to lay before us.  He went
over the circumstances succinctly, and then we three had the incomparable
experience of hearing its author read aloud the defence of Father Damien
while it was still red-hot from his indignant soul.

As we sat, dazed and overcome by emotion, he pointed out to us that the
subject-matter was libellous in the highest degree, and the publication
of the article might cause the loss of his entire substance.  Without our
concurrence he would not take such a risk.  There was no dissenting
voice; how could there be?  The paper was published with almost no change
or revision, though afterwards my husband said he considered this a
mistake.  He thought he should have waited for his anger to cool, when he
might have been more impersonal and less egotistic.

The next day he consulted an eminent lawyer, more from curiosity than
from any other reason.  Mr. Moses—I think that was his name—was at first
inclined to be jocular.  I remember his smiling question: ‘Have you
called him a hell-hound or an atheist?  Otherwise there is no libel.’
But when he looked over the manuscript his countenance changed.  ‘This is
a serious affair,’ he said; ‘however, no one will publish it for you.’
In that Mr. Moses was right; no one dared publish the pamphlet.  But that
difficulty was soon overcome.  My husband hired a printer by the day, and
the work was rushed through.  We then, my daughter, my son, and myself,
were set to work helping address the pamphlets, which were scattered far
and wide.

Father Damien was vindicated by a stranger, a man of another country and
another religion from his own.

                                                            F. V. DE G. S.




Contents:


   Preface by Mrs. Robert Louis Stevenson
   Lay Morals
   Father Damien
   The Pentland Rising
      I.  The Causes of the Revolt
      II.  The Beginning
      III.  The March of the Rebels
      IV.  Rullion Green
      V.  A Record of Blood
   The Day After To-morrow
   College Papers
      I.  Edinburgh Students in 1824
      II.  The Modern Student
      III.  Debating Societies
   Criticisms
      I.  Lord Lytton’s “Fables in Song”
      II.  Salvini’s Macbeth
      III.  Bagster’s “Pilgrim’s Progress”
   Sketches
      I.  The Satirist
      II.  Nuits Blanches
      III.  The Wreath of Immortelles
      IV.  Nurses
      V.  A Character
  The Great North Road
      I.  Nance at the “Green Dragon”
      II.  In which Mr. Archer is Installed
      III.  Jonathan Holdaway
      IV.  Mingling Threads
      V.  Life in the Castle
      IV.  The Bad Half-Crown
      VII.  The Bleaching-Green
      VIII.  The Mail Guard
   The Young Chevalier
      Prologue: The Wine-Seller’s Wife
      I.  The Prince
   Heathercat
      I.  Traqairs of Montroymont
      II.  Francie
      III.  The Hill-End of Drumlowe




LAY MORALS


_The following chapters of a projected treatise on Ethics were drafted at
Edinburgh in the spring of_ 1879.  _They are unrevised_, _and must not be
taken as representing_, _either as to matter or form_, _their author’s
final thoughts_; _but they contain much that is essentially
characteristic of his mind_.

                                * * * * *

               _Copyright in the United States of America_.



CHAPTER I


The problem of education is twofold: first to know, and then to utter.
Every one who lives any semblance of an inner life thinks more nobly and
profoundly than he speaks; and the best of teachers can impart only
broken images of the truth which they perceive.  Speech which goes from
one to another between two natures, and, what is worse, between two
experiences, is doubly relative.  The speaker buries his meaning; it is
for the hearer to dig it up again; and all speech, written or spoken, is
in a dead language until it finds a willing and prepared hearer.  Such,
moreover, is the complexity of life, that when we condescend upon details
in our advice, we may be sure we condescend on error; and the best of
education is to throw out some magnanimous hints.  No man was ever so
poor that he could express all he has in him by words, looks, or actions;
his true knowledge is eternally incommunicable, for it is a knowledge of
himself; and his best wisdom comes to him by no process of the mind, but
in a supreme self-dictation, which keeps varying from hour to hour in its
dictates with the variation of events and circumstances.

A few men of picked nature, full of faith, courage, and contempt for
others, try earnestly to set forth as much as they can grasp of this
inner law; but the vast majority, when they come to advise the young,
must be content to retail certain doctrines which have been already
retailed to them in their own youth.  Every generation has to educate
another which it has brought upon the stage.  People who readily accept
the responsibility of parentship, having very different matters in their
eye, are apt to feel rueful when that responsibility falls due.  What are
they to tell the child about life and conduct, subjects on which they
have themselves so few and such confused opinions?  Indeed, I do not
know; the least said, perhaps, the soonest mended; and yet the child
keeps asking, and the parent must find some words to say in his own
defence.  Where does he find them? and what are they when found?

As a matter of experience, and in nine hundred and ninety-nine cases out
of a thousand, he will instil into his wide-eyed brat three bad things:
the terror of public opinion, and, flowing from that as a fountain, the
desire of wealth and applause.  Besides these, or what might be deduced
as corollaries from these, he will teach not much else of any effective
value: some dim notions of divinity, perhaps, and book-keeping, and how
to walk through a quadrille.

But, you may tell me, the young people are taught to be Christians.  It
may be want of penetration, but I have not yet been able to perceive it.
As an honest man, whatever we teach, and be it good or evil, it is not
the doctrine of Christ.  What he taught (and in this he is like all other
teachers worthy of the name) was not a code of rules, but a ruling
spirit; not truths, but a spirit of truth; not views, but a view.  What
he showed us was an attitude of mind.  Towards the many considerations on
which conduct is built, each man stands in a certain relation.  He takes
life on a certain principle.  He has a compass in his spirit which points
in a certain direction.  It is the attitude, the relation, the point of
the compass, that is the whole body and gist of what he has to teach us;
in this, the details are comprehended; out of this the specific precepts
issue, and by this, and this only, can they be explained and applied.
And thus, to learn aright from any teacher, we must first of all, like a
historical artist, think ourselves into sympathy with his position and,
in the technical phrase, create his character.  A historian confronted
with some ambiguous politician, or an actor charged with a part, have but
one pre-occupation; they must search all round and upon every side, and
grope for some central conception which is to explain and justify the
most extreme details; until that is found, the politician is an enigma,
or perhaps a quack, and the part a tissue of fustian sentiment and big
words; but once that is found, all enters into a plan, a human nature
appears, the politician or the stage-king is understood from point to
point, from end to end.  This is a degree of trouble which will be gladly
taken by a very humble artist; but not even the terror of eternal fire
can teach a business man to bend his imagination to such athletic
efforts.  Yet without this, all is vain; until we understand the whole,
we shall understand none of the parts; and otherwise we have no more than
broken images and scattered words; the meaning remains buried; and the
language in which our prophet speaks to us is a dead language in our
ears.

Take a few of Christ’s sayings and compare them with our current
doctrines.

‘Ye cannot,’ he says, ‘_serve God and Mammon_.’  Cannot?  And our whole
system is to teach us how we can!

‘_The children of this world are wiser in their generation than the
children of light_.’  Are they?  I had been led to understand the
reverse: that the Christian merchant, for example, prospered exceedingly
in his affairs; that honesty was the best policy; that an author of
repute had written a conclusive treatise ‘How to make the best of both
worlds.’  Of both worlds indeed!  Which am I to believe then—Christ or
the author of repute?

‘_Take no thought for the morrow_.’  Ask the Successful Merchant;
interrogate your own heart; and you will have to admit that this is not
only a silly but an immoral position.  All we believe, all we hope, all
we honour in ourselves or our contemporaries, stands condemned in this
one sentence, or, if you take the other view, condemns the sentence as
unwise and inhumane.  We are not then of the ‘same mind that was in
Christ.’  We disagree with Christ.  Either Christ meant nothing, or else
he or we must be in the wrong.  Well says Thoreau, speaking of some texts
from the New Testament, and finding a strange echo of another style which
the reader may recognise: ‘Let but one of these sentences be rightly read
from any pulpit in the land, and there would not be left one stone of
that meeting-house upon another.’

It may be objected that these are what are called ‘hard sayings’; and
that a man, or an education, may be very sufficiently Christian although
it leave some of these sayings upon one side.  But this is a very gross
delusion.  Although truth is difficult to state, it is both easy and
agreeable to receive, and the mind runs out to meet it ere the phrase be
done.  The universe, in relation to what any man can say of it, is plain,
patent and staringly comprehensible.  In itself, it is a great and
travailing ocean, unsounded, unvoyageable, an eternal mystery to man; or,
let us say, it is a monstrous and impassable mountain, one side of which,
and a few near slopes and foothills, we can dimly study with these mortal
eyes.  But what any man can say of it, even in his highest utterance,
must have relation to this little and plain corner, which is no less
visible to us than to him.  We are looking on the same map; it will go
hard if we cannot follow the demonstration.  The longest and most
abstruse flight of a philosopher becomes clear and shallow, in the flash
of a moment, when we suddenly perceive the aspect and drift of his
intention.  The longest argument is but a finger pointed; once we get our
own finger rightly parallel, and we see what the man meant, whether it be
a new star or an old street-lamp.  And briefly, if a saying is hard to
understand, it is because we are thinking of something else.

But to be a true disciple is to think of the same things as our prophet,
and to think of different things in the same order.  To be of the same
mind with another is to see all things in the same perspective; it is not
to agree in a few indifferent matters near at hand and not much debated;
it is to follow him in his farthest flights, to see the force of his
hyperboles, to stand so exactly in the centre of his vision that whatever
he may express, your eyes will light at once on the original, that
whatever he may see to declare, your mind will at once accept.  You do
not belong to the school of any philosopher, because you agree with him
that theft is, on the whole, objectionable, or that the sun is overhead
at noon.  It is by the hard sayings that discipleship is tested.  We are
all agreed about the middling and indifferent parts of knowledge and
morality; even the most soaring spirits too often take them tamely upon
trust.  But the man, the philosopher or the moralist, does not stand upon
these chance adhesions; and the purpose of any system looks towards those
extreme points where it steps valiantly beyond tradition and returns with
some covert hint of things outside.  Then only can you be certain that
the words are not words of course, nor mere echoes of the past; then only
are you sure that if he be indicating anything at all, it is a star and
not a street-lamp; then only do you touch the heart of the mystery, since
it was for these that the author wrote his book.

Now, every now and then, and indeed surprisingly often, Christ finds a
word that transcends all common-place morality; every now and then he
quits the beaten track to pioneer the unexpressed, and throws out a
pregnant and magnanimous hyperbole; for it is only by some bold poetry of
thought that men can be strung up above the level of everyday conceptions
to take a broader look upon experience or accept some higher principle of
conduct.  To a man who is of the same mind that was in Christ, who stands
at some centre not too far from his, and looks at the world and conduct
from some not dissimilar or, at least, not opposing attitude—or, shortly,
to a man who is of Christ’s philosophy—every such saying should come home
with a thrill of joy and corroboration; he should feel each one below his
feet as another sure foundation in the flux of time and chance; each
should be another proof that in the torrent of the years and generations,
where doctrines and great armaments and empires are swept away and
swallowed, he stands immovable, holding by the eternal stars.  But alas!
at this juncture of the ages it is not so with us; on each and every such
occasion our whole fellowship of Christians falls back in disapproving
wonder and implicitly denies the saying.  Christians! the farce is
impudently broad.  Let us stand up in the sight of heaven and confess.
The ethics that we hold are those of Benjamin Franklin.  _Honesty is the
best policy_, is perhaps a hard saying; it is certainly one by which a
wise man of these days will not too curiously direct his steps; but I
think it shows a glimmer of meaning to even our most dimmed
intelligences; I think we perceive a principle behind it; I think,
without hyperbole, we are of the same mind that was in Benjamin Franklin.



