CHAPTER II—THE MODERN STUDENT CONSIDERED GENERALLY


We have now reached the difficult portion of our task.  _Mr. Tatler_, for
all that we care, may have been as virulent as he liked about the
students of a former; but for the iron to touch our sacred selves, for a
brother of the Guild to betray its most privy infirmities, let such a
Judas look to himself as he passes on his way to the Scots Law or the
Diagnostic, below the solitary lamp at the corner of the dark quadrangle.
We confess that this idea alarms us.  We enter a protest.  We bind
ourselves over verbally to keep the peace.  We hope, moreover, that
having thus made you secret to our misgivings, you will excuse us if we
be dull, and set that down to caution which you might before have charged
to the account of stupidity.

The natural tendency of civilisation is to obliterate those distinctions
which are the best salt of life.  All the fine old professional flavour
in language has evaporated.  Your very gravedigger has forgotten his
avocation in his electorship, and would quibble on the Franchise over
Ophelia’s grave, instead of more appropriately discussing the duration of
bodies under ground.  From this tendency, from this gradual attrition of
life, in which everything pointed and characteristic is being rubbed
down, till the whole world begins to slip between our fingers in smooth
undistinguishable sands, from this, we say, it follows that we must not
attempt to join _Mr. Taller_ in his simple division of students into
_Law_, _Divinity_, and _Medical_.  Nowadays the Faculties may shake hands
over their follies; and, like Mrs. Frail and Mrs. Foresight (in _Love for
Love_) they may stand in the doors of opposite class-rooms, crying:
‘Sister, Sister—Sister everyway!’  A few restrictions, indeed, remain to
influence the followers of individual branches of study.  The Divinity,
for example, must be an avowed believer; and as this, in the present day,
is unhappily considered by many as a confession of weakness, he is fain
to choose one of two ways of gilding the distasteful orthodox bolus.
Some swallow it in a thin jelly of metaphysics; for it is even a credit
to believe in God on the evidence of some crack-jaw philosopher, although
it is a decided slur to believe in Him on His own authority.  Others
again (and this we think the worst method), finding German grammar a
somewhat dry morsel, run their own little heresy as a proof of
independence; and deny one of the cardinal doctrines that they may hold
the others without being laughed at.

Besides, however, such influences as these, there is little more
distinction between the faculties than the traditionary ideal, handed
down through a long sequence of students, and getting rounder and more
featureless at each successive session.  The plague of uniformity has
descended on the College.  Students (and indeed all sorts and conditions
of men) now require their faculty and character hung round their neck on
a placard, like the scenes in Shakespeare’s theatre.  And in the midst of
all this weary sameness, not the least common feature is the gravity of
every face.  No more does the merry medical run eagerly in the clear
winter morning up the rugged sides of Arthur’s Seat, and hear the church
bells begin and thicken and die away below him among the gathered smoke
of the city.  He will not break Sunday to so little purpose.  He no
longer finds pleasure in the mere output of his surplus energy.  He
husbands his strength, and lays out walks, and reading, and amusement
with deep consideration, so that he may get as much work and pleasure out
of his body as he can, and waste none of his energy on mere impulse, or
such flat enjoyment as an excursion in the country.

See the quadrangle in the interregnum of classes, in those two or three
minutes when it is full of passing students, and we think you will admit
that, if we have not made it ‘an habitation of dragons,’ we have at least
transformed it into ‘a court for owls.’  Solemnity broods heavily over
the enclosure; and wherever you seek it, you will find a dearth of
merriment, an absence of real youthful enjoyment.  You might as well try

    ‘To move wild laughter in the throat of death’

as to excite any healthy stir among the bulk of this staid company.

The studious congregate about the doors of the different classes,
debating the matter of the lecture, or comparing note-books.  A reserved
rivalry sunders them.  Here are some deep in Greek particles: there,
others are already inhabitants of that land

    ‘Where entity and quiddity,
    ‘Like ghosts of defunct bodies fly—
    Where Truth in person does appear
    Like words congealed in northern air.’

But none of them seem to find any relish for their studies—no pedantic
love of this subject or that lights up their eyes—science and learning
are only means for a livelihood, which they have considerately embraced
and which they solemnly pursue.  ‘Labour’s pale priests,’ their lips seem
incapable of laughter, except in the way of polite recognition of
professorial wit.  The stains of ink are chronic on their meagre fingers.
They walk like Saul among the asses.

The dandies are not less subdued.  In 1824 there was a noisy dapper
dandyism abroad.  Vulgar, as we should now think, but yet genial—a matter
of white greatcoats and loud voices—strangely different from the stately
frippery that is rife at present.  These men are out of their element in
the quadrangle.  Even the small remains of boisterous humour, which still
clings to any collection of young men, jars painfully on their morbid
sensibilities; and they beat a hasty retreat to resume their perfunctory
march along Princes Street.  Flirtation is to them a great social duty, a
painful obligation, which they perform on every occasion in the same
chill official manner, and with the same commonplace advances, the same
dogged observance of traditional behaviour.  The shape of their raiment
is a burden almost greater than they can bear, and they halt in their
walk to preserve the due adjustment of their trouser-knees, till one
would fancy he had mixed in a procession of Jacobs.  We speak, of course,
for ourselves; but we would as soon associate with a herd of sprightly
apes as with these gloomy modern beaux.  Alas, that our Mirabels, our
Valentines, even our Brummels, should have left their mantles upon
nothing more amusing!

Nor are the fast men less constrained.  Solemnity, even in dissipation,
is the order of the day; and they go to the devil with a perverse
seriousness, a systematic rationalism of wickedness that would have
surprised the simpler sinners of old.  Some of these men whom we see
gravely conversing on the steps have but a slender acquaintance with each
other.  Their intercourse consists principally of mutual bulletins of
depravity; and, week after week, as they meet they reckon up their items
of transgression, and give an abstract of their downward progress for
approval and encouragement.  These folk form a freemasonry of their own.
An oath is the shibboleth of their sinister fellowship.  Once they hear a
man swear, it is wonderful how their tongues loosen and their bashful
spirits take enlargement, under the consciousness of brotherhood.  There
is no folly, no pardoning warmth of temper about them; they are as
steady-going and systematic in their own way as the studious in theirs.

Not that we are without merry men.  No.  We shall not be ungrateful to
those, whose grimaces, whose ironical laughter, whose active feet in the
‘College Anthem’ have beguiled so many weary hours and added a pleasant
variety to the strain of close attention.  But even these are too
evidently professional in their antics.  They go about cogitating puns
and inventing tricks.  It is their vocation, Hal.  They are the
gratuitous jesters of the class-room; and, like the clown when he leaves
the stage, their merriment too often sinks as the bell rings the hour of
liberty, and they pass forth by the Post-Office, grave and sedate, and
meditating fresh gambols for the morrow.

This is the impression left on the mind of any observing student by too
many of his fellows.  They seem all frigid old men; and one pauses to
think how such an unnatural state of matters is produced.  We feel
inclined to blame for it the unfortunate absence of _University feeling_
which is so marked a characteristic of our Edinburgh students.
Academical interests are so few and far between—students, as students,
have so little in common, except a peevish rivalry—there is such an
entire want of broad college sympathies and ordinary college friendships,
that we fancy that no University in the kingdom is in so poor a plight.
Our system is full of anomalies.  A, who cut B whilst he was a shabby
student, curries sedulously up to him and cudgels his memory for
anecdotes about him when he becomes the great so-and-so.  Let there be an
end of this shy, proud reserve on the one hand, and this shuddering fine
ladyism on the other; and we think we shall find both ourselves and the
College bettered.  Let it be a sufficient reason for intercourse that two
men sit together on the same benches.  Let the great A be held excused
for nodding to the shabby B in Princes Street, if he can say, ‘That
fellow is a student.’  Once this could be brought about, we think you
would find the whole heart of the University beat faster.  We think you
would find a fusion among the students, a growth of common feelings, an
increasing sympathy between class and class, whose influence (in such a
heterogeneous company as ours) might be of incalculable value in all
branches of politics and social progress.  It would do more than this.
If we could find some method of making the University a real mother to
her sons—something beyond a building of class-rooms, a Senatus and a
lottery of somewhat shabby prizes—we should strike a death-blow at the
constrained and unnatural attitude of our Society.  At present we are not
a united body, but a loose gathering of individuals, whose inherent
attraction is allowed to condense them into little knots and coteries.
Our last snowball riot read us a plain lesson on our condition.  There
was no party spirit—no unity of interests.  A few, who were mischievously
inclined, marched off to the College of Surgeons in a pretentious file;
but even before they reached their destination the feeble inspiration had
died out in many, and their numbers were sadly thinned.  Some followed
strange gods in the direction of Drummond Street, and others slunk back
to meek good-boyism at the feet of the Professors.  The same is visible
in better things.  As you send a man to an English University that he may
have his prejudices rubbed off, you might send him to Edinburgh that he
may have them ingrained—rendered indelible—fostered by sympathy into
living principles of his spirit.  And the reason of it is quite plain.
From this absence of University feeling it comes that a man’s friendships
are always the direct and immediate results of these very prejudices.  A
common weakness is the best master of ceremonies in our quadrangle: a
mutual vice is the readiest introduction.  The studious associate with
the studious alone—the dandies with the dandies.  There is nothing to
force them to rub shoulders with the others; and so they grow day by day
more wedded to their own original opinions and affections.  They see
through the same spectacles continually.  All broad sentiments, all real
catholic humanity expires; and the mind gets gradually stiffened into one
position—becomes so habituated to a contracted atmosphere, that it
shudders and withers under the least draught of the free air that
circulates in the general field of mankind.

Specialism in Society then is, we think, one cause of our present state.
Specialism in study is another.  We doubt whether this has ever been a
good thing since the world began; but we are sure it is much worse now
than it was.  Formerly, when a man became a specialist, it was out of
affection for his subject.  With a somewhat grand devotion he left all
the world of Science to follow his true love; and he contrived to find
that strange pedantic interest which inspired the man who

    ‘Settled _Hoti’s_ business—let it be—
       Properly based _Oun—_
    Gave us the doctrine of the enclitic _De_,
       Dead from the waist down.’

Nowadays it is quite different.  Our pedantry wants even the saving
clause of Enthusiasm.  The election is now matter of necessity and not of
choice.  Knowledge is now too broad a field for your Jack-of-all-Trades;
and, from beautifully utilitarian reasons, he makes his choice, draws his
pen through a dozen branches of study, and behold—John the Specialist.
That this is the way to be wealthy we shall not deny; but we hold that it
is _not_ the way to be healthy or wise.  The whole mind becomes narrowed
and circumscribed to one ‘punctual spot’ of knowledge.  A rank unhealthy
soil breeds a harvest of prejudices.  Feeling himself above others in his
one little branch—in the classification of toadstools, or Carthaginian
history—he waxes great in his own eyes and looks down on others.  Having
all his sympathies educated in one way, they die out in every other; and
he is apt to remain a peevish, narrow, and intolerant bigot.  Dilettante
is now a term of reproach; but there is a certain form of dilettantism to
which no one can object.  It is this that we want among our students.  We
wish them to abandon no subject until they have seen and felt its
merit—to act under a general interest in all branches of knowledge, not a
commercial eagerness to excel in one.

In both these directions our sympathies are constipated.  We are apostles
of our own caste and our own subject of study, instead of being, as we
should, true men and _loving_ students.  Of course both of these could be
corrected by the students themselves; but this is nothing to the purpose:
it is more important to ask whether the Senatus or the body of alumni
could do nothing towards the growth of better feeling and wider
sentiments.  Perhaps in another paper we may say something upon this
head.

One other word, however, before we have done.  What shall we be when we
grow really old?  Of yore, a man was thought to lay on restrictions and
acquire new deadweight of mournful experience with every year, till he
looked back on his youth as the very summer of impulse and freedom.  We
please ourselves with thinking that it cannot be so with us.  We would
fain hope that, as we have begun in one way, we may end in another; and
that when we are in fact the octogenarians that we _seem_ at present,
there shall be no merrier men on earth.  It is pleasant to picture us,
sunning ourselves in Princes Street of a morning, or chirping over our
evening cups, with all the merriment that we wanted in youth.



