CHAPTER III—BAGSTER’S ‘PILGRIM’S PROGRESS’


I have here before me an edition of the _Pilgrim’s Progress_, bound in
green, without a date, and described as ‘illustrated by nearly three
hundred engravings, and memoir of Bunyan.’  On the outside it is lettered
‘Bagster’s Illustrated Edition,’ and after the author’s apology, facing
the first page of the tale, a folding pictorial ‘Plan of the Road’ is
marked as ‘drawn by the late Mr. T. Conder,’ and engraved by J. Basire.
No further information is anywhere vouchsafed; perhaps the publishers had
judged the work too unimportant; and we are still left ignorant whether
or not we owe the woodcuts in the body of the volume to the same hand
that drew the plan.  It seems, however, more than probable.  The literal
particularity of mind which, in the map, laid down the flower-plots in
the devil’s garden, and carefully introduced the court-house in the town
of Vanity, is closely paralleled in many of the cuts; and in both, the
architecture of the buildings and the disposition of the gardens have a
kindred and entirely English air.  Whoever he was, the author of these
wonderful little pictures may lay claim to be the best illustrator of
Bunyan. {183}  They are not only good illustrations, like so many others;
but they are like so few, good illustrations of Bunyan.  Their spirit, in
defect and quality, is still the same as his own.  The designer also has
lain down and dreamed a dream, as literal, as quaint, and almost as
apposite as Bunyan’s; and text and pictures make but the two sides of the
same homespun yet impassioned story.  To do justice to the designs, it
will be necessary to say, for the hundredth time, a word or two about the
masterpiece which they adorn.

All allegories have a tendency to escape from the purpose of their
creators; and as the characters and incidents become more and more
interesting in themselves, the moral, which these were to show forth,
falls more and more into neglect.  An architect may command a wreath of
vine-leaves round the cornice of a monument; but if, as each leaf came
from the chisel, it took proper life and fluttered freely on the wall,
and if the vine grew, and the building were hidden over with foliage and
fruit, the architect would stand in much the same situation as the writer
of allegories.  The _Faëry Queen_ was an allegory, I am willing to
believe; but it survives as an imaginative tale in incomparable verse.
The case of Bunyan is widely different; and yet in this also Allegory,
poor nymph, although never quite forgotten, is sometimes rudely thrust
against the wall.  Bunyan was fervently in earnest; with ‘his fingers in
his ears, he ran on,’ straight for his mark.  He tells us himself, in the
conclusion to the first part, that he did not fear to raise a laugh;
indeed, he feared nothing, and said anything; and he was greatly served
in this by a certain rustic privilege of his style, which, like the talk
of strong uneducated men, when it does not impress by its force, still
charms by its simplicity.  The mere story and the allegorical design
enjoyed perhaps his equal favour.  He believed in both with an energy of
faith that was capable of moving mountains.  And we have to remark in
him, not the parts where inspiration fails and is supplied by cold and
merely decorative invention, but the parts where faith has grown to be
credulity, and his characters become so real to him that he forgets the
end of their creation.  We can follow him step by step into the trap
which he lays for himself by his own entire good faith and triumphant
literality of vision, till the trap closes and shuts him in an
inconsistency.  The allegories of the Interpreter and of the Shepherds of
the Delectable Mountains are all actually performed, like stage-plays,
before the pilgrims.  The son of Mr. Great-grace visibly ‘tumbles hills
about with his words.’  Adam the First has his condemnation written
visibly on his forehead, so that Faithful reads it.  At the very instant
the net closes round the pilgrims, ‘the white robe falls from the black
man’s body.’  Despair ‘getteth him a grievous crab-tree cudgel’; it was
in ‘sunshiny weather’ that he had his fits; and the birds in the grove
about the House Beautiful, ‘our country birds,’ only sing their little
pious verses ‘at the spring, when the flowers appear and the sun shines
warm.’  ‘I often,’ says Piety, ‘go out to hear them; we also ofttimes
keep them tame on our house.’  The post between Beulah and the Celestial
City sounds his horn, as you may yet hear in country places.  Madam
Bubble, that ‘tall, comely dame, something of a swarthy complexion, in
very pleasant attire, but old,’ ‘gives you a smile at the end of each
sentence’—a real woman she; we all know her.  Christiana dying ‘gave Mr.
Stand-fast a ring,’ for no possible reason in the allegory, merely
because the touch was human and affecting.  Look at Great-heart, with his
soldierly ways, garrison ways, as I had almost called them; with his
taste in weapons; his delight in any that ‘he found to be a man of his
hands’; his chivalrous point of honour, letting Giant Maul get up again
when he was down, a thing fairly flying in the teeth of the moral; above
all, with his language in the inimitable tale of Mr. Fearing: ‘I thought
I should have lost my man’—‘chicken-hearted’—‘at last he came in, and I
will say that for my lord, he carried it wonderful lovingly to him.’
This is no Independent minister; this is a stout, honest, big-busted
ancient, adjusting his shoulder-belts, twirling his long moustaches as he
speaks.  Last and most remarkable, ‘My sword,’ says the dying
Valiant-for-Truth, he in whom Great-heart delighted, ‘my sword I give to
him that shall succeed me in my pilgrimage, _and my courage and skill to
him that can get it_.’  And after this boast, more arrogantly unorthodox
than was ever dreamed of by the rejected Ignorance, we are told that ‘all
the trumpets sounded for him on the other side.’

In every page the book is stamped with the same energy of vision and the
same energy of belief.  The quality is equally and indifferently
displayed in the spirit of the fighting, the tenderness of the pathos,
the startling vigour and strangeness of the incidents, the natural strain
of the conversations, and the humanity and charm of the characters.
Trivial talk over a meal, the dying words of heroes, the delights of
Beulah or the Celestial City, Apollyon and my Lord Hate-good,
Great-heart, and Mr. Worldly-Wiseman, all have been imagined with the
same clearness, all written of with equal gusto and precision, all
created in the same mixed element, of simplicity that is almost comical,
and art that, for its purpose, is faultless.

It was in much the same spirit that our artist sat down to his drawings.
He is by nature a Bunyan of the pencil.  He, too, will draw anything,
from a butcher at work on a dead sheep, up to the courts of Heaven.  ‘A
Lamb for Supper’ is the name of one of his designs, ‘Their Glorious
Entry’ of another.  He has the same disregard for the ridiculous, and
enjoys somewhat of the same privilege of style, so that we are pleased
even when we laugh the most.  He is literal to the verge of folly.  If
dust is to be raised from the unswept parlour, you may be sure it will
‘fly abundantly’ in the picture.  If Faithful is to lie ‘as dead’ before
Moses, dead he shall lie with a warrant—dead and stiff like granite; nay
(and here the artist must enhance upon the symbolism of the author), it
is with the identical stone tables of the law that Moses fells the
sinner.  Good and bad people, whom we at once distinguish in the text by
their names, Hopeful, Honest, and Valiant-for-Truth, on the one hand, as
against By-ends, Sir Having Greedy, and the Lord Old-man on the other,
are in these drawings as simply distinguished by their costume.  Good
people, when not armed _cap-à-pie_, wear a speckled tunic girt about the
waist, and low hats, apparently of straw.  Bad people swagger in
tail-coats and chimney-pots, a few with knee-breeches, but the large
majority in trousers, and for all the world like guests at a
garden-party.  Worldly-Wiseman alone, by some inexplicable quirk, stands
before Christian in laced hat, embroidered waistcoat, and trunk-hose.
But above all examples of this artist’s intrepidity, commend me to the
print entitled ‘Christian Finds it Deep.’  ‘A great darkness and horror,’
says the text, have fallen on the pilgrim; it is the comfortless deathbed
with which Bunyan so strikingly concludes the sorrows and conflicts of
his hero.  How to represent this worthily the artist knew not; and yet he
was determined to represent it somehow.  This was how he did: Hopeful is
still shown to his neck above the water of death; but Christian has
bodily disappeared, and a blot of solid blackness indicates his place.

As you continue to look at these pictures, about an inch square for the
most part, sometimes printed three or more to the page, and each having a
printed legend of its own, however trivial the event recorded, you will
soon become aware of two things: first, that the man can draw, and,
second, that he possesses the gift of an imagination.  ‘Obstinate
reviles,’ says the legend; and you should see Obstinate reviling.  ‘He
warily retraces his steps’; and there is Christian, posting through the
plain, terror and speed in every muscle.  ‘Mercy yearns to go’ shows you
a plain interior with packing going forward, and, right in the middle,
Mercy yearning to go—every line of the girl’s figure yearning.  In ‘The
Chamber called Peace’ we see a simple English room, bed with white
curtains, window valance and door, as may be found in many thousand
unpretentious houses; but far off, through the open window, we behold the
sun uprising out of a great plain, and Christian hails it with his hand:

    ‘Where am I now! is this the love and care
    Of Jesus, for the men that pilgrims are!
    Thus to provide!  That I should be forgiven!
    And dwell already the next door to heaven!’

A page or two further, from the top of the House Beautiful, the damsels
point his gaze toward the Delectable Mountains: ‘The Prospect,’ so the
cut is ticketed—and I shall be surprised, if on less than a square inch
of paper you can show me one so wide and fair.  Down a cross road on an
English plain, a cathedral city outlined on the horizon, a hazel shaw
upon the left, comes Madam Wanton dancing with her fair enchanted cup,
and Faithful, book in hand, half pauses.  The cut is perfect as a symbol;
the giddy movement of the sorceress, the uncertain poise of the man
struck to the heart by a temptation, the contrast of that even plain of
life whereon he journeys with the bold, ideal bearing of the wanton—the
artist who invented and portrayed this had not merely read Bunyan, he had
also thoughtfully lived.  The Delectable Mountains—I continue skimming
the first part—are not on the whole happily rendered.  Once, and once
only, the note is struck, when Christian and Hopeful are seen coming,
shoulder-high, through a thicket of green shrubs—box, perhaps, or
perfumed nutmeg; while behind them, domed or pointed, the hills stand
ranged against the sky.  A little further, and we come to that
masterpiece of Bunyan’s insight into life, the Enchanted Ground; where,
in a few traits, he has set down the latter end of such a number of the
would-be good; where his allegory goes so deep that, to people looking
seriously on life, it cuts like satire.  The true significance of this
invention lies, of course, far out of the way of drawing; only one
feature, the great tedium of the land, the growing weariness in
well-doing, may be somewhat represented in a symbol.  The pilgrims are
near the end: ‘Two Miles Yet,’ says the legend.  The road goes ploughing
up and down over a rolling heath; the wayfarers, with outstretched arms,
are already sunk to the knees over the brow of the nearest hill; they
have just passed a milestone with the cipher two; from overhead a great,
piled, summer cumulus, as of a slumberous summer afternoon, beshadows
them: two miles! it might be hundreds.  In dealing with the Land of
Beulah the artist lags, in both parts, miserably behind the text, but in
the distant prospect of the Celestial City more than regains his own.
You will remember when Christian and Hopeful ‘with desire fell sick.’
‘Effect of the Sunbeams’ is the artist’s title.  Against the sky, upon a
cliffy mountain, the radiant temple beams upon them over deep, subjacent
woods; they, behind a mound, as if seeking shelter from the splendour—one
prostrate on his face, one kneeling, and with hands ecstatically
lifted—yearn with passion after that immortal city.  Turn the page, and
we behold them walking by the very shores of death; Heaven, from this
nigher view, has risen half-way to the zenith, and sheds a wider glory;
and the two pilgrims, dark against that brightness, walk and sing out of
the fulness of their hearts.  No cut more thoroughly illustrates at once
the merit and the weakness of the artist.  Each pilgrim sings with a book
in his grasp—a family Bible at the least for bigness; tomes so recklessly
enormous that our second, impulse is to laughter.  And yet that is not
the first thought, nor perhaps the last.  Something in the attitude of
the manikins—faces they have none, they are too small for that—something
in the way they swing these monstrous volumes to their singing, something
perhaps borrowed from the text, some subtle differentiation from the cut
that went before and the cut that follows after—something, at least,
speaks clearly of a fearful joy, of Heaven seen from the deathbed, of the
horror of the last passage no less than of the glorious coming home.
There is that in the action of one of them which always reminds me, with
a difference, of that haunting last glimpse of Thomas Idle, travelling to
Tyburn in the cart.  Next come the Shining Ones, wooden and trivial
enough; the pilgrims pass into the river; the blot already mentioned
settles over and obliterates Christian.  In two more cuts we behold them
drawing nearer to the other shore; and then, between two radiant angels,
one of whom points upward, we see them mounting in new weeds, their
former lendings left behind them on the inky river.  More angels meet
them; Heaven is displayed, and if no better, certainly no worse, than it
has been shown by others—a place, at least, infinitely populous and
glorious with light—a place that haunts solemnly the hearts of children.
And then this symbolic draughtsman once more strikes into his proper
vein.  Three cuts conclude the first part.  In the first the gates close,
black against the glory struggling from within.  The second shows us
Ignorance—alas! poor Arminian!—hailing, in a sad twilight, the ferryman
Vain-Hope; and in the third we behold him, bound hand and foot, and black
already with the hue of his eternal fate, carried high over the
mountain-tops of the world by two angels of the anger of the Lord.
‘Carried to Another Place,’ the artist enigmatically names his plate—a
terrible design.

Wherever he touches on the black side of the supernatural his pencil
grows more daring and incisive.  He has many true inventions in the
perilous and diabolic; he has many startling nightmares realised.  It is
not easy to select the best; some may like one and some another; the
nude, depilated devil bounding and casting darts against the Wicket Gate;
the scroll of flying horrors that hang over Christian by the Mouth of
Hell; the horned shade that comes behind him whispering blasphemies; the
daylight breaking through that rent cave-mouth of the mountains and
falling chill adown the haunted tunnel; Christian’s further progress
along the causeway, between the two black pools, where, at every yard or
two, a gin, a pitfall, or a snare awaits the passer-by—loathsome white
devilkins harbouring close under the bank to work the springes, Christian
himself pausing and pricking with his sword’s point at the nearest noose,
and pale discomfortable mountains rising on the farther side; or yet
again, the two ill-favoured ones that beset the first of Christian’s
journey, with the frog-like structure of the skull, the frog-like
limberness of limbs—crafty, slippery, lustful-looking devils, drawn
always in outline as though possessed of a dim, infernal luminosity.
Horrid fellows are they, one and all; horrid fellows and horrific scenes.
In another spirit that Good-Conscience ‘to whom Mr. Honest had spoken in
his lifetime,’ a cowled, grey, awful figure, one hand pointing to the
heavenly shore, realises, I will not say all, but some at least of the
strange impressiveness of Bunyan’s words.  It is no easy nor pleasant
thing to speak in one’s lifetime with Good-Conscience; he is an austere,
unearthly friend, whom maybe Torquemada knew; and the folds of his
raiment are not merely claustral, but have something of the horror of the
pall.  Be not afraid, however; with the hand of that appearance Mr.
Honest will get safe across.

Yet perhaps it is in sequences that this artist best displays himself.
He loves to look at either side of a thing: as, for instance, when he
shows us both sides of the wall—‘Grace Inextinguishable’ on the one side,
with the devil vainly pouring buckets on the flame, and ‘The Oil of
Grace’ on the other, where the Holy Spirit, vessel in hand, still
secretly supplies the fire.  He loves, also, to show us the same event
twice over, and to repeat his instantaneous photographs at the interval
of but a moment.  So we have, first, the whole troop of pilgrims coming
up to Valiant, and Great-heart to the front, spear in hand and parleying;
and next, the same cross-roads, from a more distant view, the convoy now
scattered and looking safely and curiously on, and Valiant handing over
for inspection his ‘right Jerusalem blade.’  It is true that this
designer has no great care after consistency: Apollyon’s spear is laid
by, his quiver of darts will disappear, whenever they might hinder the
designer’s freedom; and the fiend’s tail is blobbed or forked at his good
pleasure.  But this is not unsuitable to the illustration of the fervent
Bunyan, breathing hurry and momentary inspiration.  He, with his hot
purpose, hunting sinners with a lasso, shall himself forget the things
that he has written yesterday.  He shall first slay Heedless in the
Valley of the Shadow, and then take leave of him talking in his sleep, as
if nothing had happened, in an arbour on the Enchanted Ground.  And
again, in his rhymed prologue, he shall assign some of the glory of the
siege of Doubting Castle to his favourite Valiant-for-the-Truth, who did
not meet with the besiegers till long after, at that dangerous corner by
Deadman’s Lane.  And, with all inconsistencies and freedoms, there is a
power shown in these sequences of cuts: a power of joining on one action
or one humour to another; a power of following out the moods, even of the
dismal subterhuman fiends engendered by the artist’s fancy; a power of
sustained continuous realisation, step by step, in nature’s order, that
can tell a story, in all its ins and outs, its pauses and surprises,
fully and figuratively, like the art of words.

One such sequence is the fight of Christian and Apollyon—six cuts, weird
and fiery, like the text.  The pilgrim is throughout a pale and stockish
figure; but the devil covers a multitude of defects.  There is no better
devil of the conventional order than our artist’s Apollyon, with his
mane, his wings, his bestial legs, his changing and terrifying
expression, his infernal energy to slay.  In cut the first you see him
afar off, still obscure in form, but already formidable in suggestion.
Cut the second, ‘The Fiend in Discourse,’ represents him, not reasoning,
railing rather, shaking his spear at the pilgrim, his shoulder advanced,
his tail writhing in the air, his foot ready for a spring, while
Christian stands back a little, timidly defensive.  The third illustrates
these magnificent words: ‘Then Apollyon straddled quite over the whole
breadth of the way, and said, I am void of fear in this matter: prepare
thyself to die; for I swear by my infernal den that thou shalt go no
farther: here will I spill thy soul!  And with that he threw a flaming
dart at his breast.’  In the cut he throws a dart with either hand,
belching pointed flames out of his mouth, spreading his broad vans, and
straddling the while across the path, as only a fiend can straddle who
has just sworn by his infernal den.  The defence will not be long against
such vice, such flames, such red-hot nether energy.  And in the fourth
cut, to be sure, he has leaped bodily upon his victim, sped by foot and
pinion, and roaring as he leaps.  The fifth shows the climacteric of the
battle; Christian has reached nimbly out and got his sword, and dealt
that deadly home-thrust, the fiend still stretched upon him, but ‘giving
back, as one that had received his mortal wound.’  The raised head, the
bellowing mouth, the paw clapped upon the sword, the one wing relaxed in
agony, all realise vividly these words of the text.  In the sixth and
last, the trivial armed figure of the pilgrim is seen kneeling with
clasped hands on the betrodden scene of contest and among the shivers of
the darts; while just at the margin the hinder quarters and the tail of
Apollyon are whisking off, indignant and discounted.

In one point only do these pictures seem to be unworthy of the text, and
that point is one rather of the difference of arts than the difference of
artists.  Throughout his best and worst, in his highest and most divine
imaginations as in the narrowest sallies of his sectarianism, the
human-hearted piety of Bunyan touches and ennobles, convinces, accuses
the reader.  Through no art beside the art of words can the kindness of a
man’s affections be expressed.  In the cuts you shall find faithfully
parodied the quaintness and the power, the triviality and the surprising
freshness of the author’s fancy; there you shall find him out-stripped in
ready symbolism and the art of bringing things essentially invisible
before the eyes: but to feel the contact of essential goodness, to be
made in love with piety, the book must be read and not the prints
examined.

Farewell should not be taken with a grudge; nor can I dismiss in any
other words than those of gratitude a series of pictures which have, to
one at least, been the visible embodiment of Bunyan from childhood up,
and shown him, through all his years, Great-heart lungeing at Giant Maul,
and Apollyon breathing fire at Christian, and every turn and town along
the road to the Celestial City, and that bright place itself, seen as to
a stave of music, shining afar off upon the hill-top, the candle of the
world.




SKETCHES


I.  THE SATIRIST


My companion enjoyed a cheap reputation for wit and insight.  He was by
habit and repute a satirist.  If he did occasionally condemn anything or
anybody who richly deserved it, and whose demerits had hitherto escaped,
it was simply because he condemned everything and everybody.  While I was
with him he disposed of St. Paul with an epigram, shook my reverence for
Shakespeare in a neat antithesis, and fell foul of the Almighty Himself,
on the score of one or two out of the ten commandments.  Nothing escaped
his blighting censure.  At every sentence he overthrew an idol, or
lowered my estimation of a friend.  I saw everything with new eyes, and
could only marvel at my former blindness.  How was it possible that I had
not before observed A’s false hair, B’s selfishness, or C’s boorish
manners?  I and my companion, methought, walked the streets like a couple
of gods among a swarm of vermin; for every one we saw seemed to bear
openly upon his brow the mark of the apocalyptic beast.  I half expected
that these miserable beings, like the people of Lystra, would recognise
their betters and force us to the altar; in which case, warned by the
late of Paul and Barnabas, I do not know that my modesty would have
prevailed upon me to decline.  But there was no need for such churlish
virtue.  More blinded than the Lycaonians, the people saw no divinity in
our gait; and as our temporary godhead lay more in the way of observing
than healing their infirmities, we were content to pass them by in scorn.

I could not leave my companion, not from regard or even from interest,
but from a very natural feeling, inseparable from the case.  To
understand it, let us take a simile.  Suppose yourself walking down the
street with a man who continues to sprinkle the crowd out of a flask of
vitriol.  You would be much diverted with the grimaces and contortions of
his victims; and at the same time you would fear to leave his arm until
his bottle was empty, knowing that, when once among the crowd, you would
run a good chance yourself of baptism with his biting liquor.  Now my
companion’s vitriol was inexhaustible.

It was perhaps the consciousness of this, the knowledge that I was being
anointed already out of the vials of his wrath, that made me fall to
criticising the critic, whenever we had parted.

After all, I thought, our satirist has just gone far enough into his
neighbours to find that the outside is false, without caring to go
farther and discover what is really true.  He is content to find that
things are not what they seem, and broadly generalises from it that they
do not exist at all.  He sees our virtues are not what they pretend they
are; and, on the strength of that, he denies us the possession of virtue
altogether.  He has learnt the first lesson, that no man is wholly good;
but he has not even suspected that there is another equally true, to wit,
that no man is wholly bad.  Like the inmate of a coloured star, he has
eyes for one colour alone.  He has a keen scent after evil, but his
nostrils are plugged against all good, as people plugged their nostrils
before going about the streets of the plague-struck city.

Why does he do this?  It is most unreasonable to flee the knowledge of
good like the infection of a horrible disease, and batten and grow fat in
the real atmosphere of a lazar-house.  This was my first thought; but my
second was not like unto it, and I saw that our satirist was wise, wise
in his generation, like the unjust steward.  He does not want light,
because the darkness is more pleasant.  He does not wish to see the good,
because he is happier without it.  I recollect that when I walked with
him, I was in a state of divine exaltation, such as Adam and Eve must
have enjoyed when the savour of the fruit was still unfaded between their
lips; and I recognise that this must be the man’s habitual state.  He has
the forbidden fruit in his waist-coat pocket, and can make himself a god
as often and as long as he likes.  He has raised himself upon a glorious
pedestal above his fellows; he has touched the summit of ambition; and he
envies neither King nor Kaiser, Prophet nor Priest, content in an
elevation as high as theirs, and much more easily attained.  Yes, certes,
much more easily attained.  He has not risen by climbing himself, but by
pushing others down.  He has grown great in his own estimation, not by
blowing himself out, and risking the fate of Æsop’s frog, but simply by
the habitual use of a diminishing glass on everybody else.  And I think
altogether that his is a better, a safer, and a surer recipe than most
others.

After all, however, looking back on what I have written, I detect a
spirit suspiciously like his own.  All through, I have been comparing
myself with our satirist, and all through, I have had the best of the
comparison.  Well, well, contagion is as often mental as physical; and I
do not think my readers, who have all been under his lash, will blame me
very much for giving the headsman a mouthful of his own sawdust.



II.  NUITS BLANCHES


If any one should know the pleasure and pain of a sleepless night, it
should be I.  I remember, so long ago, the sickly child that woke from
his few hours’ slumber with the sweat of a nightmare on his brow, to lie
awake and listen and long for the first signs of life among the silent
streets.  These nights of pain and weariness are graven on my mind; and
so when the same thing happened to me again, everything that I heard or
saw was rather a recollection than a discovery.

Weighed upon by the opaque and almost sensible darkness, I listened
eagerly for anything to break the sepulchral quiet.  But nothing came,
save, perhaps, an emphatic crack from the old cabinet that was made by
Deacon Brodie, or the dry rustle of the coals on the extinguished fire.
It was a calm; or I know that I should have heard in the roar and clatter
of the storm, as I have not heard it for so many years, the wild career
of a horseman, always scouring up from the distance and passing swiftly
below the window; yet always returning again from the place whence first
he came, as though, baffled by some higher power, he had retraced his
steps to gain impetus for another and another attempt.

As I lay there, there arose out of the utter stillness the rumbling of a
carriage a very great way off, that drew near, and passed within a few
streets of the house, and died away as gradually as it had arisen.  This,
too, was as a reminiscence.

I rose and lifted a corner of the blind.  Over the black belt of the
garden I saw the long line of Queen Street, with here and there a lighted
window.  How often before had my nurse lifted me out of bed and pointed
them out to me, while we wondered together if, there also, there were
children that could not sleep, and if these lighted oblongs were signs of
those that waited like us for the morning.

I went out into the lobby, and looked down into the great deep well of
the staircase.  For what cause I know not, just as it used to be in the
old days that the feverish child might be the better served, a peep of
gas illuminated a narrow circle far below me.  But where I was, all was
darkness and silence, save the dry monotonous ticking of the clock that
came ceaselessly up to my ear.

The final crown of it all, however, the last touch of reproduction on the
pictures of my memory, was the arrival of that time for which, all night
through, I waited and longed of old.  It was my custom, as the hours
dragged on, to repeat the question, ‘When will the carts come in?’ and
repeat it again and again until at last those sounds arose in the street
that I have heard once more this morning.  The road before our house is a
great thoroughfare for early carts.  I know not, and I never have known,
what they carry, whence they come, or whither they go.  But I know that,
long ere dawn, and for hours together, they stream continuously past,
with the same rolling and jerking of wheels and the same clink of horses’
feet.  It was not for nothing that they made the burthen of my wishes all
night through.  They are really the first throbbings of life, the
harbingers of day; and it pleases you as much to hear them as it must
please a shipwrecked seaman once again to grasp a hand of flesh and blood
after years of miserable solitude.  They have the freshness of the
daylight life about them.  You can hear the carters cracking their whips
and crying hoarsely to their horses or to one another; and sometimes even
a peal of healthy, harsh horse-laughter comes up to you through the
darkness.  There is now an end of mystery and fear.  Like the knocking at
the door in _Macbeth_, {205} or the cry of the watchman in the _Tour de
Nesle_, they show that the horrible cæsura is over and the nightmares
have fled away, because the day is breaking and the ordinary life of men
is beginning to bestir itself among the streets.

In the middle of it all I fell asleep, to be wakened by the officious
knocking at my door, and I find myself twelve years older than I had
dreamed myself all night.



III.  THE WREATH OF IMMORTELLES


It is all very well to talk of death as ‘a pleasant potion of
immortality’, but the most of us, I suspect, are of ‘queasy stomachs,’
and find it none of the sweetest. {206a}  The graveyard may be cloak-room
to Heaven; but we must admit that it is a very ugly and offensive
vestibule in itself, however fair may be the life to which it leads.  And
though Enoch and Elias went into the temple through a gate which
certainly may be called Beautiful, the rest of us have to find our way to
it through Ezekiel’s low-bowed door and the vault full of creeping things
and all manner of abominable beasts.  Nevertheless, there is a certain
frame of mind to which a cemetery is, if not an antidote, at least an
alleviation.  If you are in a fit of the blues, go nowhere else.  It was
in obedience to this wise regulation that the other morning found me
lighting my pipe at the entrance to Old Greyfriars’, thoroughly sick of
the town, the country, and myself.

Two of the men were talking at the gate, one of them carrying a spade in
hands still crusted with the soil of graves.  Their very aspect was
delightful to me; and I crept nearer to them, thinking to pick up some
snatch of sexton gossip, some ‘talk fit for a charnel,’ {206b} something,
in fine, worthy of that fastidious logician, that adept in coroner’s law,
who has come down to us as the patron of Yaughan’s liquor, and the very
prince of gravediggers.  Scots people in general are so much wrapped up
in their profession that I had a good chance of overhearing such
conversation: the talk of fish-mongers running usually on stockfish and
haddocks; while of the Scots sexton I could repeat stories and speeches
that positively smell of the graveyard.  But on this occasion I was
doomed to disappointment.  My two friends were far into the region of
generalities.  Their profession was forgotten in their electorship.
Politics had engulfed the narrower economy of grave-digging.  ‘Na, na,’
said the one, ‘ye’re a’ wrang.’  ‘The English and Irish Churches,’
answered the other, in a tone as if he had made the remark before, and it
had been called in question—‘The English and Irish Churches have
_impoverished_ the country.’

‘Such are the results of education,’ thought I as I passed beside them
and came fairly among the tombs.  Here, at least, there were no
commonplace politics, no diluted this-morning’s leader, to distract or
offend me.  The old shabby church showed, as usual, its quaint extent of
roofage and the relievo skeleton on one gable, still blackened with the
fire of thirty years ago.  A chill dank mist lay over all.  The Old
Greyfriars’ churchyard was in perfection that morning, and one could go
round and reckon up the associations with no fear of vulgar interruption.
On this stone the Covenant was signed.  In that vault, as the story goes,
John Knox took hiding in some Reformation broil.  From that window Burke
the murderer looked out many a time across the tombs, and perhaps o’
nights let himself down over the sill to rob some new-made grave.
Certainly he would have a selection here.  The very walks have been
carried over forgotten resting-places; and the whole ground is uneven,
because (as I was once quaintly told) ‘when the wood rots it stands to
reason the soil should fall in,’ which, from the law of gravitation, is
certainly beyond denial.  But it is round the boundary that there are the
finest tombs.  The whole irregular space is, as it were, fringed with
quaint old monuments, rich in death’s-heads and scythes and hour-glasses,
and doubly rich in pious epitaphs and Latin mottoes—rich in them to such
an extent that their proper space has run over, and they have crawled
end-long up the shafts of columns and ensconced themselves in all sorts
of odd corners among the sculpture.  These tombs raise their backs
against the rabble of squalid dwelling-houses, and every here and there a
clothes-pole projects between two monuments its fluttering trophy of
white and yellow and red.  With a grim irony they recall the banners in
the Invalides, banners as appropriate perhaps over the sepulchres of
tailors and weavers as these others above the dust of armies.  Why they
put things out to dry on that particular morning it was hard to imagine.
The grass was grey with drops of rain, the headstones black with
moisture.  Yet, in despite of weather and common sense, there they hung
between the tombs; and beyond them I could see through open windows into
miserable rooms where whole families were born and fed, and slept and
died.  At one a girl sat singing merrily with her back to the graveyard;
and from another came the shrill tones of a scolding woman.  Every here
and there was a town garden full of sickly flowers, or a pile of crockery
inside upon the window-seat.  But you do not grasp the full connection
between these houses of the dead and the living, the unnatural marriage
of stately sepulchres and squalid houses, till, lower down, where the
road has sunk far below the surface of the cemetery, and the very roofs
are scarcely on a level with its wall, you observe that a proprietor has
taken advantage of a tall monument and trained a chimney-stack against
its back.  It startles you to see the red, modern pots peering over the
shoulder of the tomb.

A man was at work on a grave, his spade clinking away the drift of bones
that permeates the thin brown soil; but my first disappointment had
taught me to expect little from Greyfriars’ sextons, and I passed him by
in silence.  A slater on the slope of a neighbouring roof eyed me
curiously.  A lean black cat, looking as if it had battened on strange
meats, slipped past me.  A little boy at a window put his finger to his
nose in so offensive a manner that I was put upon my dignity, and turned
grandly off to read old epitaphs and peer through the gratings into the
shadow of vaults.

Just then I saw two women coming down a path, one of them old, and the
other younger, with a child in her arms.  Both had faces eaten with
famine and hardened with sin, and both had reached that stage of
degradation, much lower in a woman than a man, when all care for dress is
lost.  As they came down they neared a grave, where some pious friend or
relative had laid a wreath of immortelles, and put a bell glass over it,
as is the custom.  The effect of that ring of dull yellow among so many
blackened and dusty sculptures was more pleasant than it is in modern
cemeteries, where every second mound can boast a similar coronal; and
here, where it was the exception and not the rule, I could even fancy the
drops of moisture that dimmed the covering were the tears of those who
laid it where it was.  As the two women came up to it, one of them
kneeled down on the wet grass and looked long and silently through the
clouded shade, while the second stood above her, gently oscillating to
and fro to lull the muling baby.  I was struck a great way off with
something religious in the attitude of these two unkempt and haggard
women; and I drew near faster, but still cautiously, to hear what they
were saying.  Surely on them the spirit of death and decay had descended;
I had no education to dread here: should I not have a chance of seeing
nature?  Alas! a pawnbroker could not have been more practical and
commonplace, for this was what the kneeling woman said to the woman
upright—this and nothing more: ‘Eh, what extravagance!’

O nineteenth century, wonderful art thou indeed—wonderful, but wearisome
in thy stale and deadly uniformity.  Thy men are more like numerals than
men.  They must bear their idiosyncrasies or their professions written on
a placard about their neck, like the scenery in Shakespeare’s theatre.
Thy precepts of economy have pierced into the lowest ranks of life; and
there is now a decorum in vice, a respectability among the disreputable,
a pure spirit of Philistinism among the waifs and strays of thy Bohemia.
For lo! thy very gravediggers talk politics; and thy castaways kneel upon
new graves, to discuss the cost of the monument and grumble at the
improvidence of love.

Such was the elegant apostrophe that I made as I went out of the gates
again, happily satisfied in myself, and feeling that I alone of all whom
I had seen was able to profit by the silent poem of these green mounds
and blackened headstones.



IV.  NURSES


I knew one once, and the room where, lonely and old, she waited for
death.  It was pleasant enough, high up above the lane, and looking forth
upon a hill-side, covered all day with sheets and yellow blankets, and
with long lines of underclothing fluttering between the battered posts.
There were any number of cheap prints, and a drawing by one of ‘her
children,’ and there were flowers in the window, and a sickly canary
withered into consumption in an ornamental cage.  The bed, with its
checked coverlid, was in a closet.  A great Bible lay on the table; and
her drawers were full of ‘scones,’ which it was her pleasure to give to
young visitors such as I was then.

You may not think this a melancholy picture; but the canary, and the cat,
and the white mouse that she had for a while, and that died, were all
indications of the want that ate into her heart.  I think I know a little
of what that old woman felt; and I am as sure as if I had seen her, that
she sat many an hour in silent tears, with the big Bible open before her
clouded eyes.

If you could look back upon her life, and feel the great chain that had
linked her to one child after another, sometimes to be wrenched suddenly
through, and sometimes, which is infinitely worse, to be torn gradually
off through years of growing neglect, or perhaps growing dislike!  She
had, like the mother, overcome that natural repugnance—repugnance which
no man can conquer—towards the infirm and helpless mass of putty of the
earlier stage.  She had spent her best and happiest years in tending,
watching, and learning to love like a mother this child, with which she
has no connection and to which she has no tie.  Perhaps she refused some
sweetheart (such things have been), or put him off and off, until he lost
heart and turned to some one else, all for fear of leaving this creature
that had wound itself about her heart.  And the end of it all—her month’s
warning, and a present perhaps, and the rest of the life to vain regret.
Or, worse still, to see the child gradually forgetting and forsaking her,
fostered in disrespect and neglect on the plea of growing manliness, and
at last beginning to treat her as a servant whom he had treated a few
years before as a mother.  She sees the Bible or the Psalm-book, which
with gladness and love unutterable in her heart she had bought for him
years ago out of her slender savings, neglected for some newer gift of
his father, lying in dust in the lumber-room or given away to a poor
child, and the act applauded for its unfeeling charity.  Little wonder if
she becomes hurt and angry, and attempts to tyrannise and to grasp her
old power back again.  We are not all patient Grizzels, by good fortune,
but the most of us human beings with feelings and tempers of our own.

And so, in the end, behold her in the room that I described.  Very likely
and very naturally, in some fling of feverish misery or recoil of
thwarted love, she has quarrelled with her old employers and the children
are forbidden to see her or to speak to her; or at best she gets her rent
paid and a little to herself, and now and then her late charges are sent
up (with another nurse, perhaps) to pay her a short visit.  How bright
these visits seem as she looks forward to them on her lonely bed!  How
unsatisfactory their realisation, when the forgetful child, half
wondering, checks with every word and action the outpouring of her
maternal love!  How bitter and restless the memories that they leave
behind!  And for the rest, what else has she?—to watch them with eager
eyes as they go to school, to sit in church where she can see them every
Sunday, to be passed some day unnoticed in the street, or deliberately
cut because the great man or the great woman are with friends before whom
they are ashamed to recognise the old woman that loved them.

When she goes home that night, how lonely will the room appear to her!
Perhaps the neighbours may hear her sobbing to herself in the dark, with
the fire burnt out for want of fuel, and the candle still unlit upon the
table.

And it is for this that they live, these quasi-mothers—mothers in
everything but the travail and the thanks.  It is for this that they have
remained virtuous in youth, living the dull life of a household servant.
It is for this that they refused the old sweetheart, and have no fireside
or offspring of their own.

I believe in a better state of things, that there will be no more nurses,
and that every mother will nurse her own offspring; for what can be more
hardening and demoralising than to call forth the tenderest feelings of a
woman’s heart and cherish them yourself as long as you need them, as long
as your children require a nurse to love them, and then to blight and
thwart and destroy them, whenever your own use for them is at an end.
This may be Utopian; but it is always a little thing if one mother or two
mothers can be brought to feel more tenderly to those who share their
toil and have no part in their reward.



V.  A CHARACTER


The man has a red, bloated face, and his figure is short and squat.  So
far there is nothing in him to notice, but when you see his eyes, you can
read in these hard and shallow orbs a depravity beyond measure depraved,
a thirst after wickedness, the pure, disinterested love of Hell for its
own sake.  The other night, in the street, I was watching an omnibus
passing with lit-up windows, when I heard some one coughing at my side as
though he would cough his soul out; and turning round, I saw him stopping
under a lamp, with a brown greatcoat buttoned round him and his whole
face convulsed.  It seemed as if he could not live long; and so the sight
set my mind upon a train of thought, as I finished my cigar up and down
the lighted streets.

He is old, but all these years have not yet quenched his thirst for evil,
and his eyes still delight themselves in wickedness.  He is dumb; but he
will not let that hinder his foul trade, or perhaps I should say, his yet
fouler amusement, and he has pressed a slate into the service of
corruption.  Look at him, and he will sign to you with his bloated head,
and when you go to him in answer to the sign, thinking perhaps that the
poor dumb man has lost his way, you will see what he writes upon his
slate.  He haunts the doors of schools, and shows such inscriptions as
these to the innocent children that come out.  He hangs about
picture-galleries, and makes the noblest pictures the text for some
silent homily of vice.  His industry is a lesson to ourselves.  Is it not
wonderful how he can triumph over his infirmities and do such an amount
of harm without a tongue?  Wonderful industry—strange, fruitless,
pleasureless toil?  Must not the very devil feel a soft emotion to see
his disinterested and laborious service?  Ah, but the devil knows better
than this: he knows that this man is penetrated with the love of evil and
that all his pleasure is shut up in wickedness: he recognises him,
perhaps, as a fit type for mankind of his satanic self, and watches over
his effigy as we might watch over a favourite likeness.  As the business
man comes to love the toil, which he only looked upon at first as a
ladder towards other desires and less unnatural gratifications, so the
dumb man has felt the charm of his trade and fallen captivated before the
eyes of sin.  It is a mistake when preachers tell us that vice is hideous
and loathsome; for even vice has her Hörsel and her devotees, who love
her for her own sake.




THE GREAT NORTH ROAD


