CHAPTER I—EDINBURGH STUDENTS IN 1824


On the 2nd of January 1824 was issued the prospectus of the _Lapsus
Linguæ_; _or_, _the College Tatler_; and on the 7th the first number
appeared.  On Friday the 2nd of April ‘_Mr. Tatler_ became speechless.’
Its history was not all one success; for the editor (who applies to
himself the words of Iago, ‘I am nothing if I am not critical’)
overstepped the bounds of caution, and found himself seriously embroiled
with the powers that were.  There appeared in No. XVI. a most bitter
satire upon Sir John Leslie, in which he was compared to Falstaff,
charged with puffing himself, and very prettily censured for publishing
only the first volume of a class-book, and making all purchasers pay for
both.  Sir John Leslie took up the matter angrily, visited Carfrae the
publisher, and threatened him with an action, till he was forced to turn
the hapless _Lapsus_ out of doors.  The maltreated periodical found
shelter in the shop of Huie, Infirmary Street; and No. XVII. was duly
issued from the new office.  No. XVII. beheld _Mr. Tatler’s_ humiliation,
in which, with fulsome apology and not very credible assurances of
respect and admiration, he disclaims the article in question, and
advertises a new issue of No. XVI. with all objectionable matter omitted.
This, with pleasing euphemism, he terms in a later advertisement, ‘a new
and improved edition.’  This was the only remarkable adventure of _Mr.
Tatler’s_ brief existence; unless we consider as such a silly Chaldee
manuscript in imitation of _Blackwood_, and a letter of reproof from a
divinity student on the impiety of the same dull effusion.  He laments
the near approach of his end in pathetic terms.  ‘How shall we summon up
sufficient courage,’ says he, ‘to look for the last time on our beloved
little devil and his inestimable proof-sheet?  How shall we be able to
pass No. 14 Infirmary Street and feel that all its attractions are over?
How shall we bid farewell for ever to that excellent man, with the long
greatcoat, wooden leg and wooden board, who acts as our representative at
the gate of _Alma Mater_?’  But alas! he had no choice: _Mr. Tatler_,
whose career, he says himself, had been successful, passed peacefully
away, and has ever since dumbly implored ‘the bringing home of bell and
burial.’

_Alter et idem_.  A very different affair was the _Lapsus Linguæ_ from
the _Edinburgh University Magazine_.  The two prospectuses alone, laid
side by side, would indicate the march of luxury and the repeal of the
paper duty.  The penny bi-weekly broadside of session 1828–4 was almost
wholly dedicated to Momus.  Epigrams, pointless letters, amorous verses,
and University grievances are the continual burthen of the song.  But
_Mr. Tatler_ was not without a vein of hearty humour; and his pages
afford what is much better: to wit, a good picture of student life as it
then was.  The students of those polite days insisted on retaining their
hats in the class-room.  There was a cab-stance in front of the College;
and ‘Carriage Entrance’ was posted above the main arch, on what the
writer pleases to call ‘coarse, unclassic boards.’  The benches of the
‘Speculative’ then, as now, were red; but all other Societies (the
‘Dialectic’ is the only survivor) met downstairs, in some rooms of which
it is pointedly said that ‘nothing else could conveniently be made of
them.’  However horrible these dungeons may have been, it is certain that
they were paid for, and that far too heavily for the taste of session
1823–4, which found enough calls upon its purse for porter and toasted
cheese at Ambrose’s, or cranberry tarts and ginger-wine at Doull’s.
Duelling was still a possibility; so much so that when two medicals fell
to fisticuffs in Adam Square, it was seriously hinted that single combat
would be the result.  Last and most wonderful of all, Gall and Spurzheim
were in every one’s mouth; and the Law student, after having exhausted
Byron’s poetry and Scott’s novels, informed the ladies of his belief in
phrenology.  In the present day he would dilate on ‘Red as a rose is
she,’ and then mention that he attends Old Greyfriars’, as a tacit claim
to intellectual superiority.  I do not know that the advance is much.

But _Mr. Tatler’s_ best performances were three short papers in which he
hit off pretty smartly the idiosyncrasies of the ‘_Divinity_,’ the
‘_Medical_,’ and the ‘_Law_’ of session 1823–4.  The fact that there was
no notice of the ‘_Arts_’ seems to suggest that they stood in the same
intermediate position as they do now—the epitome of student-kind.  _Mr.
Tatler’s_ satire is, on the whole, good-humoured, and has not grown
superannuated in _all_ its limbs.  His descriptions may limp at some
points, but there are certain broad traits that apply equally well to
session 1870–1.  He shows us the _Divinity_ of the period—tall, pale, and
slender—his collar greasy, and his coat bare about the seams—‘his white
neckcloth serving four days, and regularly turned the third’—‘the rim of
his hat deficient in wool’—and ‘a weighty volume of theology under his
arm.’  He was the man to buy cheap ‘a snuff-box, or a dozen of pencils,
or a six-bladed knife, or a quarter of a hundred quills,’ at any of the
public sale-rooms.  He was noted for cheap purchases, and for exceeding
the legal tender in halfpence.  He haunted ‘the darkest and remotest
corner of the Theatre Gallery.’  He was to be seen issuing from ‘aerial
lodging-houses.’  Withal, says mine author, ‘there were many good points
about him: he paid his landlady’s bill, read his Bible, went twice to
church on Sunday, seldom swore, was not often tipsy, and bought the
_Lapsus Linguæ_.’

The _Medical_, again, ‘wore a white greatcoat, and consequently talked
loud’—(there is something very delicious in that _consequently_).  He
wore his hat on one side.  He was active, volatile, and went to the top
of Arthur’s Seat on the Sunday forenoon.  He was as quiet in a debating
society as he was loud in the streets.  He was reckless and imprudent:
yesterday he insisted on your sharing a bottle of claret with him (and
claret was claret then, before the cheap-and-nasty treaty), and to-morrow
he asks you for the loan of a penny to buy the last number of the
_Lapsus_.

The student of _Law_, again, was a learned man.  ‘He had turned over the
leaves of Justinian’s _Institutes_, and knew that they were written in
Latin.  He was well acquainted with the title-page of Blackstone’s
_Commentaries_, and _argal_ (as the gravedigger in _Hamlet_ says) he was
not a person to be laughed at.’  He attended the Parliament House in the
character of a critic, and could give you stale sneers at all the
celebrated speakers.  He was the terror of essayists at the Speculative
or the Forensic.  In social qualities he seems to have stood unrivalled.
Even in the police-office we find him shining with undiminished lustre.
‘If a _Charlie_ should find him rather noisy at an untimely hour, and
venture to take him into custody, he appears next morning like a Daniel
come to judgment.  He opens his mouth to speak, and the divine precepts
of unchanging justice and Scots law flow from his tongue.  The magistrate
listens in amazement, and fines him only a couple of guineas.’

Such then were our predecessors and their College Magazine.  Barclay,
Ambrose, Young Amos, and Fergusson were to them what the Café, the
Rainbow, and Rutherford’s are to us.  An hour’s reading in these old
pages absolutely confuses us, there is so much that is similar and so
much that is different; the follies and amusements are so like our own,
and the manner of frolicking and enjoying are so changed, that one pauses
and looks about him in philosophic judgment.  The muddy quadrangle is
thick with living students; but in our eyes it swarms also with the
phantasmal white greatcoats and tilted hats of 1824.  Two races meet:
races alike and diverse.  Two performances are played before our eyes;
but the change seems merely of impersonators, of scenery, of costume.
Plot and passion are the same.  It is the fall of the spun shilling
whether seventy-one or twenty-four has the best of it.

In a future number we hope to give a glance at the individualities of the
present, and see whether the cast shall be head or tail—whether we or the
readers of the _Lapsus_ stand higher in the balance.



