CHAPTER IV—RULLION GREEN


    ‘From Covenanters with uplifted hands,
    From Remonstrators with associate bands,
             Good Lord, deliver us!’

                                        _Royalist Rhyme_, KIRKTON, p. 127.

Late on the fourth night of November, exactly twenty-four days before
Rullion Green, Richard and George Chaplain, merchants in Haddington,
beheld four men, clad like West-country Whigamores, standing round some
object on the ground.  It was at the two-mile cross, and within that
distance from their homes.  At last, to their horror, they discovered
that the recumbent figure was a livid corpse, swathed in a blood-stained
winding-sheet. {99}  Many thought that this apparition was a portent of
the deaths connected with the Pentland Rising.

On the morning of Wednesday, the 28th of November 1666, they left
Colinton and marched to Rullion Green.  There they arrived about sunset.
The position was a strong one.  On the summit of a bare, heathery spur of
the Pentlands are two hillocks, and between them lies a narrow band of
flat marshy ground.  On the highest of the two mounds—that nearest the
Pentlands, and on the left hand of the main body—was the greater part of
the cavalry, under Major Learmont; on the other Barscob and the Galloway
gentlemen; and in the centre Colonel Wallace and the weak, half-armed
infantry.  Their position was further strengthened by the depth of the
valley below, and the deep chasm-like course of the Rullion Burn.

The sun, going down behind the Pentlands, cast golden lights and blue
shadows on their snow-clad summits, slanted obliquely into the rich plain
before them, bathing with rosy splendour the leafless, snow-sprinkled
trees, and fading gradually into shadow in the distance.  To the south,
too, they beheld a deep-shaded amphitheatre of heather and bracken; the
course of the Esk, near Penicuik, winding about at the foot of its gorge;
the broad, brown expanse of Maw Moss; and, fading into blue
indistinctness in the south, the wild heath-clad Peeblesshire hills.  In
sooth, that scene was fair, and many a yearning glance was cast over that
peaceful evening scene from the spot where the rebels awaited their
defeat; and when the fight was over, many a noble fellow lifted his head
from the blood-stained heather to strive with darkening eyeballs to
behold that landscape, over which, as over his life and his cause, the
shadows of night and of gloom were falling and thickening.

It was while waiting on this spot that the fear-inspiring cry was raised:
‘The enemy!  Here come the enemy!’

Unwilling to believe their own doom—for our insurgents still hoped for
success in some negotiations for peace which had been carried on at
Colinton—they called out, ‘They are some of our own.’

‘They are too blacke’ (_i.e._ numerous), ‘fie! fie! for ground to draw up
on,’ cried Wallace, fully realising the want of space for his men, and
proving that it was not till after this time that his forces were finally
arranged. {101a}

First of all the battle was commenced by fifty Royalist horse sent
obliquely across the hill to attack the left wing of the rebels.  An
equal number of Learmont’s men met them, and, after a struggle, drove
them back.  The course of the Rullion Burn prevented almost all pursuit,
and Wallace, on perceiving it, dispatched a body of foot to occupy both
the burn and some ruined sheep-walls on the farther side.

Dalzell changed his position, and drew up his army at the foot of the
hill, on the top of which were his foes.  He then dispatched a mingled
body of infantry and cavalry to attack Wallace’s outpost, but they also
were driven back.  A third charge produced a still more disastrous
effect, for Dalzell had to check the pursuit of his men by a
reinforcement.

These repeated checks bred a panic in the Lieutenant-General’s ranks, for
several of his men flung down their arms.  Urged by such fatal symptoms,
and by the approaching night, he deployed his men, and closed in
overwhelming numbers on the centre and right flank of the insurgent army.
In the increasing twilight the burning matches of the firelocks,
shimmering on barrel, halbert, and cuirass, lent to the approaching army
a picturesque effect, like a huge, many-armed giant breathing flame into
the darkness.

Placed on an overhanging hill, Welch and Semple cried aloud, ‘The God of
Jacob! The God of Jacob!’ and prayed with uplifted hands for victory.
{101b}

But still the Royalist troops closed in.

Captain John Paton was observed by Dalzell, who determined to capture him
with his own hands.  Accordingly he charged forward, presenting his
pistols.  Paton fired, but the balls hopped off Dalzell’s buff coat and
fell into his boot.  With the superstition peculiar to his age, the
Nonconformist concluded that his adversary was rendered bullet-proof by
enchantment, and, pulling some small silver coins from his pocket,
charged his pistol therewith.  Dalzell, seeing this, and supposing, it is
likely, that Paton was putting in larger balls, hid behind his servant,
who was killed. {102}

Meantime the outposts were forced, and the army of Wallace was enveloped
in the embrace of a hideous boa-constrictor—tightening, closing, crushing
every semblance of life from the victim enclosed in his toils.  The
flanking parties of horse were forced in upon the centre, and though, as
even Turner grants, they fought with desperation, a general flight was
the result.

But when they fell there was none to sing their coronach or wail the
death-wail over them.  Those who sacrificed themselves for the peace, the
liberty, and the religion of their fellow-countrymen, lay bleaching in
the field of death for long, and when at last they were buried by
charity, the peasants dug up their bodies, desecrated their graves, and
cast them once more upon the open heath for the sorry value of their
winding-sheets!

_Inscription on stone at Rullion Green_:

                                     HERE
                                 AND NEAR TO
                             THIS PLACE LYES THE
                         REVEREND MR JOHN CROOKSHANK
                           AND MR ANDREW MCCORMICK
                         MINISTERS OF THE GOSPEL AND
                      ABOUT FIFTY OTHER TRUE COVENANTED
                            PRESBYTERIANS WHO WERE
                      KILLED IN THIS PLACE IN THEIR OWN
                      INOCENT SELF DEFENCE AND DEFFENCE
                              OF THE COVENANTED
                            WORK OF REFORMATION BY
                            THOMAS DALZEEL OF BINS
                           UPON THE 28 OF NOVEMBER
                         1666.  REV. 12. 11. ERECTED
                                SEPT. 28 1738.

                             _Back of stone_:

    A Cloud of Witnesses lyes here,
    Who for Christ’s Interest did appear,
    For to restore true Liberty,
    O’erturnèd then by tyranny.
    And by proud Prelats who did Rage
    Against the Lord’s Own heritage.
    They sacrificed were for the laws
    Of Christ their king, his noble cause.
    These heroes fought with great renown;
    By falling got the Martyr’s crown. {103}



