CHAPTER VIII—THE MAIL GUARD


Somewhere about two in the morning a squall had burst upon the castle, a
clap of screaming wind that made the towers rock, and a copious drift of
rain that streamed from the windows.  The wind soon blew itself out, but
the day broke cloudy and dripping, and when the little party assembled at
breakfast their humours appeared to have changed with the change of
weather.  Nance had been brooding on the scene at the river-side,
applying it in various ways to her particular aspirations, and the
result, which was hardly to her mind, had taken the colour out of her
cheeks.  Mr. Archer, too, was somewhat absent, his thoughts were of a
mingled strain; and even upon his usually impassive countenance there
were betrayed successive depths of depression and starts of exultation,
which the girl translated in terms of her own hopes and fears.  But
Jonathan was the most altered: he was strangely silent, hardly passing a
word, and watched Mr. Archer with an eager and furtive eye.  It seemed as
if the idea that had so long hovered before him had now taken a more
solid shape, and, while it still attracted, somewhat alarmed his
imagination.

At this rate, conversation languished into a silence which was only
broken by the gentle and ghostly noises of the rain on the stone roof and
about all that field of ruins; and they were all relieved when the note
of a man whistling and the sound of approaching footsteps in the grassy
court announced a visitor.  It was the ostler from the ‘Green Dragon’
bringing a letter for Mr. Archer.  Nance saw her hero’s face contract and
then relax again at sight of it; and she thought that she knew why, for
the sprawling, gross black characters of the address were easily
distinguishable from the fine writing on the former letter that had so
much disturbed him.  He opened it and began to read; while the ostler sat
down to table with a pot of ale, and proceeded to make himself agreeable
after his fashion.

‘Fine doings down our way, Miss Nance,’ said he.  ‘I haven’t been abed
this blessed night.’

Nance expressed a polite interest, but her eye was on Mr. Archer, who was
reading his letter with a face of such extreme indifference that she was
tempted to suspect him of assumption.

‘Yes,’ continued the ostler, ‘not been the like of it this fifteen years:
the North Mail stopped at the three stones.’

Jonathan’s cup was at his lip, but at this moment he choked with a great
splutter; and Mr. Archer, as if startled by the noise, made so sudden a
movement that one corner of the sheet tore off and stayed between his
finger and thumb.  It was some little time before the old man was
sufficiently recovered to beg the ostler to go on, and he still kept
coughing and crying and rubbing his eyes.  Mr. Archer, on his side, laid
the letter down, and, putting his hands in his pocket, listened gravely
to the tale.

‘Yes,’ resumed Sam, ‘the North Mail was stopped by a single horseman;
dash my wig, but I admire him!  There were four insides and two out, and
poor Tom Oglethorpe, the guard.  Tom showed himself a man; let fly his
blunderbuss at him; had him covered, too, and could swear to that; but
the Captain never let on, up with a pistol and fetched poor Tom a bullet
through the body.  Tom, he squelched upon the seat, all over blood.  Up
comes the Captain to the window.  “Oblige me,” says he, “with what you
have.”  Would you believe it?  Not a man says cheep!—not them.  “Thy
hands over thy head.”  Four watches, rings, snuff-boxes, seven-and-forty
pounds overhead in gold.  One Dicksee, a grazier, tries it on: gives him
a guinea.  “Beg your pardon,” says the Captain, “I think too highly of
you to take it at your hand.  I will not take less than ten from such a
gentleman.”  This Dicksee had his money in his stocking, but there was
the pistol at his eye.  Down he goes, offs with his stocking, and there
was thirty golden guineas.  “Now,” says the Captain, “you’ve tried it on
with me, but I scorns the advantage.  Ten I said,” he says, “and ten I
take.”  So, dash my buttons, I call that man a man!’ cried Sam in cordial
admiration.

‘Well, and then?’ says Mr. Archer.

‘Then,’ resumed Sam, ‘that old fat fagot Engleton, him as held the
ribbons and drew up like a lamb when he was told to, picks up his cattle,
and drives off again.  Down they came to the “Dragon,” all singing like
as if they was scalded, and poor Tom saying nothing.  You would ‘a’
thought they had all lost the King’s crown to hear them.  Down gets this
Dicksee.  “Postmaster,” he says, taking him by the arm, “this is a most
abominable thing,” he says.  Down gets a Major Clayton, and gets the old
man by the other arm.  “We’ve been robbed,” he cries, “robbed!”  Down
gets the others, and all around the old man telling their story, and what
they had lost, and how they was all as good as ruined; till at last Old
Engleton says, says he, “How about Oglethorpe?” says he.  “Ay,” says the
others, “how about the guard?”  Well, with that we bousted him down, as
white as a rag and all blooded like a sop.  I thought he was dead.  Well,
he ain’t dead; but he’s dying, I fancy.’

‘Did you say four watches?’ said Jonathan.

‘Four, I think.  I wish it had been forty,’ cried Sam.  ‘Such a party of
soused herrings I never did see—not a man among them bar poor Tom.  But
us that are the servants on the road have all the risk and none of the
profit.’

‘And this brave fellow,’ asked Mr. Archer, very quietly, ‘this
Oglethorpe—how is he now?’

‘Well, sir, with my respects, I take it he has a hole bang through him,’
said Sam.  ‘The doctor hasn’t been yet.  He’d ‘a’ been bright and early
if it had been a passenger.  But, doctor or no, I’ll make a good guess
that Tom won’t see to-morrow.  He’ll die on a Sunday, will poor Tom; and
they do say that’s fortunate.’

‘Did Tom see him that did it?’ asked Jonathan.

‘Well, he saw him,’ replied Sam, ‘but not to swear by.  Said he was a
very tall man, and very big, and had a ’ankerchief about his face, and a
very quick shot, and sat his horse like a thorough gentleman, as he is.’

‘A gentleman!’ cried Nance.  ‘The dirty knave!’

‘Well, I calls a man like that a gentleman,’ returned the ostler; ‘that’s
what I mean by a gentleman.’

‘You don’t know much of them, then,’ said Nance.

‘A gentleman would scorn to stoop to such a thing.  I call my uncle a
better gentleman than any thief.’

‘And you would be right,’ said Mr. Archer.

‘How many snuff-boxes did he get?’ asked Jonathan.

‘O, dang me if I know,’ said Sam; ‘I didn’t take an inventory.’

‘I will go back with you, if you please,’ said Mr. Archer.  ‘I should
like to see poor Oglethorpe.  He has behaved well.’

‘At your service, sir,’ said Sam, jumping to his feet.  ‘I dare to say a
gentleman like you would not forget a poor fellow like Tom—no, nor a
plain man like me, sir, that went without his sleep to nurse him.  And
excuse me, sir,’ added Sam, ‘you won’t forget about the letter neither?’

‘Surely not,’ said Mr. Archer.

Oglethorpe lay in a low bed, one of several in a long garret of the inn.
The rain soaked in places through the roof and fell in minute drops;
there was but one small window; the beds were occupied by servants, the
air of the garret was both close and chilly.  Mr. Archer’s heart sank at
the threshold to see a man lying perhaps mortally hurt in so poor a
sick-room, and as he drew near the low bed he took his hat off.  The
guard was a big, blowsy, innocent-looking soul with a thick lip and a
broad nose, comically turned up; his cheeks were crimson, and when Mr.
Archer laid a finger on his brow he found him burning with fever.

‘I fear you suffer much,’ he said, with a catch in his voice, as he sat
down on the bedside.

‘I suppose I do, sir,’ returned Oglethorpe; ‘it is main sore.’

‘I am used to wounds and wounded men,’ returned the visitor.  ‘I have
been in the wars and nursed brave fellows before now; and, if you will
suffer me, I propose to stay beside you till the doctor comes.’

‘It is very good of you, sir, I am sure,’ said Oglethorpe.  ‘The trouble
is they won’t none of them let me drink.’

‘If you will not tell the doctor,’ said Mr. Archer, ‘I will give you some
water.  They say it is bad for a green wound, but in the Low Countries we
all drank water when we found the chance, and I could never perceive we
were the worse for it.’

‘Been wounded yourself, sir, perhaps?’ called Oglethorpe.

‘Twice,’ said Mr. Archer, ‘and was as proud of these hurts as any lady of
her bracelets.  ’Tis a fine thing to smart for one’s duty; even in the
pangs of it there is contentment.’

‘Ah, well!’ replied the guard, ‘if you’ve been shot yourself, that
explains.  But as for contentment, why, sir, you see, it smarts, as you
say.  And then, I have a good wife, you see, and a bit of a brat—a little
thing, so high.’

‘Don’t move,’ said Mr. Archer.

‘No, sir, I will not, and thank you kindly,’ said Oglethorpe.  ‘At York
they are.  A very good lass is my wife—far too good for me.  And the
little rascal—well, I don’t know how to say it, but he sort of comes
round you.  If I were to go, sir, it would be hard on my poor girl—main
hard on her!’

‘Ay, you must feel bitter hardly to the rogue that laid you here,’ said
Archer.

‘Why, no, sir, more against Engleton and the passengers,’ replied the
guard.  ‘He played his hand, if you come to look at it; and I wish he had
shot worse, or me better.  And yet I’ll go to my grave but what I covered
him,’ he cried.  ‘It looks like witchcraft.  I’ll go to my grave but what
he was drove full of slugs like a pepper-box.’

‘Quietly,’ said Mr. Archer, ‘you must not excite yourself.  These
deceptions are very usual in war; the eye, in the moment of alert, is
hardly to be trusted, and when the smoke blows away you see the man you
fired at, taking aim, it may be, at yourself.  You should observe, too,
that you were in the dark night, and somewhat dazzled by the lamps, and
that the sudden stopping of the mail had jolted you.  In such
circumstances a man may miss, ay, even with a blunder-buss, and no blame
attach to his marksmanship.’ . . .




THE YOUNG CHEVALIER


PROLOGUE—THE WINE-SELLER’S WIFE


There was a wine-seller’s shop, as you went down to the river in the city
of the Anti-popes.  There a man was served with good wine of the country
and plain country fare; and the place being clean and quiet, with a
prospect on the river, certain gentlemen who dwelt in that city in
attendance on a great personage made it a practice (when they had any
silver in their purses) to come and eat there and be private.

They called the wine-seller Paradou.  He was built more like a bullock
than a man, huge in bone and brawn, high in colour, and with a hand like
a baby for size.  Marie-Madeleine was the name of his wife; she was of
Marseilles, a city of entrancing women, nor was any fairer than herself.
She was tall, being almost of a height with Paradou; full-girdled,
point-device in every form, with an exquisite delicacy in the face; her
nose and nostrils a delight to look at from the fineness of the
sculpture, her eyes inclined a hair’s-breadth inward, her colour between
dark and fair, and laid on even like a flower’s.  A faint rose dwelt in
it, as though she had been found unawares bathing, and had blushed from
head to foot.  She was of a grave countenance, rarely smiling; yet it
seemed to be written upon every part of her that she rejoiced in life.
Her husband loved the heels of her feet and the knuckles of her fingers;
he loved her like a glutton and a brute; his love hung about her like an
atmosphere; one that came by chance into the wine-shop was aware of that
passion; and it might be said that by the strength of it the woman had
been drugged or spell-bound.  She knew not if she loved or loathed him;
he was always in her eyes like something monstrous—monstrous in his love,
monstrous in his person, horrific but imposing in his violence; and her
sentiment swung back and forward from desire to sickness.  But the mean,
where it dwelt chiefly, was an apathetic fascination, partly of horror;
as of Europa in mid ocean with her bull.

On the 10th November 1749 there sat two of the foreign gentlemen in the
wine-seller’s shop.  They were both handsome men of a good presence,
richly dressed.  The first was swarthy and long and lean, with an alert,
black look, and a mole upon his cheek.  The other was more fair.  He
seemed very easy and sedate, and a little melancholy for so young a man,
but his smile was charming.  In his grey eyes there was much abstraction,
as of one recalling fondly that which was past and lost.  Yet there was
strength and swiftness in his limbs; and his mouth set straight across
his face, the under lip a thought upon side, like that of a man
accustomed to resolve.  These two talked together in a rude outlandish
speech that no frequenter of that wine-shop understood.  The swarthy man
answered to the name of _Ballantrae_; he of the dreamy eyes was sometimes
called _Balmile_, and sometimes _my Lord_, or _my Lord Gladsmuir_; but
when the title was given him, he seemed to put it by as if in jesting,
not without bitterness.

The mistral blew in the city.  The first day of that wind, they say in
the countries where its voice is heard, it blows away all the dust, the
second all the stones, and the third it blows back others from the
mountains.  It was now come to the third day; outside the pebbles flew
like hail, and the face of the river was puckered, and the very
building-stones in the walls of houses seemed to be curdled with the
savage cold and fury of that continuous blast.  It could be heard to hoot
in all the chimneys of the city; it swept about the wine-shop, filling
the room with eddies; the chill and gritty touch of it passed between the
nearest clothes and the bare flesh; and the two gentlemen at the far
table kept their mantles loose about their shoulders.  The roughness of
these outer hulls, for they were plain travellers’ cloaks that had seen
service, set the greater mark of richness on what showed below of their
laced clothes; for the one was in scarlet and the other in violet and
white, like men come from a scene of ceremony; as indeed they were.

It chanced that these fine clothes were not without their influence on
the scene which followed, and which makes the prologue of our tale.  For
a long time Balmile was in the habit to come to the wine-shop and eat a
meal or drink a measure of wine; sometimes with a comrade; more often
alone, when he would sit and dream and drum upon the table, and the
thoughts would show in the man’s face in little glooms and lightenings,
like the sun and the clouds upon a water.  For a long time
Marie-Madeleine had observed him apart.  His sadness, the beauty of his
smile when by any chance he remembered her existence and addressed her,
the changes of his mind signalled forth by an abstruse play of feature,
the mere fact that he was foreign and a thing detached from the local and
the accustomed, insensibly attracted and affected her.  Kindness was
ready in her mind; it but lacked the touch of an occasion to effervesce
and crystallise.  Now Balmile had come hitherto in a very poor plain
habit; and this day of the mistral, when his mantle was just open, and
she saw beneath it the glancing of the violet and the velvet and the
silver, and the clustering fineness of the lace, it seemed to set the man
in a new light, with which he shone resplendent to her fancy.

The high inhuman note of the wind, the violence and continuity of its
outpouring, and the fierce touch of it upon man’s whole periphery,
accelerated the functions of the mind.  It set thoughts whirling, as it
whirled the trees of the forest; it stirred them up in flights, as it
stirred up the dust in chambers.  As brief as sparks, the fancies
glittered and succeeded each other in the mind of Marie-Madeleine; and
the grave man with the smile, and the bright clothes under the plain
mantle, haunted her with incongruous explanations.  She considered him,
the unknown, the speaker of an unknown tongue, the hero (as she placed
him) of an unknown romance, the dweller upon unknown memories.  She
recalled him sitting there alone, so immersed, so stupefied; yet she was
sure he was not stupid.  She recalled one day when he had remained a long
time motionless, with parted lips, like one in the act of starting up,
his eyes fixed on vacancy.  Any one else must have looked foolish; but
not he.  She tried to conceive what manner of memory had thus entranced
him; she forged for him a past; she showed him to herself in every light
of heroism and greatness and misfortune; she brooded with petulant
intensity on all she knew and guessed of him.  Yet, though she was
already gone so deep, she was still unashamed, still unalarmed; her
thoughts were still disinterested; she had still to reach the stage at
which—beside the image of that other whom we love to contemplate and to
adorn—we place the image of ourself and behold them together with
delight.

She stood within the counter, her hands clasped behind her back, her
shoulders pressed against the wall, her feet braced out.  Her face was
bright with the wind and her own thoughts; as a fire in a similar day of
tempest glows and brightens on a hearth, so she seemed to glow, standing
there, and to breathe out energy.  It was the first time Ballantrae had
visited that wine-seller’s, the first time he had seen the wife; and his
eyes were true to her.

‘I perceive your reason for carrying me to this very draughty tavern,’ he
said at last.

‘I believe it is propinquity,’ returned Balmile.

‘You play dark,’ said Ballantrae, ‘but have a care!  Be more frank with
me, or I will cut you out.  I go through no form of qualifying my threat,
which would be commonplace and not conscientious.  There is only one
point in these campaigns: that is the degree of admiration offered by the
man; and to our hostess I am in a posture to make victorious love.’

‘If you think you have the time, or the game worth the candle,’ replied
the other with a shrug.

‘One would suppose you were never at the pains to observe her,’ said
Ballantrae.

‘I am not very observant,’ said Balmile.  ‘She seems comely.’

‘You very dear and dull dog!’ cried Ballantrae; ‘chastity is the most
besotting of the virtues.  Why, she has a look in her face beyond
singing!  I believe, if you was to push me hard, I might trace it home to
a trifle of a squint.  What matters?  The height of beauty is in the
touch that’s wrong, that’s the modulation in a tune.  ’Tis the devil we
all love; I owe many a conquest to my mole’—he touched it as he spoke
with a smile, and his eyes glittered;—‘we are all hunchbacks, and beauty
is only that kind of deformity that I happen to admire.  But come!
Because you are chaste, for which I am sure I pay you my respects, that
is no reason why you should be blind.  Look at her, look at the delicious
nose of her, look at her cheek, look at her ear, look at her hand and
wrist—look at the whole baggage from heels to crown, and tell me if she
wouldn’t melt on a man’s tongue.’

As Ballantrae spoke, half jesting, half enthusiastic, Balmile was
constrained to do as he was bidden.  He looked at the woman, admired her
excellences, and was at the same time ashamed for himself and his
companion.  So it befell that when Marie-Madeleine raised her eyes, she
met those of the subject of her contemplations fixed directly on herself
with a look that is unmistakable, the look of a person measuring and
valuing another—and, to clench the false impression, that his glance was
instantly and guiltily withdrawn.  The blood beat back upon her heart and
leaped again; her obscure thoughts flashed clear before her; she flew in
fancy straight to his arms like a wanton, and fled again on the instant
like a nymph.  And at that moment there chanced an interruption, which
not only spared her embarrassment, but set the last consecration on her
now articulate love.

Into the wine-shop there came a French gentleman, arrayed in the last
refinement of the fashion, though a little tumbled by his passage in the
wind.  It was to be judged he had come from the same formal gathering at
which the others had preceded him; and perhaps that he had gone there in
the hope to meet with them, for he came up to Ballantrae with
unceremonious eagerness.

‘At last, here you are!’ he cried in French.  ‘I thought I was to miss
you altogether.’

The Scotsmen rose, and Ballantrae, after the first greetings, laid his
hand on his companion’s shoulder.

‘My lord,’ said he, ‘allow me to present to you one of my best friends
and one of our best soldiers, the Lord Viscount Gladsmuir.’

The two bowed with the elaborate elegance of the period.

‘_Monseigneur_,’ said Balmile, ‘_je n’ai pas la prétention de m’affubler
d’un titre que la mauvaise fortune de mon roi ne me permet pas de porter
comma il sied_.  _Je m’appelle_, _pour vous servir_, _Blair de Balmile
tout court_.’  [My lord, I have not the effrontery to cumber myself with
a title which the ill fortunes of my king will not suffer me to bear the
way it should be.  I call myself, at your service, plain Blair of
Balmile.]

‘_Monsieur le Vicomte ou monsieur Blèr’ de Balmaïl_,’ replied the
newcomer, ‘_le nom n’y fait rien_, _et l’on connaît vos beaux faits_.’
[The name matters nothing, your gallant actions are known.]

A few more ceremonies, and these three, sitting down together to the
table, called for wine.  It was the happiness of Marie-Madeleine to wait
unobserved upon the prince of her desires.  She poured the wine, he drank
of it; and that link between them seemed to her, for the moment, close as
a caress.  Though they lowered their tones, she surprised great names
passing in their conversation, names of kings, the names of de Gesvre and
Belle-Isle; and the man who dealt in these high matters, and she who was
now coupled with him in her own thoughts, seemed to swim in mid air in a
transfiguration.  Love is a crude core, but it has singular and
far-reaching fringes; in that passionate attraction for the stranger that
now swayed and mastered her, his harsh incomprehensible language, and
these names of grandees in his talk, were each an element.

The Frenchman stayed not long, but it was plain he left behind him matter
of much interest to his companions; they spoke together earnestly, their
heads down, the woman of the wine-shop totally forgotten; and they were
still so occupied when Paradou returned.

This man’s love was unsleeping.  The even bluster of the mistral, with
which he had been combating some hours, had not suspended, though it had
embittered, that predominant passion.  His first look was for his wife, a
look of hope and suspicion, menace and humility and love, that made the
over-blooming brute appear for the moment almost beautiful.  She returned
his glance, at first as though she knew him not, then with a swiftly
waxing coldness of intent; and at last, without changing their direction,
she had closed her eyes.

There passed across her mind during that period much that Paradou could
not have understood had it been told to him in words: chiefly the sense
of an enlightening contrast betwixt the man who talked of kings and the
man who kept a wine-shop, betwixt the love she yearned for and that to
which she had been long exposed like a victim bound upon the altar.
There swelled upon her, swifter than the Rhone, a tide of abhorrence and
disgust.  She had succumbed to the monster, humbling herself below
animals; and now she loved a hero, aspiring to the semi-divine.  It was
in the pang of that humiliating thought that she had closed her eyes.

Paradou—quick as beasts are quick, to translate silence—felt the insult
through his blood; his inarticulate soul bellowed within him for revenge.
He glanced about the shop.  He saw the two indifferent gentlemen deep in
talk, and passed them over: his fancy flying not so high.  There was but
one other present, a country lout who stood swallowing his wine, equally
unobserved by all and unobserving—to him he dealt a glance of murderous
suspicion, and turned direct upon his wife.  The wine-shop had lain
hitherto, a space of shelter, the scene of a few ceremonial passages and
some whispered conversation, in the howling river of the wind; the clock
had not yet ticked a score of times since Paradou’s appearance; and now,
as he suddenly gave tongue, it seemed as though the mistral had entered
at his heels.

‘What ails you, woman?’ he cried, smiting on the counter.

‘Nothing ails me,’ she replied.  It was strange; but she spoke and stood
at that moment like a lady of degree, drawn upward by her aspirations.

‘You speak to me, by God, as though you scorned me!’ cried the husband.

The man’s passion was always formidable; she had often looked on upon its
violence with a thrill, it had been one ingredient in her fascination;
and she was now surprised to behold him, as from afar off, gesticulating
but impotent.  His fury might be dangerous like a torrent or a gust of
wind, but it was inhuman; it might be feared or braved, it should never
be respected.  And with that there came in her a sudden glow of courage
and that readiness to die which attends so closely upon all strong
passions.

‘I do scorn you,’ she said.

‘What is that?’ he cried.

‘I scorn you,’ she repeated, smiling.

‘You love another man!’ said he.

‘With all my soul,’ was her reply.

The wine-seller roared aloud so that the house rang and shook with it.

‘Is this the—?’ he cried, using a foul word, common in the South; and he
seized the young countryman and dashed him to the ground.  There he lay
for the least interval of time insensible; thence fled from the house,
the most terrified person in the county.  The heavy measure had escaped
from his hands, splashing the wine high upon the wall.  Paradou caught
it.  ‘And you?’ he roared to his wife, giving her the same name in the
feminine, and he aimed at her the deadly missile.  She expected it,
motionless, with radiant eyes.

But before it sped, Paradou was met by another adversary, and the
unconscious rivals stood confronted.  It was hard to say at that moment
which appeared the more formidable.  In Paradou, the whole muddy and
truculent depths of the half-man were stirred to frenzy; the lust of
destruction raged in him; there was not a feature in his face but it
talked murder.  Balmile had dropped his cloak: he shone out at once in
his finery, and stood to his full stature; girt in mind and body all his
resources, all his temper, perfectly in command in his face the light of
battle.  Neither spoke; there was no blow nor threat of one; it was war
reduced to its last element, the spiritual; and the huge wine-seller
slowly lowered his weapon.  Balmile was a noble, he a commoner; Balmile
exulted in an honourable cause.  Paradou already perhaps began to be
ashamed of his violence.  Of a sudden, at least, the tortured brute
turned and fled from the shop in the footsteps of his former victim, to
whose continued flight his reappearance added wings.

So soon as Balmile appeared between her husband and herself,
Marie-Madeleine transferred to him her eyes.  It might be her last
moment, and she fed upon that face; reading there inimitable courage and
illimitable valour to protect.  And when the momentary peril was gone by,
and the champion turned a little awkwardly towards her whom he had
rescued, it was to meet, and quail before, a gaze of admiration more
distinct than words.  He bowed, he stammered, his words failed him; he
who had crossed the floor a moment ago, like a young god, to smite,
returned like one discomfited; got somehow to his place by the table,
muffled himself again in his discarded cloak, and for a last touch of the
ridiculous, seeking for anything to restore his countenance, drank of the
wine before him, deep as a porter after a heavy lift.  It was little
wonder if Ballantrae, reading the scene with malevolent eyes, laughed out
loud and brief, and drank with raised glass, ‘To the champion of the
Fair.’

Marie-Madeleine stood in her old place within the counter; she disdained
the mocking laughter; it fell on her ears, but it did not reach her
spirit.  For her, the world of living persons was all resumed again into
one pair, as in the days of Eden; there was but the one end in life, the
one hope before her, the one thing needful, the one thing possible—to be
his.



