CHAPTER IV—THE PHILOSOPHY OF UMBRELLAS {151}


It is wonderful to think what a turn has been given to our whole Society
by the fact that we live under the sign of Aquarius—that our climate is
essentially wet.  A mere arbitrary distinction, like the walking-swords
of yore, might have remained the symbol of foresight and respectability,
had not the raw mists and dropping showers of our island pointed the
inclination of Society to another exponent of those virtues.  A ribbon of
the Legion of Honour or a string of medals may prove a person’s courage;
a title may prove his birth; a professorial chair his study and
acquirement; but it is the habitual carriage of the umbrella that is the
stamp of Respectability.  The umbrella has become the acknowledged index
of social position.

Robinson Crusoe presents us with a touching instance of the hankering
after them inherent in the civilised and educated mind.  To the
superficial, the hot suns of Juan Fernandez may sufficiently account for
his quaint choice of a luxury; but surely one who had borne the hard
labour of a seaman under the tropics for all these years could have
supported an excursion after goats or a peaceful _constitutional_ arm in
arm with the nude Friday.  No, it was not this: the memory of a vanished
respectability called for some outward manifestation, and the result
was—an umbrella.  A pious castaway might have rigged up a belfry and
solaced his Sunday mornings with the mimicry of church-bells; but Crusoe
was rather a moralist than a pietist, and his leaf-umbrella is as fine an
example of the civilised mind striving to express itself under adverse
circumstances as we have ever met with.

It is not for nothing, either, that the umbrella has become the very
foremost badge of modern civilisation—the Urim and Thummim of
respectability.  Its pregnant symbolism has taken its rise in the most
natural manner.  Consider, for a moment, when umbrellas were first
introduced into this country, what manner of men would use them, and what
class would adhere to the useless but ornamental cane.  The first,
without doubt, would be the hypochondriacal, out of solicitude for their
health, or the frugal, out of care for their raiment; the second, it is
equally plain, would include the fop, the fool, and the Bobadil.  Any one
acquainted with the growth of Society, and knowing out of what small
seeds of cause are produced great revolutions, and wholly new conditions
of intercourse, sees from this simple thought how the carriage of an
umbrella came to indicate frugality, judicious regard for bodily welfare,
and scorn for mere outward adornment, and, in one word, all those homely
and solid virtues implied in the term RESPECTABILITY.  Not that the
umbrella’s costliness has nothing to do with its great influence.  Its
possession, besides symbolising (as we have already indicated) the change
from wild Esau to plain Jacob dwelling in tents, implies a certain
comfortable provision of fortune.  It is not every one that can expose
twenty-six shillings’ worth of property to so many chances of loss and
theft.  So strongly do we feel on this point, indeed, that we are almost
inclined to consider all who possess really well-conditioned umbrellas as
worthy of the Franchise.  They have a qualification standing in their
lobbies; they carry a sufficient stake in the common-weal below their
arm.  One who bears with him an umbrella—such a complicated structure of
whalebone, of silk, and of cane, that it becomes a very microcosm of
modern industry—is necessarily a man of peace.  A half-crown cane may be
applied to an offender’s head on a very moderate provocation; but a
six-and-twenty shilling silk is a possession too precious to be
adventured in the shock of war.

These are but a few glances at how umbrellas (in the general) came to
their present high estate.  But the true Umbrella-Philosopher meets with
far stranger applications as he goes about the streets.

Umbrellas, like faces, acquire a certain sympathy with the individual who
carries them: indeed, they are far more capable of betraying his trust;
for whereas a face is given to us so far ready made, and all our power
over it is in frowning, and laughing, and grimacing, during the first
three or four decades of life, each umbrella is selected from a whole
shopful, as being most consonant to the purchaser’s disposition.  An
undoubted power of diagnosis rests with the practised
Umbrella-Philosopher.  O you who lisp, and amble, and change the fashion
of your countenances—you who conceal all these, how little do you think
that you left a proof of your weakness in our umbrella-stand—that even
now, as you shake out the folds to meet the thickening snow, we read in
its ivory handle the outward and visible sign of your snobbery, or from
the exposed gingham of its cover detect, through coat and waistcoat, the
hidden hypocrisy of the ‘_dickey_’!  But alas! even the umbrella is no
certain criterion.  The falsity and the folly of the human race have
degraded that graceful symbol to the ends of dishonesty; and while some
umbrellas, from carelessness in selection, are not strikingly
characteristic (for it is only in what a man loves that he displays his
real nature), others, from certain prudential motives, are chosen
directly opposite to the person’s disposition.  A mendacious umbrella is
a sign of great moral degradation.  Hypocrisy naturally shelters itself
below a silk; while the fast youth goes to visit his religious friends
armed with the decent and reputable gingham.  May it not be said of the
bearers of these inappropriate umbrellas that they go about the streets
‘with a lie in their right hand’?

The kings of Siam, as we read, besides having a graduated social scale of
umbrellas (which was a good thing), prevented the great bulk of their
subjects from having any at all, which was certainly a bad thing.  We
should be sorry to believe that this Eastern legislator was a fool—the
idea of an aristocracy of umbrellas is too philosophic to have originated
in a nobody—and we have accordingly taken exceeding pains to find out the
reason of this harsh restriction.  We think we have succeeded; but, while
admiring the principle at which he aimed, and while cordially recognising
in the Siamese potentate the only man before ourselves who had taken a
real grasp of the umbrella, we must be allowed to point out how
unphilosophically the great man acted in this particular.  His object,
plainly, was to prevent any unworthy persons from bearing the sacred
symbol of domestic virtues.  We cannot excuse his limiting these virtues
to the circle of his court.  We must only remember that such was the
feeling of the age in which he lived.  Liberalism had not yet raised the
war-cry of the working classes.  But here was his mistake: it was a
needless regulation.  Except in a very few cases of hypocrisy joined to a
powerful intellect, men, not by nature _umbrellarians_, have tried again
and again to become so by art, and yet have failed—have expended their
patrimony in the purchase of umbrella after umbrella, and yet have
systematically lost them, and have finally, with contrite spirits and
shrunken purses, given up their vain struggle, and relied on theft and
borrowing for the remainder of their lives.  This is the most remarkable
fact that we have had occasion to notice; and yet we challenge the candid
reader to call it in question.  Now, as there cannot be any _moral
selection_ in a mere dead piece of furniture—as the umbrella cannot be
supposed to have an affinity for individual men equal and reciprocal to
that which men certainly feel toward individual umbrellas—we took the
trouble of consulting a scientific friend as to whether there was any
possible physical explanation of the phenomenon.  He was unable to supply
a plausible theory, or even hypothesis; but we extract from his letter
the following interesting passage relative to the physical peculiarities
of umbrellas: ‘Not the least important, and by far the most curious
property of the umbrella, is the energy which it displays in affecting
the atmospheric strata.  There is no fact in meteorology better
established—indeed, it is almost the only one on which meteorologists are
agreed—than that the carriage of an umbrella produces desiccation of the
air; while if it be left at home, aqueous vapour is largely produced, and
is soon deposited in the form of rain.  No theory,’ my friend continues,
‘competent to explain this hygrometric law has been given (as far as I am
aware) by Herschel, Dove, Glaisher, Tait, Buchan, or any other writer;
nor do I pretend to supply the defect.  I venture, however, to throw out
the conjecture that it will be ultimately found to belong to the same
class of natural laws as that agreeable to which a slice of toast always
descends with the buttered surface downwards.’

But it is time to draw to a close.  We could expatiate much longer upon
this topic, but want of space constrains us to leave unfinished these few
desultory remarks—slender contributions towards a subject which has
fallen sadly backward, and which, we grieve to say, was better understood
by the king of Siam in 1686 than by all the philosophers of to-day.  If,
however, we have awakened in any rational mind an interest in the
symbolism of umbrellas—in any generous heart a more complete sympathy
with the dumb companion of his daily walk—or in any grasping spirit a
pure notion of respectability strong enough to make him expend his
six-and-twenty shillings—we shall have deserved well of the world, to say
nothing of the many industrious persons employed in the manufacture of
the article.



