CHAPTER II


But, I may be told, we teach the ten commandments, where a world of
morals lies condensed, the very pith and epitome of all ethics and
religion; and a young man with these precepts engraved upon his mind must
follow after profit with some conscience and Christianity of method.  A
man cannot go very far astray who neither dishonours his parents, nor
kills, nor commits adultery, nor steals, nor bears false witness; for
these things, rightly thought out, cover a vast field of duty.

Alas! what is a precept?  It is at best an illustration; it is case law
at the best which can be learned by precept.  The letter is not only
dead, but killing; the spirit which underlies, and cannot be uttered,
alone is true and helpful.  This is trite to sickness; but familiarity
has a cunning disenchantment; in a day or two she can steal all beauty
from the mountain tops; and the most startling words begin to fall dead
upon the ear after several repetitions.  If you see a thing too often,
you no longer see it; if you hear a thing too often, you no longer hear
it.  Our attention requires to be surprised; and to carry a fort by
assault, or to gain a thoughtful hearing from the ruck of mankind, are
feats of about an equal difficulty and must be tried by not dissimilar
means.  The whole Bible has thus lost its message for the common run of
hearers; it has become mere words of course; and the parson may bawl
himself scarlet and beat the pulpit like a thing possessed, but his
hearers will continue to nod; they are strangely at peace, they know all
he has to say; ring the old bell as you choose, it is still the old bell
and it cannot startle their composure.  And so with this byword about the
letter and the spirit.  It is quite true, no doubt; but it has no meaning
in the world to any man of us.  Alas! it has just this meaning, and
neither more nor less: that while the spirit is true, the letter is
eternally false.

The shadow of a great oak lies abroad upon the ground at noon, perfect,
clear, and stable like the earth.  But let a man set himself to mark out
the boundary with cords and pegs, and were he never so nimble and never
so exact, what with the multiplicity of the leaves and the progression of
the shadow as it flees before the travelling sun, long ere he has made
the circuit the whole figure will have changed.  Life may be compared,
not to a single tree, but to a great and complicated forest; circumstance
is more swiftly changing than a shadow, language much more inexact than
the tools of a surveyor; from day to day the trees fall and are renewed;
the very essences are fleeting as we look; and the whole world of leaves
is swinging tempest-tossed among the winds of time.  Look now for your
shadows.  O man of formulæ, is this a place for you?  Have you fitted the
spirit to a single case?  Alas, in the cycle of the ages when shall such
another be proposed for the judgment of man?  Now when the sun shines and
the winds blow, the wood is filled with an innumerable multitude of
shadows, tumultuously tossed and changing; and at every gust the whole
carpet leaps and becomes new.  Can you or your heart say more?

Look back now, for a moment, on your own brief experience of life; and
although you lived it feelingly in your own person, and had every step of
conduct burned in by pains and joys upon your memory, tell me what
definite lesson does experience hand on from youth to manhood, or from
both to age?  The settled tenor which first strikes the eye is but the
shadow of a delusion.  This is gone; that never truly was; and you
yourself are altered beyond recognition.  Times and men and circumstances
change about your changing character, with a speed of which no earthly
hurricane affords an image.  What was the best yesterday, is it still the
best in this changed theatre of a to-morrow?  Will your own Past truly
guide you in your own violent and unexpected Future?  And if this be
questionable, with what humble, with what hopeless eyes, should we not
watch other men driving beside us on their unknown careers, seeing with
unlike eyes, impelled by different gales, doing and suffering in another
sphere of things?

And as the authentic clue to such a labyrinth and change of scene, do you
offer me these two score words? these five bald prohibitions?  For the
moral precepts are no more than five; the first four deal rather with
matters of observance than of conduct; the tenth, _Thou shalt not covet_,
stands upon another basis, and shall be spoken of ere long.  The Jews, to
whom they were first given, in the course of years began to find these
precepts insufficient; and made an addition of no less than six hundred
and fifty others!  They hoped to make a pocket-book of reference on
morals, which should stand to life in some such relation, say, as Hoyle
stands in to the scientific game of whist.  The comparison is just, and
condemns the design; for those who play by rule will never be more than
tolerable players; and you and I would like to play our game in life to
the noblest and the most divine advantage.  Yet if the Jews took a petty
and huckstering view of conduct, what view do we take ourselves, who
callously leave youth to go forth into the enchanted forest, full of
spells and dire chimeras, with no guidance more complete than is afforded
by these five precepts?

_Honour thy father and thy mother_.  Yes, but does that mean to obey? and
if so, how long and how far?  _Thou shall not kill_.  Yet the very
intention and purport of the prohibition may be best fulfilled by
killing.  _Thou shall not commit adultery_.  But some of the ugliest
adulteries are committed in the bed of marriage and under the sanction of
religion and law.  _Thou shalt not bear false witness_.  How? by speech
or by silence also? or even by a smile?  _Thou shalt not steal_.  Ah,
that indeed!  But what is _to steal_?

To steal?  It is another word to be construed; and who is to be our
guide?  The police will give us one construction, leaving the word only
that least minimum of meaning without which society would fall in pieces;
but surely we must take some higher sense than this; surely we hope more
than a bare subsistence for mankind; surely we wish mankind to prosper
and go on from strength to strength, and ourselves to live rightly in the
eye of some more exacting potentate than a policeman.  The approval or
the disapproval of the police must be eternally indifferent to a man who
is both valorous and good.  There is extreme discomfort, but no shame, in
the condemnation of the law.  The law represents that modicum of morality
which can be squeezed out of the ruck of mankind; but what is that to me,
who aim higher and seek to be my own more stringent judge?  I observe
with pleasure that no brave man has ever given a rush for such
considerations.  The Japanese have a nobler and more sentimental feeling
for this social bond into which we all are born when we come into the
world, and whose comforts and protection we all indifferently share
throughout our lives:—but even to them, no more than to our Western
saints and heroes, does the law of the state supersede the higher law of
duty.  Without hesitation and without remorse, they transgress the
stiffest enactments rather than abstain from doing right.  But the
accidental superior duty being thus fulfilled, they at once return in
allegiance to the common duty of all citizens; and hasten to denounce
themselves; and value at an equal rate their just crime and their equally
just submission to its punishment.

The evading of the police will not long satisfy an active conscience or a
thoughtful head.  But to show you how one or the other may trouble a man,
and what a vast extent of frontier is left unridden by this invaluable
eighth commandment, let me tell you a few pages out of a young man’s
life.

He was a friend of mine; a young man like others; generous, flighty, as
variable as youth itself, but always with some high motions and on the
search for higher thoughts of life.  I should tell you at once that he
thoroughly agrees with the eighth commandment.  But he got hold of some
unsettling works, the New Testament among others, and this loosened his
views of life and led him into many perplexities.  As he was the son of a
man in a certain position, and well off, my friend had enjoyed from the
first the advantages of education, nay, he had been kept alive through a
sickly childhood by constant watchfulness, comforts, and change of air;
for all of which he was indebted to his father’s wealth.

At college he met other lads more diligent than himself, who followed the
plough in summer-time to pay their college fees in winter; and this
inequality struck him with some force.  He was at that age of a
conversible temper, and insatiably curious in the aspects of life; and he
spent much of his time scraping acquaintance with all classes of man- and
woman-kind.  In this way he came upon many depressed ambitions, and many
intelligences stunted for want of opportunity; and this also struck him.
He began to perceive that life was a handicap upon strange, wrong-sided
principles; and not, as he had been told, a fair and equal race.  He
began to tremble that he himself had been unjustly favoured, when he saw
all the avenues of wealth, and power, and comfort closed against so many
of his superiors and equals, and held unwearyingly open before so idle,
so desultory, and so dissolute a being as himself.  There sat a youth
beside him on the college benches, who had only one shirt to his back,
and, at intervals sufficiently far apart, must stay at home to have it
washed.  It was my friend’s principle to stay away as often as he dared;
for I fear he was no friend to learning.  But there was something that
came home to him sharply, in this fellow who had to give over study till
his shirt was washed, and the scores of others who had never an
opportunity at all.  _If one of these could take his place_, he thought;
and the thought tore away a bandage from his eyes.  He was eaten by the
shame of his discoveries, and despised himself as an unworthy favourite
and a creature of the back-stairs of Fortune.  He could no longer see
without confusion one of these brave young fellows battling up-hill
against adversity.  Had he not filched that fellow’s birthright?  At best
was he not coldly profiting by the injustice of society, and greedily
devouring stolen goods?  The money, indeed, belonged to his father, who
had worked, and thought, and given up his liberty to earn it; but by what
justice could the money belong to my friend, who had, as yet, done
nothing but help to squander it?  A more sturdy honesty, joined to a more
even and impartial temperament, would have drawn from these
considerations a new force of industry, that this equivocal position
might be brought as swiftly as possible to an end, and some good services
to mankind justify the appropriation of expense.  It was not so with my
friend, who was only unsettled and discouraged, and filled full of that
trumpeting anger with which young men regard injustices in the first
blush of youth; although in a few years they will tamely acquiesce in
their existence, and knowingly profit by their complications.  Yet all
this while he suffered many indignant pangs.  And once, when he put on
his boots, like any other unripe donkey, to run away from home, it was
his best consolation that he was now, at a single plunge, to free himself
from the responsibility of this wealth that was not his, and do battle
equally against his fellows in the warfare of life.

Some time after this, falling into ill-health, he was sent at great
expense to a more favourable climate; and then I think his perplexities
were thickest.  When he thought of all the other young men of singular
promise, upright, good, the prop of families, who must remain at home to
die, and with all their possibilities be lost to life and mankind; and
how he, by one more unmerited favour, was chosen out from all these
others to survive; he felt as if there were no life, no labour, no
devotion of soul and body, that could repay and justify these
partialities.  A religious lady, to whom he communicated these
reflections, could see no force in them whatever.  ‘It was God’s will,’
said she.  But he knew it was by God’s will that Joan of Arc was burnt at
Rouen, which cleared neither Bedford nor Bishop Cauchon; and again, by
God’s will that Christ was crucified outside Jerusalem, which excused
neither the rancour of the priests nor the timidity of Pilate.  He knew,
moreover, that although the possibility of this favour he was now
enjoying issued from his circumstances, its acceptance was the act of his
own will; and he had accepted it greedily, longing for rest and sunshine.
And hence this allegation of God’s providence did little to relieve his
scruples.  I promise you he had a very troubled mind.  And I would not
laugh if I were you, though while he was thus making mountains out of
what you think molehills, he were still (as perhaps he was) contentedly
practising many other things that to you seem black as hell.  Every man
is his own judge and mountain-guide through life.  There is an old story
of a mote and a beam, apparently not true, but worthy perhaps of some
consideration.  I should, if I were you, give some consideration to these
scruples of his, and if I were he, I should do the like by yours; for it
is not unlikely that there may be something under both.  In the meantime
you must hear how my friend acted.  Like many invalids, he supposed that
he would die.  Now, should he die, he saw no means of repaying this huge
loan which, by the hands of his father, mankind had advanced him for his
sickness.  In that case it would be lost money.  So he determined that
the advance should be as small as possible; and, so long as he continued
to doubt his recovery, lived in an upper room, and grudged himself all
but necessaries.  But so soon as he began to perceive a change for the
better, he felt justified in spending more freely, to speed and brighten
his return to health, and trusted in the future to lend a help to
mankind, as mankind, out of its treasury, had lent a help to him.

I do not say but that my friend was a little too curious and partial in
his view; nor thought too much of himself and too little of his parents;
but I do say that here are some scruples which tormented my friend in his
youth, and still, perhaps, at odd times give him a prick in the midst of
his enjoyments, and which after all have some foundation in justice, and
point, in their confused way, to some more honourable honesty within the
reach of man.  And at least, is not this an unusual gloss upon the eighth
commandment?  And what sort of comfort, guidance, or illumination did
that precept afford my friend throughout these contentions?  ‘Thou shalt
not steal.’  With all my heart!  But _am_ I stealing?

The truly quaint materialism of our view of life disables us from
pursuing any transaction to an end.  You can make no one understand that
his bargain is anything more than a bargain, whereas in point of fact it
is a link in the policy of mankind, and either a good or an evil to the
world.  We have a sort of blindness which prevents us from seeing
anything but sovereigns.  If one man agrees to give another so many
shillings for so many hours’ work, and then wilfully gives him a certain
proportion of the price in bad money and only the remainder in good, we
can see with half an eye that this man is a thief.  But if the other
spends a certain proportion of the hours in smoking a pipe of tobacco,
and a certain other proportion in looking at the sky, or the clock, or
trying to recall an air, or in meditation on his own past adventures, and
only the remainder in downright work such as he is paid to do, is he,
because the theft is one of time and not of money,—is he any the less a
thief?  The one gave a bad shilling, the other an imperfect hour; but
both broke the bargain, and each is a thief.  In piecework, which is what
most of us do, the case is none the less plain for being even less
material.  If you forge a bad knife, you have wasted some of mankind’s
iron, and then, with unrivalled cynicism, you pocket some of mankind’s
money for your trouble.  Is there any man so blind who cannot see that
this is theft?  Again, if you carelessly cultivate a farm, you have been
playing fast and loose with mankind’s resources against hunger; there
will be less bread in consequence, and for lack of that bread somebody
will die next winter: a grim consideration.  And you must not hope to
shuffle out of blame because you got less money for your less quantity of
bread; for although a theft be partly punished, it is none the less a
theft for that.  You took the farm against competitors; there were others
ready to shoulder the responsibility and be answerable for the tale of
loaves; but it was you who took it.  By the act you came under a tacit
bargain with mankind to cultivate that farm with your best endeavour; you
were under no superintendence, you were on parole; and you have broke
your bargain, and to all who look closely, and yourself among the rest if
you have moral eyesight, you are a thief.  Or take the case of men of
letters.  Every piece of work which is not as good as you can make it,
which you have palmed off imperfect, meagrely thought, niggardly in
execution, upon mankind who is your paymaster on parole and in a sense
your pupil, every hasty or slovenly or untrue performance, should rise up
against you in the court of your own heart and condemn you for a thief.
Have you a salary?  If you trifle with your health, and so render
yourself less capable for duty, and still touch, and still greedily
pocket the emolument—what are you but a thief?  Have you double accounts?
do you by any time-honoured juggle, deceit, or ambiguous process, gain
more from those who deal with you than it you were bargaining and dealing
face to face in front of God?—What are you but a thief?  Lastly, if you
fill an office, or produce an article, which, in your heart of hearts,
you think a delusion and a fraud upon mankind, and still draw your salary
and go through the sham manœuvres of this office, or still book your
profits and keep on flooding the world with these injurious goods?—though
you were old, and bald, and the first at church, and a baronet, what are
you but a thief?  These may seem hard words and mere curiosities of the
intellect, in an age when the spirit of honesty is so sparingly
cultivated that all business is conducted upon lies and so-called customs
of the trade, that not a man bestows two thoughts on the utility or
honourableness of his pursuit.  I would say less if I thought less.  But
looking to my own reason and the right of things, I can only avow that I
am a thief myself, and that I passionately suspect my neighbours of the
same guilt.

Where did you hear that it was easy to be honest?  Do you find that in
your Bible?  Easy!  It is easy to be an ass and follow the multitude like
a blind, besotted bull in a stampede; and that, I am well aware, is what
you and Mrs. Grundy mean by being honest.  But it will not bear the
stress of time nor the scrutiny of conscience.  Even before the lowest of
all tribunals,—before a court of law, whose business it is, not to keep
men right, or within a thousand miles of right, but to withhold them from
going so tragically wrong that they will pull down the whole jointed
fabric of society by their misdeeds—even before a court of law, as we
begin to see in these last days, our easy view of following at each
other’s tails, alike to good and evil, is beginning to be reproved and
punished, and declared no honesty at all, but open theft and swindling;
and simpletons who have gone on through life with a quiet conscience may
learn suddenly, from the lips of a judge, that the custom of the trade
may be a custom of the devil.  You thought it was easy to be honest.  Did
you think it was easy to be just and kind and truthful?  Did you think
the whole duty of aspiring man was as simple as a horn-pipe? and you
could walk through life like a gentleman and a hero, with no more concern
than it takes to go to church or to address a circular?  And yet all this
time you had the eighth commandment! and, what makes it richer, you would
not have broken it for the world!

The truth is, that these commandments by themselves are of little use in
private judgment.  If compression is what you want, you have their whole
spirit compressed into the golden rule; and yet there expressed with more
significance, since the law is there spiritually and not materially
stated.  And in truth, four out of these ten commands, from the sixth to
the ninth, are rather legal than ethical.  The police-court is their
proper home.  A magistrate cannot tell whether you love your neighbour as
yourself, but he can tell more or less whether you have murdered, or
stolen, or committed adultery, or held up your hand and testified to that
which was not; and these things, for rough practical tests, are as good
as can be found.  And perhaps, therefore, the best condensation of the
Jewish moral law is in the maxims of the priests, ‘neminem lædere’ and
‘suum cuique tribuere.’  But all this granted, it becomes only the more
plain that they are inadequate in the sphere of personal morality; that
while they tell the magistrate roughly when to punish, they can never
direct an anxious sinner what to do.

Only Polonius, or the like solemn sort of ass, can offer us a succinct
proverb by way of advice, and not burst out blushing in our faces.  We
grant them one and all and for all that they are worth; it is something
above and beyond that we desire.  Christ was in general a great enemy to
such a way of teaching; we rarely find him meddling with any of these
plump commands but it was to open them out, and lift his hearers from the
letter to the spirit.  For morals are a personal affair; in the war of
righteousness every man fights for his own hand; all the six hundred
precepts of the Mishna cannot shake my private judgment; my magistracy of
myself is an indefeasible charge, and my decisions absolute for the time
and case.  The moralist is not a judge of appeal, but an advocate who
pleads at my tribunal.  He has to show not the law, but that the law
applies.  Can he convince me? then he gains the cause.  And thus you find
Christ giving various counsels to varying people, and often jealously
careful to avoid definite precept.  Is he asked, for example, to divide a
heritage?  He refuses: and the best advice that he will offer is but a
paraphrase of that tenth commandment which figures so strangely among the
rest.  _Take heed, and beware of covetousness_.  If you complain that
this is vague, I have failed to carry you along with me in my argument.
For no definite precept can be more than an illustration, though its
truth were resplendent like the sun, and it was announced from heaven by
the voice of God.  And life is so intricate and changing, that perhaps
not twenty times, or perhaps not twice in the ages, shall we find that
nice consent of circumstances to which alone it can apply.



