CHAPTER I—LORD LYTTON’S ‘FABLES IN SONG’


It seems as if Lord Lytton, in this new book of his, had found the form
most natural to his talent.  In some ways, indeed, it may be held
inferior to _Chronicles and Characters_; we look in vain for anything
like the terrible intensity of the night-scene in _Irene_, or for any
such passages of massive and memorable writing as appeared, here and
there, in the earlier work, and made it not altogether unworthy of its
model, Hugo’s _Legend of the Ages_.  But it becomes evident, on the most
hasty retrospect, that this earlier work was a step on the way towards
the later.  It seems as if the author had been feeling about for his
definite medium, and was already, in the language of the child’s game,
growing hot.  There are many pieces in _Chronicles and Characters_ that
might be detached from their original setting, and embodied, as they
stand, among the _Fables in Song_.

For the term Fable is not very easy to define rigorously.  In the most
typical form some moral precept is set forth by means of a conception
purely fantastic, and usually somewhat trivial into the bargain; there is
something playful about it, that will not support a very exacting
criticism, and the lesson must be apprehended by the fancy at half a
hint.  Such is the great mass of the old stories of wise animals or
foolish men that have amused our childhood.  But we should expect the
fable, in company with other and more important literary forms, to be
more and more loosely, or at least largely, comprehended as time went on,
and so to degenerate in conception from this original type.  That
depended for much of its piquancy on the very fact that it was fantastic:
the point of the thing lay in a sort of humorous inappropriateness; and
it is natural enough that pleasantry of this description should become
less common, as men learn to suspect some serious analogy underneath.
Thus a comical story of an ape touches us quite differently after the
proposition of Mr. Darwin’s theory.  Moreover, there lay, perhaps, at the
bottom of this primitive sort of fable, a humanity, a tenderness of rough
truths; so that at the end of some story, in which vice or folly had met
with its destined punishment, the fabulist might be able to assure his
auditors, as we have often to assure tearful children on the like
occasions, that they may dry their eyes, for none of it was true.

But this benefit of fiction becomes lost with more sophisticated hearers
and authors: a man is no longer the dupe of his own artifice, and cannot
deal playfully with truths that are a matter of bitter concern to him in
his life.  And hence, in the progressive centralisation of modern
thought, we should expect the old form of fable to fall gradually into
desuetude, and be gradually succeeded by another, which is a fable in all
points except that it is not altogether fabulous.  And this new form,
such as we should expect, and such as we do indeed find, still presents
the essential character of brevity; as in any other fable also, there is,
underlying and animating the brief action, a moral idea; and as in any
other fable, the object is to bring this home to the reader through the
intellect rather than through the feelings; so that, without being very
deeply moved or interested by the characters of the piece, we should
recognise vividly the hinges on which the little plot revolves.  But the
fabulist now seeks analogies where before he merely sought humorous
situations.  There will be now a logical nexus between the moral
expressed and the machinery employed to express it.  The machinery, in
fact, as this change is developed, becomes less and less fabulous.  We
find ourselves in presence of quite a serious, if quite a miniature
division of creative literature; and sometimes we have the lesson
embodied in a sober, everyday narration, as in the parables of the New
Testament, and sometimes merely the statement or, at most, the
collocation of significant facts in life, the reader being left to
resolve for himself the vague, troublesome, and not yet definitely moral
sentiment which has been thus created.  And step by step with the
development of this change, yet another is developed: the moral tends to
become more indeterminate and large.  It ceases to be possible to append
it, in a tag, to the bottom of the piece, as one might write the name
below a caricature; and the fable begins to take rank with all other
forms of creative literature, as something too ambitious, in spite of its
miniature dimensions, to be resumed in any succinct formula without the
loss of all that is deepest and most suggestive in it.

Now it is in this widest sense that Lord Lytton understands the term;
there are examples in his two pleasant volumes of all the forms already
mentioned, and even of another which can only be admitted among fables by
the utmost possible leniency of construction.  ‘Composure,’ ‘Et Cætera,’
and several more, are merely similes poetically elaborated.  So, too, is
the pathetic story of the grandfather and grandchild: the child, having
treasured away an icicle and forgotten it for ten minutes, comes back to
find it already nearly melted, and no longer beautiful: at the same time,
the grandfather has just remembered and taken out a bundle of
love-letters, which he too had stored away in years gone by, and then
long neglected; and, behold! the letters are as faded and sorrowfully
disappointing as the icicle.  This is merely a simile poetically worked
out; and yet it is in such as these, and some others, to be mentioned
further on, that the author seems at his best.  Wherever he has really
written after the old model, there is something to be deprecated: in
spite of all the spirit and freshness, in spite of his happy assumption
of that cheerful acceptation of things as they are, which, rightly or
wrongly, we come to attribute to the ideal fabulist, there is ever a
sense as of something a little out of place.  A form of literature so
very innocent and primitive looks a little over-written in Lord Lytton’s
conscious and highly-coloured style.  It may be bad taste, but sometimes
we should prefer a few sentences of plain prose narration, and a little
Bewick by way of tail-piece.  So that it is not among those fables that
conform most nearly to the old model, but one had nearly said among those
that most widely differ from it, that we find the most satisfactory
examples of the author’s manner.

In the mere matter of ingenuity, the metaphysical fables are the most
remarkable; such as that of the windmill who imagined that it was he who
raised the wind; or that of the grocer’s balance (‘Cogito ergo sum’) who
considered himself endowed with free-will, reason, and an infallible
practical judgment; until, one fine day, the police made a descent upon
the shop, and find the weights false and the scales unequal; and the
whole thing is broken up for old iron.  Capital fables, also, in the same
ironical spirit, are ‘Prometheus Unbound,’ the tale of the vainglorying
of a champagne-cork, and ‘Teleology,’ where a nettle justifies the ways
of God to nettles while all goes well with it, and, upon a change of
luck, promptly changes its divinity.

In all these there is still plenty of the fabulous if you will, although,
even here, there may be two opinions possible; but there is another
group, of an order of merit perhaps still higher, where we look in vain
for any such playful liberties with Nature.  Thus we have ‘Conservation
of Force’; where a musician, thinking of a certain picture, improvises in
the twilight; a poet, hearing the music, goes home inspired, and writes a
poem; and then a painter, under the influence of this poem, paints
another picture, thus lineally descended from the first.  This is
fiction, but not what we have been used to call fable.  We miss the
incredible element, the point of audacity with which the fabulist was
wont to mock at his readers.  And still more so is this the case with
others.  ‘The Horse and the Fly’ states one of the unanswerable problems
of life in quite a realistic and straightforward way.  A fly startles a
cab-horse, the coach is overset; a newly-married pair within and the
driver, a man with a wife and family, are all killed.  The horse
continues to gallop off in the loose traces, and ends the tragedy by
running over an only child; and there is some little pathetic detail here
introduced in the telling, that makes the reader’s indignation very
white-hot against some one.  It remains to be seen who that some one is
to be: the fly?  Nay, but on closer inspection, it appears that the fly,
actuated by maternal instinct, was only seeking a place for her eggs: is
maternal instinct, then, ‘sole author of these mischiefs all’?  ‘Who’s in
the Right?’ one of the best fables in the book, is somewhat in the same
vein.  After a battle has been won, a group of officers assemble inside a
battery, and debate together who should have the honour of the success;
the Prince, the general staff, the cavalry, the engineer who posted the
battery in which they then stand talking, are successively named: the
sergeant, who pointed the guns, sneers to himself at the mention of the
engineer; and, close by, the gunner, who had applied the match, passes
away with a smile of triumph, since it was through his hand that the
victorious blow had been dealt.  Meanwhile, the cannon claims the honour
over the gunner; the cannon-ball, who actually goes forth on the dread
mission, claims it over the cannon, who remains idly behind; the powder
reminds the cannon-ball that, but for him, it would still be lying on the
arsenal floor; and the match caps the discussion; powder, cannon-ball,
and cannon would be all equally vain and ineffectual without fire.  Just
then there comes on a shower of rain, which wets the powder and puts out
the match, and completes this lesson of dependence, by indicating the
negative conditions which are as necessary for any effect, in their
absence, as is the presence of this great fraternity of positive
conditions, not any one of which can claim priority over any other.  But
the fable does not end here, as perhaps, in all logical strictness, it
should.  It wanders off into a discussion as to which is the truer
greatness, that of the vanquished fire or that of the victorious rain.
And the speech of the rain is charming:

    ‘Lo, with my little drops I bless again
    And beautify the fields which thou didst blast!
    Rend, wither, waste, and ruin, what thou wilt,
    But call not Greatness what the Gods call Guilt.
    Blossoms and grass from blood in battle spilt,
    And poppied corn, I bring.
    ‘Mid mouldering Babels, to oblivion built,
    My violets spring.
    Little by little my small drops have strength
    To deck with green delights the grateful earth.’

And so forth, not quite germane (it seems to me) to the matter in hand,
but welcome for its own sake.

Best of all are the fables that deal more immediately with the emotions.
There is, for instance, that of ‘The Two Travellers,’ which is profoundly
moving in conception, although by no means as well written as some
others.  In this, one of the two, fearfully frost-bitten, saves his life
out of the snow at the cost of all that was comely in his body; just as,
long before, the other, who has now quietly resigned himself to death,
had violently freed himself from Love at the cost of all that was finest
and fairest in his character.  Very graceful and sweet is the fable (if
so it should be called) in which the author sings the praises of that
‘kindly perspective,’ which lets a wheat-stalk near the eye cover twenty
leagues of distant country, and makes the humble circle about a man’s
hearth more to him than all the possibilities of the external world.  The
companion fable to this is also excellent.  It tells us of a man who had,
all his life through, entertained a passion for certain blue hills on the
far horizon, and had promised himself to travel thither ere he died, and
become familiar with these distant friends.  At last, in some political
trouble, he is banished to the very place of his dreams.  He arrives
there overnight, and, when he rises and goes forth in the morning, there
sure enough are the blue hills, only now they have changed places with
him, and smile across to him, distant as ever, from the old home whence
he has come.  Such a story might have been very cynically treated; but it
is not so done, the whole tone is kindly and consolatory, and the
disenchanted man submissively takes the lesson, and understands that
things far away are to be loved for their own sake, and that the
unattainable is not truly unattainable, when we can make the beauty of it
our own.  Indeed, throughout all these two volumes, though there is much
practical scepticism, and much irony on abstract questions, this kindly
and consolatory spirit is never absent.  There is much that is cheerful
and, after a sedate, fireside fashion, hopeful.  No one will be
discouraged by reading the book; but the ground of all this hopefulness
and cheerfulness remains to the end somewhat vague.  It does not seem to
arise from any practical belief in the future either of the individual or
the race, but rather from the profound personal contentment of the
writer.  This is, I suppose, all we must look for in the case.  It is as
much as we can expect, if the fabulist shall prove a shrewd and cheerful
fellow-wayfarer, one with whom the world does not seem to have gone much
amiss, but who has yet laughingly learned something of its evil.  It will
depend much, of course, upon our own character and circumstances, whether
the encounter will be agreeable and bracing to the spirits, or offend us
as an ill-timed mockery.  But where, as here, there is a little tincture
of bitterness along with the good-nature, where it is plainly not the
humour of a man cheerfully ignorant, but of one who looks on, tolerant
and superior and smilingly attentive, upon the good and bad of our
existence, it will go hardly if we do not catch some reflection of the
same spirit to help us on our way.  There is here no impertinent and
lying proclamation of peace—none of the cheap optimism of the well-to-do;
what we find here is a view of life that would be even grievous, were it
not enlivened with this abiding cheerfulness, and ever and anon redeemed
by a stroke of pathos.

It is natural enough, I suppose, that we should find wanting in this book
some of the intenser qualities of the author’s work; and their absence is
made up for by much happy description after a quieter fashion.  The burst
of jubilation over the departure of the snow, which forms the prelude to
‘The Thistle,’ is full of spirit and of pleasant images.  The speech of
the forest in ‘Sans Souci’ is inspired by a beautiful sentiment for
nature of the modern sort, and pleases us more, I think, as poetry should
please us, than anything in _Chronicles and Characters_.  There are some
admirable felicities of expression here and there; as that of the hill,
whose summit

             ‘Did print
    The azure air with pines.’

Moreover, I do not recollect in the author’s former work any symptom of
that sympathetic treatment of still life, which is noticeable now and
again in the fables; and perhaps most noticeably, when he sketches the
burned letters as they hover along the gusty flue, ‘Thin, sable veils,
wherein a restless spark Yet trembled.’  But the description is at its
best when the subjects are unpleasant, or even grisly.  There are a few
capital lines in this key on the last spasm of the battle before alluded
to.  Surely nothing could be better, in its own way, than the fish in
‘The Last Cruise of the Arrogant,’ ‘the shadowy, side-faced, silent
things,’ that come butting and staring with lidless eyes at the sunken
steam-engine.  And although, in yet another, we are told, pleasantly
enough, how the water went down into the valleys, where it set itself
gaily to saw wood, and on into the plains, where it would soberly carry
grain to town; yet the real strength of the fable is when it dealt with
the shut pool in which certain unfortunate raindrops are imprisoned among
slugs and snails, and in the company of an old toad.  The sodden
contentment of the fallen acorn is strangely significant; and it is
astonishing how unpleasantly we are startled by the appearance of her
horrible lover, the maggot.

And now for a last word, about the style.  This is not easy to criticise.
It is impossible to deny to it rapidity, spirit, and a full sound; the
lines are never lame, and the sense is carried forward with an
uninterrupted, impetuous rush.  But it is not equal.  After passages of
really admirable versification, the author falls back upon a sort of
loose, cavalry manner, not unlike the style of some of Mr. Browning’s
minor pieces, and almost inseparable from wordiness, and an easy
acceptation of somewhat cheap finish.  There is nothing here of that
compression which is the note of a really sovereign style.  It is unfair,
perhaps, to set a not remarkable passage from Lord Lytton side by side
with one of the signal masterpieces of another, and a very perfect poet;
and yet it is interesting, when we see how the portraiture of a dog,
detailed through thirty odd lines, is frittered down and finally almost
lost in the mere laxity of the style, to compare it with the clear,
simple, vigorous delineation that Burns, in four couplets, has given us
of the ploughman’s collie.  It is interesting, at first, and then it
becomes a little irritating; for when we think of other passages so much
more finished and adroit, we cannot help feeling, that with a little more
ardour after perfection of form, criticism would have found nothing left
for her to censure.  A similar mark of precipitate work is the number of
adjectives tumultuously heaped together, sometimes to help out the sense,
and sometimes (as one cannot but suspect) to help out the sound of the
verses.  I do not believe, for instance, that Lord Lytton himself would
defend the lines in which we are told how Laocoön ‘Revealed to Roman
crowds, now _Christian_ grown, That _Pagan_ anguish which, in _Parian_
stone, The _Rhodian_ artist,’ and so on.  It is not only that this is bad
in itself; but that it is unworthy of the company in which it is found;
that such verses should not have appeared with the name of a good
versifier like Lord Lytton.  We must take exception, also, in conclusion,
to the excess of alliteration.  Alliteration is so liable to be abused
that we can scarcely be too sparing of it; and yet it is a trick that
seems to grow upon the author with years.  It is a pity to see fine
verses, such as some in ‘Demos,’ absolutely spoiled by the recurrence of
one wearisome consonant.



