III

THE EMPIRE


We arrived at Constance at four o’clock. This town, which is about the
size of Châlons, belongs to the Archduke of Austria, and holds to the
Catholic religion, though up to thirty years ago it was in the hands
of the Lutherans, whom the Emperor Charles V. drove out by force. The
churches still show signs of images, and the bishop is a gentleman
of the country, who lives at Rome, and as a cardinal draws from this
benefice an income of forty thousand crowns. There are canonries, too,
of the church of Notre Dame, which are worth fifteen hundred crowns,
and are held by men of gentle family. We saw one of these on horseback
coming in from the country, attired gallantly like a gentleman-of-arms;
and report says that in the town are many Lutherans. We ascended
the clock tower, which is very high, and there found a man as fixed
sentinel, who is shut therein and not suffered to quit his post,
whatever may call him thence. They were constructing beside the Rhine a
large covered building, fifty feet long and forty wide, or thereabouts,
and fixing therein twelve or fifteen great wheels, by means of which
they propose to raise continuously a large quantity of water up to a
wooden tower, one storey higher, where will be an equal number of iron
wheels (the lower ones are of wood), which will raise the water from
the first floor to the one above. The water, having been lifted to the
height of some fifty feet, will discharge itself by a large artificial
channel and flow down into the town, and set several mills to work. The
artisan who has the direction of this building had for his labour alone
five thousand seven hundred florins, and wine to boot. In the deep
water they were fixing a strong wooden erection all around to break the
current; so that, when the force of the water should be moderated,
they might be able to draw it upwards more easily. There was also an
arrangement of machinery by which the whole system of wheelwork can be
raised or lowered according to the level of the water.

At this point the stream is not called the Rhine, for by the upper part
of the city it spreads out into a lake full four German leagues in
width and five or six in length. There is a fine terrace overlooking
this lake where merchandise is stored, and about fifty paces from the
shore stands a finely-built lodge, where a sentinel is always on duty.
A chain is here prepared, by which the way of access to the bridge may
be closed, and high palisades are set, which enclose on both sides that
part of the lake in which boats lie and take in cargo. Near the church
of Notre Dame there is a conduit by which water from the Rhine higher
up finds its way to the suburbs of the town.

We perceived that we were leaving behind us the country of the Swiss,
for the reason that, shortly before we came to the entrance to the
town, we saw several noblemen’s dwellings, such as are seldom or never
seen in Switzerland; and as to the private houses, both in town and
country, we found them beyond all comparison better than in France,
and they seem to lack nothing except slate roofs. To speak more
particularly of the hostelries, they might perhaps provide a somewhat
better style of entertainment; moreover, with regard to certain
deficiencies which we found in the service, these could not have been
the result of poverty. What we had seen of their way of life in other
respects forbade us to believe this, seeing that it is hard to name a
place where they do not drink from fine silver cups, gilded and chased;
wherefore, what seemed to us strange, was simply local custom. The
country is very rich, especially in wine. To return to the town of
Constance, we were badly lodged at the “Eagle,” and we got from our
host a sample of the barbaric German arrogance and independence over
the quarrel of one of our serving-men with our guide from Basle. And
when the question came before the judges to whom the guide made an
appeal, it chanced that M. de Montaigne asked the provost of the place,
an Italian gentleman, married and settled there for a long time with
full right of citizenship, whether the servants he had with him could
give evidence on our behalf. The provost answered that they could,
provided M. de Montaigne should have discharged them from his service.
He might, of course, re-engage them immediately afterwards; a reply
which seemed full of subtlety.

On the following day, Sunday, on account of this tumult, we only
tarried until after dinner, and then changed our quarters to the
“Pike,” where we fared excellently. The son of the captain of the town,
who was brought up as a page in the household of M. de Meru,[48] was
always in attendance upon Messieurs at table and elsewhere. He did
not know a word of French. The service at table is very often varied.
They gave us here, and subsequently in other places, after the cloth
was removed, other courses with our wine. The first what the Gascons
call _canaules_, then spiced bread, and lastly white bread cut into
slices, but still holding together. In the cuttings they put plenty
of spices and salt, as also in the crust of the bread. There are many
lepers in this country, the highways being full of them. The villagers
give their workmen for mid-day meal large flat loaves,[49] made with
fennel, and spread upon these a mess of bacon, cut very small and mixed
with cloves of garlic. The Germans, when they would do honour to a man,
always place themselves on his left side, whatever seat he may occupy,
and maintain that to sit on his right hand is to put an insult on him,
saying that to show true deference to a man it is necessary to leave
his right side free, so that he may easily put his hand to his arms.
After dinner on the Sunday we quitted Constance, and after crossing the
lake at a point about a league from the town, we reached Smardorff in
time for bed, after travelling two leagues.

Smardorff[50] is a small Catholic town. We had lodging at the “Standard
of Cologne,” a post-house which is kept here for the Emperor’s route
into Italy. There, as in other places, they fill the mattresses with
the leaves of a certain tree, which serves the purpose better than
straw and lasts longer. The town is surrounded by a wide plain of
vineyard which produces excellent wine. On Monday, the 10th October,
we started after breakfast; for M. de Montaigne was persuaded by
the beauty of the day to change the plan he had made of going to
Ravensburg, and make a day’s journey to Lindau instead. M. de Montaigne
never took breakfast, but caused to be brought to him a piece of
dry bread which he would eat during the journey, adding thereto
occasionally such grapes as he could get on the road, the vintage being
still in course of gathering in this region even up to the outskirts of
Lindau. Their practice is to train the vines up on trellises, and they
leave therein divers verdurous alleys which are delightful to the view.
We passed through Sonchem,[51] an imperial Catholic town on the bank
of the Lake of Constance, to which all the wares of Ulm and Nuremburg
and divers other places are brought in waggons, thence to be conveyed
through the lake to the Rhine route. After travelling three leagues we
arrived about three in the afternoon at Linde.[52]

The little town is situated some hundred paces out into the lake, which
distance is traversed over a stone bridge. There is no other entrance,
all the rest of the town being surrounded by the lake, which is at
least a league in width, and on the other side rise the mountains of
the Grisons. The lake and all the streams are low in winter and full in
summer on account of the melting of the snow. All through these parts
the women cover their heads with bonnets of fur like our skull-caps,
each costing about three testoons;[53] the outside being trimmed with
some seemly grey fur, and the inside with lambs’-wool. The opening
which in our caps is in front is in theirs behind, and through it may
be seen their hair tucked up. Their favourite foot-gear is boots, and
these are either red or white, each sort suiting the wearer not amiss.
Both religions are followed. We went to see the Catholic cathedral,
built in 866, where all things are as they have always been, and we
saw also the church served by the Lutheran ministers. All the imperial
towns have liberty in the matter of the two religions, Catholic and
Lutheran, according to the leanings of the people, and they devote
themselves more or less to that form which they prefer. At Lindau,
from what the priest told M. de Montaigne, there are not more than two
or three Catholics. The priests do not fail to draw their incomes and
to perform the service, and the nuns who are there do the same. M. de
Montaigne had some talk also with the minister, from whom he got but
little information, except to learn that the common hatred against
Zwingle and Calvin was prevalent here likewise. It seems clear that
almost every separate place holds for its belief some particular view;
and, under the authority of Martin, whom they hail as their head, they
set up divers disputes on the interpretation of the meaning of Martin’s
works.

We lodged at the “Crown,” a good house. Near the stone on the panelled
wall there was a sort of wooden cage for the keeping of a vast number
of birds. It was fitted with hanging perches made of copper wire,
which gave room for the birds to shift from one end to the other. The
furniture and woodwork of their houses is generally made of pine,
the most common forest tree, but they paint and varnish and polish it
carefully, and even use hair brushes for the furbishing of their chairs
and tables. They have great abundance of cabbages, which they shred
with a tool made for the purpose, and then salt the same in vessels for
making soup in the winter. At this place M. de Montaigne made trial of
the feather coverlets, such as they use in bed, and was full of praise
thereof, finding them light and warm at the same time. It was a saying
of his that people of fastidious taste had more occasion to complain
when travelling of their bed furniture than of aught else, and he
commended those who carried a mattress or curtains amongst the baggage
when visiting strange countries.

As to fare at table, they have such vast abundance of provisions,
and vary the service so widely in the matter of soups, sauces, and
salads, that nothing in our own way of living can be found to equal
it. They gave us soups made of quince, of apples cooked and cut into
strips, and cabbage salad. They make pottage of all sorts, one of rice
which they eat in common, having no separate service of this dish, an
excellently flavoured one. The kitchens are incomparably superior to
those of our great houses, and the sitting-rooms are better furnished
than with us.

They have abundance of excellent fish, which is served at the table
with the meat. Of trout they only eat the liver, and they have also
great plenty of game, hares, and woodcocks, which they dress in a
fashion differing from our own, but a good one all the same; indeed
I have never met with meat so tender as that which was commonly set
before us. They serve with the meat cooked plums and slices of apples
and pears, sometimes putting the roast first and the soup last, and
sometimes reversing this order. As to their fruits, they have only
pears and apples, which are both good, and nuts and cheese. During the
meat course they hand round a utensil, made either of silver or tin,
having four compartments filled with divers sorts of spices. They also
use cummin, or some similar grain with a hot stinging savour, as an
admixture to their bread; this bread being made for the most part with
fennel added thereto. After the meal they replace the glasses filled
full on the table, and offer two or three sorts of eatables which serve
to provoke thirst.

While he was travelling M. de Montaigne noted with regret three steps
which he had neglected to take with regard to his journey. One was that
he had not taken with him a cook, who might have learnt the particular
methods of foreign lands, and some day at home have shown proof of
his skill. The next was that he had not engaged a German valet, or
joined himself to some gentleman of the country, for he felt it very
irksome to be always at the mercy of a blockhead of a guide; and the
last was that, before setting out, he had neither consulted those
books which might have pointed out to him what rare and remarkable
sights were to be seen in every place, nor included in his baggage a
copy of Münster[54] or some similar book. In sooth there was mixed
up with his judgments a certain asperity and want of regard for his
own country, against which for other reasons he harboured dislike and
discontent:[55] certain it is that he preferred the accommodation of
these lands, without comparison, to those of France, and conformed to
them so far as to drink his wine without water. In drinking he never
took wine for its own sake, but simply out of courtesy. Travel is more
costly in High Germany than in France: for at our reckoning a man with
a horse will lay out at least one crown of the sun[56] per diem. In
the first place the innkeepers here charge for food at table d’hôte
four, five, or six batzen. They make a separate item of everything,
even the smallest refreshment that is taken before or after the two
regular meals, wherefore the Germans as a rule quit their lodgings in
the morning without drinking aught. Any additional service after the
principal meals, and the wine consumed therewith--which is for them
the chief expense--they reckon together. In sooth, when we consider
the plentiful fare put on the table, and this especially applies to
wine, even where it is exceedingly dear and brought from afar, I find
the prices charged to be quite justified. They themselves have a way
of urging the servants of their guests to drink, and make them keep
at table two or three hours. The wine is served from large jugs, and
it is reckoned a breach of good manners to let a cup be empty and not
replenish it forthwith. They will never give water even to those who
ask for it, except these should be persons of great worship. They add
to the bill the oats eaten by the horses, and lastly the charge for
the stable, which includes also the hay. A good point about them is
that they ask at once what they mean to accept, and one gains naught
by bargaining. They are boastful, quick-tempered, and drunken, but
they are neither deceitful nor robbers, according to M. de Montaigne’s
opinion. We departed after breakfast and made a journey of two leagues,
and arrived at Vanguen[57] at two in the afternoon.

Here a mishap befell our baggage mule, which injured itself, and
compelled us in consequence to halt and to hire a cart for the next
day at three crowns per diem, the driver, who had four horses, keeping
himself in victual for this sum. Vanguen is a small imperial town which
has always refused to harbour a congregation of any form of religion
other than the Catholic. They make here scythes so famous that they
are sent for sale as far as Lorrenne. M. de Montaigne left it on the
morrow, to wit, on the morning of Wednesday, October 12th, and set out
for Trent by the shortest route. We halted to dine at Isne,[58] two
leagues on our road, a small imperial town very pleasantly situated;
and M. de Montaigne, according to his wont, went straightway to call
upon a doctor of theology for the sake of discourse, and this doctor
he brought in to dine with us. He found that all the people were
Lutherans, and he went to visit the Lutheran church which, as with
all the churches they occupy in the imperial cities, had been taken
from the Catholic. While they were holding divers arguments concerning
the Sacrament, M. de Montaigne bethought him how, during the journey,
certain Calvinists had informed him that the Lutherans now intermix
with the original tenets of Martin divers new errors, such as the
“Ubi-quis me,” and maintain that the body of Christ is everywhere as
well as in the Host; wherefore they fall into the same difficulty as do
the Zwinglians, though by a different road, the one by limiting too
much the bodily presence, and the other by a too lavish application of
the words (for by their reasoning the Sacrament would be no privilege
to the body of the Church or to those two or three just men gathered
together). Moreover, the principal Lutheran arguments were that the
divinity was inseparable from the body, wherefore the divinity being
omnipresent the body must be omnipresent also. They declare, in the
second place, that Jesus Christ, being bound to be always at the right
hand of His Father, is omnipresent, seeing that the right hand of God,
to wit, His power, is in all places. The doctor aforesaid gave strong
denial to this imputation, and set up a defence against the same as
against a calumny; but, indeed, M. de Montaigne gathered the impression
that his defence was somewhat weak.

This doctor went afterwards in company with M. de Montaigne to visit
a grand and sumptuous monastery, where Mass was being said, and he
entered and bided there without removing his headgear until M.
d’Estissac and M. de Montaigne had finished their prayers. They next
went to view in a cellar of the abbey a long cylinder-shaped fragment
of stone,[59] which apparently had once formed part of a column. On it,
written in easily legible Latin letters, was an inscription telling how
the Emperors Pertinax and Antonius Verus had repaired all the roads and
bridges for a distance of eleven thousand paces around Campidonium,
that is to say, Kempten, whither we were bound for the night. This
stone might have been set up to record some later repair of the road,
for report says that this village of Isny is of no great antiquity.
In any case, having inspected all the roads about Kempten, we could
find no repairs worthy of such artificers, and there was not a single
bridge. We certainly remarked that a way had been cut through some of
the hills, but this work was not of prime importance.

[Illustration: KEMPTEN

_From Civitates Orbis Terrarum_

    _To face p. 116_, vol. i.
]

Kempten, three leagues farther on, is a town as big as St. Foy,
handsome, populous, and abounding in good lodgings. We stayed at the
“Bear,” an excellent house. At our meals they brought in great silver
vessels of various kinds (these in sooth were intended to serve merely
as ornaments, being richly worked and covered with the arms of divers
gentlemen), the sort of plate which is only to be seen in houses of
high quality. Here it was that we were brought to see the truth of an
observation which M. de Montaigne had made elsewhere, to wit, that if
foreigners ignore certain usages favoured by ourselves, it is because
they hold these usages in slight esteem. For instance, these people,
though they possess vast store of pewter utensils as well scoured
as those at Montaigne, will only make use of wooden platters, which
indeed are both well made and well kept. In all these countries they
put cushions on the seats in the evening, and nearly all the panelled
ceilings of the apartments are vaulted half-moon fashion, which gives
them a very graceful appearance. As to the linen, concerning which
we had previously made certain complaints, we had no occasion to be
dissatisfied; indeed, as far as my master was concerned,[60] I never
failed to procure enough of the same wherewith to fashion a pair of
curtains for his bed, and whenever he happened to want an extra towel
it was always given to him. In this town lives a certain merchant
who carries on a traffic of a hundred thousand florins annually in
linen. M. de Montaigne, on leaving Constance, would fain have visited
that canton of Switzerland[61] which supplies linen for the whole
of Christendom, if there had not been four or five hours needed for
crossing the lake and back to Lindau. This town (Kempten) is Lutheran,
and here, as at Isne, the strange custom obtains that the Catholic
church is most sumptuously served, notwithstanding the lack of
worshippers. On the morrow, Thursday, a working day, the Mass was said
at the abbey outside the town, as it is given in Notre Dame, at Paris,
on Easter Day, with organ music, though none were present but priests.
Those who dwell outside the imperial towns are not free to change
their religion, and many in this case attend the service aforesaid on
feast days. This is a very magnificent abbey.[62] The abbot holds the
same as a prince, and receives therefrom an income of fifty thousand
florins yearly, the present abbot being of the house of Estain. All
the brethren are of gentle birth. The abbey was founded in 783 by
Hildegarde, the wife of Charlemagne, who is buried there and honoured
as a saint; and her bones have been disinterred from the vault in which
they were laid to be placed elsewhere in a shrine.

On the same Thursday morning M. de Montaigne went to the Lutheran
church, which was similar to others of the same sect and of the
Huguenots, except that close by the altar, which is at the head of the
nave, there are several wooden benches, with stools below, so that
those who receive the supper may kneel, as is their custom. M. de
Montaigne found there two ministers, elderly men, of whom one preached
in German to a scanty congregation. When he had finished they sang a
psalm in German, to music differing somewhat from what we use. After
each verse the fine organ, which had recently been erected, made a
response in music, and whenever the preacher named the name of Christ
he and all his hearers uncovered themselves. The sermon being finished,
the other minister placed himself in front of the altar with his face
towards the people, holding in his hand a book. A young woman with bare
head and loosened hair approached him, and, after saluting him in the
way these people use, remained standing before him. Soon afterwards a
young man, an artisan with a sword by his side, presented himself, and
stood beside the young woman. The minister spoke a few words into the
ear of each, directed them both to repeat a paternoster, and then began
to read from his book. There were certain ceremonies to be undergone
by those seeking marriage, and next the minister made them take each
other by the hand without kissing. When this ceremony was finished
the minister went his way, and M. de Montaigne caught him up, and they
held a long discourse together after he had taken M. de Montaigne to
his house, which was seemly and well appointed. His name was Johannes
Tillianus, a native of Augsburg. M. de Montaigne asked concerning
a new Confession, lately formulated by the Lutherans to which all
the doctors and princes who supported it have put their names; this
however, is not written in Latin. When they were leaving the church a
company with violins and tambourines came to meet the newly-married
pair and escorted them home. On being asked if they permitted dancing,
the minister exclaimed, “And why not!” and again to the question: Why
had they let Jesus Christ be represented in the windows of the church,
and upon the organs newly built? and why had they set up divers images?
he replied that they did not condemn the use of images as warnings and
examples, but only as objects of worship. Again, when he was asked
why they had removed from the churches the ancient images, he answered
that it was not they who had done this, but their worthy disciples the
Zwinglians, who had occupied the churches in the first instance, and,
being stirred up by a spiteful humour, had done this outrage and divers
others to boot. The same explanation was given to M. de Montaigne by
other members of this confession during his travels, the doctor at Isne
to wit, who, when he was asked whether he hated the figure and effigy
of the Cross, cried out straightway: “How can I be such an atheist
as to hate this figure so full of joy and glory to all Christians!
Opinions like these are of the devil.” And as they sat at ease at table
all declared the same: that they would rather hear a hundred masses
than take part in the Calvinist supper. At this place they served us
white hares at table. The town is on the river Isler,[63] and, after
taking our dinner there on the Thursday aforesaid, we travelled four
leagues over a rocky, sterile road to Frienten,[64] a small village,
Catholic like all the rest of this country, which is under the Archduke
of Austria.

When treating of Linde, I forgot to say that at the entrance of the
town there is a large wall bearing signs of great antiquity, and having
naught written thereon that I see. I heard that its name in German
signified “the old wall.”

On this Friday morning, though our lodging was a very mean one, we
did not fail to find plentiful provision. It is the habit of these
people to warm neither their sheets before going to bed nor their
clothes before getting up, and they take it ill if any one should
have a fire lighted in the kitchen for this service, or even make use
of such fire as may be burning. This was one of the chief causes of
wrangling we encountered in the houses where we lodged; indeed, even in
the depths of the mountains and forests, where ten thousand feet of
pinewood could be bought for less than fifty sous, they were just as
ill disposed to let us make a fire as elsewhere. On the Friday morning
we departed, and followed the more easy road to the left, instead of
taking the mountain path which leads direct to Trent, M. de Montaigne
being minded to make a détour of several days in order to visit certain
fine cities of Germany; and annoyed that, when at Vanguen, he had
altered his plan which he had first made of going direct to Germany,
and had taken another route. On our road we saw, as in divers other
places, certain water-mills which have water brought to them simply by
wooden troughs, which take in the water at the foot of some mountain,
and then, being raised and propped high above the ground, discharge the
stream down a very steep incline from the end of the last trough. After
going a league on the road, we stopped to dine at Frissen.[65]

This is a small Catholic town, belonging to the bishop of Augsburg. We
found there numerous members of the train of the Archduke of Austria,
who was paying a visit to the Duke of Bavaria in a castle hard by.[66]
It was decided to leave there on the banks of the Lech our heavy
baggage, and that I and certain others should take them on to Augsburg
on a raft, as they term the trunks of trees bound together, which they
break up when in harbour. There is an abbey in which they showed to
Messieurs a chalice and a stole which they hold to be relics. These
belonged to a saint named Magnus,[67] who was, as they declare, the son
of a king of Scotland, and a disciple of Columbanus. Pepin founded this
monastery for the benefit of this Magnus, whom he made the first abbot.
He likewise caused to be written there on the roof of the nave this
inscription, and below the same notes of music to which it might be
sung: “_Comperta virtute beati Magni fama, Pipinus Princeps locum quem
Sanctus incoluit regia largitate donavit._” Charlemagne subsequently
enriched the place still further, as an inscription in the monastery
records. After dinner we all met at Chonguen[68] at bedtime, after a
journey of four leagues.

Chonguen is a small town under the Duke of Bavaria, and consequently
entirely Catholic; for this prince, beyond any other in Germany, has
kept his jurisdiction free from all touch of religious innovation, and
is stiffly set in his views. There is excellent lodging at the “Star,”
where we found a new fashion at table. On a square board they arrange
the salt-cellars from one corner to another, the candlesticks being set
between the two other corners, thus forming a Saint Andrew’s cross.
They never serve eggs, or at least only when boiled hard and cut in
quarters in the salads, which are of the best, the vegetables being
quite fresh. The wine is drunk new, as a rule, immediately after it is
made. They thresh out the corn in the barns as they may want it, using
in this work the heavy end of a flail. On the Saturday we journeyed
four leagues and dined at Lanspergs,[69] a small town belonging also to
the Duke of Bavaria aforesaid, and situated on the banks of the Lech,
the town, the suburbs, and the castle alike exhibiting a remarkably
fine aspect. We arrived there on a market day, when the place was
crowded with people, and remarked in the middle of a very large square
a fountain which sent up water through a hundred pipes to the height of
a pike shaft, and scattered the jets in elaborate fashion, according
to the manipulation of the pipes. There is a very fine church in the
town and another in the suburb, both high up on the hill, which is
very steep, and the castle is similarly situated. M. de Montaigne went
thither to visit the Jesuit college, finely housed in quite a new
building, to which they are about to add a church. M. de Montaigne
spent as much time as he had to spare in conversing with the Jesuits.

The Count of Helfenstein[70] was in command at the castle. Here, if
any one should favour another religion than the Roman, he would be
wise to keep silent thereanent. On the gate between the town and the
suburb there is a long inscription in Latin, written in the year
1552, which declares that the _Senatus populusque_ of the town built
this monument to the memory of the brothers William and Louis, dukes
_utriusque Boiariæ_. Here there are many conceits after the following
fashion: “_Horridum militem esse decet, nec auro cœlatum, sed animo et
ferro fretum_;” and at the top thereof, “_Cavea stultorum mundus_.”
And in another place, very conspicuous, are certain words taken from
some Latin historian,[71] concerning the battle which the Consul
Marcellus lost to a king of this nation: “_Carolami Boiorumque Regis
cum Marcello Cos. pugna quâ eum vicit_,” &c. Besides these there are
divers appropriate mottoes in Latin over the doors of private houses.
These people constantly refurbish their towns and churches, which in
consequence have a most prosperous look; and, as it happened most
seasonably for the amenity of our visit, everything had been newly set
in order in this place three or four years before; for they always
put the date upon their work. The clock of this town, like those in
many other towns in this country, sounds all the quarters; and they
say there is one in Nuremburg which sounds the minutes. We left the
town after dinner, and after going four leagues over a lengthy plain
of pasture, very level, like the plain of La Beausse, we arrived at
Augsburg.

[Illustration: AUGSBURG

    _To face p. 128_, vol. i.
]

This is reckoned the fairest town of Germany, as Strasburg is the
strongest. The first sight we got of their household arrangements was a
strange one, but it assuredly bore witness to their cleanliness. This
was when we found the steps of the staircase of our lodging covered
with pieces of linen cloth, upon which we were required to walk in
order that we might not soil the steps aforesaid, seeing that they had
just washed and polished them, as is their wont to do every Saturday.
We saw no trace of cobweb or of mud in our lodging: in certain of the
rooms were curtains which any one may at will draw over the windows. It
is rare to find tables in the chambers, save those which are attached
to the foot of the bed, and these are made to go with hinges so they
can be raised or lowered at pleasure. The footboards of the beds are
elevated two or three feet above the frame, and are often as high as
the bolsters, beautifully carven in pinewood, but the pine they use is
inferior to our walnut. They make use of pewter plates polished bright,
but they put inside these other plates of wood, and on the walls,
beside the beds, they often hang up linen cloths and curtains in order
that the walls may not be sullied by the spitting of the guests. The
Germans set great store on coats-of-arms, and in every apartment may
be found a great number of these which the gentlefolk of the country
on their travels have left behind; the glass in the windows, moreover,
is often garnished with the same. The routine of table service varies
greatly. Here they gave us first crayfish of a wonderful size, but in
other places this dish has always come last. In many of the large inns
they bring everything in covered dishes. The reason why their window
glass is so brilliant is that they have no set window-frames like ours,
but casements which open at will and which they clean often.

On the following morning, which was Sunday, M. de Montaigne went to see
several churches. He went to some which were Catholic, and everywhere
he found the service very well done. Six of the churches are Lutheran
and are served by sixteen ministers, two of these churches being taken
from the Catholics, and four built by the Lutherans themselves. One
of the last-named he visited in the morning, and found it like the
great hall of a college, with neither images nor organs nor cross,
but with the walls covered with inscriptions in German taken from the
Bible. There were two chairs, one for the minister or for whomsoever
might preach, and another one placed lower for the leader in singing
the psalms. At every verse the people wait for the leader aforesaid,
who gives the note. They sing in haphazard fashion, each one according
to his humour, and with head bare or covered. After the singing, a
minister who had been in the assembly went to the altar, and read
from a book several prayers, at certain of which the people stood up
and clasped their hands, and made deep reverence at the name of Jesus
Christ. After he had finished his reading to the assembly, he put
before him on the altar a napkin, a basin, and a saucer, in which was
water. A woman, followed by a dozen others, brought to him a child,
swaddled and with face bare, whereupon the minister thrice took the
water in the saucer and sprinkled it on the child’s face and said
certain words. This being finished, two men approached and each one of
them placed two fingers of the right hand upon the child; the minister
then addressed them, and this was all.

M. de Montaigne held a conversation with this minister after he left
the church, and was informed that the ministers receive no stipend from
the church, their salary being paid by the Senate as a public charge;
that there was a greater crowd of worshippers in this one church than
in two or three of the Catholic churches together. We did not see a
single handsome woman. The women wear a vast variety of attire, and in
the case of the men it is a hard matter to say who is noble and who is
not, forasmuch as all sorts of men wear bonnets of velvet and carry
swords by the side. We had our lodging at the sign of the “Linde,”
called after a tree of the country, which stands adjoining the palace
of the Foulcres.[72] A certain member of this family, who died some
years ago, left a sum of two millions of French crowns to his heirs,
and these heirs made over to the Jesuits of the city thirty thousand
florins for prayers for the soul of the deceased, with which sum the
Jesuits are very handsomely equipped and provided. This house of the
Foulcres is roofed with copper: as a rule the houses are much finer,
larger, and higher than in any French town, and the streets much wider.
M. de Montaigne estimated the population of Augsburg to equal that of
Orléans.

After dinner we went to see a show of fencing in the public hall, where
there was a vast crowd. We had to pay for entrance as to a puppet
show, and for our seats in addition. They showed us some play with
the poignard, with the two-handed sword, with the quarter-staff, and
with the hanger. Afterwards we saw them shooting for a prize with bow
and crossbow, on a ground far finer than that of Schaffhausen. Beyond
this place, at the city gate by which we had entered, we observed a
copious stream of water which was brought into the city from outside
and led under the bridge used for traffic. It is conveyed by a wooden
aqueduct built below the bridge aforesaid, and is thus carried over the
stream which forms the city ditch. This current in its course turns a
number of water-wheels attached to pumps which, by means of two leaden
pipes, raise the water of a spring, which rises in a hollow, to the
top of a tower some fifty feet in height. On the top of this tower the
water is poured into a great stone cistern, and from this cistern it
runs down through divers pipes and is distributed all over the city,
which in consequence is abundantly supplied with fountains. Private
persons, if it be their wish, may have a right of water for their own
use on payment of an annual rent of ten florins to the city, or for two
hundred florins paid down. The city was enriched by this magnificent
work about forty years ago.[73]

Marriages of Catholics with Lutherans are common, and the one most
keenly set on marriage commonly conforms to the faith of the other.
There are thousands of marriages of this sort. Our host was a Catholic
and his wife a Lutheran. Here they clean the glasses with a hairbrush
fixed to the end of a stick. According to report, excellent houses may
be bought for forty or fifty crowns apiece. The city guard did M. de
Montaigne and M. d’Estissac the honour of presenting to them fourteen
large vessels of wine for supper. This was brought by seven sergeants
clad in uniform and an officer of worship, whom our gentlemen invited
to sup, as is the custom in such cases. Something, moreover, is always
given to the bearers of the offering, and the sergeants aforesaid got a
crown. The officer who remained to supper told M. de Montaigne that the
city maintained three officials whose duty it was to greet strangers
of quality who came to visit the place, and that on this account they
always took care to ascertain the quality of each visitor, so that he
might receive the honours due to him. Moreover, they offered more wine
to some than to others. If a duke should arrive in the city, one of the
burgomasters would attend to bid him welcome. Us they took for barons
and knights. For certain reasons M. de Montaigne was inclined to assume
this counterfeit dignity, and to keep silence as to our real quality.
He spent the whole of the day walking through the town by himself, and
was convinced that he was treated with greater consideration on account
of the aforesaid subterfuge. A like honour indeed was paid by all the
German towns.

As he was passing through the church of Notre Dame on a very cold
day (for, after having enjoyed the finest weather possible up to our
departure from Kempten, we had of late been sharply pricked by the
cold), he carried, without thinking thereof, his handkerchief at his
nose, deeming that, being alone and plainly dressed, no one would
remark him; but after he had become more familiar with certain of
the citizens, they told him that the church officers had found his
carriage on the morning aforesaid very strange. Thus he committed the
fault he was ever most studious to avoid, to wit, that he had made
himself conspicuous by a trick alien to the taste of those who remarked
the same; for, as far as in him lay, he always conformed and brought
himself in line with the manners of whatever place he might frequent;
indeed, while he was in Augsburg he always wore a fur cap when he went
about the town. Augsburg, they say, is free from the mice and large
rats with which the rest of Germany is infested, and they tell many
wonderful stories thereanent, attributing this immunity to one of their
bishops who is buried there, and affirming that the earth from his
tomb, which is sold in little portions the bigness of a nut, will drive
away the vermin aforesaid from any place to which it may be taken.[74]

On the Monday we repaired to the church of Notre Dame to witness the
marriage of a rich young lady of the city--albeit ill-favoured--to a
certain Venetian, a factor in the house of the Foulcres. Amongst the
guests there was not one good-looking woman. This family is a very
numerous one; they are all very rich, and hold the highest position
in this city. We visited two apartments in their house, one high, of
grand measurement, and paved with marble, and the other low-ceilinged,
enriched with medals, both ancient and modern, and having a small
room at the end. These are the most sumptuous rooms I ever beheld.
At the gathering after the wedding we saw some dancing, and they
danced nothing but _Alemandes_. They constantly stop dancing and
lead the ladies back to their seats, which are ranged in double rows
against the walls and covered with red cloth; but the gentlemen do
not sit there with them. After a slight pause they take their dames
out again, kissing their hands, which salutation the ladies accept
without returning it; and then, having placed the arm under the ladies’
armpits, they embrace them, and the ladies put their right hands on the
gentlemen’s shoulders. They dance and chat together with heads bare and
in sober attire.

We saw more houses belonging to the Foulcres in other parts of the
city, which is beholden to this family for the great outlay of money
they spend in its adornment. These houses are summer residences. In
one we saw a clock which was worked by the flow of water which serves
as a counterpoise. At the same place were two large covered fish-ponds
full of fish, and twenty paces square. Round the brink of each of
the ponds are divers small pipes, some straight and others curving
upwards, and through each of these water is poured in very pleasant
wise into the pond, some delivering it in a direct jet, and others
spouting it upwards to the height of a pikestaff. Between the ponds is
a space some ten paces in width floored with planks, and between these
planks are hidden certain little taps of brass. Thus, at any time when
ladies may go to divert themselves by seeing the fish play about the
pond, it needs only the letting go a certain spring to make every tap
aforesaid send a jet of water straight upward to the height of a man,
and drench the petticoats and cool the thighs of the ladies. In another
place there is a fountain pipe, contrived to play a merry jest upon the
spectator, for, while you look at the same, any one who is so minded
may turn on the water in tiny hidden jets, which will throw in your
face a hundred little threads of water; and there is set up a Latin
inscription: _Quæsisti nugas, nugis gaudeto repertis_. Near thereto is
a large cage, twenty paces square and twelve or fifteen feet high,
which is enclosed all round with copper wire, well knit and fastened,
and inside are ten or twelve fir trees and a fountain. This cage is
full of birds, amongst others Polish pigeons, which they call _D’inde_,
and which I have seen elsewhere: these are large birds beaked like
partridges.

We saw also the handiwork of a certain gardener who, foreseeing
cold, inclement weather, had transported into a little shed a great
quantity of artichokes, cabbages, lettuces, spinach, chicory, and other
vegetables, which he had gathered as if to consume them at once, but in
lieu thereof had set them by the root in soil, and hoped to keep them
good and fresh three or four months; and indeed he had there a hundred
artichokes, not the least withered, though they had been plucked more
than six weeks. We saw also an instrument of lead bent and open at
either end. If any one should fill this with water and, keeping both
ends upwards, reverse it dexterously, so that one end shall suck up
from a vessel filled with water, while the other shall discharge
outside, they say that if the stream be once set going, the water will
continuously rush into the tube and discharge itself at the other end,
so as not to produce a vacuum in the tube.

The escutcheon of the Foulcres is a shield divided in the midst; on
the left a _fleur de lys_ of azure on a golden ground; on the right
a _fleur de lys_ of gold on an azure ground. These arms the Emperor
Charles V. granted when he ennobled them. We went to see certain men
who were conveying from Venice two ostriches to the Duke of Saxony. The
male was the blacker of the two, and had a red neck; the female was
of a grey colour and laid a great number of eggs. The men said that
these beasts felt less fatigue than they themselves, and constantly
contrived to escape, but they kept them in hand by means of a band
which girt them round the back above the thighs, and another one above
the shoulders. These bands held them in all round, and the guards had
caused to be fastened thereto long reins, by means of which they could
stop them, and make them turn as they desired. On the Tuesday the chief
men of the city showed us with great courtesy a postern gate, through
which all who wish may enter the city at any hour of the night, whether
on horse or on foot, by simply giving his name, and the name of the
citizen to whom he is going, or the name of the hostelry he purposes to
visit. Two trusty men, paid by the city, keep guard, and horsemen on
entering pay two batzen, and footmen one. The gate opposite to this one
in the outer wall is covered with iron, and beside it, attached to a
chain, is a handle, also of iron, which, being pulled, moves the chain
and strikes a bell in the bedchamber of one of the porters in a high
tower. The porter, though undressed and in bed, by means of machinery
which he moves backwards and forwards can open the door aforesaid,
albeit it is a hundred paces distant from his chamber. The incomer will
find himself on a bridge, some forty paces long, covered throughout,
which stretches over the city ditch. Along this bridge is a wooden
casing, within which works the machinery devised to open the outside
door, which is quickly closed behind the incomer. The bridge being
passed, the next place is a small enclosure; and here a stranger will
have to speak to the porter aforesaid and give his name and address.
Then the porter with a bell gives notice to his mate, who is lodged on
a lower floor of the gate tower, which contains many apartments; and
this porter, by working a spring in a gallery adjacent to his chamber,
opens, in the first instance, a little iron gate; and next, by means
of a great wheel, raises the drawbridge in such quiet fashion that no
one can detect any movement (for everything works by means of weights
on the walls and on the doors), and straightway everything closes again
with a great clatter. Beyond the bridge a great door, very thick, opens
by itself: this is of wood and strengthened by large sheets of iron.
The stranger now finds himself in a hall, and in all his passage
he meets no one with whom he may speak. When he is shut up in this
apartment another door, similar to the aforesaid, is opened for him,
and he can enter a second hall, lighted, where he will find a brazen
vessel, suspended by a chain, into which he casts the coin due for
his entry, and this the porter hoists up to his chamber. If he is not
content therewith he lets the stranger bide below till morning; but, if
he be satisfied, he opens by similar means another great door, which
closes immediately it has been passed by the stranger, who then finds
himself in the town.[75] This is one of the most carefully wrought
devices to be found anywhere, and the Queen of England sent thither a
special ambassador to inquire of the city authority how it was worked,
but the explanation of the secret was refused to her. Underneath this
gateway there is a vast vault, in which can be stabled under cover
five hundred horses, to be maintained and to be used in war without the
knowledge or consent of the town council.

After our visit to this place we went to see the church of Sainte
Croix, which is very beautiful. There at certain seasons they have a
great ceremony on account of a miracle which came to pass some hundred
years ago. It chanced that a woman instead of swallowing the body of
our Lord, took the same from her mouth and put it, wrapped in wax, into
a box. She confessed what she had done, and afterwards found what she
had placed in the box had changed into real flesh. They bring forward
divers testimonies to confirm the above statement, written both in
Latin and German, in divers parts of the church. They exhibit this bit
of wax enclosed in a crystal case and a little scrap of something red
like flesh. This church, like the house of the Foulcres, is covered
with copper, a thing not uncommon in these parts. The Lutheran church
is built adjoining thereto, this religion being housed and established
here, as in certain other places, almost in the cloisters of the
Catholic churches. In the churchyard of this church they have set up
the image of our Lady holding Christ in her arms, together with images
of saints and infants, and this inscription: _Sinite parvulos venire
ad me_, &c. In our lodging there was a machine made of iron fixed so
as to reach down to the bottom of a very deep well. Then up above a
servant, by working a handle which moves the machinery up and down
within a space of three or four feet, produces a pressure on the water
at the bottom of the well, and propels it by the pistons of the machine
aforesaid, so that it is forced to ascend by a leaden pipe, which takes
it to the kitchens and whithersoever else it may be needed. They have a
paid cleaner who puts in order immediately any befoulment of the walls.

At table we were offered pasties, large and small, made in earthen
dishes, of form and colour exactly resembling that of a pasty crust;
and it is very rare to sit down to a meal without sweetmeats or boxes
of confectionery. The bread is the best to be had anywhere, and the
wines good. In this country the wine is, for the most part, white,
and what we drank was not grown near Augsburg, but five or six days’
journey distant. For every hundred florins which an innkeeper lays out
in wine, the city government takes sixty as a tax, and half this amount
is demanded of a private person who only buys for his own consumption.
In many places they still retain the custom of putting perfumes in the
bed-chambers and in the stoves.

Some time ago the town was entirely Zwinglian. But since the Catholics
have been recalled,[76] those of the reformed faith take the second
place, and at this time, though they are greatly superior in number to
the Catholics, they are ousted from all authority. M. de Montaigne also
paid a visit to the Jesuits, whom he found to be men of much learning.
On the morning of Wednesday, October 19, we took our breakfast, and
M. de Montaigne was much grieved to depart and leave unvisited the
Danube and the town of Ulm which it passes, seeing that he was only one
day’s journey distant. He also desired to go to a bath some half-day’s
journey farther on called Sourbronne,[77] which is in a level country,
and has a spring of cold water, good both for drinking and for the bath
when duly warmed. It has, moreover, a pleasant relish on the palate
which makes it agreeable to drink, and it is excellent for distempers
of the head and stomach. The bath is in great repute, and visitors can
be most sumptuously housed there in fine apartments, the same as at
Baden, according to what we were told thereanent; but the season of
winter was now approaching, and this place lay in a direction opposite
to that in which we were bound, wherefore it would have been necessary
for us to retrace our steps to Augsburg, and M. de Montaigne was
greatly averse from traversing the same road twice. I left a shield
with the arms of M. de Montaigne in front of the door of the room he
had occupied, marvellously well painted, at a cost of two crowns to the
painter and twenty sous to the joiner. The town is on the banks of the
river Lech, _Lycus_. We traversed a very fine country, fertile with
cornfields, and after travelling five leagues, we arrived at Broug[78]
in time for bed.

This is a large Catholic village, finely situated, and belonging to the
duchy of Bavaria. We started on the morrow, Thursday, October 20, and
after having traversed a vast plain of corn-land (for in this country
no vines are planted), and then one of pasturage stretching as far as
the eye could see, we arrived, after four leagues’ journey, in time for
dinner at Munich, a large city about the size of Bourdeaux, the capital
of the duchy of Bavaria, and the principal residence of the dukes,
situated on the river Yser, _Ister_.

[Illustration: MUNICH

_From Civitates Orbis Terrarum_

    _To face p. 150_, vol. i.
]

The castle is fine, and its stables are the best I have ever seen
either in France or Italy, vaulted, and big enough to contain two
hundred horses. The city is strongly Catholic, and it is populous,
finely built, and busy. Since the day after we quitted Augsburg we
could reckon the cost of man and horse to be four livres a day, and
forty sous for a footman at the lowest. Here we found curtains in the
chambers, and though there were no testers to the beds, everything
belonging thereto was exceedingly well found. They clean the floors
with sawdust boiled. Everywhere in these parts they slice the radishes
and turnips with as great care and attention as if they were threshing
corn. Seven or eight men, each one with a big knife in his hand, will
set to work on the same with regular stroke, as they work in our
wine-presses. These vegetables, like their great-headed cabbages, are
salted for winter use, and they plant them in their fields in the
country, rather than their gardens, and harvest them. The duke, who was
at this time in the city, has to wife the sister of M. de Lorene,[79]
and has by her two sons, big boys, and a daughter. The two brothers
live also in the city, but they, together with the ladies and all the
rest, were gone hunting the day we were there. On the Friday morning
we went our way, and, as we passed through the duke’s forests, we saw
countless red deer in flocks like sheep. We went in one stretch to
Kinief, an insignificant village, about six leagues distant.

The Jesuits, who sway the government mightily in this country, have
made a movement which has roused against them the hatred of the
people;[80] to wit, that they have put constraint on the priests to
make them send away their concubines under severe penalties. To judge
from the complaints made thereanent, it appears that this licence was
formerly granted to them so freely that they treated it as a legitimate
thing; moreover, they are now about to address a remonstrance to the
duke. It was here for the first time in Germany that they served us
eggs on a fast-day in any other way than quartered in a salad. At
table we had, amongst the silver, some wooden goblets made of pipe
staff and hooped. A young lady, the daughter of a gentleman of this
village, sent some wine to M. de Montaigne. Early on the Saturday we
set out and, after seeing on our right hand the river Yser and a great
lake[81] lying at the foot of the Bavarian mountains, and ascending
by road for an hour, we came to the summit of the pass, where we
found an inscription, recording how some hundred years ago a duke of
Bavaria had cleft this way through the rocks. Then we plunged straight
into the bowels of the Alps by an easy, convenient, and charmingly
made road, the fine calm weather being greatly in our favour. As we
descended from the summit aforesaid, we passed a very lovely lake[82]
about a Gascon league in length and the same in width, surrounded by
high and inaccessible mountains; and, keeping always the same road at
the base of the mountains, we came now and again upon small pleasant
level meadows with dwellings thereon, and arrived without halting at
Mittevol,[83] a little Bavarian village, pleasantly placed on the bank
of the Yser. Here we ate the first chestnuts we had seen in Germany,
served raw. In the hostelry there is a hot room, in which travellers
go to get sweated for a charge of a batz and a half. I myself went
to see it, while Messieurs were at supper, and found there several
Germans, who were being cupped and bled. On the morrow, Sunday, October
23rd, we set forth on the same path amongst the mountains, and soon
came to a house and a gate which barred the passage. This was the
entrance to the country of Tirol, belonging to the Archduke of Austria,
and after travelling three leagues we arrived in time for dinner
at Seefelden,[84] a small village with an abbey standing in a very
pleasant site.

The church there is a very fair one, and famous for a miracle. In
1384 a certain man, whose name has been preserved there by adequate
and unbroken record, refused to content himself on Easter day with
the Eucharist as offered to the people, and demanded to receive that
which was wont to be given to the priesthood alone. While he had this
in his mouth the earth beneath him opened and swallowed him up to the
neck, and while he held on for a moment to the corner of the altar the
priest withdrew the Host from his mouth. They still exhibit the hole
covered with an iron grating, the altar which bears the impress of this
man’s fingers, and the Host of a reddish hue like drops of blood. We
found there, written in recent Latin, an account how a certain Tiroler,
who had swallowed some days before a bit of flesh which stuck in his
throat and could neither be swallowed nor vomited, made a vow and
repaired to this church, where he was healed forthwith. On quitting
this place we found on the high land several nice villages, and after
half-an-hour’s descent, we perceived at the foot of the hill a fair
hamlet finely placed, and high above it on a cloven and seemingly
inaccessible rock, a magnificent castle commanding the road we had
come down, which is narrow and cut in the mountain side. The road is
scarcely wide enough to let pass a common cart, as in divers other
places amongst these mountains, so much so that the carters hereabout
are wont to reduce the size of their carts a foot at the least. Beyond
this we came upon a valley of great extent through which the Inn flows
to join the Danube at Vienna. In Latin it is called Œnus. It is five or
six days’ journey by water from Insprug to Vienna. To M. de Montaigne
this valley seemed the fairest country he had ever seen, now narrowing
itself with the mountains pressing close on it, now spreading out wide
on our side of the river--the left--and forming a space meet for
cultivation on the very slopes of the mountains, which were not too
steep for this, and now expanding on the other bank. Next it would
reveal to the eye platforms on two or three different levels, one above
the other, and everywhere fair houses of noblemen and churches. And
all this in a country shut and walled in on every side by mountains of
immeasurable height. On our side of the valley we espied in a rocky
place a crucifix, set up where no man could have gone save by being let
down by cords from above.[85] They say that the Emperor Maximilian,
grandfather of Charles V., lost himself one day while hunting in these
mountains; and, as a witness of the danger he escaped, he erected this
image, a story which is recorded by a painting in the hall of the
Arquebusiers at Augsburg. We arrived that evening, after travelling
three leagues, at Insprug.[86]

[Illustration: INSBRUCK

_Reproduced from Civitates Orbis Terrarum_

    _To face p. 158_, vol. i.
]




IV

TIROL


This is the chief town of the county of Tirol, _Œnopontum_ in Latin,
the residence of Fernand, Archduke of Austria.[87] It is a very
beautiful little town and well built, standing in the bottom of the
valley and full of fountains and running water, a convenience most
common in all the towns we have seen in Germany and Switzerland. The
houses are almost all built terraced, and we found lodgment at the
“Rose,” an excellent house where they served us on plates of pewter.
As to napkins of French fashion, we had already had them given us
several days previous. Round about some of the beds they had hung
curtains which, as typical of the character of the people, were fine
and rich, of a certain sort of cloth, slashed and open worked, and also
very short and narrow. In fine they were quite unfitted for the use to
which we put such things, and there was besides a little tester, three
fingers wide, with a lot of tassels. They gave me for M. de Montaigne
white sheets trimmed with lace, four fingers wide, as is the custom of
most towns in Germany. All night long men go about the streets crying
the hour. Everywhere we have been they have the fashion of serving
the fish the same time as the meat; but, as far as we saw, they offer
no meat on fish days. On the Monday we departed, travelling along the
right bank of the Inn through a fair plain for two leagues until we
reached Hala.

We made the journey solely to see this place. Like Insprug it is a
small town, about the size of Libourne, on the river Inn, which we
crossed by a bridge. Here is produced all the salt used in Germany;
they make nine hundred loaves thereof weekly at one crown apiece, the
loaves being about the thickness of a half-hogshead, and somewhat
of the same shape, for the vessel which serves as a mould is of the
aforesaid kind. This traffic belongs to the archduke, and is carried
on at a vast cost. To produce the salt they had gathered together the
greatest store of wood I ever saw, for they boil in vast stoves of iron
the brine, which is brought from a mountain more than two good leagues
distant.

There are several fine churches, notably one belonging to the Jesuits,
and this, as well as the one in Insprug, M. de Montaigne visited. Other
churches there are, richly adorned and finely situated. After dinner we
recrossed the river, forasmuch as the fine palace where the Archduke
Fernand of Austria dwells is there situated. M. de Montaigne desired to
kiss the hand of this prince, as he passed thereby in the morning, but
from what a certain count told him he learned that the archduke was
holding a council.

When we retraced our steps thither after dinner, and found that the
archduke was in his garden, we hoped at least to be presented to him;
but those who went to inform him that Messieurs were there, and at his
service, brought word back that he prayed to be excused from granting
an interview at that moment, but that on the morrow he would find it
convenient so to do. Meantime, if Messieurs desired any favour of him,
they might state their wants to a certain Milanese count. This cold
reception, added to the fact that he refused to allow us to see the
castle, ruffled somewhat M. de Montaigne’s temper; and when we spoke
of this offence to an officer of the household this gentleman told him
that the prince had said he was averse from seeing Frenchmen, for that
the house of France was the foe of his own. We then returned to Insprug.

We next saw in a church eighteen magnificent bronze statues of the
princes and princesses of the house of Austria.[88] We also went to
sup with the Cardinal of Austria[89] and the Marquis of Burgant,[90]
sons of the archduke by a concubine, the daughter of a merchant of
Augsburg. She bore him only these two sons, and then he married her
to make them legitimate. She died during the present year and all the
court still wears mourning. Here the ceremonial is almost the same as
with our princes. The hall, the dais, and the chairs were all covered
with black cloth. The cardinal, the elder, is not, I fancy, more than
twenty; he drank wine freely diluted with water, and the marquis naught
but sweet drink.[91] The dinner was not served in a closed tray,[92]
but everything uncovered, the service of viands being conducted as with
us. When they took their seats they placed themselves some distance
from the table, which was moved towards them, laden with dishes; the
cardinal sat highest, the right-hand place being always reckoned the
chief one. In this palace we saw two tennis-courts and a seemly garden.

This archduke is a mighty builder and planner of all such useful
devices. There we saw ten or twelve field-pieces, each carrying a ball
as big as a goose’s egg, and mounted on wheels enriched and gilded all
over; the very pieces themselves being gilded. They are made of nothing
stronger than wood, but the muzzles are covered with iron plating, and
inside the guns this plating is of double thickness. A man can carry
one on his back. These guns are not fired so often as those cast in
iron, but they will carry a ball almost as far. At the archduke’s
country house we saw two oxen of an extraordinary size, grey with white
heads, which M. de Ferrara had given him; for the aforesaid Duke of
Ferrara had married one of his sisters, the Duke of Florence another,
and the Duke of Mantua a third. At Hala three others formerly resided
who were called “the Three Queens,”[93] for to the daughters of the
Emperor they give this style, as they call the daughters of other
rulers countesses and duchesses, according to their estates; also to
the Emperor’s daughters is given a surname from the kingdoms ruled
by the Emperor. Two of these three are dead, and the third, who was
still residing there, M. de Montaigne was unable to see. She lives in
religious seclusion, and has called in and established the Jesuits at
Hala.

Report goes that the archduke cannot leave his possessions to his
children, but that these must revert to the successor to the Empire.
They could not, however, give the reason for this arrangement; and, as
far as this remark applies to the wife, it seems to carry no meaning,
forasmuch as, though she was not of suitable rank, still he married
her, and all men hold her to have been his lawful wife, and her
children legitimate. However, he has amassed much money in order to
bequeath them something.

On the Tuesday morning we resumed our journey, crossing the plain and
following the mountain path. At the end of the first league we ascended
for an hour a small mountain by an easy road. On the left hand we
had a view of divers other mountains, which for the reason that they
sloped gently, were covered with villages and churches and for the most
part tilled up to the very tops, a pleasing prospect on account of
the diversity of the landscape aforesaid. The mountains on the right
were somewhat wilder and sparsely peopled. We crossed several brooks
and torrents, running in varied course, and on the road we passed
several large towns and villages and good inns, at the very base of the
mountains. Also on the left hand were two castles and some gentlemen’s
dwellings; and, about four leagues from Insprug, on the left side of
a very narrow passage, we came upon a bronze tablet, richly engraved,
attached to the rock and inscribed thus: “The Emperor Charles V.,
returning from Spain and Italy,[94] where he had received the Imperial
crown; and his brother Ferdinand, King of Hungary and Bohemia, coming
from Pannonia, seeking one another after an interval of eight years,
met at this spot in the year 1530. Ferdinand commanded this memorial to
be placed here.” They are represented embracing one another.

A short distance farther on, as we passed beneath a gate which blocked
the road, we found written thereon some Latin verses recording the
passage of the Emperor aforesaid, and of his stay in this place
after his capture of the King of France and of Rome. M. de Montaigne
found the scenery of this pass greatly to his taste on account of
the diversity of the objects to be seen, and we encountered no
inconvenience, except the thickest and most intolerable dust we had
ever experienced, which kept with us the whole of our mountain passage.
After we had been on the road ten hours, M. de Montaigne affirmed that
this journey seemed to him like moonlight travelling.[95] It was always
his habit, whether he purposed to halt on the road or not, to let his
horses have oats to eat in the morning at the inn before starting.
After faring seven leagues, we all arrived fasting late at night at
Stertzinguen, a decent little town,[96] belonging to the county of
Tirol, with a fine new castle built on the rock above. At table they
gave us round loaves, joined one to another, and as everywhere else
in Germany, the mustard was liquid, with the taste of white French
mustard. Everywhere the vinegar is white. No wine grows in these
mountains, but corn enough for the inhabitants, who drink three sorts
of good white wine. All these roads are perfectly safe, being much
used by merchants, coachmen, and carters. Instead of the cold, which
had been instanced as a detriment to this road, we were troubled with
intolerable heat. The women of the country wear cloth hats, like our
scholars’ caps, with their hair braided and hanging down as in other
places. M. de Montaigne, having espied a fair young girl in a church,
asked if she could speak Latin, deeming she was a scholar.

Here we had curtains to our beds of thick linen dyed red. In all our
travels in Germany we found no room or chamber which was not panelled,
the ceilings being very low. M. de Montaigne suffered this night from
colic for two or three hours, and very sharply, to judge from what he
said next morning. Then indeed, when he rose from bed, he passed a
stone of medium size which crumbled easily: outside it was yellowish,
and when broken showed white in the middle. He had taken cold the
previous day and found himself ailing, but he had not suffered from
colic since Plommieres. This seizure partially removed the fear he
felt that at Plommieres some gravel had descended into the bladder
without passing therefrom, and that certain matter, there arrested, was
collecting and consolidating. Now, seeing what had happened, he felt
he might reasonably infer that, if there were indeed other particles,
they would have joined themselves to the stone he had just passed. On
the way he complained of pain in his loins, and now he declared he
had prolonged the day’s journey simply on this account, deeming that
he would find greater ease on horseback than elsewhere. At this place
he called for the schoolmaster to converse with him in Latin, but the
fellow was a fool from whom he could get no information as to the
country.

On the morrow, Wednesday, October 26, we set out over a plain some
half-quarter of a league in width, having the river Aisoc[97] on our
right hand, and traversed this plain for two leagues. At the foot of
the neighbouring mountains we saw here and there spaces of ground,
inhabited and cultivated and often adjacent one to the other, but could
discern no road leading thereto. We passed four or five castles, and
crossed the river on a wooden bridge, and came upon some roadmakers
who were repairing the way because it was somewhat stony, but not
worse than the roads in Perigord. Then, having passed a stone gateway,
we mounted to higher ground, where we came upon a level space about
a league in length, and espied a similar plain on the other side of
the river, both being sterile and rocky. There were some very fine
low-lying meadows on our side of the stream. After going four leagues
without halt we arrived in time for supper at Brixen, a fair little
town, through which flows the river aforesaid, crossed by a wooden
bridge. A bishop resides here and we saw two fine churches. We found
good lodging at the “Eagle.”

[Illustration: BRIXEN

_From Civitates Orbis Terrarum_

    _To face p. 172_, vol. i.
]

The level ground here is of no great extent, but the adjacent mountains
rise so gently, even on the left-hand side, that they can, so to
speak, be curled and combed up to the very ears.[98] The whole country
seems full of clock towers and villages high up in the hills, and
near the town are several fine houses well built and situated. M. de
Montaigne declared “that he had all his life distrusted the verdict
of other people upon the amenities of foreign lands, no one being
able, apparently, to appreciate them except by the rule of his own
peculiar habit, and the custom of his village; and that he paid very
little respect to the information given him by travellers. But now he
was more amazed than ever over their stupidity, seeing that he had
heard tell--and especially concerning travelling in this region--of
the exceeding difficulties to be overcome in these passes of the Alps;
that the manners of the people were uncouth, the roads impassable, the
lodging rough, and the air intolerable. As to the air, he thanked God
to find it so mild--for he was fain of excess of heat rather than of
cold, and up to the present we had experienced only three days of cold,
and an hour or so of rain--and moreover, if he were minded to take
his little girl[99] of eight out for a walk, he would as lief take
her out on this road as in his own garden; that, as to the lodgings,
he had never seen a country where they were so plentiful and good,
having always found accommodation in handsome towns well supplied with
provision and wine at a cheaper rate than elsewhere.”

They use in these parts a machine with various wheels to turn the
spits. They bind closely a strong cord round a great spindle of iron;
this unwinds itself, and, the movement thereof being arrested somehow,
the process lasts an hour. When it stops the machine has to be wound
up afresh. As to smoke-jacks we saw several of these. So great is
the abundance of iron that, besides fitting gratings of divers sorts
to their windows and doors, they cover even the wooden shutters with
plates of iron. Here we came again into the land of vines, which we
had lost sight of since we quitted Augsburg. Round about these parts
most of the houses have every storey vaulted. In Germany they do what
we cannot do in France, to wit, they use hollow tiles to cover the
narrowest slopes of roofing, as in their clock towers. Their tiling is
smaller and more hollowed, and sometimes plastered at the joints. We
quitted Brixen on the morning of the morrow, and traversed the same
wide open valley, the roadsides being adorned with divers fine houses.
Travelling with the river Eisock on our left, we passed a small village
named Clause,[100] inhabited by various sorts of workers, and at the
end of three leagues came to Colman[101] in time for dinner, a small
place where the archduke has a pleasure-house.

At table they gave us, together with silver goblets, others of painted
earthenware, and they washed the glasses with white salt. The first
service was sent up in a hot dish, very handy, which they placed on the
table with an iron implement. It contained eggs poached with butter.
On quitting this place we found the road somewhat narrow, and the
rocks closed upon us so much that the pass was hardly wide enough for
ourselves and the river together. In sooth we should have been in
danger of pushing one another into the abyss, if they had not built
between the river and the wayfarers a wall which was continued in
places a German league at a stretch. The more lofty of the mountains
which stood around us were wild rocks, some in solid masses, some
scored and broken up by the passage of the torrents, and some of a kind
of shale which let fall below innumerable fragments of astonishing
size, wherefore it impressed us that it would be perilous to travel
here during a tempest. We saw likewise whole forests of pine trees torn
up by the roots which still carried masses of earth. But the country
is well peopled, for, beyond these lower hills, we caught sight of
others higher up, cultivated and inhabited; and we learned also that
above these were fine, broad, level fields and good houses occupied
by rich farmers, who raised abundant corn for the villages below. We
crossed the stream by one of the numerous wooden bridges and then had
it on our left hand. Amongst other objects we saw a castle, perched on
the loftiest and most inaccessible point of the mountains, which they
told us belonged to a baron of the country, who lived there and enjoyed
his fine lands and hunting. Beyond these hills there is always to be
seen the range of high Alps, which we left to themselves. They indeed
bar the issue from this pass, so that the traveller has continually to
return to the course of the stream, and to emerge again at some turn
or other. This county of Tirol, which yields no revenue except from
the mountains, is worth three hundred thousand florins a year to the
archduke, more than he gets from all the rest of his dominions. We
crossed the river again by a stone bridge, and, after a bout of four
leagues, we arrived in good time at Bolzan.[102]

This town, about the size of Libourne, is situated on the river before
named, and is somewhat less pleasing than other towns we had visited in
Germany, so much so that M. de Montaigne exclaimed that it was evident
we were about to cross the German border. The streets are narrow, and
there is no fine public place, but we still found fountains, running
water, paintings, and glass windows. Wine is so plentiful that they
supply the whole of Germany with what it needs, and the bread eaten in
these mountains is the best in the world. The church is a very fine
one, and possesses amongst other things a wooden organ, which is very
high and placed close to the crucifix by the great altar. But the
player sits some twelve feet lower, beside the column to which the
organ is attached, and the bellows are underground outside the church,
about fifteen paces behind the organist. The open space in which this
town is situated is only just large enough to contain it, but the
mountains to the right hand stand back somewhat, thus giving a little
extra ground. From here M. de Montaigne wrote to François Hottoman,
whom he had met at Basel, “that albeit he was bound for Italy, he had
fared so well in Germany that he quitted it with much regret; that
strangers had to suffer the exactions of innkeepers there as elsewhere,
but that this abuse would soon right itself, and that the traveller
would no longer be at the mercy of guides and interpreters who sold him
and shared the profit. In every other respect he had always met with
unbounded courtesy and convenience, and was specially struck with the
justice and security everywhere prevalent.”[103] We left Bolzan early
on Friday morning, and at two leagues’ end we halted for breakfast and
to feed our horses at Brounsol.[104]

This was a small village standing above the river Eysock which, after
bearing us company so far, now mixed itself with the Adisse[105] and
flowed therewith to the Adriatic Sea, broad and tranquil, and no longer
resembling the brawling and furious torrents of the mountains above.
The plain, too, became a little broader as far as Trante,[106] and
the hills showed their peaks less prominently. The slopes of these,
however, are less fertile than those higher up, and in the valley are
some swamps which encroach upon the road in places, but elsewhere the
travelling is easy in the bottom of the valley and along the plain.
Two leagues after leaving Brounsol we came to a large village where a
great crowd was assembled by reason of a fair. Farther on was another
well-built village, called Solorne,[107] where the archduke has a small
castle on the left of the road, set in a strange position on the point
of a rock. Five leagues’ journey took us to Trante, where we arrived in
time for bed.

[Illustration: TRENT

    _To face p. 180_, vol. i.
]

Trante is somewhat larger than Aagen, an unpleasant place, and quite
lacking in the grace of the German towns, with narrow and crooked
streets.[108] Two leagues before reaching it we heard the Italian
tongue, and the town itself is equally divided between the two
languages, one quarter thereof being called after the Germans, with a
church in which they have a preacher of their own speech. We heard no
talk of the new forms of religion after we left Augsburg. In Trante,
which is on the Adisse, we saw the cathedral, which had a look of
great antiquity,[109] and the same may be said of a square tower near
thereto. We likewise visited Notre Dame, the new church where the
Council was held, in which church there is an organ, the gift of a
private gentleman. This is exceedingly beautiful; it is set up in a
marble gallery which is carved and adorned with divers fine statues,
those of some singing children being especially lovely.[110] This
church was built by _Bernardus Clesius Cardinalis_ in 1520, a native
of Trante and afterwards bishop.[111] Trante is a free town under the
charge and governance of the bishop, but at a time when they were hard
pressed in a struggle with the Venetians, the people called in the
Count of Tirol to help them, and in return therefor he has retained
certain authority and rights over the town. There has been a contention
between him and the bishop over this matter, but the bishop, who is a
Cardinal Madruccio, now holds possession.[112]

On this point M. de Montaigne said “that he had taken note during his
journey of those citizens who had done good service to the towns where
they were born; of the Foulcres of Augsburg, to whom was due the main
part of the embellishment of that city, who had placed palaces at all
the crossings of the streets, and filled the churches with all kinds
of works of art; of this Cardinal Clesius also, who, besides building
this church and several streets at his own charges, added a very fine
building to the castle of the town.” The outside of this building is
nothing remarkable, but within it is furnished and painted and enriched
in a fashion beyond anything that can be imagined. All the panel work
below is enriched with painted patterns, the bosses of the ceilings
are gilded and carven, the floors are made of a kind of hardened
earth painted like marble, a part of the rooms being fitted after one
fashion, and part, _à l’Allemande_, with stoves. One of these is of
porcelain darkened to the colour of bronze, and made in the form of
a group of large human figures, which, being heated warm the room.
Moreover there are certain others, stationed close to the wall, which
give out water, this being brought to them from the fountain in the
court below. This is a fine piece of work. We saw there also amongst
the other designs on the ceilings a torchlight procession by night,
which M. de Montaigne admired greatly, also two or three circular
chambers, in one of which was an inscription recording how “Clesius,
having been sent in the year 1530 to the coronation of the Emperor
Charles V. by Pope Clement VII., on St. Matthias’s Day, as envoy on
the part of Ferdinand, King of Hungary and Bohemia, Count of Tirol,
and brother of the aforenamed Emperor, was made a cardinal, being
already Bishop of Trent.” Moreover, they have set round the chamber
the armorial bearings, and painted on the walls the arms and the names
of the gentlemen who accompanied him: some fifty in number, all counts
and barons owing service to the bishopric. In one of these chambers
there is a trap door through which a man can slip into the town without
passing the main entrance, and two richly ornamented chimney-pieces.
This was an excellent cardinal. The Foulcres have done great building
work, but they have built for their posterity, while the cardinal
aforesaid has built for the public weal, for he has left this castle,
together with the furniture still in it worth more than a hundred
thousand crowns, to his successors in office. Besides this he left to
the public fund of the bishopric a hundred and fifty silver thalers,
which is held without payment of interest on the same. In spite of
these benefactions they have left his church of Notre Dame unfinished,
and have erected a very mean tomb over his body. His successors provide
themselves with no other furniture than the aforenamed for the castle.
Some of this is fitted for the winter, some for the summer, and none of
it can be alienated.

Here they reckon distance by the Italian mile, of which five go to make
one mile of Germany, and they count the hours through to twenty-four
without dividing them in the midst. We found good lodging at the
“Rose,” and left Trante on the Saturday after dinner. We followed a
road like the last we traversed in the valley, which was here wider and
girt by higher, uninhabited mountains, having the river Adisse on our
right hand. There we passed a castle[113] belonging to the archduke,
which commands the road, like various other strongholds elsewhere,
built to control the passage, and arrived at Rovere[114] very late,
after travelling fifteen miles. Never until now did we journey in the
dewfall,[115] so carefully had we laid out our time on the road.

This town belongs to the archduke aforenamed. Here in our lodging we
found once more the usages with which we were familiar: we found,
indeed, not merely German neatness in rooms and furniture and glass
windows, but German stoves as well, which commended themselves to M. de
Montaigne much more than open chimneys.[116] As to food, we had here
no crayfish, which thing M. de Montaigne found very strange, seeing
that, ever since we left Plommieres, a distance of two hundred leagues,
this dish had been put before us at every meal. Here and in all this
mountainous country they commonly eat snails larger and fatter than
those of France, but not so well flavoured; also truffles which they
peel and serve sliced with oil and vinegar, a passably good dish. The
truffles we ate at Trante had been kept for a year. Here at Rovere,
greatly to the gratification of M. de Montaigne, we were plentifully
supplied with oranges and citrons and olives. The bed curtains are cut
short and made either of cloth or serge. M. de Montaigne also regretted
the lack of those beds which they use as coverings in Germany; made
not like our beds, but of the finest down enclosed in an envelope of
well-bleached fustian. The beds used for lying upon in Germany are not
of this character, and could not be used as coverlets with comfort.

I verily believe that, if he had been alone with his own following, M.
de Montaigne would rather have gone to Cracow or to Greece by land than
have turned towards Italy. He took great pleasure in his visits to
strange countries, finding therein forgetfulness of his age and of his
ill-health, but he could never win over the rest of the company to this
view, each one of them being anxious to have done with travel and to
return. He was ever wont to say that, after an uneasy night, he would
rise eager and lively when he remembered he was about to sally forth to
see some fresh town or district. Never did I see him less subject to
fatigue or less querulous of his ailments; so full of spirit both on
the road and at his lodgings; so appreciative of everything he saw, and
eager for conversation with strangers; indeed I believe that this habit
drew off his thoughts from his infirmities. When the others complained
to him of his practice of leading the party over indirect and winding
roads, often returning to the spot whence they had set out (which he
would often do when he heard report of something worth seeing, or when
he saw reason for varying his plan of travel), he would reply that,
for his own part, he never set forth for any place other than that
in which he might at present find himself; and that it was impossible
he should miss or go aside from his route, because this route always
lay where places unfamiliar to him were to be seen; and that, provided
he did not fare the same road twice over, or see one place a second
time, he never considered that he had failed one jot in his original
purpose. As to Rome, which other people might easily see, he was less
fain to visit it than other places, because it was well known to every
one, and moreover every lackey was ready to give news of Florence and
Ferrara. He said that he seemed to be in like case to one who reads
some delightful story or good book, and dreads to turn the last page.
The pleasure of travel was to him so keen, that he hated the sight of
the place where he ought rightly to stop and rest; moreover, he devised
several projects of travelling exactly as the mood might seize him,
supposing that he should separate from his present companions.

On the Sunday morning, having a wish to see the Lake of Garda, a famous
lake of these parts and rich in the finest fish,[117] he hired three
horses for himself and Messieurs de Caselis and Mattecoulon at twenty
batzen apiece. M. d’Estissac hired two others for himself and the Sieur
du Hautoy, and with no escort--having left their own horses at this
place, Rovere, for the day--they rode eight miles to Torbole, where
they dined. This is a village under Tirolese jurisdiction, situated at
the head of the lake, and opposite to it is a small town and a castle
called Riva.[118] To this place they were taken by water, five miles,
and the same distance to return; they accomplished the journey in about
three hours, being rowed by five boatmen. They saw nothing at Riva save
a tower which had the appearance of great age, and the governor of
the place, the Seigneur Hortimato Madruccio, brother of the present
cardinal bishop of Trante. In looking down the lake the farther end is
not in view, for it is thirty-five miles long, while the width and all
they could see of it did not exceed five miles. The head of the lake
is in the county of Tirol, but all the lower part on either side is
under the Signiory of Venice, a region rich in fine churches, gardens
of olives, oranges, and other similar fruits. This lake is terribly
rough in times of tempest, and the surrounding mountains are more bare
and threatening than any of those we had hitherto passed, according
to the report of Messieurs.[119] On quitting Rovere they crossed the
Adisse, leaving the road to Verona to the left hand, and entered a deep
valley where they passed through a long village and a small town, the
road being the roughest and the view the most forbidding of any they
had yet experienced, by reason of these mountains which obstructed the
way. On leaving Torbole, they returned to Rovere to supper.

At this place we put our trunks on one of the rafts, which are called
_flottes_ in Germany, for conveyance to Verona by the river Adisse,
paying therefor a florin, and on the morrow I had the charge of this
transport. For supper they gave us poached eggs and a pike, together
with a great plenty of flesh of all kinds. On the next morning, Monday,
they set forth early, and following the valley, fairly populous but not
over fertile and flanked by high, rocky mountains, they arrived after
riding fifteen miles at Bourquet[120] in time for dinner. This town
lies within the county of Tirol, which is very large. In this matter
M. de Montaigne, when he asked whether this county included aught else
than the valley we had traversed and the mountain tops we had seen,
was informed that it contained divers other mountain valleys, fully as
extensive and fertile, and fine towns: that the county was, as we saw
it, like a robe in folds, but that, were it spread out, it would cover
a very wide stretch of country. The river was all this time on the
right hand, and when they resumed their journey after dinner they kept
the same road as far as Chiusa, a small fort in a mountain cleft above
the Adisse, which the Venetians had taken. They followed the course of
the river, descending a steep slope of solid rock over which the horses
could hardly keep their feet, and passing the fort aforesaid, where the
Venetian government, in whose territory they had been after a mile or
two on this side of Bourquet, kept twenty-five soldiers. They arrived
in time for bed at Volarne after riding twelve miles. At this place
they found wretched lodging, as everywhere else on the way to Verona. A
young lady, the daughter of the lord of the castle who was then absent,
sent M. de Montaigne a present of wine. On the morrow there were no
more mountains visible on the right of the road, and to the left even
the hills which lay upon the skirts of the plain were far distant.
The way was for some time over a sterile plain, but when it neared the
river it improved, and vines, trained upon trees, as is the fashion
in these parts, came in sight. After a journey of twelve miles they
arrived on All Saints’ Day before mass at Verona.


END OF VOL. I.


    Printed by BALLANTYNE, HANSON & CO.
    Edinburgh & London


FOOTNOTES:

[1] The MS. of the Journal was incomplete at the time of its discovery,
certain leaves having been torn away from the beginning, but the
concluding paragraphs supply the date at which Montaigne must have left
home, _i.e._ June 22, 1580. He seems to have halted at the outset of
his journey near La Fère, which was at that time besieged by the forces
of the League under Marshal de Matigon, and to have gone thence to
Beaumont-sur-Oise, where the Journal begins on September 4th. The siege
of La Fère was undertaken by Henry III. as a counter-move to the recent
capture of Cahors by the Huguenots. Operations were some time delayed
by the shortness of money and by an outbreak of whooping-cough, the
first recorded appearance of this distemper. The king, the greater part
of the courtiers, and thousands of the people of Paris were attacked,
and the whole city was panic-stricken. When the Catholic leaders were
at length ready to move, they spoke of the task before them as “_un
siège de velours_,” anticipating little difficulty or danger; but they
lost two thousand men before the place fell on August 31st.

[2] For notice of Mattecoulon and D’Estissac, see Introduction.

[3] There is no exact clue to the identity of this person, but there
is a passage in the Essais, iii. 4, which seems to refer to him: “Je
fus entre plusieurs autres de ses amis, conduire à Soissons le corps de
Monsieur de Grammont, du siège de la Fère, où il fut tué.”

[4] Meaux was besieged by the English under Henry V. in 1422. The
Marché was the last part to surrender. After the English had gained
the town, Monstrelet writes (_Ch._ cclvii.): “Dedens laquelle ville se
loga le roy d’Angleterre et grant multitude de ses gens. Et tantost
après gaigna une petite ysle assez près du marchié, en laquelle il fit
asseoir plusieurs grosses bombardes qui moult terriblement craventèrent
les maisons du dit marchié et aussi les murailles d’icelleui.” Ed.
Paris, 1860.

[5] “Dans les premières années du xviii. siècle on venait encore
admirer à Saint Faron le somptueux tombeau d’Ogier, monument executé
certainement avant le xii^e. siècle, et suivant Mabillon dès le ix^e.,
fort peu de temps après la mort du héros. Ce n’est pas ici le lieu de
décrire ce tombeau, dont une gravure nous est heureusement restée; mais
pour faire voir l’étroit lieu qui unit les souvenirs historiques et les
traditions romanesques, nous ajuterons que devant les colonnes avancées
qui formaient une sorte de péristyle autour de la tombe d’Ogier et
de Benoît, son compagnon de guerre, on distinguait les statues de
Roland, d’Aude la fiancée de Roland, d’Olivier, et d’un prélat qui
semblait bénir l’union d’Aude et de Roland. Dans les mains d’Olivier
était un rouleau sur laquelle Mabillon avait lu ces deux vers: ‘_Audæ,
conjugium tibi do, Rollande, sororis, Perpetuumque mei socialis fœdus
amoris_’.... Ogier voulut-il consacrer dans l’abbaye de Saint Faron
un immortel souvenir aux héros de Roncevaux? et lui même aurait-il
ainsi présidé à l’érection d’un riche monument qui devait lui servir
de sepulchre? ou bien les moines de Saint Faron, plusieurs siècles
après sa mort auraient-ils eu la première pensée d’un mausolée dont ils
auraient emprunté les principaux détails de sculpture et d’architecture
au traditions populaires?”--_Histoire littéraire de la France_, xx. 690.

Gaston Paris (_Histoire poétique de Charlemagne_) remarks: “Le monument
de Saint Faron de Meaux tendrait aussi à faire croire qu’il (Ogier) a
été confondu avec Olivier.”--P. 307.

[6] He was a cleric attached to the diocese of Auxerre, and in 1546
became treasurer of the cathedral of Meaux. He was sent by Francis I.
to the East with instructions to acquire Greek MSS., and some of his
collections are now in the Bibliothèque Nationale. He died in 1590, and
was buried in the cathedral of Meaux.

[7] Epernay.

[8] Piero Strozzi, son of Filippo, and an exile. He entered the service
of Francis I. in 1542, and served under the French kings till his death
at the siege of Thionville in 1558.

[9] Catherine dei Medici. Strozzi was bitterly hostile to the Medicis
then ruling in Florence.

[10] September 8th, the Nativity of the Virgin.

[11] A Spaniard educated at Salamanca and a member of the Jesuit order
since 1562. He taught theology and philosophy at Paris, and was said to
have converted many Protestants. His success raised envy amongst the
other orders, and he was accused of heretical views on the immaculate
conception. De Thou, who was hostile to the Jesuits, speaks of him as
a man of the highest character and the most brilliant parts. His chief
work is a commentary on the Bible. He died at Rome in 1583.

[12] Montpensier was Louis de Bourbon, who died in 1582. Nevers was the
son of Federigo Gonzaga, Duke of Mantua. He married Henrietta, the last
of the house of Cleves, and abandoned his Italian title for that of
Duc de Nevers. He died in 1595. The dispute referred to was over some
question of Court precedence.

[13] Châlons-sur-Marne.

[14] Antoinette de Bourbon, daughter of François de Bourbon, Comte de
Vendôme, and Marie de Luxembourg. She married in 1513 Claude, Duke of
Guise and Aumale, who died in 1550. She lived till 1583.

[15] Montier-en-Der.

[16] This strange story is worthy of remark on account of the notice
thereof by Ambroise Paré, the illustrious French surgeon. He writes
(_Œuvres_, vol. iii., p. 19, Paris, 1841): “Aussi estant à la
suite du roy à Vitry le François en Champagne, i’y vis un certain
personnage nommé Germain Garnier: aucuns le nommoient Germain Marie,
parcequ’estant fille estoit appellé Marie: jeune homme de taille
moyenne, trappé et bien amassé, portant barbe rousse assez espaisse,
lequel jusqu’au quinzième an de son aage avoit esté tenu pour fille,
attendu qu’en luy ne se monstroit aucune marque de virilité, et même
qu’il se tenôit avec les filles en habit de femme. Or ayant atteint
l’aage susdit, comme il estoit aux champs et poursuiuoit assez vivement
ses porceaux qui alloient dedans un blé, trouvant un fossé le voulut
affranchir: et l’ayant sauté, à l’instant se viennent à lui développer
les genitoires et la verge virile, s’estans rompu les ligamens par
les quels auparavant estoient tenus clos et enserrés (ce qui ne luy
aduint sans douleur) et s’en retourna, larmoyant en la maison de sa
mère, disant que ses trippes estoient sortiés hors du ventre: la quelle
fût fort estonnée de ce spectacle. Et ayant assemblé des Médicins
et Chirugiens pour la dessus auoir advis, on trouva qu’elle estoit
homme, et non plus fille: et tantost après avoir rapporté à l’Éuesque,
qu’estoit le défunt Cardinal de Lenoncourt, par son autorité et
assemblée du peuple, il receut le nom d’homme; et au lieu de Marie (car
il estoit ainsi nommé auparavant) il fut appellé Germain, et lui fût
baillé habit d’homme.”

Goulart (_Histoires admirables et mémorables_, Senlis, 1628) also
notices the story. In the _Novellæ_ of Morlini, which was first
published at Naples in 1520, Novella XXII. is of a character somewhat
similar, and was borrowed by Straparola for the ninth fable of the
thirteenth night of the _Piacevoli Notti_.

Montaigne refers to this matter again in the “Essays,” i. 20: “Passant
à Vitry le François je pûs voir un homme que l’Évesque de Soissons
avoit nommé Germain,” a manifest lapse of memory, as in the text above
he expressly states that he was not able to see Germain. His memory was
evidently treacherous. “Ma librairie est assise à un coin de ma maison:
s’il me tombe en fantaisie chose que j’y vueille aller chercher ou
escrire, de peur qu’elle ne m’eschappe en traversant seulement ma cour,
il faut que je la donne en garde à quelqu’autre. Si je m’enhardis en
parlant, à me détourner tant soit peu de mon fil, je ne faux jamais de
le perdre: qui fait que je me tiens en mes discours, contraint, sec, et
reserré. Les gens qui me servent, il faut que je les appelle par le nom
de leurs charges ou de leur païs: car il m’est tres-malaisé de retenir
des noms. Je diray bien qu’il a trois syllabes, que le son en est rude,
qu’il commence ou termine par telle lettre: et si je durois à vivre
longtemps, je ne crois pas que je n’oubliasse mon nom propre, comme ont
fait d’autres.”--_Essais_, ii. 17.

[17] Bar-le-Duc.

[18] Son of a certain Pierre de Trèves. The college he founded was
directed by the Jesuits up to the outbreak of the Revolution; the
chapel alluded to was added to the collegiate church of St Mark. He
became dean of the college, and died in 1582; and his portrait now
hangs in the museum at Bar-le-Duc.

[19] Manois.

[20] Charles VII.

[21] “Cy git tel qui fut mors lors que li milliaires courroit per mil
deux cens.” Querlon in his note in the edition of 1774 adds: “Entre
autres plusieurs tombeaux de Seigneurs de la Maison du Châtelet il est
rapporté dans les observations de l’Abbé Desfontaines (_Lettre 467_)
qu’un du Châtelet voulut y être enterré tout debout dans le creux d’un
pillier, disant que ‘jamais vilain ne passeroit par dessus son ventre.’”

[22] Épinal.

[23] Plombières.

[24] Jean d’Andelot, who fought on the Imperial side at Pavia. He was
of the family of Andelot of Montague.

[25] Bagnères de Bigorre.

[26] The Duke of Lorraine.

[27] Bussang, a well-known medicinal spring near the source of the
Moselle.

[28] Thann.

[29] Mülhausen. It was not incorporated with France till 1798.

[30] The host’s story is somewhat contradictory. He says that for
twenty years past he had been the pensioner of the King of France, and
in the same breath talks of having marched with John Casimir, the son
of Frederic III., Elector Palatine, to fight against this same king in
1567. Perhaps his pension may have been in arrear.

[31] La Fère had fallen on August 31st.

[32] “De nomine hujus urbis quidam scribunt, sed sine probatione, ipsum
tractum a Basalisco. Fuerunt alii qui priusquam evulgarentur omnes
libri Ammiani Marcellini (saltem qui extant) putabant Basileam sic
dictam a passagio et trajectu, qui in eo fuit loco anteaquā civitas
extrueretur, ut scilicet a passagio illo rectius Pastel quam Basel
primum fuerit vocata. At Ammianus irrita reddit hanc cōjecturam,
qui civitatē illam Græca voce βασιλείαν, id est regnū vocat, quasi
Regnopolim seu regiam civitatem.”--Munster, _Cosmographie_ 1566, p. 400.

[33] It is difficult to identify this personage; probably he was Simon
Grynæus _minor_ (so called to distinguish him from his grandfather
Grynæus _major_) who wrote on medicine and mathematics, and died in
September 1582. Or he might have been Samuel, a younger son of Grynæus
major, a jurisconsult who was syndic of Basel, and died in 1599. There
was also a John James, a famous theologian, who died in 1617.

[34] François Hottoman was a French jurisconsult, sprung from Silesian
parentage, born at Paris in 1524. Though he became a Calvinist, he
retained the favour of Catherine dei Medici, who sent him twice on
missions into Germany. He fled from Paris after St. Bartholomew, and
died at Basel in 1590. He was always in poverty through his attempts to
find the philosopher’s stone.

[35] Cardan, in his _De Rerum Varietate_, first published in 1553,
gives a description and drawing of smoke-jacks then used in Italy. Book
xii. c. 58.

[36] The Aar to Brugg.

[37] This sentence is confused and incorrect. The reference is
manifestly to the abbey of Königsfelden, close to Brugg, which was
founded in 1310 by the Empress Elizabeth and her daughter Agnes,
Queen of Hungary, on the spot where Albert of Austria, husband of the
former, was killed by John of Suabia in 1308. Duke Leopold and sixty
of the knights who fell at Sempach in 1386 were buried here, but were
disinterred by the order of Maria Theresa in 1770, and re-entombed at
St. Blasien, in the Black Forest. Querlon mistakes it for the abbey of
Mouri.

[38] Reuss.

[39] At this date there were thirteen cantons in the Confederation.

[40] Eaux-Chaudes, in Béarn.

[41] A village in the Department of the Gers.

[42] The ancient name was Aquæ Helvetiæ. In the time of Nero, according
to Tacitus (_Hist._, i. 67), it had all the appearance of a town: “In
modum municipii extructus locus, amœno salubrium aquarum usu frequens.”
But nothing is said about the personal investigations of Tacitus, to
which Montaigne alludes.

Querlon, in a note on this passage, remarks: “Je ne sais où l’écrivain
a pris cela. La mémoire trompoit quelquefois Montaigne come tous ceux
qui citent beaucoup, car on ne peut mettre cette érudition que sur son
compte.”

[43] In the spring of 1416 Poggio Bracciolini visited Baden, and
during his stay wrote to his friend, Niccolo Niccoli, a description
of the place, which is one of the most graphic and vivid pictures of
contemporary life. It is given in Shepherd’s “Life of Poggio.”

[44] “... à ceus qui se conforment à eux.” But sense seems to show that
a “_ne_” must have slipped out of the text.

[45] Rodolf II.

[46] 21 batzen = 1 Rhenish florin.

[47] Probably Charles, the younger brother of Henry II., who died in
1545.

[48] According to Querlon this gentleman was Charles de Montmorenci,
afterwards Duc d’Anville and Admiral of France, son of the Constable,
Anne de Montmorenci.

[49] _Fouasses_, which Querlon describes as “espèce de galettes.” See
also Rabelais, Book i., ch. xxv.

[50] Markdorf.

[51] This is probably meant for Buchhorn, a free imperial city. In
1810 it came under the rule of Würtemberg and received the name of
Friedrickshafen.

[52] Lindau.

[53] A silver coin worth about eighteen pence in English money.

[54] The _Cosmographia_ of Sebastian Münster, one of the earliest
guide-books.

[55] “Il me semble que je n’ay rencontré guères de manières qui ne
vaillent les nostres,” _Essais_, iii. 9. Montaigne’s liking for Germany
and German ways is very marked. It may perhaps be explained by a
passage in _Essais_, i. 25: “Mon père me donna en charge à un Allemand,
qui depuis est mort fameux medecin en France.”

[56] A gold coin of the time of Louis XI.

[57] Wangen.

[58] Isny.

[59] Now in the museum at Augsburg. The inscription is in Mommsen,
_Corpus Insc._, iii. n. 5987:--

                    IMP. CAESAR.
    I. SEPTIMIUS. SEVERUS. PIUS.
    PERTINAX. AUG. ARABIC.
    ADIAB. PARTHICUS. MAXIMUS.
    PONTIF. MX. TRB. POT. VIII.
    IMP. XII. COS. II. P. P. PROCOS. ET
    IMP. CAESAR. MRCUS. AUREL.
    ANTONINUS. PIUS. AUG. TRB.
    POT. IIII. PROCOS. ET.
            A. CAMB. M. P.
                XI.


[60] This passage seems to show that the servant who acted as
Montaigne’s amanuensis for this part of the diary was also his
_valet-de-chambre_.

[61] St. Gallen.

[62] The abbey of Kempten was the most important of South German
monasteries. It was founded by Benedictines from St. Gallen in the
eighth century, became an imperial free town in 1289, and in 1360 the
abbot was made a prince. The old town, as Montaigne saw it, is still
Protestant, and a new Catholic suburb has grown up outside the walls.
The legend of Hildegarde’s burial there and that she was once abbess of
the convent seems to be false.

[63] Iller.

[64] Pfronten.

[65] Füssen.

[66] Hohenschwangau.

[67] St. Magnus was the first abbot of Kempten.

[68] Schongan.

[69] Landsberg.

[70] Schweikhart, son of Count George von Helfenstein. He was president
of the Imperial Court at Innsbruck from 1562-1564. He was a man of
learning and literary taste, and translated into German the works of S.
Basil and the story of Barlaam and Josaphat. He died in 1591.

[71] Livy.

[72] Fuggers.

[73] Augsburg was one of the first cities in Europe to be supplied with
water by artificial means. The old water-works are still to be seen.
The view of Augsburg in Münster’s _Cosmographia_ shows them exactly as
Montaigne writes of them.

[74] Variants of this legend are numerous. Hector Boece (cap. ix.)
affirms there are no rats in Buchan, and Sir Robert Gordon, writing on
Sutherlandshire, says: “If they come thither from other parts in ships
they die presently as soon as they do smell the air of that country.”
In Sir John Sinclair’s “Statistical Account of Scotland,” in an account
of Roseneath, in Argyleshire, it is stated: “From a prevailing opinion
that the soil of this parish is hostile to that animal, some years ago
a West India planter actually carried out to Jamaica several casks of
Roseneath earth, with a view to kill the rats that were destroying his
sugar canes.”

[75] “And this their entrance is so curiously admitted, as many
strangers desirous to see the fashion, suffer themselves of purpose
to be locked out at night, and willing give a reward to the souldiers
letting them in.”--Fynes Moryson, _Itinerary_, i. 20.

[76] In 1552: Münster, _Cosmographia_ (1559), p. 607.

[77] Sauerbrunnen.

[78] Bruck.

[79] Wilhelm, who married Renée of Lorraine, and abdicated in 1596.

[80] “... denique Laici usque adeo persuasum habent nullos Cœlibes esse
ut in plerisque parochiis non aliter velint Presbyterum tolerare, nisi
Concubinam habeat, quo vel sic suis sit consuetum uxoribus, quæ nec sic
quidem usque quaque sunt extra periculam.” Nicolaus de Clemangis, _De
Præsulibus Simoniacis_, p. 165.

[81] Probably the Starnberger See. This road was made by the Romans.

[82] The Kochel, or Walchen See.

[83] Mittenwald.

[84] Seefeld.

[85] Martinswand.

[86] Innsbruck.

[87] Ferdinand of Tirol, son of the Emperor Ferdinand I. and brother of
Maximilian II. He was born 1537 and died 1595.

[88] The tomb of Maximilian I. in the Hofkirche at Innsbruck.

[89] Cardinal Andreas, the son of Ferdinand of Tirol and Philippina
Welser. He was made a cardinal at nineteen years of age by Gregory
XIII. He became legate in Germany, and Philip II. at one time wanted to
make him governor of the Netherlands. He died in Rome in 1600, and lies
buried in the church of S. Maria dell’ Anima. He was about twenty-four
when Montaigne saw him.

[90] Karl, the second son of the Archduke.

[91] _Bouchet_, sugar and water flavoured with cinnamon.

[92] _Nef_, which, according to Querlon, here means, “_étui ou boîte où
se met le couvert des princes et des rois_.”

[93] Ferdinand I. left nine daughters. The Three Queens were Margaret,
who died in 1566; Helena, who died in 1570; and Magdalen, who was alive
at the time of Montaigne’s visit. Barbara was duchess of Ferrara,
Joanna, grand-duchess of Florence, and Catherine duchess of Mantua.

[94] Charles was crowned at Bologna in 1530. The monument referred to
still stands in the pass of Lueg on the Brenner.

[95] “M. de Montaigne disoit que c’estoit la lune de ses tretes.”
Querlon remarks, by way of explanation: “Parceque cette poussière
obscurcissait le jour, ne lui laissoit, ainsi que la lune, que ce qu’il
falloit de clarté pour se conduire.”

[96] Stertzing. Here the watchman still calls the hours of the night as
he did at Innsbruck in Montaigne’s time.

[97] Eisack, a stream which rises on the Brenner and joins the Adige
near Botzen.

[98] “Qu’elles se laissent testonner et peigner jusques aus oreilles.”

[99] Leonore, the only one of his children who survived him. In
alluding to those who died in infancy he says, _Essais_, ii. 8: “Ils
me meurent touts en nourrice: mais Leonor, une seule fille qui est
echappée à cette infortune, a attainct six ans et plus.”

[100] Klausen.

[101] Kolmann.

[102] Botzen.

[103] In his _Voyage faict en 1600_, the Duc de Rohan puts this matter
in a different light: “Je passay à Trente nullement agréable--et
si ce n’estoit pour ce qu’elle est demy Italienne, me rejouissait
de sortir de la petite barbarie et beuvette universelle, je n’en
parlerois pas: ne trouvant point que tous les mathematiciens de nostre
temps puissent jamais si bien trouver le mouvement perpetuel que les
Allemans le font faire à leur goblets ... cette si grand frequentation
de bouteils obscurcit tellement leurs autres belles parties que cela
les rends méprisables et inaccostables de tout le monde. Car ils ne
pensent faire bonne chère ny permettre amitié ou fraternité, comme
ils disent, à personne sans y apporter le seau plein de vin pour la
sceler à perpetuité.” The love of eating and drinking is still a marked
characteristic amongst the Tirolese.

[104] Branzoll.

[105] Adige.

[106] Trent.

[107] Salurn.

[108] Montaigne shows himself here less judicial than usual. He had
evidently been so well pleased with his sojourn in Germany that he
looked on everything over the frontier with a jaundiced eye.

[109] It was begun in 1212 and is built entirely of marble. The tower
alluded to is the Torre di Piazza, in which was hung Rengo, the great
bell of Trent.

[110] The work of Vincenzio Vicentini, 1534.

[111] Bernardo Clesio, bishop from 1514 to 1539. He was made cardinal
in 1530.

[112] The relations of the bishops of Trent with the counts of Tirol,
which resulted in the _quasi_ subjection of the first named, had been
embroiled by disputes over the right of taxation which the counts of
Tirol claimed over Church property in Trent ever since the twelfth
century. Cardinal Madruccio held the see from 1567 to 1600. He was a
member of an illustrious family of the city.

[113] Probably Castel Beseno, a notable stronghold in these times. Or
it might have been Castelbarco, afterwards a Venetian frontier fortress.

[114] Roveredo. It had formerly been Venetian, but was now under Tirol
as a fee of the bishop of Trent.

[115] In the _Essais_, iii. 13, Montaigne writes of his horror of dew
and vapours.

[116] Another instance of his love of German customs.

[117] Garda has always been famous for its fish, and the fishing
industry gave its name to the town at the outlet, Peschiera. Cardan
(_De Vita Prop._, c. xxx.) tells of a mighty pike he ate at Sirmio
after a narrow escape from drowning in the lake. In Coryat’s time it
was celebrated for its abundance of “Carpes, Troutes, and Eeles.”

[118] Now an important town at the head of the lake.

[119] In describing this excursion the secretary uses sometimes the
first and sometimes the third person plural, but this sentence seems to
show that he did not accompany the others, and on leaving Roveredo he
went to Verona on a raft in charge of the luggage.

[120] Borghetto.



Transcriber’s Notes

Obvious typographical errors have been silently corrected. Variations
in hyphenation have been standardised but all other spelling and
punctuation remains unchanged.

Italics are represented thus _italic_, superscripts are represented
thus y^n.

