II

SWITZERLAND


We travelled two leagues farther to dinner at Melhouse,[29] a fair
little Swiss town of the canton of Basle. There M. de Montaigne went to
visit the church, the people of this town being no longer Catholics.
This he found, as elsewhere in the country, in good condition, for
scarcely any change has been made, except with regard to the altars
and the images, the churches themselves having suffered no defacement.
He was vastly pleased to behold the liberty and order prevalent among
these people; how our host of the “Grapes” returned from the council
board of the town, held in a magnificent palace, over which he had
presided, to do service to his guests at table; and to hear how
this man, without any following or office, who poured out the wine
at dinner, had formerly led four troops of footmen into France under
Casimir to fight against the king, and was now the king’s pensioner,
having received three hundred crowns per annum for the last twenty
years.[30] While M. de Montaigne was sitting at table, this gentleman
talked to him, without the least pretentiousness or affectation,
of his condition and way of life; and how he and others found that
their religion was no bar to their serving the king, even against
the Huguenots. This we heard likewise from others whom we met in our
travels, and also at the siege of La Fère[31] more than fifty of these
people served with us, and that they made no scruple of being married
by a priest to Catholic women, who were never required to change their
religion. After dinner we set out travelling through a fine country,
abundant, very fertile, and ornamented with divers pretty villages and
hostelries, and arrived at Basle, three leagues’ journey, in time for
bed.

[Illustration: BASEL

_From Civitates Orbis Terrarum_

    _To face p. 62_, vol. i.
]

Basle is a fine town, about the size of Blois, and divided into two
parts, for the Rhine flows through the midst under a large wooden
bridge of great width. The city authorities did the honour to M.
d’Estissac and M. de Montaigne of sending a present of wine by one of
their officers, who made a long speech to them as they sat at table. M.
de Montaigne made a similar reply in the presence of certain Germans
and Frenchmen, who were seated with them round the stove, the host
serving as interpreter. The wines were very good. We went in separate
parties to the house of a certain physician, named Felix Plater, which
was painted and decorated in delicate French fashion with the utmost
care. This house the aforesaid physician had built for himself in
very large, ample, and sumptuous style. Amongst other work he was
preparing a book of simples, which was then well advanced, and it was
his practice, instead of painting like other botanists the plants
according to their natural colours, to glue the same upon paper with
so great care and dexterity that the smallest leaves and fibres should
be visible, exactly as in nature. He can turn the leaves of this book
without fear of any plant falling out, and he showed us certain simples
which had been fastened therein more than twenty years ago. At this
house, and in the public school as well, we saw entire skeletons of men.

They have a custom in the town, but not in the suburbs, that the clocks
shall strike one hour in advance of the true time, to wit, if it should
strike ten, the time would be really nine. They say the reason of this
custom is that in past years an attempt against the city miscarried
on account of a similar fault of the town clock. It is called
_Basilee_,[32] not from the Greek word, but because _Base_ in German
means _passage_. We saw many learned men: Grynæus,[33] and the author
of the _Theatrum_, and Platerus the physician already mentioned, and
Francis Hottoman.[34] The two last-named supped with M. de Montaigne
the day after his arrival. From answers given to certain questions he
put, M. de Montaigne gathered that there was in Basle considerable
religious discord, some calling themselves Zwinglians, some Calvinists,
and others Martinists, while many, as he was informed, had in their
hearts a hidden liking for the Roman religion. The ordinary form
of administering the sacrament is to place it in the mouth, but at
the same time any one, who so wishes, may reach out his hand for
it, the ministers being chary of stirring up afresh the antagonisms
of religion. The interiors of the churches are like those I have
heretofore described. The exteriors are still garnished with images
and with ancient tombs unmutilated, and inscribed with prayers for the
souls of the departed. The organs, the bells, the crosses on the bell
towers, and all the different images in the painted windows are whole
as ever they were, as well as the benches and the seats of the choirs.
The Calvinists place the baptismal font where the high altar stood
aforetime, and build at the head of the nave another altar to serve for
their Lord’s Supper; the one at Basle being beautifully arranged. The
church of the Carthusians is a very fine building, preserved and kept
up most carefully; the same furniture and ornaments are still there,
a circumstance which the reformers bring forward as a testimony of
their good faith, seeing that they gave a promise to maintain these at
the time of their agreement. The bishop of the place, who is strongly
inimical to them, lives outside the city, and holds the greater part
of the country people to the ancient religion. He enjoys an income of
fifty thousand livres from the city, and thus the succession to the
bishopric is kept up.

Certain of the people lamented to M. de Montaigne over the dissolute
carriage of the women, and the prevalent drunkenness of the city. We
witnessed an operation for rupture done by a surgeon on the child of a
poor man, who was very roughly handled by the operator, and likewise
saw the very fine public library overlooking the river in a pleasant
situation. We spent one more day at Basle, and on the next after dinner
we took the road along the Rhine for some two leagues. Then we left
it on our left hand and traversed a fertile country. In these parts
springs abound, and no village or crossroads lack fair running water;
in Basle indeed they number some three hundred. Balconies are so
common in all houses, even in Lorraine, that in building they always
leave between the windows of the chambers doorways looking over the
streets, with the view of letting a balcony be built thereto at some
future time. All through the country beyond Espine even the smallest
cottages have glass windows, and the good houses are well fitted with
the same, excellently arranged both within and without, the glass
being made in various fashions. There is abundance of iron, and the
workers thereof are very skilful, greatly in advance of ourselves,
and furthermore the smallest church will always have a magnificent
clock and dial. Their work in tiles is excellent, and on this account
the roofs of the houses are decorated with a medley of tiles, glazed
in various colours, and the floors of their chambers are the same.
Moreover it would be impossible to find more delicate work than that
of their stoves, which are of pottery. They make much use of pine wood
and are skilled carpenters, their casks being all carven and many of
them varnished and painted. They are very lavish in stoves, that is to
say, in the public dining-rooms. In all rooms of this sort, which are
always well furnished, there will be five or six tables fitted with
benches at which all the guests will dine together, each party at its
own particular table. The smallest houses of entertainment will have
three or four well-appointed rooms of this kind. They are pierced for
many windows which are filled with rich glass, but on the whole it
seems that the hosts concern themselves more with the dinner than with
aught else, for the bed-chambers are often mean enough, the beds never
curtained and always placed three or four together, the rooms being
without chimneys, and only heated from the general stove. Beyond this
there is no sign of a fire, and they take it very ill if a stranger
should go into their kitchens. There is much want of cleanliness in
their bed-chambers, and he who gets a white sheet may deem himself
fortunate: moreover, it is their fashion never to cover the pillow with
sheeting; there is rarely any other covering than a feather quilt,
which is very dirty.

They are good cooks, of fish especially. In fine weather or in storm
their houses have no other protection from the weather than bare glass
windows without wooden shutters. The houses are well windowed and
very light, both below and in the chambers, the windows being rarely
closed even at night. Their service at table differs greatly from ours.
They never mix water with their wine, and they are justified in this
practice, for their wines are so thin that our gentlemen found them
less potent than those of Gascony when diluted. They are, however, very
light and delicate.

The body-servants dine either at their master’s table or at one close
by, one valet being enough to attend to the high table, seeing that
each gentleman has always his own goblet or silver cup beside him,
wherefore the servant only needs to fill this as soon as it may be
empty, without moving it. For this purpose they use a vessel of pewter
or wood with a long spout. As to the meat, they serve only two or three
dishes thereof, cut in slices. Unlike our fashion, they serve in the
same dish divers sorts of well-dressed meats; sometimes indeed they
bring to table one course with the other, using certain appliances of
iron made with long legs, in which they carry one dish above and one
below. Some of their tables are round and some square, but all are
very wide, so that it is very difficult to place the dishes thereon.
The valet, however, can easily manage dishes arranged as above named,
letting them follow, two by two, up to six or seven changes.

A fresh dish is never served till the foregoing one shall have been
finished; and as to the plates, as soon as the service of viands has
come to an end and the dessert is ready, the valet puts on the table a
large wicker basket on a vessel of painted wood into which the chief
person present first puts his plate; the others follow suit, the order
of rank being closely observed. The valet removes this vessel without
difficulty, and then serves the fruit in two dishes all mixed together
like the other courses. At this stage they often serve radishes, and
with your roast meat you will most likely have been offered cooked
pears. Amongst other edibles they give a high place to the crayfish,
and honour it by serving it in a covered dish, a tribute they pay to
hardly any other viand. The whole country abounds in these fish, and
they are served every day, and rated as a delicacy.

They take no care to wash on sitting down or on rising from table.
Most people go to a little laver, set in a corner of the room as in a
monastery. In most places they use wooden plates and pots, clean and
white as they can be made; but in some they set on the wooden plates
others of pewter, until they serve the fruit, for which wood is always
used. They serve this wooden ware only from custom, for in the same
houses where it is seen they give their guests silver goblets in any
quantity. They clean and polish their wooden furniture with great care
and even the boards of their chambers. The beds are so high that steps
are generally needed to mount the same, and nearly everywhere small
beds are placed beside the large ones.

Seeing that they are such excellent smiths, nearly all their spits
are made to revolve by springs, or by weights like clocks, or even by
wooden fans fixed in the chimney and made to turn by the draught of the
smoke and the vapour of the fire. These appliances cause the roast to
revolve gently and slowly. They over-roast their meat somewhat. These
smoke-jacks[35] are only worked in large hostelries which burn great
fires, as at Baden, and they turn at a uniform and steady pace. After
leaving Lorrenne we found the chimneys built in a fashion different
from ours. They build up the hearths in the middle or in the corner
of the kitchen, using almost the entire width of the place for the
chimney flue. This is a vast opening seven or eight paces square, which
becomes narrower as it rises to the top of the house. This structure
gives them the chance to place in position their large wheel, which, in
chimneys built like ours, would occupy so much room in the flue that
the smoke would not be able to find a passage. The lightest repasts
last three or four hours, because of the method of service aforesaid,
and in sooth these people eat vastly more leisurely than we do, and in
more healthful manner. There is everywhere abundance of provisions, of
flesh and fish, and every table is sumptuously spread--at least this
was our experience. On Fridays no flesh is served, and report says that
in these parts the people willingly abstain therefrom entirely, the
practice of fasting being similar to that in France round about Paris.
As a rule they give their horses more fodder than they can eat. We
travelled four leagues and arrived in time for bed at Hornes.

This is a small village in the duchy of Austria. On the morrow, as it
was Sunday, we went to Mass, and observed that in church the women sat
on the left-hand side of the church and the men on the right, without
mixing. The women have several rows of seats, set reversed, one behind
the other, of a convenient height for sitting, and upon these they
kneel, and not upon the ground, wherefore they seem to be upright.
The men have also pieces of wood in front of them to lean upon, and
they only kneel upon the chairs which are in front of them. Instead of
joining the hands as we do at the elevation, they stretch them out
apart, and open and keep them thus raised until the priest exhibits
the pyx. They assigned to M. d’Estissac and M. de Montaigne the third
bench on the men’s side, while those of less worship in our company
were afterwards given seats amongst the lesser folk; and the same on
the women’s side. It seemed to us that the front rows were not held in
the highest honour. The interpreter and guide whom we engaged at Basle,
a sworn messenger of the city, went to the Mass with us, and showed
by his carriage that he had come there with great longing and devout
feeling. After dinner we crossed the river Arat[36] to Broug, a fair
little town belonging to the seigniory of Berne, and beyond that we
went to see an abbey which Queen Catherine of Hungary gave to the lords
of Berne in 1524,[37] where are buried Leopold, Archduke of Austria,
and a great number of gentlemen who were overthrown by the Swiss in
1386. Their arms and names are there inscribed, and their remains
kept with great care. M. de Montaigne held converse with the Bernese
gentleman in charge of the place, who ordered that everything should be
shown to him. In this abbey slices of bread and soup are always ready
at hand for any wayfarer who may demand the same, and no refusal has
ever been made by the heads of the abbey. From this place we crossed by
a boat, which is attached by an iron pulley to a rope stretched high
above the Reix,[38] a river flowing out of the Lake of Lucerne, and
arrived, after a journey of four leagues, at Baden, a little town with
a suburb adjoining, where there are baths.

[Illustration: BADEN EN ARGOW

    _To face p. 76_, vol. i.
]

Baden is a Catholic town, under protection of the eight[39] Swiss
cantons, in which divers great gatherings of princes have taken place.
We did not lodge in the town but in the suburb, which lies at the
foot of the mountain on the bank of the Limmat, a stream, or rather
torrent, which flows out of the Lake of Zürich. There are two or three
uncovered public baths, which are frequented only by poor folk. Of the
other kind there are great number within the houses, divided into small
private rooms, both closed and open, which are let with the lodgings,
and are as dainty and well fitted as possible, hot water being drawn
from the water-courses for each bath. The lodgment is magnificent. In
the house where we stayed three hundred mouths had to be fed every day;
and, while we were there, beds were made for a hundred-and-seventy
sojourners. It possessed seventeen stoves and eleven kitchens, and
in the house adjoining were fifty furnished chambers, the walls of
all the rooms being hung with the coats-of-arms of the gentry who
had lodged therein. The town, perched high on the crest of a hill,
is small and very fair, like almost all the towns of this country.
Moreover, they build their streets wider and more open than ours, and
their market-places more ample, and there is a wealth of richly-glazed
windows everywhere. They paint almost all the houses outside with
various devices, and the towns consequently are very pleasant to look
upon. Again, there is scarcely a town without running water in the
streets, and at every cross-street will be found a handsome fountain,
built either in stone or in wood, and on this account their towns are
much fairer to view than those of France. The water of the baths gives
out an odour of sulphur like those of Aigues-Caudes[40] and certain
others. The heat is tempered as at Barbotan[41] or Aigues-Caudes, and
for this reason the baths are very soft and pleasant.

Ladies who are fain to take their bath with daintiness and decency can
repair to Baden with confidence, for they will be alone in the bath,
which is like an elegant cabinet, light, with glazed windows, painted
panelling, and clean flooring. Everywhere are chairs and small tables
for reading or gaming while in the bath. The bather may empty and fill
the bath as often as he likes, and will find a chamber adjoining.
There are fine walks along the river, besides artificial ones under
galleries. These baths are placed in a valley commanded by the slopes
of high mountains, which nevertheless are fertile and well cultivated.
The water when drunk tastes rather flat and soft, like water heated
up, and there is a smell of sulphur about it, and a certain prickling
flavour of salt. Amongst the people of the place it is chiefly used
in the bath, in which they subject themselves also to cupping and
bleeding, so that I have at times seen the water in the two public
baths the colour of blood. Those who drink it by habit take a glass or
two at the most. The guests as a rule stay six or seven weeks, and
some or other frequent the baths all through the summer. No country
sends so many visitors as Germany, from whence come great crowds.

The practice of bathing here is of high antiquity and is remarked by
Tacitus,[42] who searched to the utmost to find the chief spring, but
could get no knowledge thereof; but apparently the springs rise from
a great depth below the level even of the river. The water is less
clear than that of the other springs we have seen, and when drawn
from the spring it shows certain minute fibres. Moreover, it contains
no sparkling bubbles like other sulphurous waters when the glass is
filled; like those of Spa, for instance, of which M. de Maldonat told
us. M. de Montaigne took some of it on the Monday morning after we
arrived, seven small glasses, and on the next day five large glasses,
amounting to ten of the aforesaid. On this same day, Tuesday, at nine
in the morning, while the others were at table, he took a bath and fell
into a heavy sweat in bed afterwards, having stayed in the bath only
half-an-hour. The people of the country, who stay all day in the bath
playing and drinking, stand only up to the middle in water, but M. de
Montaigne lay full length and was covered to the neck.[43]

On this day departed from the baths a certain Swiss gentleman, an
excellent servant of our State, who all the day before had held
converse with M. de Montaigne concerning Swiss affairs, and had shown
him a letter which the French ambassador, son of our President du
Harlay, had written from Souleure, where he was staying, committing
to him the king’s interests while he himself should be absent. The
ambassador had been summoned by the queen to meet her at Lyons, in
order to devise some plan of checkmating the schemes of Spain and
the late Duke of Savoy. The duke shortly before his death had allied
himself with certain of the cantons, an alliance which our king had
resisted, alleging that the cantons, being already pledged to him,
could incur no fresh obligations without his leave. Some of the
cantons, when this was pointed out to them by the Swiss gentleman
aforesaid, drew back from the alliance. Indeed, all through this
country they showed great respect and friendship to our king’s name
and the utmost civility to ourselves. The Swiss gentleman had a train
of four horses. His son, who is also in the king’s service, on one, a
valet on another, his daughter, a tall, handsome girl, on another, with
a horsecloth and footboard in French fashion, a trunk on the crupper,
and a bonnet box on the saddle-bow, without any waiting-maid, though
they were two long days’ journey from their abode, which is in a town
where the gentleman aforesaid was the governor. He himself rode the
remaining horse.

The common dress of the women does not seem to me so becoming as that
usually worn in France, nor the headgear either. This is a bonnet,
_à la cognard_, turned up before and behind, and having in front a
slight peak enriched with stripes of silk and fur trimmings. The hair
hangs down behind in a braid. If you should jestingly take off this
bonnet--for it is lightly attached as with us--they will show no
offence, and you will see the head quite uncovered. The younger women
wear simple garlands in lieu of a bonnet. There is little difference of
attire to make the distinction of classes, and the habit is to salute
by kissing the hand, and by offering to touch the lady’s. Otherwise,
if in passing you give a greeting and bow they will generally make no
sign of acknowledgment, according to ancient usage, but some will bow
the head slightly by way of returning the salutation. They are for the
most part well-favoured women, tall, and fair.

As a nation they have an excellent disposition, even towards those
who [do not][44] agree with them. M. de Montaigne, in order to make
full trial of diverse manners and customs of the countries he visited,
always conformed to local usage, however greatly such a usage may have
irked him. Nevertheless, in Switzerland he said that he suffered no
inconvenience except that he had at table, by way of napkin, only a
piece of linen half a foot long: moreover, the Swiss themselves only
unfold this napkin at dinner when many sauces and divers sorts of soup
are served; but, on the other hand, they always provide as many wooden
spoons with silver handles as there are guests. And a Swiss will always
be provided with a knife with which he will eat everything, and never
put his fingers in his plate.

In almost all the towns the proper arms of the place are displayed,
and above them those of the Emperor and of the house of Austria, but
the greater part of the towns have been detached from the archduke
aforesaid by ill policy. They say that all members of the Austrian
house, except the Catholic king, have been brought to great poverty,
even the Emperor,[45] who is held very lightly in Germany. On the
Wednesday the host bought a large quantity of fish, and being asked by
M. de Montaigne the reason why, he replied that the greater part of the
people of Baden ate fish on Wednesdays on religious grounds, a remark
which confirmed what he had before heard on this subject: to wit, that
those who have remained Catholics are confirmed in their faith by the
fact that they have to reckon on an opposition. The host added, when
division and religious strife shows itself in a particular town, and
infects the governing body, the bond of good feeling is loosened, and
the effect of this admixture is felt in individual families, as has
been manifested in Augsburg and in the imperial cities. But when a town
has one central government--and every Swiss town has its separate laws
and administration, is dependent on its neighbours for the preservation
of order, and keeps up alliance and union only for purposes affecting
the whole community--those towns which possess special civic rights,
with a separate civil government complete in all parts, find therein
a support for their strengthening and upholding. Towns in this case
undoubtedly become stronger, closing their ranks and recruiting their
forces through the contagious shock of conflicts near at hand.

Their custom of warming the houses by stoves pleased us greatly, and
none of our company complained thereof; for, after you have taken in
a breath or two of the air which indeed may seem strange on entering
a room, you are sensible only of a soft and regular heat. M. de
Montaigne, who slept in a room with a stove, was loud in its praises,
saying that all night he felt a pleasant moderate warmth. In warming
yourself you burn neither your face nor your boots, and are free from
the smoke of a French fireplace. At home we put on our warm furred
dressing-gowns when we enter our apartments, but here people appear in
doublet and bareheaded in the warm rooms, and put on thick garments
before going into the air. On the Thursday M. de Montaigne drank the
same quantity of water, which acted well and rid him of a small amount
of gravel. Still, he found these waters more powerful than any others
which he had ever tried--whether from the strength of the water itself
or from the present habit of his body--and accordingly he drank them
more sparingly.

On this same Thursday he held discourse with a minister from Zürich,
a native of that city, and heard from him that the religion there
was formerly Zwinglian, but that now it had come nearer to Calvinism,
a somewhat milder creed. Being questioned as to predestination, he
replied that they kept the mean between Geneva and Augsburg, but that
their people were free to debate this question. For his own part he
inclined rather to the side of Zwingli, praising him highly as one who
came the nearest to primitive Christianity.

On Friday, October 7th, at seven in the morning, after breakfast, we
quitted Baden; and, before we set out, M. de Montaigne drank the same
quantity of the water as he had taken on five previous occasions. With
regard to the operation of the same, concerning which he was more
sanguine than he was in the case of any other bath he had visited (both
as to the bathing and the drinking), he was free in his praise of these
baths beyond all the rest, not only because the place itself, and the
baths and the private apartments, are comfortably and conveniently
managed, but also because, in all apartments, visitors are always
able to go to their own rooms without passing through the rooms of
other people. Moreover, persons of small means may find quarters to
suit them quite as easily as those who are rich. Bathrooms, kitchens,
cabinets, and chapels may be hired for a large retinue, and at the
house adjacent to our own, the Cour de la Ville--ours being the Cour
de derrière--there are public apartments belonging to the cantonal
authorities, and occupied by lodgers. This same house has several
chimneys built in French fashion, and there are stoves in all the
chief apartments. The demand for payment from strangers is a little
arbitrary, as in all countries and notably in our own. Four furnished
chambers, with nine beds in all, two of which had stoves and one bath
besides, cost us a crown a day for the masters, and for the servants
four batzen:[46] that is to say, a little more than nine sous apiece;
the horses cost six batzen, about four sous, but in addition to this
they added certain nonsensical charges which were not customary. A
guard is kept in the town and even in the bath quarter, which is
nothing but a village, and every night two sentinels make the round of
the houses, not so much to keep off the foe, as for fear of fire or
other disturbance. When the hour strikes one of them is bound to cry
out at the top of his voice to the other, and ask what is the hour,
whereupon the other in like manner tells him the hour, and adds that he
is keeping good watch. The women do their washing in the open in the
public place, bringing out their little wooden tubs to the river side
where they heat water and do their work excellently; they also clean
the earthenware far better than do our French women in the inns. Here
each chambermaid and each valet has a special charge.

One disadvantage of travel is that with ever so great diligence it
is impossible for a stranger to ascertain from the people of the
country whom he may meet--I speak of the cultivated folk as well as
the vulgar--what objects of interest may be worthy of a visit, and to
make them understand what he may ask. I write thus because, after we
had spent five days at Baden, and had inquired curiously concerning
everything there which might be worth seeing, we were told naught about
a certain object of interest which we saw by chance afterwards as we
were leaving the town. This was a stone, about the height of a man,
apparently a portion of some column, without adornment or workmanship,
placed at the angle of a house, and easily visible to any passer-by on
the high-road. There was a Latin inscription, which I was not able to
decipher fully, but it seemed to be a simple dedication to the Emperors
Nerva and Trajan. We crossed the Rhine at Kaiserstuhl, a Catholic town
and allied to the Swiss, and onward thence we traversed a fine flat
country until we came to some rapids where the river is broken up by
rocks, which they call cataracts, like those of the Nile. And below
Schaffhausen there is in the Rhine a gulf full of vast rocks where it
becomes rapid, and farther down, amongst the same rocks, it comes to a
fall of two pikes’ length, where it makes a mighty leap, foaming and
roaring marvellously. This fall stops the boats, and interrupts the
navigation of the river. We travelled four leagues at a stretch, and
came in time for supper to Schaffhausen.

This town, the capital of a Swiss canton, has the same form of religion
as Zürich. On our departure from Baden we left on our right hand
Zürich, whither M. de Montaigne had determined to journey, the town
being not more than two leagues distant. But word was brought to him
of an outbreak of plague there. At Schaffhausen he saw naught which
interested him. The citizens were erecting a citadel which promised to
be a good work; and they have, moreover, a butt for crossbow practice,
and a place for this exercise, as fine and large and shady and well
provided with seats and galleries and rooms as man could desire.
There is also a similar place for shooting with the arquebus, and
water-mills for the sawing of wood, like those we have seen elsewhere,
and others for the scutching of flax and the shelling of millet.
Likewise a tree of the sort we saw at Baden and elsewhere, but not so
large. Out of the lowest branches they contrive to make the floor of
a sort of circular gallery, twenty paces or so in diameter. They next
braid these branches together in an upward direction so as to form the
side of the gallery aforesaid, and likewise let them grow upwards as
high as possible. They afterwards clip the tree, and prevent the growth
of any branch from the trunk, so far as it passes through the gallery,
which is for the space of ten feet. They take the upper branches of the
tree, and these they lay down upon supports of willow in order to form
a roof to the little chamber. Then branches are plaited from below, and
at last joined to those which grow upward from the contrary direction:
thus the whole space is filled with green growth. Then they clip the
tree as high as the top branches, which they allow to grow naturally.
The tree brought into this form is a very beautiful object. In addition
they have made spring up at its feet a fountain of water which mounts
up as high as the floor of the gallery already mentioned.

M. de Montaigne paid a visit to the burgomasters of the town, who
afterwards, to show him courtesy, came with certain other public
officers to sup at our apartments, when they brought a present of
wine for him and M. d’Estissac, and certain speeches were made on
both sides. The chief burgomaster was a man of good family who had
been brought up as a page in the house of M. d’Orléans,[47] and had
now quite forgotten French. This canton professed to be well affected
towards our interests, and had given proof of this disposition by a
refusal to join the league of the other cantons, which the late Duke
of Savoy had tried to bring about, and of which mention has been
made already. On Saturday, October 8th, we set forth at eight in
the morning, after breakfast, from Schaffhausen, where we had found
excellent lodgment at the “Crown.” One of the most learned men of the
place had a conversation with M. de Montaigne, and told him, amongst
other matters, that in truth the people of the town were not over
well disposed to our Court, forasmuch as whenever he had listened to
discourse concerning an alliance with our king, the majority of the
people were always disposed to break it, but that by the intervention
of certain rich citizens the opposite policy had hitherto been adopted.
As we left the town we saw an engine made of iron, like certain others
we had seen elsewhere, by the help of which carts could be loaded with
heavy stones without the aid of human muscles. We passed along beside
the Rhine, leaving it on our right hand, as far as Stein, a small town,
the ally of the cantons, and of the same religion as Schaffhausen. Also
on the road we observed many stone crosses. Here we again crossed
the Rhine by a wooden bridge and, still keeping beside the river on
the left, we passed by another small town allied to the Catholic
cantons. Here the Rhine spreads out to a vast width, equal to that of
the Garonne at Blaye, and then narrows itself till the approach to
Constance, a distance of four leagues.

[Illustration: CONSTANCE

_From Civitates Orbis Terrarum_

    _To face p. 96_, vol. i.
]




