The Project Gutenberg eBook of "The Kingdom of God Is Within You"
    
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: "The Kingdom of God Is Within You"

Author: graf Leo Tolstoy

Translator: Constance Garnett


        
Release date: November 1, 2003 [eBook #4602]
                Most recently updated: May 27, 2019

Language: English

Other information and formats: www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/4602

Credits: Produced by Jack Eden






Produced by Jack Eden <jackeden@yahoo.com>







[For those interested, there is a note at the end of
this document that details the adaptations made to this
work]







"THE KINGDOM OF GOD IS WITHIN YOU"
CHRISTIANITY NOT AS A MYSTIC RELIGION
BUT AS A NEW THEORY OF LIFE

TRANSLATED FROM THE RUSSIAN OF COUNT LEO TOLSTOI
BY CONSTANCE GARNETT
New York, 1894



TRANSLATOR'S PREFACE.

The book I have had the privilege of translating is, undoubtedly,
one of the most remarkable studies of the social and psychological
condition of the modern world which has appeared in Europe for
many years, and its influence is sure to be lasting and far
reaching.  Tolstoi's genius is beyond dispute.  The verdict of the
civilized world has pronounced him as perhaps the greatest
novelist of our generation.  But the philosophical and religious
works of his later years have met with a somewhat indifferent
reception.  They have been much talked about, simply because they
were his work, but, as Tolstoi himself complains, they have never
been seriously discussed.  I hardly think that he will have to
repeat the complaint in regard to the present volume.  One may
disagree with his views, but no one can seriously deny the
originality, boldness, and depth of the social conception which he
develops with such powerful logic.  The novelist has shown in this
book the religious fervor and spiritual insight of the prophet;
yet one is pleased to recognize that the artist is not wholly lost
in the thinker.  The subtle intuitive perception of the
psychological basis of the social position, the analysis of the
frame of mind of oppressors and oppressed, and of the intoxication
of Authority and Servility, as well as the purely descriptive
passages in the last chapter--these could only have come from the
author of "War and Peace."

The book will surely give all classes of readers much to think of,
and must call forth much criticism.  It must be refuted by those
who disapprove of its teaching, if they do not want it to have
great influence.

One cannot of course anticipate that English people, slow as they
are to be influenced by ideas, and instinctively distrustful of
all that is logical, will take a leap in the dark and attempt to
put Tolstoi's theory of life into practice.  But one may at least
be sure that his destructive criticism of the present social and
political RÉGIME will become a powerful force in the work of
disintegration and social reconstruction which is going on around
us.  Many earnest thinkers who, like Tolstoi, are struggling to
find their way out of the contradictions of our social order will
hail him as their spiritual guide.  The individuality of the
author is felt in every line of his work, and even the most
prejudiced cannot resist the fascination of his genuineness,
sincerity, and profound earnestness.  Whatever comes from a heart
such as his, swelling with anger and pity at the sufferings of
humanity, cannot fail to reach the hearts of others.  No reader
can put down the book without feeling himself better and more
truth-loving for having read it.

Many readers may be disappointed with the opening chapters of the
book.  Tolstoi disdains all attempt to captivate the reader.  He
begins by laying what he considers to be the logical foundation of
his doctrines, stringing together quotations from little-known
theological writers, and he keeps his own incisive logic for the
later part of the book.

One word as to the translation.  Tolstoi's style in his religious
and philosophical works differs considerably from that of his
novels.  He no longer cares about the form of his work, and his
style is often slipshod, involved, and diffuse.  It has been my
aim to give a faithful reproduction of the original.

CONSTANCE GARNETT.
January, 1894




PREFACE.

In the year 1884 I wrote a book under the title "What I Believe,"
in which I did in fact make a sincere statement of my beliefs.

In affirming my belief in Christ's teaching, I could not help
explaining why I do not believe, and consider as mistaken, the
Church's doctrine, which is usually called Christianity.

Among the many points in which this doctrine falls short of the
doctrine of Christ I pointed out as the principal one the absence
of any commandment of non-resistance to evil by force.  The
perversion of Christ's teaching by the teaching of the Church is
more clearly apparent in this than in any other point of
difference.

I know--as we all do--very little of the practice and the spoken and
written doctrine of former times on the subject of non-resistance to
evil. I knew what had been said on the subject by the fathers of the
Church--Origen, Tertullian, and others--I knew too of the existence of
some so-called sects of Mennonites, Herrnhuters, and Quakers, who do not
allow a Christian the use of weapons, and do not enter military service;
but I knew little of what had been done by these so-called sects toward
expounding the question.

My book was, as I had anticipated, suppressed by the Russian
censorship; but partly owing to my literary reputation, partly
because the book had excited people's curiosity, it circulated in
manuscript and in lithographed copies in Russia and through
translations abroad, and it evolved, on one side, from those who
shared my convictions, a series of essays with a great deal of
information on the subject, on the other side a series of
criticisms on the principles laid down in my book.

A great deal was made clear to me by both hostile and sympathetic
criticism, and also by the historical events of late years; and I
was led to fresh results and conclusions, which I wish now to
expound.

First I will speak of the information I received on the history of
the question of non-resistance to evil; then of the views of this
question maintained by spiritual critics, that is, by professed
believers in the Christian religion, and also by temporal ones,
that is, those who do not profess the Christian religion; and
lastly I will speak of the conclusions to which I have been
brought by all this in the light of the historical events of late
years.

L. TOLSTOI.
YASNAÏA POLIANA,
May 14/26, 1893.




CONTENTS.

    I. THE DOCTRINE OF NON-RESISTANCE TO EVIL BY FORCE
       HAS BEEN PROFESSED BY A MINORITY OF MEN FROM
       THE VERY FOUNDATION OF CHRISTIANITY

   II. CRITICISMS OF THE DOCTRINE OF NON-RESISTANCE TO
       EVIL BY FORCE ON THE PART OF BELIEVERS AND OF UNBELIEVERS

  III. CHRISTIANITY MISUNDERSTOOD BY BELIEVERS

   IV. CHRISTIANITY MISUNDERSTOOD BY MEN OF SCIENCE

    V. CONTRADICTION BETWEEN OUR LIFE AND OUR CHRISTIAN
       CONSCIENCE

   VI. ATTITUDE OF MEN OF THE PRESENT DAY TO WAR

  VII. SIGNIFICANCE OF COMPULSORY SERVICE

 VIII. DOCTRINE OF NON-RESISTANCE TO EVIL BY FORCE MUST
       INEVITABLY BE ACCEPTED BY MEN OF THE PRESENT DAY

   IX. THE ACCEPTANCE OF THE CHRISTIAN CONCEPTION OF
       LIFE WILL EMANCIPATE MEN FROM THE MISERIES OF OUR PAGAN
       LIFE

    X. EVIL CANNOT BE SUPRESSED BY THE PHYSICAL FORCE OF THE
       GOVERNMENT--THE MORAL PROGRESS OF HUMANITY IS BROUGHT ABOUT
       NOT ONLY BY INDIVIDUAL RECOGNITION OF THE TRUTH BUT ALSO
       THROUGH THE ESTABLISHMENT OF A PUBLIC OPINION

   XI. THE CHRISTIAN CONCEPTION OF LIFE HAS ALREADY
       ARISEN IN OUR SOCIETY, AND WILL INFALLIBLY PUT
       AN END TO THE PRESENT ORGANIZATION OF OUR LIFE
       BASED ON FORCE--WHEN THAT WILL BE

  XII. CONCLUSION--REPENT YE, FOR THE KINGDOM OF
       HEAVEN IS AT HAND




         "Ye shall know the truth, and the truth shall make you
       free. "--John viii. 32.

         "Fear not them which kill the body, but are not able to
       kill the soul; but rather fear him which is able to
       destroy both soul and body in hell."--MATT. x. 28.

         "Ye have been bought with a price; be not ye the servants
       of men."--I COR. vii. 23.





"THE KINGDOM OF GOD IS WITHIN YOU."



CHAPTER I.

THE DOCTRINE OF NON-RESISTANCE TO EVIL BY FORCE HAS BEEN PROFESSED
BY A MINORITY OF MEN FROM THE VERY FOUNDATION OF CHRISTIANITY.

Of the Book "What I Believe"--The Correspondence Evoked by it--Letters
from Quakers--Garrison's Declaration--Adin Ballou, his Works, his
Catechism--Helchitsky's "Net of Faith"--The Attitude of the World to
Works Elucidating Christ's Teaching--Dymond's Book "On War"--Musser's
"Non-resistance Asserted"--Attitude of the Government in 1818 to Men who
Refused to Serve in the Army--Hostile Attitude of Governments Generally
and of Liberals to Those who Refuse to Assist in Acts of State Violence,
and their Conscious Efforts to Silence and Suppress these Manifestations
of Christian Non-resistance.


Among the first responses called forth by my book were some letters from
American Quakers. In these letters, expressing their sympathy with my
views on the unlawfulness for a Christian of war and the use of force of
any kind, the Quakers gave me details of their own so-called sect, which
for more than two hundred years has actually professed the teaching of
Christ on non-resistance to evil by force, and does not make use of
weapons in self-defense. The Quakers sent me books, from which I learnt
how they had, years ago, established beyond doubt the duty for a
Christian of fulfilling the command of non-resistance to evil by force,
and had exposed the error of the Church's teaching in allowing war and
capital punishment.

In a whole series of arguments and texts showing that war--that
is, the wounding and killing of men--is inconsistent with a
religion founded on peace and good will toward men, the Quakers
maintain and prove that nothing has contributed so much to the
obscuring of Christian truth in the eyes of the heathen, and has
hindered so much the diffusion of Christianity through the world,
as the disregard of this command by men calling themselves
Christians, and the permission of war and violence to Christians.

"Christ's teaching, which came to be known to men, not by means of
violence and the sword," they say, "but by means of non-resistance
to evil, gentleness, meekness, and peaceableness, can only be
diffused through the world by the example of peace, harmony, and
love among its followers."

"A Christian, according to the teaching of God himself, can act
only peaceably toward all men, and therefore there can be no
authority able to force the Christian to act in opposition to the
teaching of God and to the principal virtue of the Christian in
his relation with his neighbors."

"The law of state necessity," they say, "can force only those to
change the law of God who, for the sake of earthly gains, try to
reconcile the irreconcilable; but for a Christian who sincerely
believes that following Christ's teaching will give him salvation,
such considerations of state can have no force."

Further acquaintance with the labors of the Quakers and their
works--with Fox, Penn, and especially the work of Dymond
(published in 1827)--showed me not only that the impossibility of
reconciling Christianity with force and war had been recognized
long, long ago, but that this irreconcilability had been long ago
proved so clearly and so indubitably that one could only wonder
how this impossible reconciliation of Christian teaching with the
use of force, which has been, and is still, preached in the
churches, could have been maintained in spite of it.

In addition to what I learned from the Quakers I received about
the same time, also from America, some information on the subject
from a source perfectly distinct and previously unknown to me.

The son of William Lloyd Garrison, the famous champion of the
emancipation of the negroes, wrote to me that he had read my book, in
which he found ideas similar to those expressed by his father in the
year 1838, and that, thinking it would be interesting to me to know
this, he sent me a declaration or proclamation of "non-resistance" drawn
up by his father nearly fifty years ago.

This declaration came about under the following circumstances:
William Lloyd Garrison took part in a discussion on the means of
suppressing war in the Society for the Establishment of Peace
among Men, which existed in 1838 in America.  He came to the
conclusion that the establishment of universal peace can only be
founded on the open profession of the doctrine of non-resistance
to evil by violence (Matt. v. 39), in its full significance, as
understood by the Quakers, with whom Garrison happened to be on
friendly relations. Having come to this conclusion, Garrison
thereupon composed and laid before the society a declaration,
which was signed at the time--in 1838--by many members.

   "DECLARATION OF SENTIMENTS ADOPTED BY PEACE CONVENTION.
   "Boston, 1838.

   "We the undersigned, regard it as due to ourselves, to the
   cause which we love, to the country in which we live, to
   publish a declaration expressive of the purposes we aim to
   accomplish and the measures we shall adopt to carry forward the
   work of peaceful universal reformation.

   "We do not acknowledge allegiance to any human government.  We
   recognize but one King and Lawgiver, one Judge and Ruler of
   mankind.  Our country is the world, our countrymen are all
   mankind.  We love the land of our nativity only as we love all
   other lands.  The interests and rights of American citizens are
   not dearer to us than those of the whole human race.  Hence we
   can allow no appeal to patriotism to revenge any national
   insult or injury...

   "We conceive that a nation has no right to defend itself
   against foreign enemies or to punish its invaders, and no
   individual possesses that right in his own case, and the unit
   cannot be of greater importance than the aggregate.  If
   soldiers thronging from abroad with intent to commit rapine and
   destroy life may not be resisted by the people or the
   magistracy, then ought no resistance to be offered to domestic
   troublers of the public peace or of private security.

   "The dogma that all the governments of the world are
   approvingly ordained of God, and that the powers that be in the
   United States, in Russia, in Turkey, are in accordance with his
   will, is no less absurd than impious.  It makes the impartial
   Author of our existence unequal and tyrannical. It cannot be
   affirmed that the powers that be in any nation are actuated by
   the spirit or guided by the example of Christ in the treatment
   of enemies; therefore they cannot be agreeable to the will of
   God, and therefore their overthrow by a spiritual regeneration
   of their subjects is inevitable.

   "We regard as unchristian and unlawful not only all wars,
   whether offensive or defensive, but all preparations for war;
   every naval ship, every arsenal, every fortification, we regard
   as unchristian and unlawful; the existence of any kind of
    standing army, all military chieftains, all monuments
   commemorative of victory over a fallen foe, all trophies won in
   battle, all celebrations in honor of military exploits, all
   appropriations for defense by arms; we regard as unchristian
   and unlawful every edict of government requiring of its
   subjects military service.

   "Hence we deem it unlawful to bear arms, and we cannot hold any
   office which imposes on its incumbent the obligation to compel
   men to do right on pain of imprisonment or death.  We therefore
   voluntarily exclude ourselves from every legislative and
   judicial body, and repudiate all human politics, worldly
   honors, and stations of authority.  If we cannot occupy a seat
   in the legislature or on the bench, neither can we elect others
   to act as our substitutes in any such capacity.  It follows
   that we cannot sue any man at law to force him to return
   anything he may have wrongly taken from us; if he has seized
   our coat, we shall surrender him our cloak also rather than
   subject him to punishment.

   "We believe that the penal code of the old covenant--an eye for
   an eye, and a tooth for a tooth--has been abrogated by Jesus
   Christ, and that under the new covenant the forgiveness instead
   of the punishment of enemies has been enjoined on all his
   disciples in all cases whatsoever.  To extort money from
   enemies, cast them into prison, exile or execute them, is
   obviously not to forgive but to take retribution.

   "The history of mankind is crowded with evidences proving that
   physical coercion is not adapted to moral regeneration, and
   that the sinful dispositions of men can be subdued only by
   love; that evil can be exterminated only by good; that it is
   not safe to rely upon the strength of an arm to preserve us
   from harm; that there is great security in being gentle,
   long-suffering, and abundant in mercy; that it is only the meek
   who shall inherit the earth; for those who take up the sword
   shall perish by the sword.

   "Hence as a measure of sound policy--of safety to property,
   life, and liberty--of public quietude and private enjoyment--as
   well as on the ground of allegiance to Him who is King of kings
   and Lord of lords, we cordially adopt the non-resistance
   principle, being confident that it provides for all possible
   consequences, is armed with omnipotent power, and must
   ultimately triumph over every assailing force.

   "We advocate no Jacobinical doctrines.  The spirit of
   Jacobinism is the spirit of retaliation, violence, and murder.
   It neither fears God nor regards man.  We would be filled with
   the spirit of Christ.  If we abide evil by our fundamental
   principle of not opposing evil by evil we cannot participate in
   sedition, treason, or violence.  We shall submit to every
   ordinance and every requirement of government, except such as
   are contrary to the commands of the Gospel, and in no case
   resist the operation of law, except by meekly submitting to the
   penalty of disobedience.

   "But while we shall adhere to the doctrine of non-resistance
   and passive submission to enemies, we purpose, in a moral and
   spiritual sense, to assail iniquity in high places and in low
   places, to apply our principles to all existing evil,
   political, legal, and ecclesiastical institutions, and to
   hasten the time when the kingdoms of this world will have
   become the kingdom of our Lord Jesus Christ.  It appears to us
   a self-evident truth that whatever the Gospel is designed to
   destroy at any period of the world, being contrary to it, ought
   now to be abandoned.  If, then, the time is predicted when
   swords shall be beaten into plowshares and spears into pruning
   hooks, and men shall not learn the art of war any more, it
   follows that all who manufacture, sell, or wield these deadly
   weapons do thus array themselves against the peaceful dominion
   of the Son of God on earth.

   "Having thus stated our principles, we proceed to specify the
   measures we propose to adopt in carrying our object into
   effect.

   "We expect to prevail through the Foolishness of Preaching.  We
   shall endeavor to promulgate our views among all persons, to
   whatever nation, sect, or grade of society they may belong.
   Hence we shall organize public lectures, circulate tracts and
   publications, form societies, and petition every governing
   body.  It will be our leading object to devise ways and means
   for effecting a radical change in the views, feelings, and
   practices of society respecting the sinfulness of war and the
   treatment of enemies.

   "In entering upon the great work before us, we are not
   unmindful that in its prosecution we may be called to test
   our sincerity even as in a fiery ordeal.  It may subject us to
   insult, outrage, suffering, yea, even death itself.  We
   anticipate no small amount of misconception, misrepresentation,
   and calumny.  Tumults may arise against us.  The proud and
   pharisaical, the ambitious and tyrannical, principalities and
   powers, may combine to crush us.  So they treated the Messiah
   whose example we are humbly striving to imitate.  We shall not
   be afraid of their terror.  Our confidence is in the Lord
   Almighty and not in man.  Having withdrawn from human
   protection, what can sustain us but that faith which overcomes
   the world?  We shall not think it strange concerning the fiery
   trial which is to try us, but rejoice inasmuch as we are
   partakers of Christ's sufferings.

   "Wherefore we commit the keeping of our souls to God. For every
   one that forsakes houses, or brethren, or sisters, or father,
   or mother, or wife, or children, or lands for Christ's sake,
   shall receive a hundredfold, and shall inherit everlasting
   life.

   "Firmly relying upon the certain and universal triumph of the
   sentiments contained in this declaration, however formidable
   may be the opposition arrayed against them, we hereby affix our
   signatures to it; commending it to the reason and conscience of
   mankind, and resolving, in the strength of the Lord God, to
   calmly and meekly abide the issue."

Immediately after this declaration a Society for Non-resistance was
founded by Garrison, and a journal called the NON-RESISTANT, in
which the doctrine of non-resistance was advocated in its full
significance and in all its consequences, as it had been expounded
in the declaration.  Further information as to the ultimate
destiny of the society and the journal I gained from the excellent
biography of W. L. Garrison, the work of his son.

The society and the journal did not exist for long.  The
greater number of Garrison's fellow-workers in the movement for
the liberation of the slaves, fearing that the too radical
programme of the journal, the NON-RESISTANT, might keep people
away from the practical work of negro-emancipation, gave up the
profession of the principle of non-resistance as it had been
expressed in the declaration, and both society and journal ceased
to exist.

This declaration of Garrison's gave so powerful and eloquent an
expression of a confession of faith of such importance to men,
that one would have thought it must have produced a strong
impression on people, and have become known throughout the world
and the subject of discussion on every side.  But nothing of the
kind occurred.  Not only was it unknown in Europe, even the
Americans, who have such a high opinion of Garrison, hardly knew
of the declaration.

Another champion of non-resistance has been overlooked in the same
way--the American Adin Ballou, who lately died, after spending fifty
years in preaching this doctrine. Lord God, to calmly and meekly abide
the doctrine. How great the ignorance is of everything relating to the
question of non-resistance may be seen from the fact that Garrison the
son, who has written an excellent biography of his father in four great
volumes, in answer to my inquiry whether there are existing now
societies for non-resistance, and adherents of the doctrine, told me
that as far as he knew that society had broken up, and that there were
no adherents of that doctrine, while at the very time when he was
writing to me there was living, at Hopedale in Massachusetts, Adin
Ballou, who had taken part in the labors of Garrison the father, and had
devoted fifty years of his life to advocating, both orally and in print,
the doctrine of non-resistance. Later on I received a letter from Wilson,
a pupil and colleague of Ballou's, and entered into correspondence with
Ballou himself. I wrote to Ballou, and he answered me and sent me his
works. Here is the summary of some extracts from them:

   "Jesus Christ is my Lord and teacher," says Ballou in one of
   his essays exposing the inconsistency of Christians who allowed
   a right of self-defense and of warfare.  "I have promised
   leaving all else, to follow good and through evil, to death
   itself.  But I am a citizen of the democratic republic of the
   United States; and in allegiance to it I have sworn to defend
   the Constitution of my country, if need be, with my life.
   Christ requires of me to do unto others as I would they should
   do unto me.  The Constitution of the United States requires of
   me to do unto two millions of slaves [at that time there were
   slaves; now one might venture to substitute the word
   'laborers'] the very opposite of what I would they should do
   unto me--that is to help to keep them in their present
   condition of slavery.  And, in spite of this, I continue to
   elect or be elected, I propose to vote, I am even ready to be
   appointed to any office under government.  That will not hinder
   me from being a Christian.  I shall still profess Christianity,
   and shall find no difficulty in carrying out my covenant
   with Christ and with the government.

   "Jesus Christ forbids me to resist evil doers, and to take from
   them an eye for an eye, a tooth for a tooth, bloodshed for
   bloodshed, and life for life.

   "My government demands from me quite the opposite, and bases a
   system of self-defense on gallows, musket, and sword, to be
   used against its foreign and domestic foes.  And the land is
   filled accordingly with gibbets, prisons, arsenals, ships of
   war, and soldiers.

   "In the maintenance and use of these expensive appliances for
   murder, we can very suitably exercise to the full the virtues
   of forgiveness to those who injure us, love toward our enemies,
   blessings to those who curse us, and doing good to those who
   hate us.

   "For this we have a succession of Christian priests to pray for
   us and beseech the blessing of Heaven on the holy work of
   slaughter.

   "I see all this (i. e., the contradiction between profession and
   practice), and I continue to profess religion and take part in
   government, and pride myself on being at the same time a devout
   Christian and a devoted servant of the government.  I do not
   want to agree with these senseless notions of non-resistance.
   I cannot renounce my authority and leave only immoral men in
   control of the government.  The Constitution says the
   government has the right to declare war, and I assent to this
   and support it, and swear that I will support it.  And I do not
   for that cease to be a Christian. War, too, is a Christian
   duty.  Is it not a Christian duty to kill hundreds of thousands
   of one's fellow-men, to outrage women, to raze and burn towns,
   and to practice every possible cruelty?  It is time to dismiss
   all these false sentimentalities.  It is the truest means of
   forgiving injuries and loving enemies.  If we only do it in the
   spirit of love, nothing can be more Christian than such
   murder."

In another pamphlet, entitled "How many Men are Necessary to
Change a Crime into a Virtue?" he says: "One man may not kill.  If
he kills a fellow-creature, he is a murderer.  If two, ten, a
hundred men do so, they, too, are murderers.  But a government or
a nation may kill as many men as it chooses, and that will not be
murder, but a great and noble action.  Only gather the people
together on a large scale, and a battle of ten thousand men
becomes an innocent action.  But precisely how many people must
there be to make it so?--that is the question.  One man cannot
plunder and pillage, but a whole nation can.  But precisely how
many are needed to make it permissible?  Why is it that one man,
ten, a hundred, may not break the law of God, but a great number
may?"

And here is a version of Ballou's catechism composed for his
flock:

   CATECHISM OF NON-RESISTANCE.

   Q. Whence is the word "non-resistance" derived?

   A. From the command, "Resist not evil." (M. v. 39.)

   Q. What does this word express?

   A. It expresses a lofty Christian virtue enjoined on us by
   Christ.

   Q. Ought the word "non-resistance" to be taken in its widest
   sense--that is to say, as intending that we should not offer
   any resistance of any kind to evil?

   A. No; it ought to be taken in the exact sense of our Saviour's
   teaching--that is, not repaying evil for evil.  We ought to
   oppose evil by every righteous means in our power, but not by
   evil.

   Q. What is there to show that Christ enjoined non-resistance in
   that sense?

   A. It is shown by the words he uttered at the same time.  He
   said: "Ye have heard, it was said of old, An eye for an eye,
   and a tooth for a tooth.  But I say unto you Resist not evil.
   But if one smites thee on the right cheek, turn him the other
   also; and if one will go to law with thee to take thy coat from
   thee, give him thy cloak also."

   Q. Of whom was he speaking in the words, "Ye have heard it was
   said of old"?

   A. Of the patriarchs and the prophets, contained in the Old
   Testament, which the Hebrews ordinarily call the Law and the
   Prophets.

   Q. What utterances did Christ refer to in the words, "It was
   said of old"?

   A. The utterances of Noah, Moses, and the other prophets, in
   which they admit the right of doing bodily harm to those who
   inflict harm, so as to punish and prevent evil deeds.

   Q. Quote such utterances.

   A. "Whoso sheddeth man's blood, by man shall his blood be
   shed."--GEN. ix. 6.

   "He that smiteth a man, so that he die, shall be surely put to
   death... And if any mischief follow, then thou shalt give life
   for life, eye for eye, tooth for tooth, hand for hand, foot for
   foot, burning for burning, wound for wound, stripe for stripe."
   --Ex. xxi. 12 and 23-25.

   "He that killeth any man shall surely be put to death.  And if
   a man cause a blemish in his neighbor, as he hath done, so
   shall it be done unto him: breach for breach, eye for eye,
   tooth for tooth."--LEV. xxiv. 17, 19, 20.

   "Then the judges shall make diligent inquisition; and behold,
   if the witness be a false witness, and hath testified falsely
   against his brother, then shall ye do unto him as he had
   thought to have done unto his brother... And thine eye shall not
   pity; but life shall go for life, eye for eye, tooth for tooth,
   hand for hand, foot for foot."--DEUT. xix. 18, 21.

   Noah, Moses, and the Prophets taught that he who kills, maims,
   or injures his neighbors does evil.  To resist such evil, and
   to prevent it, the evil doer must be punished with death, or
   maiming, or some physical injury.  Wrong must be opposed by
   wrong, murder by murder, injury by injury, evil by evil.  Thus
   taught Noah, Moses, and the Prophets.  But Christ rejects all
   this.  "I say unto you," is written in the Gospel, "resist not
   evil," do not oppose injury with injury, but rather bear
   repeated injury from the evil doer.  What was permitted is
   forbidden.  When we understand what kind of resistance they
   taught, we know exactly what resistance Christ forbade.

   Q. Then the ancients allowed the resistance of injury by
   injury?

   A. Yes. But Jesus forbids it. The Christian has in no case the
   right to put to death his neighbor who has done him evil, or to
   do him injury in return.

   Q. May he kill or maim him in self-defense?

   A. No.

   Q. May he go with a complaint to the judge that he who has
   wronged him may be punished?

   A. No. What he does through others, he is in reality doing
   himself.

   Q. Can he fight in conflict with foreign enemies or disturbers
   of the peace?

   A. Certainly not. He cannot take any part in war or in
   preparations for war.  He cannot make use of a deadly weapon.
   He cannot oppose injury to injury, whether he is alone or with
   others, either in person or through other people.

   Q. Can he voluntarily vote or furnish soldiers for the
   government?

   A. He can do nothing of that kind if he wishes to be faithful
   to Christ's law.

   Q. Can he voluntarily give money to aid a government resting on
   military force, capital punishment, and violence in general?

   A. No, unless the money is destined for some special object,
   right in itself, and good both in aim and means.

   Q. Can he pay taxes to such a government?

   A. No; he ought not voluntarily to pay taxes, but he ought not
   to resist the collecting of taxes.  A tax is levied by the
   government, and is exacted independently of the will of the
   subject.  It is impossible to resist it without having recourse
   to violence of some kind.  Since the Christian cannot employ
   violence, he is obliged to offer his property at once to the
   loss by violence inflicted on it by the authorities.

   Q. Can a Christian give a vote at elections, or take part in
   government or law business?

   A. No; participation in election, government, or law business
   is participation in government by force.

   Q. Wherein lies the chief significance of the doctrine of
   non-resistance?

   A. In the fact that it alone allows of the possibility of
   eradicating evil from one's own heart, and also from one's
   neighbor's.  This doctrine forbids doing that whereby evil has
   endured for ages and multiplied in the world.  He who attacks
   another and injures him, kindles in the other a feeling of
   hatred, the root of every evil.  To injure another because he
   has injured us, even with the aim of overcoming evil, is
   doubling the harm for him and for oneself; it is begetting, or
   at least setting free and inciting, that evil spirit which we
   should wish to drive out.  Satan can never be driven out by
   Satan.  Error can never be corrected by error, and evil cannot
   be vanquished by evil.

   True non-resistance is the only real resistance to evil.  It is
   crushing the serpent's head.  It destroys and in the end
   extirpates the evil feeling.

   Q. But if that is the true meaning of the rule of non-resistance,
   can it always put into practice?

   A. It can be put into practice like every virtue enjoined by
   the law of God.  A virtue cannot be practiced in all
   circumstances without self-sacrifice, privation, suffering, and
   in extreme cases loss of life itself.  But he who esteems life
   more than fulfilling the will of God is already dead to the
   only true life.  Trying to save his life he loses it.  Besides,
   generally speaking, where non-resistance costs the sacrifice of
   a single life or of some material welfare, resistance costs a
   thousand such sacrifices.

   Non-resistance is Salvation; Resistance is Ruin.

   It is incomparably less dangerous to act justly than unjustly,
   to submit to injuries than to resist them with violence, less
   dangerous even in one's relations to the present life.  If all
   men refused to resist evil by evil our world would be happy.

   Q. But so long as only a few act thus, what will happen to
   them?

   A. If only one man acted thus, and all the rest agreed
   to crucify him, would it not be nobler for him to die in the
   glory of non-resisting love, praying for his enemies, than to
   live to wear the crown of Caesar stained with the blood of the
   slain?  However, one man, or a thousand men, firmly resolved
   not to oppose evil by evil are far more free from danger by
   violence than those who resort to violence, whether among
   civilized or savage neighbors.  The robber, the murderer, and
   the cheat will leave them in peace, sooner than those who
   oppose them with arms, and those who take up the sword shall
   perish by the sword, but those who seek after peace, and behave
   kindly and harmlessly, forgiving and forgetting injuries, for
   the most part enjoy peace, or, if they die, they die blessed.
   In this way, if all kept the ordinance of non-resistance, there
   would obviously be no evil nor crime.  If the majority acted
   thus they would establish the rule of love and good will even
   over evil doers, never opposing evil with evil, and never
   resorting to force.  If there were a moderately large minority
   of such men, they would exercise such a salutary moral
   influence on society that every cruel punishment would be
   abolished, and violence and feud would be replaced by peace and
   love.  Even if there were only a small minority of them, they
   would rarely experience anything worse than the world's
   contempt, and meantime the world, though unconscious of it, and
   not grateful for it, would be continually becoming wiser and
   better for their unseen action on it.  And if in the worst case
   some members of the minority were persecuted to death, in dying
   for the truth they would have left behind them their doctrine,
   sanctified by the blood of their martyrdom.  Peace, then, to
   all who seek peace, and may overruling love be the imperishable
   heritage of every soul who obeys willingly Christ's word,
   "Resist not evil."

   ADIN BALLOU.

For fifty years Ballou wrote and published books dealing
principally with the question of non-resistance to evil by force.
In these works, which are distinguished by the clearness of their
thought and eloquence of exposition, the question is looked at
from every possible side, and the binding nature of this command
on every Christian who acknowledges the Bible as the revelation of
God is firmly established.  All the ordinary objections to the
doctrine of non-resistance from the Old and New Testaments are
brought forward, such as the expulsion of the moneychangers from
the Temple, and so on, and arguments follow in disproof of them
all.  The practical reasonableness of this rule of conduct is
shown independently of Scripture, and all the objections
ordinarily made against its practicability are stated and refuted.
Thus one chapter in a book of his treats of non-resistance in
exceptional cases, and he owns in this connection that if there
were cases in which the rule of non-resistance were impossible of
application, it would prove that the law was not universally
authoritative.  Quoting these cases, he shows that it is precisely
in them that the application of the rule is both necessary and
reasonable.  There is no aspect of the question, either on his
side or on his opponents', which he has not followed up in his
writings.  I mention all this to show the unmistakable interest
which such works ought to have for men who make a profession of
Christianity, and because one would have thought Ballou's work
would have been well known, and the ideas expressed by him would
lave been either accepted or refuted; but such has not been the
case.

The work of Garrison, the father, in his foundation of the Society
of Non-resistants and his Declaration, even more than my
correspondence with the Quakers, convinced me of the fact that the
departure of the ruling form of Christianity from the law of
Christ on non-resistance by force is an error that has long been
observed and pointed out, and that men have labored, and are still
laboring, to correct.  Ballou's work confirmed me still more in
this view.  But the fate of Garrison, still more that of Ballou,
in being completely unrecognized in spite of fifty years of
obstinate and persistent work in the same direction, confirmed me
in the idea that there exists a kind of tacit but steadfast
conspiracy of silence about all such efforts.

Ballou died in August, 1890, and there was as obituary notice of him in
an American journal of Christian views (RELIGIO-PHILOSOPHICAL JOURNAL,
August 23). In this laudatory notice it is recorded that Ballou was the
spiritual director of a parish, that he delivered from eight to nine
thousand sermons, married one thousand couples, and wrote about five
hundred articles; but there is not a single word said of the object to
which he devoted his life; even the word "non-resistance" is not
mentioned. Precisely as it was with all the preaching of the Quakers for
two hundred years and, too, with the efforts of Garrison the father, the
foundation of his society and journal, and his Declaration, so it is
with the life-work of Ballou. It seems just as though it did not exist
and never had existed.

We have an astounding example of the obscurity of works which aim
at expounding the doctrine of non-resistance to evil by force, and
at confuting those who do not recognize this commandment, in the
book of the Tsech Helchitsky, which has only lately been noticed
and has not hitherto been printed.

Soon after the appearance of my book in German, I received a
letter from Prague, from a professor of the university there,
informing me of the existence of a work, never yet printed, by
Helchitsky, a Tsech of the fifteenth century, entitled "The Net of
Faith."  In this work, the professor told me, Helchitsky expressed
precisely the same view as to true and false Christianity as I had
expressed in my book "What I Believe."  The professor wrote to me
that Helchitsky's work was to be published for the first time in
the Tsech language in the JOURNAL OF THE PETERSBURG ACADEMY OF
SILENCE.  Since I could not obtain the book itself, I tried to
make myself acquainted with what was known of Helchitsky, and I
gained the following information from a German book sent me by the
Prague professor and from Pypin's history of Tsech literature.
This was Pypin's account:

   "'The Net of Faith' is Christ's teaching, which ought to draw
   man up out of the dark depths of the sea of worldliness and his
   own iniquity.  True faith consists in believing God's Word; but
   now a time has come when men mistake the true faith for heresy,
   and therefore it is for the reason to point out what the true
   faith consists in, if anyone does not know this.  It is hidden
   in darkness from men, and they do not recognize the true law of
   Christ.

   "To make this law plain, Helchitsky points to the primitive
   organization of Christian society--the organization which, he
   says, is now regarded in the Roman Church as an abominable
   heresy. This Primitive Church was his special ideal of social
   organization, founded on equality, liberty, and fraternity.
   Christianity, in Helchitsky's view, still preserves these
   elements, and it is only necessary for society to return to its
   pure doctrine to render unnecessary every other form of social
   order in which kings and popes are essential; the law of love
   would alone be sufficient in every case.

   "Historically, Helchitsky attributes the degeneration of
   Christianity to the times of Constantine the Great, whom he
   Pope Sylvester admitted into the Christian Church with all his
   heathen morals and life.  Constantine, in his turn, endowed the
   Pope with worldly riches and power.  From that time forward
   these two ruling powers were constantly aiding one another to
   strive for nothing but outward glory.  Divines and
   ecclesiastical dignitaries began to concern themselves only
   about subduing the whole world to their authority, incited men
   against one another to murder and plunder, and in creed and
   life reduced Christianity to a nullity. Helchitsky denies
   completely the right to make war and to inflict the punishment
   of death; every soldier, even the 'knight,' is only a violent
   evil doer--a murderer."

The same account is given by the German book, with the addition of
a few biographical details and some extracts from Helchitsky's
writings.

Having learnt the drift of Helchitsky's teaching in this way, I
awaited all the more impatiently the appearance of "The Net of
Faith" in the journal of the Academy.  But one year passed, then
two and three, and still the book did not appear.  It was only in 1888
that I learned that the printing of the book, which had been
begun, was stopped.  I obtained the proofs of what had been
printed and read them through.  It is a marvelous book from every
point of view.

Its general tenor is given with perfect accuracy by Pypin.
Helchitsky's fundamental idea is that Christianity, by allying
itself with temporal power in the days of Constantine, and by
continuing to develop in such conditions, has become completely
distorted, and has ceased to be Christian altogether.  Helchitsky
gave the title "The Net of Faith" to his book, taking as his motto
the verse of the Gospel about the calling of the disciples to be
fishers of men; and, developing this metaphor, he says:

   "Christ, by means of his disciples, would have caught all the
   world in his net of faith, but the greater fishes broke the net
   and escaped out of it, and all the rest have slipped through
   the holes made by the greater fishes, so that the net has
   remained quite empty.  The greater fishes who broke the net are
   the rulers, emperors, popes, kings, who have not renounced
   power, and instead of true Christianity have put on what is
   simply a mask of it."

Helchitsky teaches precisely what has been and is taught in these
days by the non-resistant Mennonites and Quakers, and in former
tunes by the Bogomilites, Paulicians, and many others.  He teaches
that Christianity, expecting from its adherents gentleness,
meekness, peaceableness, forgiveness of injuries, turning the
other cheek when one is struck, and love for enemies, is
inconsistent with the use of force, which is an indispensable
condition of authority.

The Christian, according to Helchitsky's reasoning, not only
cannot be a ruler or a soldier; he cannot take any part in
government nor in trade, or even be a landowner; he can only be an
artisan or a husbandman.

This book is one of the few works attacking official Christianity
which has escaped being burned.  All such so-called heretical
works were burned at the stake, together with their authors, so
that there are few ancient works exposing the errors of official
Christianity.  The book has a special interest for this reason
alone.  But apart from its interest from every point of view, it
is one of the most remarkable products of thought for its depth of
aim, for the astounding strength and beauty of the national
language in which it is written, and for its antiquity. And yet
for more than four centuries it has remained unprinted, and is
still unknown, except to a few learned specialists.

One would have thought that all such works, whether of the
Quakers, of Garrison, of Ballou, or of Helchitsky, asserting and
proving as they do, on the principles of the Gospel, that our
modern world takes a false view of Christ's teaching, would have
awakened interest, excitement, talk, and discussion among
spiritual teachers and their flocks alike.

Works of this kind, dealing with the very essence of Christian
doctrine, ought, one would have thought, to have been examined and
accepted as true, or refuted and rejected.  But nothing of the
kind has occurred, and the same fate has been repeated with all
those works.  Men of the most diverse views, believers, and, what
is surprising, unbelieving liberals also, as though by agreement,
all preserve the same persistent silence about them, and all that
has been done by people to explain the true meaning of Christ's
doctrine remains either ignored or forgotten.

But it is still more astonishing that two other books, of
which I heard on the appearance of my book, should be so little
known, I mean Dymond's book "On War," published for the first time
in London in 1824, and Daniel Musser's book on "Non-resistance,"
written in 1864.  It is particularly astonishing that these books
should be unknown, because, apart from their intrinsic merits,
both books treat not so much of the theory as of the practical
application of the theory to life, of the attitude of Christianity
to military service, which is especially important and interesting
now in these clays of universal conscription.

People will ask, perhaps: How ought a subject to behave who
believes that war is inconsistent with his religion while the
government demands from him that he should enter military service?

This question is, I think, a most vital one, and the answer to it
is specially important in these days of universal conscription.
All--or at least the great majority of the people--are Christians,
and all men are called upon for military service.  How ought a
man, as a Christian, to meet this demand?  This is the gist of
Dymond's answer:

   "His duty is humbly but steadfastly to refuse to serve."

There are some people, who, without any definite reasoning about
it, conclude straightway that the responsibility of government
measures rests entirely on those who resolve on them, or that the
governments and sovereigns decide the question of what is good or
bad for their subjects, and the duty of the subjects is merely to
obey. I think that arguments of this kind only obscure men's
conscience.  I cannot take part in the councils of government, and
therefore I am not responsible for its misdeeds..  Indeed, but we
are responsible for our own misdeeds.  And the misdeeds of our
rulers become our own, if we, knowing that they are misdeeds,
assist in carrying, them out.  Those who suppose that they are
bound to obey the government, and that the responsibility for the
misdeeds they commit is transferred from them to their rulers,
deceive themselves.  They say:  "We give our acts up to the will
of others, and our acts cannot be good or bad; there is no merit
in what is good nor responsibility for what is evil in our
actions, since they are not done of our own will."

It is remarkable that the very same thing is said in the
instructions to soldiers which they make them learn--that is, that
the officer is alone responsible for the consequences of his
command.  But this is not right.  A man cannot get rid of the
responsibility, for his own actions.  And that is clear from the
following example.  If your officer commands you to kill your
neighbor's child, to kill your father or your mother, would you
obey?  If you would not obey, the whole argument falls to the
ground, for if you can disobey the governors in one case, where do
you draw the line up to which you can obey them?  There is no line
other than that laid down by Christianity, and that line is both
reasonable and practicable.

And therefore we consider it the duty of every man who thinks war
inconsistent with Christianity, meekly but firmly to refuse to
serve in the army.  And let those whose lot it is to act thus,
remember that the fulfillment of a great duty rests with them.
The destiny of humanity in the world depends, so far as it depends
on men at all, on their fidelity to their religion.  Let them
confess their conviction, and stand up for it, and not in words
alone, but in sufferings too, if need be.  If you believe that
Christ forbade murder, pay no heed to the arguments nor to the
commands of those who call on you to bear a hand in it.  By such a
steadfast refusal to make use of force, you call down on
yourselves the blessing promised to those "who hear these sayings
and do them," and the time will come when the world will recognize
you as having aided in the reformation of mankind.

Musser's book is called "Non-resistance Asserted," or "Kingdom of
Christ and Kingdoms of this World Separated."  This book is
devoted to the same question, and was written when the American
Government was exacting military service from its citizens at the
time of the Civil War.  And it has, too, a value for all time,
dealing with the question how, in such circumstances, people
should and can refuse to enter military service. Here is the tenor
of the author's introductory remarks:

   "It is well known that there are many persons in the United
   States who refuse to fight on grounds of conscience.  They are
   called the 'defenseless,' or 'non-resistant' Christians.  These
   Christians refuse to defend their country, to bear arms, or at
   the call of government to make war on its enemies.  Till lately
   this religious scruple seemed a valid excuse to the government,
   and those who urged it were let off service.  But at the
   beginning of our Civil War public opinion was agitated on this
   subject.  It was natural that persons who considered it their
   duty to bear all the hardships and dangers of war in defense of
   their country should feel resentment against those persons who
   had for long shared with them the advantages of the protection
   of government, and who now in time of need and danger would not
   share in bearing the labors and dangers of its defense.  It was
   even natural that they should declare the attitude of such men
   monstrous, irrational, and suspicious."

A host of orators and writers, our author tells us, arose to oppose this
attitude, and tried to prove the sinfulness of non-resistance, both from
Scripture and on common-sense grounds. And this was perfectly natural,
and in many cases the authors were right--right, that is, in regard to
persons who did not renounce the benefits they received from the
government and tried to avoid the hardships of military service, but not
right in regard to the principle of non-resistance itself. Above all,
our author proves the binding nature of the rule of non-resistance for a
Christian, pointing out that this command is perfectly clear, and is
enjoined upon every Christian by Christ without possibility of
misinterpretation. "Bethink yourselves whether it is righteous to obey
man more than God," said Peter and John. And this is precisely what
ought to be the attitude to every man who wishes to be Christian to the
claim on him for military service, when Christ has said, "Resist not
evil by force." As for the question of the principle itself, the author
regards that as decided. As to the second question, whether people have
the right to refuse to serve in the army who have not refused the
benefits conferred by a government resting on force, the author
considers it in detail, and arrives at the conclusion that a Christian
following the law of Christ, since he does not go to war, ought not
either to take advantage of any institutions of government, courts of
law, or elections, and that in his private concerns he must not have
recourse to the authorities, the police, or the law. Further on in the
book he treats of the relation of the Old Testament to the New, the
value of government for those who are Christians, and makes some
observations on the doctrine of non-resistance and the attacks made on
it. The author concludes his book by saying: "Christians do not need
government, and therefore they cannot either obey it in what is contrary
to Christ's teaching nor, still less, take part in it." Christ took his
disciples out of the world, he says. They do not expect worldly
blessings and worldly happiness, but they expect eternal life. The
Spirit in whom they live makes them contented and happy in every
position. If the world tolerates them, they are always happy. If the
world will not leave them in peace, they will go elsewhere, since they
are pilgrims on the earth and they have no fixed place of habitation.
They believe that "the dead may bury their dead." One thing only is
needful for them, "to follow their Master."

Even putting aside the question as to the principle laid down in these
two books as to the Christian's duty in his attitude to war, one cannot
help perceiving the practical importance and the urgent need of deciding
the question.

There are people, hundreds of thousands of Quakers, Mennonites,
all our Douhobortsi, Molokani, and others who do not belong to any
definite sect, who consider that the use of force--and,
consequently, military service--is inconsistent with Christianity.
Consequently there are every year among us in Russia some men
called upon for military service who refuse to serve on the ground
of their religious convictions.  Does the government let them off
then?  No.  Does it compel them to go, and in case of disobedience
punish them?  No. This was how the government treated them in
1818.  Here is an extract from the diary of Nicholas Myravyov of
Kars, which was not passed by the censor, and is not known in
Russia:

   "Tiflis, October 2, 1818.

   "In the morning the commandant told me that five peasants
   belonging to a landowner in the Tamboff government had lately
   been sent to Georgia.  These men had been sent for soldiers,
   but they would not serve; they had been several times flogged
   and made to run the gauntlet, but they would submit readily to
   the cruelest tortures, and even to death, rather than serve.
   'Let us go,' they said, 'and leave us alone; we will not hurt
   anyone; all men are equal, and the Tzar is a man like us; why
   should we pay him tribute; why should I expose my life to
   danger to kill in battle some man who has done me no harm?  You
   can cut us to pieces and we will not be soldiers.  He who has
   compassion on us will give us charity, but as for the
   government rations, we have not had them and we do not want to
   have them.'  These were the words of those peasants, who declare
   that there are numbers like them Russia.  They brought them
   four times before the Committee of Ministers, and at last
   decided to lay the matter before the Tzar who gave orders that
   they should be taken to Georgia for correction, and commanded
   the commander-in-chief to send him a report every month of
   their gradual success in bringing these peasants to a better
   mind."

How the correction ended is not known, as the whole episode indeed
was unknown, having been kept in profound secrecy.

This was how the government behaved seventy-five years ago--this
is how it has behaved in a great cumber of cases, studiously
concealed from the people.  And this is how the government behaves
now, except in the case of the German Mennonites, living in the
province of Kherson, whose plea against military service is
considered well grounded.  They are made to work off their term of
service in labor in the forests.

But in the recent cases of refusal on the part of Mennonites to
serve in the army on religious grounds, the government authorities
have acted in the following manner:

To begin with, they have recourse to every means of coercion used
in our times to "correct" the culprit and bring him to "a better
mind," and these measures are carried out with the greatest
secrecy.  I know that in the case of one man who declined to serve
in 1884 in Moscow, the official correspondence on the subject had
two months after his refusal accumulated into a big folio, and was
kept absolutely secret among the Ministry.

They usually begin by sending the culprit to the priests, and the
latter, to their shame be it said, always exhort him to obedience.
But since the exhortation in Christ's name to forswear Christ is
for the most part unsuccessful, after he has received the
admonitions of the spiritual authorities, they send him to the
gendarmes, and the latter, finding, as a rule, no political cause
for offense in him, dispatch him back again, and then he is sent
to the learned men, to the doctors, and to the madhouse.  During
all these vicissitudes he is deprived of liberty and has to endure
every kind of humiliation and suffering as a convicted criminal.
(All this has been repeated in four cases.)  The doctors let him
out of the madhouse, and then every kind of secret shift is
employed to prevent him from going free--whereby others would be
encouraged to refuse to serve as he has done--and at the same time
to avoid leaving him among the soldiers, for fear they too should
learn from him that military service is not at all their duty by
the law of God, as they are assured, but quite contrary to it.

The most convenient thing for the government would be to kill the
non-resistant by flogging him to death or some other means, as was
done in former days.  But to put a man openly to death because he
believes in the creed we all confess is impossible.  To let a man
alone who has refused obedience is also impossible.  And so the
government tries either to compel the man by ill-treatment to
renounce Christ, or in some way or other to get rid of him
unobserved, without openly putting him to death, and to hide
somehow both the action and the man himself from other people.
And so all kinds of shifts and wiles and cruelties are set on foot
against him.  They either send him to the frontier or provoke him
to insubordination, and then try him for breach of discipline and
shut him up in the prison of the disciplinary battalion, where
they can ill treat him freely unseen by anyone, or they declare
him mad, and lock him up in a lunatic asylum.  They sent one man
in this way to Tashkend--that is, they pretended to transfer to
the Tashkend army; another to Omsk; a third him they convicted of
insubordination and shut up in prison; a fourth they sent to a
lunatic asylum.

Everywhere the same story is repeated.  Not only the government,
but the great majority of liberal, advanced people, as they are
called, studiously turn away from everything that has been said,
written, or done, or is being done by men to prove the
incompatibility of force in its most awful, gross, and glaring
form--in the form, that is, of an army of soldiers prepared to
murder anyone, whoever it may be--with the teachings of
Christianity, or even of the humanity which society professes as
its creed.

So that the information I have gained of the attitude of the
higher ruling classes, not only in Russia but in Europe and
America, toward the elucidation of this question has convinced me
that there exists in these ruling classes a consciously hostile
attitude to true Christianity, which is shown pre-eminently in
their reticence in regard to all manifestations of it.




