CHAPTER VIII.

ALLIED PSYCHIC PHASES

The faculty of second sight is not by any means the most
common of the psychic powers. Psychometric impressions which
proceed by the sense of touch into that of a superior order of
feeling are far more general. We are affected much more than is
generally recognized by the impressions gathered from the things
we have contact with, and it is quite a common experience that
very delicate and sensitive people take the "atmosphere" of places
into which they go. I have in mind an instance of an extremely
high-keyed person who invariably takes on the atmosphere of
new localities, houses and even rooms. Going to view a house
with the object of taking it on rental, she will as likely as not
pronounce against the moment she enters on the ground that it is
a "house of death" or a "quarrelsome house," full of sickness,
intemperance or what not, and wherever enquiry has been
possible it has invariably confirmed her impressions. On one
occasion she had telegraphed to engage a room at an hotel in a
seaside town, and on being shown to it by the maid found that it
was locked. While the maid went to fetch the key the young
lady tried the door and immediately received a psychometric
impression. "Oh, M--," she said to her companion, "we cannot
possibly have this room, there's a corpse in it!" This was
confirmed, almost as soon as said, by the appearance of the
proprietor, who explained that the maid had made a mistake in
the number of the room, and then, feeling that there was a state of
tension, confidentially informed his visitors that the locked room
had really been booked to them but the old lady who was to have
vacated it that morning had unfortunately died, and in order not
to distress the other visitors the door had been locked pending the
removal of the body, and even the servants had not been
informed of it.

The experiments of Denton recorded in his _Soul of Things_ are
full of interest for those who would learn something more about
the phenomena of psychometry.

The suggestion is that every particle of matter has its own aura or
"atmosphere" in which are stored up the experiences of that
particle. What is said of the particle applies also to the mass of
any body, and in effect we get the aura of a room, of a house, of a
town, of a city; and so successively until we come to that of the
planet itself. These stored-up impressions are not caused by the
mental action of human beings in association with the material
psychometrized, they appertain entirely to the associations of the
material itself, and the psychometric sense consists in recovering
these associations and bringing them into terms of human sense
and consciousness. The experience seems to suggest a nexus
between the individualized human soul and the world-soul in
which the generic life is included; also that the human soul is a
specialized evolution from the world-soul, and hence inclusive of
all stages of experience beneath the human. I think it was Draper
who suggested in his _Conflict_ that a man's shadow falling upon
a wall produced an indelible impression which was capable of
being revived. The cinematograph film is that brick wall raised to
the nth power of impressibility. The occultist will point you to a
universal medium as much above the cinema film as that is above
the brick or stone, and in which are stored up the _memoria
mundi_. It is this sensitized envelope of the planetary atom that
your sensitive taps by means of his clairvoyant, psychometric and
clairaudient senses.

Clairaudience is far more general than second sight, but there is
the same variability in the range of perception as is seen in
clairvoyance and psychometry. Thus while one hears only the
evil suggestions of "obsessing spirits" or discarnate souls being
dinned into his ears, another will be lifted to the third heaven and
hear "things unutterable." Brain-cell discharges will hardly
account for the phenomena of clairaudience. A brain-cell
discharge never goes beyond the repetition of one's own name in
some familiar voice, or at most the revival of a phrase or the
monotonous clang of a neighbouring church bell. These are not
clairaudiences at all. Clairaudience consists in receiving auditory
impressions of intelligible phrases not previously associated with
the name of person or place involved in the statement. These
impressions may be sporadic or may be continuous. In the case of
a genuine development where the interior sense is fully opened
up, the communication will be continuous and normal, as much
so as ordinary conversation, and the translation of consciousness
into terms of sense will be so rapid and unimpeded as to give the
impression to an Englishman that he is listening to his native
language and to a Frenchman that he is listening to French,
though the communication may proceed from a source which
renders this impossible. The universal language of humanity is
neither Volapuk, nor Esperanto, nor Ido. It is Thought, and when
thought proceeds from a point beyond the plane of differentiation
it can be determined along the line which makes for English as
readily as that which makes for French, or any other tongue. It is
they of the soul-world who convey the thought, it is we of the
sublunary world who translate that thought into our own
language. The Hebrew prophets were almost uniformly instructed
by means of clairaudience. But as I have already said there are
degrees of clairaudience, as of any other psychic faculty. The
danger is that a false value may be set upon the experiences,
especially during the early stages of development when everything
is very new and very wonderful.

Telepathy is another and yet more general phrase of psychic
activity. It may consist in the transmission from one person to
another of a feeling or impression merely, which results in a
certain degree of awareness to the state of mind in which the
transmitter may be at the time, as when a mother has a "feeling"
that all is not well with her absent child. Or it may yet take a
more definite and perspicuous form, even to the transmission of
details such as the names of persons and places, of numbers,
forms and incidents. Telepathy commonly exists between persons
in close sympathy; and when two persons are working along
separate lines toward the same result, it is quite usual that they
unconsciously "telepath" with one another, their brains being for
the time in synchronous vibration. Spiritual communication in
any degree is nothing more or less than sympathy--those who feel
together, think together. The modern development of the aerial
post is a step towards the universal federation of thought, but it is
not comparable with the astral post which carries a thousand
miles an hour. In this sort of correspondence the communication
is written like any ordinary letter designed for transmission, but
instead of stamping and posting it, a lighted match is applied to
the finished work. The material part is destroyed, but the
intangible and only real and lasting part remains behind. This is
attached, by the direction of the will, to a particular person and
set in a certain direction. If all the conditions have been properly
observed it will not fail to reach its destination. I have fortunately
been able to demonstrate this fact in public on more than one
occasion. The phenomenon is repeated in a less striking
form in every case of what is called "crossing," as when one
correspondent feels suddenly called upon to write urgently to
another and receives a reply to his enquiries while his letter is
still in course of delivery.

Nature is full of a subtle magic of this sort for which we have no
organized science. It is said that if you put snails together and
afterwards separate them, placing each upon a copper ground to
which electric wires are attached, a shock given to one snail will
be registered by the other at the same moment. I have not tried
this theory, but the idea is fundamental to a mass of telepathic
observations which have found practical expression in wireless
telegraphy. Some thirty years ago, however, I made trial of the
twin magnet theory and was entirely successful in getting
wireless messages from one room to another. The performance
was, however, clumsy and tedious, and I did not then know
enough to see how it could be perfected. The idea is now in the
very safe custody of the Patents Office.

Community of taste can be demonstrated under hypnosis. It is not
otherwise usually active in sensitives, and Swedenborg was
hence of opinion that the sense of taste could not be obsessed.
This, however, is incorrect. I have illustrated community of all
the senses under hypnosis in circumstances which entirely
precluded the possibility of feint or imposition on the part of the
subject.

Another phase of psychic activity is that illustrated in "dowsing"
or water-finding by means of the hazel fork. It may be accounted
a form of hyperaesthesia and no doubt has a nervous expression,
but it is not the less psychic in its origin. I have already referred
to the action of water upon psychic sensitives, and there seems
little room for doubt that it is the psychometric sense which, by
means of the self-extensive faculty inhering in consciousness,
registers the presence of the great diamagnetic agent. Professor
Barrett has written a most interesting monograph on this subject,
and there are many books extant which make reference to and
give examples of this curious phenomenon. The late British
Consul at Trieste and famous explorer and linguist, Sir Richard
Burton, could detect the presence of a cat at a considerable
distance, and I have heard that Lord Roberts experiences the
same paralyzing influence by the proximity of the harmless feline.
If, therefore, one can register the presence of a cat, and another
that of a dead body, I see no difficulty in others registering water
or any other antipathetic. All we have to remember is that these
things are psychic in their origin, and not ignorantly confound
sensation with consciousness, or hyperaesthesia with the various
psychopathic faculties we have been discussing. But it is
necessary to return to our main subject and consider where our
developed clairvoyant or second-sight faculty will lead us, and
what sort of experience we may expect to gain by its use. These
points may now be dealt with.


