CHAPTER XXXIII. THE HAPPY DAY


IT was a bright day in the latter part of October that Jerome and
Clotelle set out for the church, where the marriage ceremony was to be
performed. The clear, bracing air added buoyancy to every movement, and
the sun poured its brilliant rays through the deeply-stained windows,
as the happy couple entered the sanctuary, followed by old Mr. Devenant,
whose form, bowed down with age, attracted almost as much attention from
the assembly as did the couple more particularly interested.

As the ceremonies were finished and the priest pronounced the
benediction on the newly-married pair, Clotelle whispered in the ear of
Jerome,--

     “'No power in death shall tear our names apart,
       As none in life could rend thee from my heart.'”

A smile beamed on every face as the wedding-party left the church and
entered their carriage. What a happy day, after ten years' separation,
when, both hearts having been blighted for a time, they are brought
together by the hand of a beneficent and kind Providence, and united in
holy wedlock.

Everything being arranged for a wedding tour extending up the Rhine, the
party set out the same day for Antwerp. There are many rivers of greater
length and width than the Rhine. Our Mississippi would swallow up half
a dozen Rhines. The Hudson is grander, the Tiber, the Po, and the
Mincio more classic; the Thames and Seine bear upon their waters greater
amounts of wealth and commerce; the Nile and the Euphrates have a
greater antiquity; but for a combination of interesting historical
incidents and natural scenery, the Rhine surpasses them all. Nature has
so ordained it that those who travel in the valley of the Rhine shall
see the river, for there never will be a railroad upon its banks. So
mountainous is the land that it would have to be one series of tunnels.
Every three or four miles from the time you enter this glorious river,
hills, dales, castles, and crags present themselves as the steamer
glides onward.

Their first resting-place for any length of time was at Coblentz, at the
mouth of the “Blue Moselle,” the most interesting place on the river.
From Coblentz they went to Brussels, where they had the greatest
attention paid them. Besides being provided with letters of
introduction, Jerome's complexion secured for him more deference than is
usually awarded to travellers.

Having letters of introduction to M. Deceptiax, the great lace
manufacturer, that gentleman received them with distinguished honors,
and gave them a splendid [soiree,] at which the [elite] of the city were
assembled. The sumptuously-furnished mansion was lavishly decorated for
the occasion, and every preparation made that could add to the novelty
or interest of the event.

Jerome, with his beautiful bride, next visited Cologne, the largest and
wealthiest city on the banks of the Rhine. The Cathedral of Cologne
is the most splendid structure of the kind in Europe, and Jerome and
Clotelle viewed with interest the beautiful arches and columns of this
stupendous building, which strikes with awe the beholder, as he gazes at
its unequalled splendor, surrounded, as it is, by villas, cottages,
and palace-like mansions, with the enchanting Rhine winding through the
vine-covered hills.

After strolling over miles and miles of classic ground, and visiting
castles, whose legends and traditions have given them an enduring fame,
our delighted travellers started for Geneva, bidding the picturesque
banks of the Rhine a regretful farewell. Being much interested in
literature, and aware that Geneva was noted for having been the city
of refuge to the victims of religious and political persecution, Jerome
arranged to stay here for some days. He was provided with a letter
of introduction to M. de Stee, who had been a fellow-soldier of Mr.
Devenant in the East India wars, and they were invited to make his house
their home during their sojourn. On the side of a noble mountain, whose
base is kissed by the waves of Lake Geneva, and whose slopes are decked
with verdure to the utmost peak of its rocky crown, is situated the
delightful country-residence of this wealthy, retired French officer. A
winding road, with frequent climbs and brakes, leads from the valley to
this enchanting spot, the air and scenery of which cannot be surpassed
in the world.




CHAPTER XXXIV. CLOTELLE MEETS HER FATHER.


THE clouds that had skirted the sky during the day broke at last, and
the rain fell in torrents, as Jerome and Clotelle retired for the night,
in the little town of Ferney, on the borders of Lake Leman. The peals
of thunder, and flashes of vivid lightening, which seemed to leap from
mountain to mountain and from crag to crag, reverberating among the
surrounding hills, foretold a heavy storm.

“I would we were back at Geneva,” said Clotelle, as she heard groans
issuing from an adjoining room. The sounds, at first faint, grew louder
and louder, plainly indicating that some person was suffering extreme
pain.

“I did not like this hotel, much, when we came in,” said Jerome,
relighting the lamp, which had been accidentally extinguished.

“Nor I,” returned Clotelle.

The shrieks increased, and an occasional “she's dead!” “I killed her!”
 “No, she is not dead!” and such-like expressions, would be heard from
the person, who seemed to be deranged.

The thunder grew louder, and the flashes of lightening more vivid, while
the noise from the sick-room seemed to increase.

As Jerome opened the door, to learn, if possible, the cause of the cries
and groans, he could distinguish the words, “She's dead! yes, she's
dead! but I did not kill her. She was my child! my own daughter. I loved
her, and yet I did not protect her.”

“Whoever he is,” said Jerome, “he's crack-brained; some robber,
probably, from the mountains.”

The storm continued to rage, and the loud peals of thunder and sharp
flashes of lightening, together with the shrieks and moans of the maniac
in the adjoining room, made the night a fearful one. The long hours wore
slowly away, but neither Jerome nor his wife could sleep, and they arose
at an early hour in the morning, ordered breakfast, and resolved to
return to Geneva.

“I am sorry, sir, that you were so much disturbed by the sick man last
night,” said the landlord, as he handed Jerome his bill. “I should be
glad if he would get able to go away, or die, for he's a deal of trouble
to me. Several persons have left my house on his account.”

“Where is he from?” inquired Jerome. “He's from the United States, and
has been here a week to-day, and has been crazy ever since.”

“Has he no friends with him?” asked the guest.

“No, he is alone,” was the reply.

Jerome related to his wife what he had learned from the landlord,
respecting the sick man, and the intelligence impressed her so strongly,
that she requested him to make further inquiries concerning the
stranger.

He therefore consulted the book in which guests usually register their
names, and, to his great surprise, found that the American's name was
Henry Linwood, and that he was from Richmond, Va.

It was with feelings of trepidation that Clotelle heard these
particulars from the lips of her husband.

“We must see this poor man, whoever he is,” said she, as Jerome finished
the sentence.

The landlord was glad to hear that his guests felt some interest in the
sick man, and promised that the invalid's room should be got ready for
their reception.

The clock in the hall was just striking ten, as Jerome passed through
and entered the sick man's chamber. Stretched upon a mattress, with both
hands tightly bound to the bedstead, the friendless stranger was indeed
a pitiful sight. His dark, dishevelled hair prematurely gray, his long,
unshaven beard, and the wildness of the eyes which glanced upon them
as they opened the door and entered, caused the faint hope which had so
suddenly risen in Clotelle's heart, to sink, and she felt that this man
could claim no kindred with her. Certainly, he bore no resemblance to
the man whom she had called her father, and who had fondly dandled her
on his knee in those happy days of childhood.

“Help!” cried the poor man, as Jerome and his wife walked into the room.
His eyes glared, and shriek after shriek broke forth from his parched
and fevered lips.

“No, I did not kill my daughter!--I did not! she is not dead! Yes, she
is dead! but I did not kill her--poor girl! Look! that is she! No, it
cannot be! she cannot come here! it cannot be my poor Clotelle.”

At the sound of her own name, coming from the maniac's lips, Clotelle
gasped for breath, and her husband saw that she had grown deadly pale.
It seemed evident to him that the man was either guilty of some terrible
act, or imagined himself to be. His eyeballs rolled in their sockets,
and his features showed that he was undergoing “the tortures of that
inward hell,” which seemed to set his whole brain on fire. After
recovering her self-possession and strength, Clotelle approached the
bedside, and laid her soft hand upon the stranger's hot and fevered
brow.

One long, loud shriek rang out on the air, and a piercing cry, “It is
she!--Yes, it is she! I see, I see! Ah! no, it is not my daughter! She
would not come to me if she could!” broke forth from him.

“I am your daughter,” said Clotelle, as she pressed her handkerchief to
her face, and sobbed aloud.

Like balls of fire, the poor man's eyes rolled and glared upon the
company, while large drops of perspiration ran down his pale and
emaciated face. Strange as the scene appeared, all present saw that it
was indeed a meeting between a father and his long-lost daughter. Jerome
now ordered all present to leave the room, except the nurse, and every
effort was at once made to quiet the sufferer. When calm, a joyous smile
would illuminate the sick man's face, and a strange light beam in his
eyes, as he seemed to realize that she who stood before him was indeed
his child.

For two long days and nights did Clotelle watch at the bedside of her
father before he could speak to her intelligently. Sometimes, in his
insane fits, he would rave in the most frightful manner, and then, in a
few moments, would be as easily governed as a child. At last, however,
after a long and apparently refreshing sleep, he awoke suddenly to a
full consciousness that it was indeed his daughter who was watching so
patiently by his side.

The presence of his long absent child had a soothing effect upon Mr.
Linwood, and he now recovered rapidly from the sad and almost hopeless
condition in which she had found him. When able to converse, without
danger of a relapse, he told Clotelle of his fruitless efforts to obtain
a clew to her whereabouts after old Mrs. Miller had sold her to the
slave-trader. In answer to his daughter's inquiries about his family
affairs up to the time that he left America, he said,--

“I blamed my wife for your being sold and sent away, for I thought she
and her mother were acting in collusion; But I afterwards found that
I had blamed her wrongfully. Poor woman! she knew that I loved your
mother, and feeling herself forsaken, she grew melancholy and died in a
decline three years ago.”

Here both father and daughter wept at the thought of other days. When
they had recovered their composure, Mr. Linwood went on again:

“Old Mrs. Miller,” said he, “after the death of Gertrude, aware that
she had contributed much toward her unhappiness, took to the free use
of intoxicating drinks, and became the most brutal creature that ever
lived. She whipped her slaves without the slightest provocation, and
seemed to take delight in inventing new tortures with which to punish
them. One night last winter, after having flogged one of her slaves
nearly to death, she returned to her room, and by some means the bedding
took fire, and the house was in flames before any one was awakened.
There was no one in the building at the time but the old woman and the
slaves, and although the latter might have saved their mistress, they
made no attempt to do so. Thus, after a frightful career of many years,
this hard-hearted woman died a most miserable death, unlamented by a
single person.”

Clotelle wiped the tears from her eyes, as her father finished this
story, for, although Mrs. Miller had been her greatest enemy, she
regretted to learn that her end had been such a sad one.

“My peace of mind destroyed,” resumed the father, “and broken down in
health, my physician advised me to travel, with the hope of recruiting
myself, and I sailed from New York two months ago.”

Being brought up in America, and having all the prejudice against color
which characterizes his white fellow-countrymen, Mr. Linwood very much
regretted that his daughter, although herself tinctured with African
blood, should have married a black man, and he did not fail to express
to her his dislike of her husband's complexion.

“I married him,” said Clotelle, “because I loved him. Why should the
white man be esteemed as better than the black? I find no difference in
men on account of their complexion. One of the cardinal principles of
Christianity and freedom is the equality and brotherhood of man.”

Every day Mr. Linwood became more and more familiar with Jerome, and
eventually they were on the most intimate terms.

Fifteen days from the time that Clotelle was introduced into her
father's room, they left Ferney for Geneva. Many were the excursions
Clotelle made under the shadows of Mont Blanc, and with her husband
and father for companions; she was now in the enjoyment of pleasures
hitherto unknown.




