CHAPTER XVI. DEATH IS FREEDOM


ON receiving intelligence of the arrest of Isabella, Mr. Gordon
authorized the sheriff to sell her to the highest bidder. She was,
therefore, sold; the purchaser being the noted negro-trader, Hope H.
Slater, who at once placed her in prison. Here the fugitive saw none but
slaves like herself, brought in and taken out to be placed in ships, and
sent away to some part of the country to which she herself would soon be
compelled to go. She had seen or heard nothing of her daughter while in
Richmond, and all hopes of seeing her had now fled.

At the dusk of the evening previous to the day when she was to be sent
off, as the old prison was being closed for the night, Isabella suddenly
darted past the keeper, and ran for her life. It was not a great distance
from the prison to the long bridge which passes from the lower part of
the city across the Potomac to the extensive forests and woodlands of
the celebrated Arlington Heights, then occupied by that distinguished
relative and descendant of the immortal Washington, Mr. Geo. W. Custis.
Thither the poor fugitive directed her flight. So unexpected was her
escape that she had gained several rods the start before the keeper had
secured the other prisoners, and rallied his assistants to aid in the
pursuit. It was at an hour, and in a part of the city where horses could
not easily be obtained for the chase; no bloodhounds were at hand to run
down the flying woman, and for once it seemed as if there was to be
a fair trial of speed and endurance between the slave and the
slave-catchers.

The keeper and his force raised the hue-and-cry on her path as they
followed close behind; but so rapid was the flight along the wide avenue
that the astonished citizens, as they poured forth from their dwellings
to learn the cause of alarm, were only able to comprehend the nature of
the case in time to fall in with the motley throng in pursuit, or raise
an anxious prayer to heaven as they refused to join in the chase (as
many a one did that night) that the panting fugitive might escape, and
the merciless soul-dealer for once be disappointed of his prey. And now,
with the speed of an arrow, having passed the avenue, with the distance
between her and her pursuers constantly increasing, this poor, hunted
female gained the “Long Bridge,” as it is called, where interruption
seemed improbably. Already her heart began to beat high with the hope
of success. She had only to pass three-quarters of a mile across the
bridge, when she could bury herself in a vast forest, just as the time
when the curtain of night would close around her, and protect her from
the pursuit of her enemies.

But God, by his providence, had otherwise determined. He had ordained
that an appalling tragedy should be enacted that night within plain
sight of the President's house, and the Capitol of the Union, which
would be an evidence wherever it should be known of the unconquerable
love of liberty which the human heart may inherit, as well as a fresh
admonition to the slave-dealer of the cruelty and enormity of his
crimes.

Just as the pursuers passed the high draw, soon after entering upon the
bridge, they beheld three men slowly approaching from the Virginia side.
They immediately called to them to arrest the fugitive, proclaiming her
a runaway slave. True to their Virginia instincts, as she came near,
they formed a line across the narrow bridge to intercept her. Seeing the
escape was impossible in that quarter, she stopped suddenly, and turned
upon her pursuers.

On came the profane and ribald crew faster than ever, already exulting
in her capture, and threatening punishment for her flight. For a moment
she looked wildly and anxiously around to see if there was no hope of
escape. On either hand, far down below, rolled the deep, foaming waters
of the Potomac, and before and behind were the rapidly approaching steps
and noisy voices of her pursuers. Seeing how vain would be any further
effort to escape, her resolution was instantly taken. She clasped her
hands convulsively together, raised her tearful and imploring eyes
toward heaven, and begged for the mercy and compassion there which was
unjustly denied her on earth; then, exclaiming, “Henry, Clotelle, I die
for thee!” with a single bound, vaulted over the railing of the bridge,
and sank forever beneath the angry and foaming waters of the river!

Such was the life, and such the death, of a woman whose virtues and
goodness of heart would have done honor to one in a higher station of
life, and who, had she been born in any other land but that of slavery,
would have been respected and beloved. What would have been her
feelings if she could have known that the child for whose rescue she had
sacrificed herself would one day be free, honored, and loved in another
land?




CHAPTER XVII. CLOTELLE


THE curtain rises seven years after the death of Isabella. During that
interval, Henry, finding that nothing could induce his mother-in-law to
relinquish her hold on poor little Clotelle, and not liking to contend
with one on whom a future fortune depended, gradually lost all interest
in the child, and left her to her fate.

Although Mrs. Miller treated Clotelle with a degree of harshness
scarcely equalled, when applied to one so tender in years, still the
child grew every day more beautiful, and her hair, though kept closely
cut, seemed to have improved in its soft, silk-like appearance. Now
twelve years of age, and more than usually well-developed, her harsh old
mistress began to view her with a jealous eye.

Henry and Gertrude had just returned from Washington, where the husband
had been on his duties as a member of Congress, and where he had
remained during the preceding three years without returning home. It
was on a beautiful evening, just at twilight, while seated at his parlor
window, that Henry saw a young woman pass by and go into the kitchen.
Not aware of ever having seen the person before, he made an errand into
the cook's department to see who the girl was. He, however, met her in
the hall, as she was about going out.

“Whom did you wish to see?” he inquired.

“Miss Gertrude,” was the reply.

“What did you want to see her for?” he again asked.

“My mistress told me to give her and Master Henry her compliments, and
ask them to come over and spend the evening.”

“Who is your mistress?” he eagerly inquired.

“Mrs. Miller, sir,” responded the girl.

“And what's your name?” asked Henry, with a trembling voice.

“Clotelle, sir,” was the reply.

The astonished father stood completely amazed, looking at the now
womanly form of her who, in his happier days, he had taken on his knee
with so much fondness and alacrity. It was then that he saw his own
and Isabella's features combined in the beautiful face that he was then
beholding. It was then that he was carried back to the days when with
a woman's devotion, poor Isabella hung about his neck and told him how
lonely were the hours in his absence. He could stand it no longer. Tears
rushed to his eyes, and turning upon his heel, he went back to his own
room. It was then that Isabella was revenged; and she no doubt looked
smilingly down from her home in the spirit-land on the scene below.

On Gertrude's return from her shopping tour, she found Henry in a
melancholy mood, and soon learned its cause. As Gertrude had borne
him no children, it was but natural, that he should now feel his
love centering in Clotelle, and he now intimated to his wife
his determination to remove his daughter from the hands of his
mother-in-law.

When this news reached Mrs. Miller, through her daughter, she became
furious with rage, and calling Clotelle into her room, stripped her
shoulders bare and flogged her in the presence of Gertrude.

It was nearly a week after the poor girl had been so severely whipped
and for no cause whatever, that her father learned on the circumstance
through one of the servants. With a degree of boldness unusual for him,
he immediately went to his mother-in-law and demanded his child. But
it was too late,--she was gone. To what place she had been sent no one
could tell, and Mrs. Miller refused to give any information whatever
relative to the girl.

It was then that Linwood felt deepest the evil of the institution under
which he was living; for he knew that his daughter would be exposed to
all the vices prevalent in that part of the country where marriage is
not recognized in connection with that class.




