CHAPTER XXIV. THE LAW AND ITS VICTIM


THE death of Dr. Morton, on the third day of his illness, came like
a shock upon his wife and daughters. The corpse had scarcely been
committed to its mother earth before new and unforeseen difficulties
appeared to them. By the laws of the Slave States, the children follow
the condition of their mother. If the mother is free, the children are
free; if a slave, the children are slaves. Being unacquainted with the
Southern code, and no one presuming that Marion had any negro blood in
her veins, Dr. Morton had not given the subject a single thought. The
woman whom he loved and regarded as his wife was, after all, nothing
more than a slave by the laws of the State. What would have been his
feelings had he known that at his death his wife and children would
be considered as his property? Yet such was the case. Like most men of
means at that time, Dr. Morton was deeply engaged in speculation, and
though generally considered wealthy, was very much involved in his
business affairs.

After the disease with which Dr. Morton had so suddenly died had to some
extent subsided, Mr. James Morton, a brother of the deceased, went
to New Orleans to settle up the estate. On his arrival there, he was
pleased with and felt proud of his nieces, and invited them to return
with him to Vermont, little dreaming that his brother had married a
slave, and that his widow and daughters would be claimed as such. The
girls themselves had never heard that their mother had been a slave, and
therefore knew nothing of the danger hanging over their heads.

An inventory of the property of the deceased was made out by Mr. Morton,
and placed in the hands of the creditors. These preliminaries being
arranged, the ladies, with their relative, concluded to leave the city
and reside for a few days on the banks of Lake Ponchartrain, where they
could enjoy a fresh air that the city did not afford. As they were
about taking the cars, however, an officer arrested the whole party--the
ladies as slaves, and the gentleman upon the charge of attempting to
conceal the property of his deceased brother. Mr. Morton was overwhelmed
with horror at the idea of his nieces being claimed as slaves, and asked
for time, that he might save them from such a fate. He even offered
to mortgage his little farm in Vermont for the amount which young
slave-women of their ages would fetch. But the creditors pleaded that
they were an “extra article,” and would sell for more than common
slaves, and must therefore be sold at auction.

The uncle was therefore compelled to give them up to the officers of the
law, and they were separated from him. Jane, the oldest of the girls, as
we have before mentioned, was very handsome, bearing a close resemblance
to her cousin Clotelle. Alreka, though not as handsome as her sister,
was nevertheless a beautiful girl, and both had all the accomplishments
that wealth and station could procure.

Though only in her fifteen year, Alreka had become strongly attached to
Volney Lapie, a young Frenchman, a student in her father's office. This
attachment was reciprocated, although the poverty of the young man and
the extreme youth of the girl had caused their feelings to be kept from
the young lady's parents.

The day of sale came, and Mr. Morton attended, with the hope that either
the magnanimity of the creditors or his own little farm in Vermont might
save his nieces from the fate that awaited them. His hope, however, was
in vain. The feelings of all present seemed to be lost in the general
wish to become the possessor of the young ladies, who stood trembling,
blushing, and weeping as the numerous throng gazed at them, or as the
intended purchaser examined the graceful proportions of their fair and
beautiful frames. Neither the presence of the uncle nor young Lapie
could at all lessen the gross language of the officers, or stay the rude
hands of those who wishes to examine the property thus offered for sale.
After a fierce contest between the bidders, the girls were sold, one for
two thousand three hundred, and the other for two thousand three hundred
and fifty dollars. Had these girls been bought for servants only, they
would in all probability have brought not more than nine hundred or a
thousand dollars each. Here were two beautiful young girls, accustomed
to the fondest indulgence, surrounded by all the refinements of life,
and with the timidity and gentleness which such a life would naturally
produce, bartered away like cattle in the markets of Smithfield or New
York.

The mother, who was also to have been sold, happily followed her husband
to the grave, and was spared the pangs of a broken heart.

The purchaser of the young ladies left the market in triumph, and the
uncle, with a heavy heart, started for his New England home, with no
earthly prospect of ever beholding his nieces again.

The seizure of the young ladies as slaves was the result of the
administrator's having found among Dr. Morton's papers the bill-of-sale
of Marion which he had taken when he purchased her. He had doubtless
intended to liberate her when he married her, but had neglected from
time to time to have the proper papers made out. Sad was the result of
this negligence.




CHAPTER XXV. THE FLIGHT


ON once gaining the wharf, Devenant and Clotelle found no difficulty in
securing an immediate passage to France. The fine packet-ship Utica lay
down the bay, and only awaited the return of the lighter that night to
complete her cargo and list of passengers, ere she departed. The young
Frenchman therefore took his prize on board, and started for the ship.

Daylight was just making its appearance the next morning when the Utica
weighed anchor and turned her prow toward the sea. In the course of
three hours, the vessel, with outspread sails, was rapidly flying from
land. Everything appeared to be auspicious. The skies were beautifully
clear, and the sea calm, with a sun that dazzled the whole scene. But
clouds soon began to chase each other through the heavens, and the sea
became rough. It was then that Clotelle felt that there was hoped of
escaping. She had hitherto kept in the cabin, but now she expressed a
wish to come on deck. The hanging clouds were narrowing the horizon to
a span, and gloomily mingling with the rising surges. The old and
grave-looking seamen shook their weather-wise heads as if foretelling a
storm.

As Clotelle came on deck, she strained her eyes in vain to catch a
farewell view of her native land. With a smile on her countenance, but
with her eyes filled with tears, she said,--

“Farewell, farewell to the land of my birth, and welcome, welcome, ye
dark blue waves. I care not where I go, so it is

     'Where a tyrant never trod,
       Where a slave was never known,
      But where nature worships God,
       If in the wilderness alone.'”

Devenant stood by her side, seeming proud of his future wife, with his
face in a glow at his success, while over his noble brow clustering
locks of glossy black hair were hanging in careless ringlets. His
finely-cut, classic features wore the aspect of one possessed with a
large and noble heart.

Once more the beautiful Clotelle whispered in the ear of her lover,--

     “Away, away, o'er land and sea,
      America is now no home for me.”

The winds increased with nightfall, and impenetrable gloom surrounded
the ship. The prospect was too uncheering, even to persons in love.
The attention which Devenant paid to Clotelle, although she had been
registered on the ship's passenger list as his sister, caused more than
one to look upon his as an agreeable travelling companion. His tall,
slender figure and fine countenance bespoke for him at first sight one's
confidence. That he was sincerely and deeply enamored of Clotelle all
could see.

The weather became still more squally. The wind rushed through the
white, foaming waves, and the ship groaned with its own wild and
ungovernable labors, while nothing could be seen but the wild waste of
waters. The scene was indeed one of fearful sublimity.

Day came and went without any abatement of the storm. Despair was now on
every countenance. Occasionally a vivid flash of lightning would break
forth and illuminate the black and boiling surges that surrounded the
vessel, which was now scudding before the blast under bare poles.

After five days of most intensely stormy weather, the sea settled down
into a dead calm, and the passengers flocked on deck. During the last
three days of the storm, Clotelle had been so unwell as to be unable to
raise her head. Her pale face and quivering lips and languid appearance
made her look as if every pulsation had ceased. Her magnificent large
and soft eyes, fringed with lashes as dark as night, gave her an angelic
appearance. The unreserved attention of Devenant, even when sea-sick
himself, did much to increase the little love that the at first
distrustful girl had placed in him. The heart must always have some
object on which to centre its affections, and Clotelle having lost all
hope of ever again seeing Jerome, it was but natural that she should now
transfer her love to one who was so greatly befriending her. At first
she respected Devenant for the love he manifested for her, and for his
apparent willingness to make any sacrifice for her welfare. True, this
was an adventure upon which she had risked her all, and should her heart
be foiled in this search for hidden treasures, her affections would be
shipwrecked forever. She felt under great obligations to the man who had
thus effected her escape, and that noble act alone would entitle him to
her love.

Each day became more pleasant as the noble ship sped onward amid the
rippled spray. The whistling of the breeze through the rigging was music
to the ear, and brought gladness to the heart of every one on board. At
last, the long suspense was broken by the appearance of land, at which
all hearts leaped for joy. It was a beautiful morning in October. The
sun had just risen, and sky and earth were still bathed in his soft,
rosy glow, when the Utica hauled into the dock at Bordeaux. The
splendid streets, beautiful bridges, glittering equipages, and smiling
countenances of the people, gave everything a happy appearance, after a
voyage of twenty-nine days on the deep, deep sea.

After getting their baggage cleared from the custom-house and going to a
hotel, Devenant made immediate arrangements for the marriage. Clotelle,
on arriving at the church where the ceremony was to take place, was
completely overwhelmed at the spectacle. She had never beheld a scene so
gorgeous as this. The magnificent dresses of the priests and choristers,
the deep and solemn voices, the elevated crucifix, the burning tapers,
the splendidly decorated altar, the sweet-smelling incense, made the
occasion truly an imposing one. At the conclusion of the ceremony, the
loud and solemn peals of the organ's swelling anthem were lost to all in
the contemplation of the interesting scene.

The happy couple set out at once for Dunkirk, the residence of the
bridegroom's parents. But their stay there was short, for they had
scarcely commenced visiting the numerous friends of the husband ere
orders came for him to proceed to India to join that portion of the
French army then stationed there.

In due course of time they left for India, passing through Paris and
Lyons, taking ship at Marseilles. In the metropolis of France, they
spent a week, where the husband took delight in introducing his wife
to his brother officers in the French army, and where the newly-married
couple were introduced to Louis Philippe, then King of France. In all of
these positions, Clotelle sustained herself in a most ladylike manner.

At Lyons, they visited the vast factories and other public works, and
all was pleasure with them. The voyage from Marseilles to Calcutta
was very pleasant, as the weather was exceedingly fine. On arriving in
India, Captain Devenant and lady were received with honors--the former
for his heroic bravery in more than one battle, and the latter for
her fascinating beauty and pleasing manners, and the fact that she
was connected with one who was a general favorite with all who had his
acquaintance. This was indeed a great change for Clotelle. Six months
had not elapsed since her exposure in the slave-market of New Orleans.
This life is a stage, and we are indeed all actors.




