Chapter I

The Classical Conception of the Purpose of Poetry



1. General


To say that poetry has a moral effect on the reader is not the same as to
say that moral improvement is the purpose of poetry. The following section
of this historical study will be devoted to tracing the substitution of
the second assertion for the first.

As has been shown,[263] the classical critics were in substantial
agreement with Aristotle in defining rhetoric as the faculty of
discovering all possible means to persuasion. Although the consensus of
classical opinion agreed that poetry does have a moral effect on the
reader, it never defined poetry as an art of discovering all means to
moral improvement. As will be shown, such a definition of poetry was not
formulated previous to the renaissance. Then by combining Aristotle's
definition of tragedy from the _Poetics_[264] with his definition of
rhetoric, Lombardus defined poetic as

  a faculty of finding out whatsoever is accommodated to the imitation of
  actions, passions, customs, in rhythmical language, for the purpose of
  correcting the vices of men and causing them to live good and happy
  lives.[265]

The same definition, derived as Spingarn has shown from the same sources,
was formulated by Varchi.[266]

  Poetic is a faculty which shows in what modes one may imitate certain
  actions, passions, and customs, with rhythm, words, and harmony,
  together or separately, for the purpose of removing the vices of men and
  inciting them to virtue, in order that they may attain their true
  happiness and beatitude.[267]

I propose, after reviewing the classical conception of poetry as an
educational agent, to trace briefly the rise of allegorical interpretation
of poetry in post-classical times and in the middle ages; to exemplify the
tendency of renaissance criticism to borrow the terminology of classical
rhetoric when it asserted that the purpose of poetry is moral improvement;
and finally, to study in the literary criticism of the English renaissance
those moral theories of poetry which derive from the middle ages, from the
classical rhetorics, and from the criticism of the Italian renaissance.



2. Moral Improvement through Precept and Example


The ancients believed that great poetry produces moral improvement in the
reader. Before the judgment seat of Dionysos, as is recorded in _The
Frogs_ of Aristophanes, Aeschylus and Euripides engage in an interesting
and instructive dispute. "Come," says Aeschylus, "tell me what are the
points for which we praise a noble poet." Euripides replies, "For his
ready wit and his wise counsels and because he trains the townsfolk to be
better citizens and worthier men."[268] Aeschylus then goes on to show
that he has merited well of his countrymen because he has preached the
military virtues and his dramas have been full of Ares. Euripides he
accuses of softening the moral fibre of the Athenians by introducing on
the stage immoral plots and love-sick women. Such drama Aeschylus asserts
to be immoral in its effect. "For boys a school teacher is provided; but
we, the poets, are teachers of men."[269]

This represents the well-nigh universal Greek opinion. Poetry inspires,
teaches, makes better men. A further example of this idea is furnished by
Timocles. "Our spirit," says one of the characters in the drama,
"forgetting its own sorrows in sympathizing with the misfortunes of
others, receives at the theatre instruction and pleasure at one
time."[270]

The real opinions of Plato are here difficult to discover. In the
_Protagoras_, however, he puts into the mouth of that famous sophist an
exposition of the conventional Greek opinion.

  When a boy has learned his letters and is beginning to understand what
  is written, as before he understood only what was spoken, they put into
  his hands the works of great poets, which he reads sitting on a bench at
  school; in these are contained many admonitions, and many tales, and
  praises, and encomia of ancient famous men, which he is required to
  learn by heart, in order that he may imitate them and desire to become
  like them.[271]

It is in the _Republic_, of course, that Plato enunciates his capital
objections to poetry. The first objection is that poetry as an imitative
art is three removes from truth. The divine powers, for instance, create
the idea of a table--the only true table. A carpenter makes a particular
table which is not the real, but only an appearance. A graphic artist
making a picture of this appearance is only an imitator of appearances.
"And the tragic poet is an imitator and therefore thrice removed from the
king and from the truth."[272] The second objection which Plato raises
against poetry is that poetry is addressed to the passional element in
man. The man of noble spirit and philosophy will not lament his
misfortunes, especially in public, while the lower orders of intellect are
likely to express all their feelings with greater freedom, and thus
furnish the poet with easier subjects for imitation. Consequently poetry
has the power of harming the good, for a good man will be in raptures at
the excellences of the poet who stirs his feelings most by representing a
hero in an emotional condition. As a result, when he himself suffers
sorrow or is moved by his own passions, it becomes more difficult for him
to repress his feelings.[273] Plato thus examines the popular contention
that the study of poetry educates the moral character of a man, and still
maintaining that it should be a moral force for good, demonstrates to his
own satisfaction that it fails to have the supposed beneficial effect
because it is three removes from truth, and because it encourages
unrestrained emotionalism in conduct. Plato's moral standard of poetry is
even better illustrated, perhaps, by the kind of poetry which he does not
ban from his ideal commonwealth. "We must remain firm in our conviction,"
he says, "that hymns to the gods and praises of famous men are the only
poetry which ought to be admitted into our state." As his utmost
concession to poetry, he will admit her if her defenders can prove "not
only that she is pleasant, but also useful to states and to human
life."[274] According to a later view, to be sure, Plato has been thought
to justify pleasure of a most refined and exalted variety as an end of
art. "The view which identifies the pleasant and the just and the good and
the noble has an excellent moral and religious tendency."[275] In view,
however, of other pronouncements, such an endeavor to father upon him the
hedonistic theory of the purpose of art seems strained and ineffective.

It was to justify poetry against the attacks of Plato that Aristotle
advanced a hedonistic view of poetry and propounded his theory of
katharsis. Nowhere in the _Poetics_ does Aristotle explicitly state that
the function of poetry is to give pleasure. Indirect evidence, however, is
plentiful. For instance, Aristotle justifies poetry as an imitative art
because children learn by imitation and the pleasure in imitation is
universal.[276] Furthermore, plot in tragedy is more important than
character; for in painting, a confused mass of colors gives less pleasure
than a chalk drawing of a portrait.[277] Beauty in any art depends in a
measure on magnitude; therefore a play must not be too short.[278] Most of
the tragic poets of Greece derived their plots from a limited number of
well known stories. But Aristotle justifies Agathon for departing from
this custom and making both his plot and characters fictitious, for the
plays of Agathon give none the less pleasure.[279] But not all pleasure,
he says, is appropriate to tragedy. In comedy we are pleased to see
enemies walk off the stage as friends, but in tragedy the "pleasure which
the poet should afford is that which comes from pity and fear through
imitation."[280] Marvels, too, and wonders in poetry he justifies because
"the wonderful is pleasing; as may be inferred from the fact that everyone
tells a story with additions of his own, knowing that his hearers like it.
It is Homer who has chiefly taught other poets the art of telling lies
skilfully."[281] And at the very end of the _Poetics_, where he is
endeavoring to prove that tragedy is a higher art than epic, he does so by
showing that drama has all the epic elements, and in addition music and
spectacle, which produce the most vivid of pleasures. Moreover the drama
is more compact; "for the concentrated effect is more pleasurable than one
which is diluted."[282] Thus, in the _Poetics_, Aristotle takes a
non-moral attitude toward literature, although in the _Politics_[283] he
grants that poetry and music are eminently serviceable in conveying moral
instruction to young people. His mature attitude is well illustrated in
contrast with that of Aristophanes. Aristophanes criticises Euripides
severely as a perverter of Athenian morality. Aristotle mentions Euripides
about twenty times in the _Poetics_, and frequently criticises him
adversely, not, however, for his evil moral influence, but because he uses
his choruses badly, and is faulty in character-drawing.

In answer to Plato's second objection to poetry, that it encourages
unrestrained emotionalism, Aristotle propounded his theory of katharsis.
"Tragedy," he says, "is an imitation of an action ... through pity and
fear effecting the proper purgation of these emotions."[284] That
Aristotle had in mind an analogy with medicine is better understood from a
passage in the _Politics_ which describes the beneficial effect of music
on patients suffering from religious ecstasy. The stimulating music
furnishes the patient with an outlet for the expression of his religious
fervor. Afterwards, says Aristotle, the patients "fall back into their
normal state, as if they had undergone a medical or purgative
treatment."[285] Thus the theory of katharsis seems to have the same basis
as the modern psychological theory which encourages the expression of
emotions in their milder form lest, if inhibited, they gather added power
and finally burst disastrously through all restraints. Consequently,
although hedonist theorists have been anxious to establish katharsis on a
purely aesthetic foundation, it seems that the theory has inescapable
moral implications. To be sure, Aristotle in the same section of the
_Politics_ says that the emotional result of katharsis is "harmless joy,"
and in the _Poetics_ he says that pity and fear produce the appropriate
pleasure of tragedy. Nevertheless Aristotle is answering Plato's
objections to unrestrained emotionalism, and by his theory of katharsis
endeavors to show not only that the emotional excitation of tragedy is
harmless to the spectator, but that it is actually good for him.

But if the spectator is to derive these emotional excitations from
tragedy, his aesthetic experience cannot be passive. Aristotle recommends
as the ideal tragic hero a man not preeminently good nor unusually
depraved, but a man between these extremes; "for pity is aroused by
unmerited misfortune, fear by the misfortune of a man like
ourselves."[286] Evidently, then, through his imagination the spectator
must in a lively fashion participate in the action of the drama. Not only
is he present at the action, even when he reads the drama, but he
identifies himself with the hero and vicariously experiences his emotions.

But neither the hedonism of Aristotle, nor his defense of poetry on moral
grounds through his theory of katharsis, is usual in Greek criticism.
Isocrates and Xenophon adhere to the usual opinion. Isocrates believes
that Homer was prized by the earlier Greeks because his poems instilled a
hatred of the barbarians, and kindled in the hearts of the readers a
desire to emulate the heroes who fought against Troy.[287] One might think
that the hatred of the barbarians was not the highest degree of morality,
but perhaps for the political integrity of Greece it was. That Homer
especially was supposed to have a moral influence is illustrated also by
Xenophon. Niceratus, in the _Symposium_, is telling the diners of what
knowledge he is most proud. "My father," he says, "in his pains to make me
a good man, compelled me to learn the whole of Homer's poems."[288]

Strabo in a famous passage records an exceptional hedonism in Greek
thought and goes on to expound the conventional belief.

  Eratosthenes says that the poet directs his whole attention to the
  amusement of the mind, and not at all to its instruction. In opposition
  to this idea, the ancients define poesy as a primitive philosophy,
  guiding our life from infancy, and pleasantly regulating our morals, our
  tastes, and our actions. The Stoics of our day affirm that the only wise
  man is the poet. On this account the earliest lessons which the citizens
  of Greece convey to their children are from the poets; certainly not for
  the purpose of amusing their minds, but for their instruction.[289]

This same moral and educational view of poetry so permeates Plutarch's
essay _On the Study of Poetry_ that it is difficult to quote from him
without reproducing the whole treatise. The young man who is being taught
poetry, Plutarch believes, should be made "to indulge in pleasure merely
as a relish, and to seek for the useful and the wholesome,"[290] in his
reading. Some believe that, because some of the pleasures of poetry are
pernicious, young men should not be allowed to read. This, Plutarch
believes, would be every whit as foolish as to cut down the vineyards
because some people are addicted to drunkenness. Young men should be
taught to use poetry intelligently. "Poetry is not to be scrupulously
avoided by those who intend to be philosophers, but they are to make
poetry a fitting school for philosophers, by forming the habit of seeking
and gaining the profitable in the pleasant."[291] The profit of poetry he
believes to come from two sources: maxims and examples. He praises very
highly such _sententiae_ as "Virtue keeps its luster untarnished," and
"know thyself."[292] Indeed, the moral value of such precepts weighed so
heavily with Plutarch that he advocated emending the poets to bring them
in more strict accord with the ethics of the Stoic philosophy. For
instance:

  Thus, why not change such a passage as this, "That man is to be envied
  who so aims as to hit his wish," to read, "who so aims as to hit his
  advantage"? for to get and have things wrongly desired merits pity, not
  envy.[293]

But greater than the moral value of maxims in the poets is that of
example. "Philosophers employ examples from history for our correction
and instruction, and the poets differ from them only by inventing and
presenting fictitious narratives."[294] For instance, according to
Plutarch, Homer introduces the story of Hera's vain endeavor to gain her
ends from Zeus by means of wine and the girdle of Aphrodite to show that
such conduct is not only immoral, but useless. Again we may conclude that
frequenting women in the day time is a shame and a reproach because the
only man who does such a thing in the _Iliad_ is that lascivious and
adulterous fellow Paris.[295] It is interesting that this essay of
Plutarch's, which gives probably the most complete classical exposition of
the moral use of poetry, should have been well known in the renaissance
and translated into English by Philemon Holland in 1603.

The Romans had very much the same feeling about the moral value in poetry
as had the Greeks. The only fundamental difference lay in that the Roman
was less philosophical and more practical. This practical element in Roman
criticism is well illustrated by Horace, whose statements have sometimes
been made to support opinions which Horace did not hold. Let it be noted,
for one thing, that Horace is talking not about the purpose of poetry, but
about the purpose of the poet.

  Poets desire either to profit or to delight, or to tell things which are
  at once pleasant and profitable.

His reason for favoring the third view is important.

  Old men reject poems which are void of instruction; the knights neglect
  austere poems: he who mixes the useful with the sweet wins the approval
  of all by delighting and at the same time admonishing the reader. This
  book makes money for the book-sellers, and passes over the sea, and
  prolongs the reputation of the well-known author.[296]

But aside from the desirability of mingling pleasure with profit in his
poetry in order to gain the greatest popularity, the poet does have an
educational value in the training of youths by presenting in an attractive
manner examples of noble conduct which the young people may desire to
emulate.

  His lessons form the child's young lips, and wean
  The boyish ear from words and tales unclean;
  As years roll on, he moulds the ripening mind,
  And makes it just and generous, sweet and kind;
  He tells of worthy precedents, displays
  The example of the past to after days,
  Consoles affliction, and disease allays.[297]

Moreover the consensus of conventional opinion in the Roman world was that
the study of the poets did succeed in moulding the moral character of the
youth. Apuleius, writing of a certain virtuous young man, the hero of one
of the episodes of the _Metamorphoses_, makes the following incidental
remark: "The master of the house had a young son well instructed in good
literature, and consequently remarkable for his piety and modesty."[298]

Although Lucretius may not have been assured of the moral value, he was
so convinced of the seductive powers of poetry that he deliberately
utilized them to make palatable the forbidding thoughts of his essay _On
the Nature of Things_. The long passage is worth quoting entire because
his comparison is borrowed so frequently by renaissance critics to
illustrate the poetic doctrine of pleasurable profit. Lucretius says:

  But as physicians, when they attempt to give bitter wormwood to
  children, first tinge the rim round the cup with the sweet and yellow
  liquid of honey, that the age of childhood, as yet unsuspicious, may
  find its lips deluded, and may in the meantime drink the bitter juice of
  the wormwood, and though deceived, may not be injured, but rather, being
  recruited by such a process, may acquire strength; so now I, since this
  argument seems generally too severe and forbidding to those by whom it
  has not been handled, and since the multitude shrink back from it, was
  desirous to set forth my chain of reasoning to thee, O Memmius, in
  sweetly-speaking Pierian verse, and, as it were, tinge it with the honey
  of the Muses.[299]

From this survey of classical opinion we may conclude that the public
looked for two things in poetry: pleasure and profit. Eratosthenes took an
extreme view in seeking pleasure alone. Both Aristotle and Horace
emphasized the pleasure to be derived from poetry, although neither denied
that poetry is beneficial. Horace takes almost a cynical view in
suggesting that, as some readers seek pleasure in poetry and others
improvement, a poet will be more popular and make more money for the
book-sellers if he mingles both elements. The extreme view of the moral
value of poetry was taken by the educators of youth. This view is well
exemplified in the quotations from Aristophanes, Xenophon, Strabo, and
especially Plutarch. But even Plutarch, who goes so far as to suggest
emending the poets to make their effect more moral, does not suggest that
the purpose of poetry is to afford moral instruction. He distinguishes;
some poetry is distinctly immoral and should be enjoyed only for its art.
Other poetry is moral in its effect, and consequently should be utilized
extensively by the school-master in educating young men. For such purposes
no poetry was thought to be better than Homer, whose epics furnish so many
examples of heroic conduct.



3. Moral Improvement through Allegory


When the Roman arms conquered a new city, the story runs, the commander of
the forces took over in the name of the Emperor the gods; but before the
gates of Jerusalem this ceremony proved ineffective. The fathers of the
Christian church, Tatian, Hermas, Theophilus, and Tertullian, believing
that all the truth was contained in Christianity, utterly condemned the
philosophy and religion of the Greeks and consequently the poetry which,
according to Greek popular belief, was the inspired vehicle for its
presentation. Furthermore, the gods of the Greeks were immoral and
furnished their worshippers with bad examples of conduct. Long before
Tertullian the moral philosophers of antiquity had already attacked the
poetry of Greece and Rome on the ground of immorality. Plato in his day
called the war between philosophy and poetry "age-long." The ancient
Greeks had considered Homer and Hesiod as the inspired recorders of the
facts of religion. They had looked to the poets for moral dogma and
example. Of necessity the philosophers condemned the poets for the
immorality of their thievish, lying, and adulterous pantheon.

When the Christian fathers were confronted with the Syriac gospel of the
youth of Jesus, they called a council to declare it apochryphal. Lest
some devout reader should take literally the love poetry of the Canticles,
the fathers allegorized it as the love of Christ for his Church.
Unfortunately for Greek religion the philosophers did not determine which
episodes in the histories of the gods were valid as doctrine and which
were fictitious. They did, however, anticipate the fathers in their
allegorical interpretations. Socrates in the _Phaedrus_ laughs at
allegory;[300] and Plutarch believes that the poets intended to teach a
moral idea by example instead of expressing a hidden meaning by allegory.
For him allegory involved distortion and perversion. "For some men
_distort_ these stories and _pervert_ them into allegories or what the men
of old times called hidden meanings ὑπόνοιαι."[301] But allegory none the
less flourished. Theognis of Rhegium, Anaxagoras, and Stesimbrotus of
Thasos, were assiduous and startling in their interpretations.[302] The
Greek allegorical interpretations were of two kinds: one an explanation
of the secrets of nature, the other the teaching of morality.[303]
Although the practice was very old, the word "allegory" is not recorded
before Cicero, who says:

  When the imagery of the metaphor is sustained for a long time, the
  nature of the style assuredly becomes changed. Consequently the Greeks
  call this sort of thing allegory.... But he is nearer the truth who
  calls all of these metaphors.[304]

From Cicero on, allegory has a long history as a rhetorical figure--a
trope.[305] St. Augustine recommends that students of the scriptures study
the rhetorical figures so that they may be able to interpret the tropes in
the Bible, such as allegory.[306]

The result will always be the same whenever the poets are considered
theologians and moral teachers. They will be condemned or allegorized.
Fortunate are the poets when they are not believed. "How much better,"
exclaims St. Augustine, "are these fables of the poets" than the false
religious notions of the Manichees. "But Medea flying, although I chanted
sometimes, yet I maintained not the truth of; and though I heard it sung,
I believed it not: but these phantasies I thoroughly believed."[307] For
it is only when one believes devoutly that Zeus procured access to Danae
in a shower of gold, that his action gives a divine sanction to such
traffic in beauty on the agora or in the forum.[308] It is only when the
poets make no pretense of recounting facts that they can escape the
clutches of the philosophers. It was to save the poets from such attacks
that Aristotle asserts that poetry deals with the universal, not with the
particular.[309] Or, as Spingarn explains his meaning, "Poetry has little
regard for the actuality of specific event, but aims at the reality of an
eternal probability."[310]



4. The Influence of Rhetoric


Thus the general consensus of classical opinion agreed that poetry has
inescapable moral effects on those who listen or read. The moralists,
especially the Stoics, when confronted with traditional poetry whose
literal significance was immoral, leaned toward allegorical
interpretations which brought out a kernel of truth. The greater number,
however, of Greeks and Romans in the classical period believed that poetry
exerted the most potent influence for good when it enunciated crisp moral
maxims and afforded examples of heroic conduct which young people could be
induced to follow.

In all these respects the classical view of poetic has much in common with
classical rhetoric. Allegory has been shown to have had a long history as
an extended metaphor--a rhetorical figure. Maxims are considered fully by
Aristotle as aids to persuasion in rhetoric.[311] The exemplum is
obviously a stock means of rhetoric.

"Examples," says Aristotle, "are of two kinds, one consisting in the
allegation of historical facts, and the other in the invention of facts
for oneself. Invention comprises illustration on the one hand and ...
fables on the other." Then he tells how Aesop defended a demagogue by the
fable of the fox caught in the cleft of a rock. The fox was infested with
dog-ticks which sucked his blood. A benevolent hedge-hog offered to remove
the ticks, but the fox declined the kind offer on the ground that his
ticks were already full of blood and had ceased to annoy him much, whereas
if they were removed, a new colony of ticks would establish themselves and
thus entirely drain him of blood. "Yes, and in your case, men of Samos,"
said Aesop, "my client will not do much further mischief--he has already
made his fortune--but, if you put him to death, there will come others who
are poor and who will consume all the revenues of the state by their
embezzlements."[312] "Fables," continues the shrewd master of those who
know, "have this advantage that, while historical parallels are hard to
find, it is comparatively easy to find fables." Quintilian, like
Aristotle, believes in the persuasive efficacy of examples. But Quintilian
has less faith in the probative value of fictitious examples than he has
in those drawn from authentic history. He thinks that fables are most
effective with a rustic and ingenuous audience, which "captivated by their
pleasure in the story, give assent to that which pleases them."[313] Thus
Menenius Agrippa reconciled the people to the senators by telling them the
fable of the revolt of the members against the belly. And Thomas Wilson,
in his _Arte of Rhetorique_, repeats the story, in his section on
examples, and ascribes to Themistocles the fox story which Aristotle tells
of Aesop.[314]

But Aristotle, Quintilian, and Wilson are talking about rhetoric. Very
justly they believe that if one wants to persuade an audience to a course
of action, he must interest his audience sufficiently to hold their
attention. As Wilson sagely remarks, "For except men finde delite, they
will not long abide: delite them and winne them."[315] Cicero expressed in
memorable phrase the relationship between proof and pleasure as
instruments to persuasion and added a third element. He classified the
aims of an orator as "to teach, to please, to move" (_docere, delectare,
movere_). The teaching is the appeal to the intellect of the hearer by
means of proof. The pleasure is afforded by a euphonious style, and by
fables and stories. The audience is moved to action by the appeal to their
feelings.[316]

Not until the renaissance did writers on the theory of poetry carry over
Cicero's threefold aim of the orator and make it apply to the poet.[317]
But already in post-classical times rhetoric had, as Seneca the father
clearly shows, vitiated the Latin poetry of the Silver Age. Under the
Empire the declamation schools in Rome had a profound influence on
literature.[318] It could not be otherwise in a society where the school
of rhetoric was the only temple of higher education, for which the
grammaticus, or elementary professor of literature, was constrained to
prepare his students. Rhetoric was the organon of Roman education, and
declamation was the aim of rhetoric. It was such an educational system
which prepared Ovid and Lucan for their careers as poets and men of
letters. Seneca the father records the brilliant declamations of Ovid as a
schoolboy, quoting at some length his plea for a wife who threw herself
over a cliff on hearing of the death of her husband, and calling attention
to several passages in Ovid's poems where the poet has borrowed the clever
sayings of his professors in the school of rhetoric.[319] Ovid makes his
characters prove that they are moved by passion instead of being
passionate in word and deed. He vitiates his emotions with his wit. This
is characteristic of almost all the poets who attended the declamation
schools. They talk about situations and characters instead of realizing
them. They write as if they were speaking to an audience. One can almost
see the gestures, the wait for applause after the enunciation of a noble
platitude. Not only historically, but also in the worst modern sense this
is rhetoric. It is not unreasonable to conclude that such a preoccupation
with rhetoric, such a sustained search for all possible means of
persuasion, should have strengthened rather than weakened the utilitarian
theory of poetry. The school-master endeavored to mould the characters of
his students by examples from heroic poetry; the teacher of rhetoric, in
turn, taught them that to persuade an audience they must prove, please,
and move, and that ficticious examples were about as persuasive as
historical parallels and much easier to find. When the student left school
he continued to seek means of persuasion in canvassing votes, pleading in
the courts, or deliberating in the senate. If he became a poet, he did not
forget the lessons of his youth; or if he became a teacher of literature
or a professor of rhetoric, he perpetuated the tradition.




