Chapter VIII

Theories of Poetry in the English Renaissance



1. The Rhetorical Period of English Criticism


Spingarn has carefully traced the introduction of the theories of poetry
formulated by the Italian critics into England at the end of the sixteenth
century. It is the purpose of this study not to go over the ground which
Spingarn has so admirably covered, but to point out in English renaissance
theories of poetry those elements which derive from the mediaeval
tradition and from the classical rhetorics, and to trace the gradual
displacements of these elements by the sounder classical tradition which
reached England from Italy.

"The first stage of English Criticism," say Spingarn, "was entirely given
up to rhetorical study."[193] In his period he includes Cox and Wilson,
the rhetoricians, and Ascham, the scholar. Of the second period, which he
characterizes as one of classification and metrical studies, he says, "A
long period of rhetorical and metrical study had helped to formulate a
rhetorical and technical conception of the poet's function."[194] These
two periods have so much in common that they may readily be considered
together.

Throughout this period in England there was no abstract theorizing on the
art of poetry. The rhetorics of Cox (1524) and Wilson (1553) were
rhetorics and made no pretence of treating poetry. This is significant of
a direct contact with classical rhetoric. Because Cox founded his treatise
on the sound scholarship of Melanchthon, and Wilson wrote with the text of
his Cicero and his Quintilian open before him, neither was so completely
under the mediaeval influence as were most of the subsequent writers on
rhetoric in England.

Another scholar in classical rhetoric was Roger Ascham, whose
_Scholemaster_ (1570) contains the first reference in England to
Aristotle's _Poetics_. But except as a teacher of language and of
literature Ascham does not treat of poetry. Following Quintilian, he
classifies literature into _genres_ of poetry, history, philosophy, and
oratory, each with its appropriate subdivisions. Both Ascham and
Quintilian are interested in literature as professors who must organize a
field for presentation to students; and as is frequently the case, the
result is apt to become arid, schematic, and lifeless. In his criticism of
individual poems, also, Ascham praises the authors less for creative power
than for adherence to certain formal tests. Watson's _Absolon_ and
Buchanan's _Iephthe_ he considers the best tragedies of his age because
only they can "abide the trew touch" of Aristotle's precepts and
Euripides's example. They were good because they were according to rule,
and in imitation of good models.[195] Watson he especially praises for his
refusal to publish _Absolon_ because in several places an anapest was
substituted for an iambus. Thus far we have the influence of classical
rhetoric urging as an ideal for poetry formal correctness.

The rhetoric of Gascoigne, however, was not derived from the classical
treatises, but from the middle ages. His _Certayne Notes of Instruction_
(1575) marks the beginning of the period of metrical studies. Now in the
English middle ages, prosody had consistently been treated as a part of
grammar, following the classical tradition; but in France prosody had
regularly been discussed in treatises bearing the name of rhetoric. As
Spingarn has shown, this tradition of the French middle ages persisted in
the works of Du Bellay and Ronsard, whose works in turn inspired
Gascoigne.[196]

Following Ronsard, Gascoigne devotes a great deal of attention to what,
borrowing the terminology of rhetoric, he calls "invention." But whereas
Ronsard had meant by invention high, grand, and beautiful conceptions,
Gascoigne means "some good and fine devise, shewing the quicke capacitie
of a writer." That Gascoigne takes invention to mean a search for fancies
is illustrated by his own example.

If I should undertake to wryte in prayse of a gentlewoman, I would neither
praise her christal eye, nor her cherrie lippe, etc. For these things are
_trita et obvia_. But I would either find some supernaturall cause whereby
my penne might walke in the superlative degree, or els I would undertake
to answer for any imperfection that shee hath, and thereupon rayse the
prayse of hir commendacion.[197]

By far the greater part of Gascoigne's treatise is devoted to metrics and
to style. One can use, he says, the same figures or tropes in verse as are
used in prose. It is noteworthy that in this treatise on making verses
Gascoigne restricts himself to externals of form and style. When he does
discuss the subject-matter of poetry, instead of emphasizing the
seriousness of content, he talks about his mistress' "cristal eye."

What has been said about Gascoigne applies almost equally well to the
_Schort Treatise_ (1584) of James VI which was modeled on it. Like
Gascoigne's _Notes_, it is rhetorical and concerned with only the
externals of poetry. The treatise is almost entirely a metrical study,
although the author does call attention to three special ornaments of
verse, which are comparisons, epithets, and proverbs. The other figures of
rhetoric which are so appropriate to poetry James says may be studied in
Du Bellay. In both these writers, poetry is treated in the categories of
the middle ages. Poetry to them is composed of subject-matter and style.
The characteristic structure and movement of poetry is not considered at
all.



2. The Influence of Horace


Thus far there had been no fundamental criticism of poetic in England, no
attempt to arrive at the basis of critical theory. Horace had been known
long before, but not until Drant's translation of the _Ars Poetica_ into
English in 1567 is its influence seen to be definite and extensive in
England. One of the earliest published evidences of this influence is
George Whetstone's _Dedication to Promos and Cassandra_ (1578). The
passage is short, but contains two very important points in the creed of
classicism. Whetstone inveighs against the English dramatist who "in three
howers ronnes throwe the worlde, marryes, gets children, makes Children
men, men to conquer kingdomes, murder Monsters, and bringeth Gods from
Heaven, and fetcheth Divels from Hel."[198] This is the earliest record in
England of an insistence on unity of time and place. Then he urges the
claims of decorum in comedy. The poet should not make clowns the
companions of kings, nor put wise counsels into the mouth of fools. "For,
to worke a comedie kindly, grave olde men should instruct, yonge men
should showe the imperfections of youth, Strumpets should be lascivious,
Boyes unhappy, and Clownes should speake disorderlye."[199]

It is interesting that this conception of the characters in a drama should
ultimately trace back through many perversions to Aristotle's rhetorical
theory. There are three kinds of proof, says Aristotle in the _Rhetoric_:
the character of the speaker, the production of a certain disposition in
the audience, and the argument of the speech itself. The last kind of
proof is derived from logic; the first two, from psychology.[200]
Consequently, Aristotle devotes almost a third of his _Rhetoric_, the
second book, to an elaborate exposition of the passions (πάθη) of men, so
that the orator may know how to excite or allay them according as the
necessities of his case demand, and a full explanation of the character (ᤦθος)
of men, that the speaker may know how to impress upon his audience his own
trustworthiness, and adapt his arguments to the character of the
particular audience which he is addressing. Varieties of character in an
audience depend upon its passions, its virtues and vices, its age or
youth, and its position in life.[201] Aristotle's generalizations on the
character of young people and old, of the wealthy, noble and powerful,
display penetrating acumen. That flesh and blood character realizations in
drama or story could be attained by this method Aristotle never intended.
He is talking of public address. But the study of characterization as part
of the education of an orator became fixed in the curriculum of rhetoric
schools. The boys were supposed to study certain types of persons and then
write character sketches to show their sharpness of observation.
Theophrastus, Aristotle's favorite student and successor as head of the
school in Athens, wrote his _Characters_ to show how it was done, and did
it with such ability as to elevate the school exercise to a literary
form. These "characters" were epitomized in the Latin rhetorics and the
school exercises continued. The rhetoric _Ad Herennium_ calls them
_notatio_,[202] Cicero, _descriptio_,[203] and Quintilian, _mores_.[204]

Quintilian furthermore makes interesting comments on the use of the
character sketches by the poets. Character (Greek: ᤦθος) in oratory, he
says, is similar to comedy, as the passions (πάθος) are to tragedy.[205]
Professor Butcher calls attention to the early influence of the character
sketches on the middle comedy. Here the "humours," to anticipate Ben
Jonson, give names not only to the characters of the play, but to the
plays themselves.[206] As adopted by the drama, the orator's view that
people of a certain age and rank are likely to behave in certain fashions
was perverted to the dramatical law of _decorum_, that people of certain
age or rank must on the stage act up to this generalization of what was
characteristic. This law of decorum was formulated by Horace in his _Ars
Poetica_,[207] whence it was derived by the renaissance. Thomas Wilson,
in his _Arte of Rhetorique_, gives a Theophrastian character sketch as an
illustration of the figure _descriptio_.

  "As in speaking against a covetous man, thus. There is no such pinch
  peney on live as this good fellowe is. He will not lose the paring of
  his nailes. His haire is never rounded for sparing of money, one paire
  of shone serveth him a twelve month, he is shod with nailes like a
  Horse. He hath bene knowne by his coate this thirtie Winter. He spent
  once a groate at good ale, being forced through companie, and taken
  short at his words, whereupon he hath taken such conceipt since that
  time, that it hath almost cost him his life."[208]

In 1592 Casaubon edited Theophrastus in Latin. Thereafter the character
sketch became a literary form, as in Hall, Overbury, and Earle, instead of
remaining merely a rhetorical exercise.[209] In the theory of the drama
the rhetorical method of characterization, fixed as the law of decorum,
flourished throughout the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries. In England
from Whetstone on it was made much of. Thus a rhetorical tradition of
classical pedagogy, derived ultimately from Aristotle, and a poetical
tradition of later classical drama, derived from Horace, coincide in the
English renaissance.

In _The Epistle Dedicatory to the Shepheards Calender_ (1579), for
instance, E.K. praises Spenser for "his dewe observing of decorum everye
where, in personages, in seasons, in matter, in speach."[210] The
archaisms are defended in the first place, indeed, because they are
appropriate to rustic speakers, but in the second because Cicero says that
ancient words make the style seem grave and reverend. Further praise E.K.
grants the author because he avoids loose sentence structure and affects
the oratorical period. "Now, for the knitting of sentences, whych they
call the ioynts and members thereof, and for all the compasse of the
speach, it is round without roughness."[211] The "ioynts and members" are
the _cola_ and _commas_ of the oratorical prose rhythm. Stanyhurst in the
_Dedication_ to his translation of Virgil (1582), like E. K., is concerned
with style rather than matter, and of course primarily with the revival
of classical meters, a subject already so thoroughly investigated that it
need not be gone into here.[212] Stanyhurst's praise of Virgil is largely
concerned with formal and rhetorical excellences.

  Our _Virgil_ dooth laboure, in telling as yt were a _Cantorburye tale_,
  too ferret owt the secretes of _Nature_, with woordes so fitlye coucht,
  wyth verses so smoothlye slyckte, with sentences so featlye ordered,
  with orations so neatlie burnisht, with similitudes so aptly applyed,
  with eeche _decorum_ so duely observed, as in truth hee hath in right
  purchased too hym self thee name of a surpassing poet, thee fame of an
  od oratoure, and thee admiration of a profound philosopher.[213]

Thus in accord with the mediseval tradition he analyzes poetry into
profitable subject matter and style.



3. The Influence of Aristotle


In 1579 the Puritan attack on poetry and the stage began with Gosson's
_School of Abuse._[214] and was answered by Lodge's _Defence of Poetry_ in
the same year. The attack and defense both rested on moral, not aesthetic,
sanctions and will be discussed in a later section. It is only in Sidney's
_Defense_ (c. 1583) and that of his follower Harington that theories of
the nature of poetry are included. And with Sidney the Aristotelianism of
the Italian renaissance makes its first appearance in English
criticism.[215]

"Poesie," writes Sidney, "therefore is an arte of imitation, for so
Aristotle termeth it in his word _Mimesis_, that is to say, a
representing, counterfeiting, or figuring forth: to speake metaphorically,
a speaking picture."[216] Thus not only Aristotle's imitation enters
English criticism, but Plutarch's speaking picture as well, with all the
power of its false analogy. That Sidney himself was not, however, carried
away by the analogy is apparent from other passages. Aristotle,
classifying poetic with music and dancing as a time art with its essence
in movement, had insisted that a poem must have a beginning, a middle, and
an end--qualities which do not exist in space. So in the most quoted
passage from Sidney's _Defense_, it is a "tale forsooth," which draws old
men from the chimney corner, and children from play,[217] and "the
narration" which furnishes the groundplot of poesie.[218] Thus he
introduces into English criticism, as an important element of poetry, the
essentially sound idea that the characteristic structure of poetry lies in
its narrative and dramatic movement. Poetry cannot lie because it never
pretends to fact. He establishes this assertion on Aristotle's "universal
not the particular" as the basis of poetic. Sidney had followed Scaliger
in classifying poets into three kinds: the theological, the philosophical,
and the right poets. The third class, the real poets, he says, "borrow
nothing of what is, hath been, or shall be: but range, onely rayned with
learned discretion, into the divine consideration of what may be, and
should be."[219]

In considering the vehicle of poetic Sidney parts company with Scaliger
and agrees with Castelvetro that verse is but an ornament and not the
characteristic mark of poetry. The _Cyropaedia_ of Xenophon, and the
_Theagines and Cariclea_ of Heliodorus are poems, although written in
prose, because they feign notable images of virtues and vices, "although
indeed the Senate of Poets hath chosen verse as their fittest
rayment."[220] Proceeding thence, he defends verse as being a far greater
aid to memory than prose, borrowing his terminology of "rooms," "places,"
and "seates," from the mnemonic system of Simonides usually incorporated
in the section on memory in the classical rhetorics.[221] Furthermore,
Sidney is the first in England to insist on the vividness of realization
which comes from the poet's being himself moved. Discussing lyric poetry,
Sidney says:

  But truely many of such writings as come under the banner of
  unresistable love, if I were a Mistres, would never perswade mee they
  were in love; so coldely they apply fiery speeches, as men that had
  rather red Lovers writings, and so caught up certaine swelling
  phrases,... then that in truth they feele those passions, which easily
  (as I think) may be bewrayed by that same forcibleness or _Energia_ (as
  the Greeks call it), of the writer.[222]

Sidney's _Energia_ came to him from the rhetorics of Aristotle and
Quintilian via the _Poetice_ of Scaliger.[223] _Energia_, the vivifying
quality of poetry, had at the earliest age been adopted by rhetoric to
lend power to persuasion. Carefully preserved among the figures of
rhetoric, it had survived the middle ages, and appears in Wilson's _Arte
of Rhetoric_ as "an evident declaration of a thing, as though we saw it
even now done."

Sidney makes _energia_ an essential quality of poetic; but even with him
it seems to have a rhetorical cast. It is especially to be used, says
Sidney, by a lover to persuade his mistress, urging her to yield while yet
her beauty endures. This _genre_ of versified oration to one's mistress
was unusually popular in Elizabethan England. It may even be one reason
for Bacon's classification of lyric poetry as part of rhetoric.[224]
Although _energia_ does belong to both poetic and rhetoric, as
pseudo-Longinus implies,[225] there seems to be here a definitely
rhetorical conception of poetic style. Sidney, however, keeps the
classical distinction between rhetoric and poetic, although he was
conscious of their contact in diction. "Both," he says with Aristotle,
"have an affinity in this wordish consideration."[226] While many
renaissance critics interpreted this affinity as permitting rhetorical
elaboration in poetry as well as in prose, Sidney with innate good taste
pleaded for more restraint. The diction of the writers of lyrics is even
worse, he says, than their content.

  So is that honny-flowing Matron Eloquence apparalled, or rather
  disguised, in a Curtizan-like painted affectation: one time with so
  farre fette words, they seem monsters, but must seem strangers to any
  poore English man, another tyme with coursing of a Letter as if they
  were bound to follow the method of a Dictionary; another tyme, with
  figures and flowers extreamelie winter-starved.[227]

Prose writers, he adds, are as badly infected as "versers," even scholars
and preachers. That he himself was infected appears in the examples of
interminable "tropes" and "schemes" quoted by Fraunce in his _Arcadian
Rhetoric_ (1588) from Sidney's own _Arcadia_. But the concession of his
own style to the habit of his age did not involve any fundamental
confusion of rhetoric with poetic.

Thus Sidney's _Defense of Poesie_, by domesticating in England the
Aristotelian theories of the Italian critics, went far in displacing
mediaeval tradition by sounder classical criticism. To object that
Sidney's criticism contains elements which derive from the middle ages and
from the classical rhetorics would be captious. It is asking too much to
expect that a man can shake off at once the traditional habits of thought
which are part of the air he breathes. The important thing is that Sidney
instituted a tendency toward classicism which during the next fifty years
established itself in criticism. That this classicism tended in some cases
toward over-emphasis does not alter the fact that English criticism
profited greatly by the return to classical poetical theory. It is
interesting, however, that Sidney's influence did not at once dislodge the
mediaeval tradition. Although the manuals of Webbe and Puttenham do show
classical influence, their theories of poetry still show a notable
residuum of theory characteristically mediaeval.



4. Manuals for Poets


Before William Webbe wrote his _Discourse of English Poetry_ (1586) there
had been no attempt in England to compose a systematic and comprehensive
study of the art. The rhetorical studies of Ascham and Wilson merely
glanced at poetry as something related to rhetoric. Gascoigne and James
attempted no more than manuals of prosody. Lodge and Harington were
primarily interested in justifying poetry on moral grounds against the
Puritan attack; and Sidney, though he goes beyond this, still keeps it as
a main object. In his _Discourse_ Webbe modestly asserts that his purpose
in writing is primarily to stir up some one better than he to write on
English poetry so that proper criteria of judgment may be established to
discern between good writers and bad, and that the poets may thereby be
aided in the right practice and orderly course of true poetry. If as much
attention were devoted in England to poetry as to oratory, he thinks,
poetry would be in as good state as her sister "Rhetoricall _Eloquution_,
as they were by byrth Twyns, by kinde the same, by original of one
descent."[228] As an example of the high degree of excellence attained by
eloquence, he cites Lyly's _Euphues_.

  Whose workes surely in respecte of his singuler eloquence and brave
  composition of apt words and sentences, let the learned examine and make
  tryall thereof through all the partes of Rethoricke, in fitte phrases,
  in pithy sentences, in gallant tropes, in flowing speech, in plaine
  sence.[229]

Thus rhetoric is considered merely as style; and the implication seems to
be that the poets who would improve their style might well imitate Lyly.
Webbe evidently means what he says in identifying poetry and rhetoric in
style. He adds:

  Thus it appeareth both Eloquence and Poetrie to have had their beginning
  and original from these exercises, beeing framed in such sweete measure
  of sentences and pleasant harmonie called ῥυθμός which is an apt
  composition of wordes or clauses, drawing as it were by force the hearers
  eares even whether soever it lysteth, that _Plato_ affirmeth
  therein to be contained γοητεία, an inchantment, as it were to
  persuade.[230]

The confusion thus is carried pretty far by Webbe, who makes poetry and
rhetoric the same in style, both aiming at persuasion. Not only have
poetic and rhetoric for him a common ground in diction, but the ideal of
diction is the same for both. The diction of poetry is the same as the
diction of oratory. The only difference to him is that poetry is in verse
and oratory in prose.

  Poetry, therefore, is where any worke is learnedly compiled in
  measurable speech, and framed in wordes conteyning number or proportion
  of just syllables, delighting the readers or hearers as well by the apt
  and decent framing of wordes in equal resemblance of quantity--commonly
  called verse, as by the skylfull handling of the matter.[231]

Webbe organizes his treatise in good rhetorical fashion. First come
seventeen pages of history, mentioning with perfunctory comment the best
known poets of classical antiquity and of England. The remainder of the
_Discourse_ is devoted to the theory of poetry, which he divides into
matter and form. Matter, which receives nineteen pages, is the mediæval
_doctrina_, for the whole gist of this section is that moral lessons are
derivable from the poets. By form he means verse, making no mention of the
figures of speech. English rimes receive half of this space, and classical
meters the remainder. Webbe's fund of critical opinion is not opulent. His
treatise is based on traditional English opinion of the middle ages, with
an increment of Horace, of whom he thinks so highly as to append to his
treatise an English translation of the "Cannons or generall cautions of
poetry," which Georgius Fabricius Chemnicensis (1560) had digested from
the _Ars Poetica_, and the _Epistles_.

Perhaps the author of _The Arte of English Poesie_ (1589),
generally supposed to be Puttenham, had in mind to be the
some-one-better-than-Webbe, whom that worthy tutor hoped to stir up to
write a treatise for the benefit of poetry in England. At any rate,
Puttenham is primarily concerned with teaching his contemporaries how to
write verses. Like classical authors of text-books, he calls his treatise
an "Arte." Furthermore, as a courtier himself writing for courtiers,
Puttenham does not lay down rules for the drama or the epic, but devotes
most of his attention to occasional verse: lyrics, elegies, epigrams, and
satires. His structure is significant. The first book, 58 pages in the
Arber reprint, deals with definition, purpose and subject matter of
poetry. The poet, he says, is a maker who creates new forms out of his
inner consciousness, and at the same time an imitator. Thus he reconciles
Aristotle and Horace.[232] Moreover, Puttenham calls attention to the
importance of the imagination in the composition of poetry as well as in
war, engineering and politics.[234] That the art of poetry is eminently
teachable, Puttenham is entirely convinced, for he defines it as a skill
appertaining to utterance, or as a certain order of rules prescribed by
reason and gathered by experience.[233] It is verse, according to
Puttenham, not imitation, which is the characteristic mark of poetry. This
makes poetry a nobler form, for verse is "a manner of utterance more
eloquent and rethorical then the ordinarie prose, because it is decked and
set out with all manner of fresh colours and figures, which maketh that it
sooner invegleth the judgment of man." It is because poetry is thus so
beautiful, he says, that "the Poets were also from the beginning the best
persuaders, and their eloquence the first Rethoricke of the world."[235]
Rhetoric to Puttenham is beauty of speech: and because poetry is more
beautiful than prose, as being in this sense more rhetorical, it is better
able to persuade. The remainder of the book explains the nature and
history of the various poetical forms, as lyric, epic, tragedy, pastoral,
and so on. The second book, _Of Proportion_, 70 pages, is a treatise on
metrics. The first half, like the section in Webbe, is devoted to English
versing, dealing with stanza forms, meters, rime, and conceited figures
such as anagrams and verses in the form of eggs. The second half is
devoted to classical meters. In his third book, _Of Ornament_, 165 pages,
Puttenham gives an exhaustive and exhausting treatment of the figures of
speech. Of the 121 figures which Puttenham defines and illustrates,
Professor Van Hook has traced 107 to Quintilian's rhetoric[236]. Professor
Schelling refuses to treat this third book in his _Poetic and Verse
Criticism in the Reign of Elizabeth_, because, he says, it does not fall
within the scope of his purpose, being made up of matters rhetorical, as
applicable to prose as to verse[237]. That Puttenham did include it,
however, is most significant evidence that both the author and his reading
public considered these adornments an essential part of poetry. As the
ladies of the court, be they ever so beautiful, should be ashamed to be
seen without their courtly habiliments of silks, and tissues, and costly
embroideries, even so poetry cannot be seen if any limb be left naked and
bare and not clad in gay clothes and colors, says Puttenham.

  This ornament is given to it by figures and figurative speaches, which
  be the flowers, as it were, and colours that a Poet setteth upon his
  language of arte, as the embroderer doth his stone and perle or
  passements of gold upon the stuffe of a Princely garment[238].

The figures Puttenham divides according to his own scheme. First come the
figures _auricular_ peculiar to the poets, then the figures _sensable_
common to the poets and the rhetoricians, and finally the figures
_sententious_ appropriate to the orators alone. After he has explained the
first two varieties, however, and enters on the third, Puttenham says:

  Now if our presupposall be true, that the Poet is of all other the most
  auncient Orator, as he that by good and pleasant perswasions first
  reduced the wilde and beastly people into publicke societies and
  civilitie of life, insinuating unto them, under fictions with sweete and
  coloured speeches, many wholesome lessons and doctrines, then no doubt
  there is nothing so fitte for him, as to be furnished with all the
  figures that be _Rhetoricall_, and such as do most beautifie language
  with eloquence and sententiousness. So as if we should intreate our
  maker to play also the Orator, and whether it be to pleade, or to
  praise, or to advise, that in all three cases he may utter and also
  perswade both copiously and vehemently[239].

Puttenham was writing in the same age and with the same tradition which
defined Rhetoric as the art of ornament in speech. The only difference
between oratory and poetry lay in that the latter was composed in verse.



5. Rhetorical Elements in Later English Classicism


From Puttenham to Bacon no serious contributions were made to the general
theory of poetry. Critical attention was absorbed by controversies of
Campion and Daniel over native and classical versification, and the
flyting of Harvey and Nash. Harvey was a classical scholar and rhetorician
who knew that poetry and oratory were different things, and believed verse
to be the mark of the first and prose of the latter[240]. He preferred the
periodic style of Isocrates and Ascham to the tricksy pages of
Euphues[241]. Chapman, likewise, considered verse the mark of poetry, and
prose of rhetoric[242].

In the _Advancement of Learning_ (1605) Bacon clears up some of the
misconceptions of the English renaissance by judicious borrowing from the
Italian. He says:

  Poesie is a part of Learning in measure of words for the most part
  restrained, but in all other points extremely licensed, and doth truly
  referre to the Imagination, which, beeing not tyed to the Lawes of
  Matter, may at pleasure joyne that which Nature hath severed, & sever
  that which Nature hath joyned, and so make all unlawful Matches &
  divorses of things: It is taken in two senses in respect of Wordes or
  Matter. In the first sense it is but a _Character_ of stile, and
  belongeth to Arts of speeche. In the later, it is, as hath beene saide,
  one of the principall Portions of learning, and is nothing else but
  _Fained History_, which may be stiled as well in Prose as in Verse.[243]

Bacon's focus of attention on the substance of poetry is in keeping with
his attack on mere sophistication of style in rhetoric. Poetry as style
does not interest him. Like Castelvetro and Sidney, he considers the
vehicle of verse not essential to poetry, which, as a product of the
imagination, he considers to be occupied with fiction. To Bacon, perhaps,
the imagination seems to be too much the organ of make-believe, imaging
things which never were on land or under the sea. Nevertheless his claim
for the imagination is fortunate in ruling out those theories of art which
set up slavish fidelity to fact, under the name of imitation, as the
essence of poetry. Bacon was not concerned with formulating a complete
theory of poetry, but his pithy _obiter dicta_ were influential in further
establishing the sounder criticism of the Italian classicists.

As Spingarn points out, Ben Jonson was first led to classicism in poetical
theory by the example of Sidney.[244] But during the intervening years
the scholars of Holland had supplanted those of Italy; and whereas Sidney
derived his Aristotelianism from Scaliger and Minturno, Jonson derived his
even more from Pontanus, Heinsius, and Lipsius and from the Latin
rhetoricians, Cicero and Quintilian.

  A Poet (says Jonson) is a Maker, or a fainer: His Art, an Art of
  imitation or faining, expressing the life of man in fit measure,
  numbers, and harmony.... Hence hee is called a _Poet_, not he which
  writeth in measure only, but that fayneth and formeth a fable, and
  writes things like the truth. For the Fable and Fiction is, as it were,
  the form and Soule of any Poeticall worke or Poeme.[245]

So convinced was Jonson that the essence of poetry does not lie in verse
but in fiction that Drummond reports, "he thought not Bartas a Poet, but a
Verser, because he wrote not fiction."[246] Jonson was misled by the false
analogy of poetry and painting.

  _Poetry_ and _Picture_ are Arts of a like nature, and both are busie
  about imitation. It was excellently said of _Plutarch, Poetry_ was a
  speaking Picture, and _Picture_ a mute _Poesie_. For they both invent,
  fame, and devise many things.[247]

This structural and static conception of poetry is well exemplified by his
comparisons. Whereas Aristotle classified poetry with music and dance,
Jonson compares the epic or dramatic plot to a house. The epic is like a
palace and so requires more space than a drama. The influence of Jonson
was beneficial, however, in that he did emphasize in poetry the element of
structure which the middle ages had largely neglected.[248] In his ideals
of style Jonson is rhetorical. In the twelve sections of _Timber_ which he
devotes to rhetoric he incorporates a sound treatise on prose style,
urging restraint and perspicuity as especial virtues. In his nine sections
on poetry he says nothing about style, except to quote Oicero to the
effect that "the _Poet_ is the nearest Borderer upon the Orator, and
expresseth all his vertues, though he be tyed more to numbers." It would
seem that the section on style in oratory was meant to serve for poetry as
well. Jonson's own methods of comparison, as related to Drummond, would
bear this out: "That he wrote all his (verses) first in prose."[249] From
the same authority one may learn that "He recommended to my reading
Quintilian, who, he said, would tell me the faults of my Verses as if he
lived with me," and "That Quintilian's 6, 7, 8, bookes were not only to be
read, but altogether digested,"[250] Though Jonson makes no more
distinction than Petrarch, between Horace, Cicero, or Quintilian as
authorities on poetical style,[251] his rhetorical cast does not imply the
style advocated by Webbe and Puttenham. This was the exuberant style of
mediaeval rhetoric, whereas by temperament and scholarly training Jonson
threw his influence in favor of the classical rhetorical style of the best
period.

The influence of Bacon in favor of the sound rhetoric of Cicero and
Quintilian, seconded by that of Jonson, finally did away with the
mediaeval ideal of rhetoric as being one with aureate language and
embroidered style. The stylistic exuberance of the Elizabethans gave place
to a more restrained and polished phrase in the reign of Charles. Bolton,
for instance, in his _Hypercritica_ (c. 1618) warns the historians against
the style of the _Arcadia_. "Solidity and Fluency," he says, "better
becomes the historian, then Singularity of Oratorical or Poetical
Notions."[252] Henry Reynolds, in his _Mythomystes_ (c. 1633), although he
goes wool-gathering with mystical interpretations of poetry, yet evinces
the same reaction against the ornate style in terming the flowers of
rhetoric and versification as mere accidents of poetry.[253] In his
_Anacrisis_ (1634) the Earl of Stirling likewise urges that "language is
but the Apparel of Poesy."[254] The "but" marks the difference between the
ideals of two ages. Fiction remains for him the essence of poetry, for
fiction in prose is poetry. But he will not go the whole way with Jonson
and deny the name of poet to one whose material is not fictitious.[255]

Unfortunately, for English criticism, Milton wrote very little on the
theory of poetry. His casual remarks, however, show such enlightened
scholarship and keen insight that what little he did write makes up in
importance what it lacks in bulk. In the Treatise _Of Education_ (1644) he
refers to the sublime art of poetry "which in _Aristotle's poetics_, in
_Horace_, and the _Italian_ commentaries of _Castelvetro, Tasso, Mazzoni_,
and others, teaches what the laws are of a true _Epic_ poem, what of a
_Dramatic_, what of a _Lyric_, what decorum is, which is the grand master
peece to observe."[256] His rhetoric, also, he knew at first hand from the
best classical sources. He gives as his authorities Plato, Aristotle,
Phalereus,[257] Cicero, Hermogenes, Longinus.[258] This is the first time
that an English critic mentions the treatise _On the Sublime_ in
connection with poetry. It can thus hardly be a coincidence that Milton,
while citing the only surviving literary critic of classical antiquity who
gave proper emphasis to the importance of passion in poetry,[259] should
himself be the first English critical writer to urge for passion the same
importance. This he does in his famous differentiation of rhetoric and
poetic. In the educational scheme, he says, after mathematics should be
studied logic and rhetoric "To which Poetry would be made subsequent or
indeed rather precedent, as being lesse suttle and fine, but more simple,
sensuous, and passionate."[260] Milton has sometimes been thought to be
here defining poetry, but he is only distinguishing it from rhetoric. A
definition of poetry he never attempted. Meter he deemed essential to
poetry,[261] but rime he disliked. Thus, as far as he goes, Milton
represents the best in English renaissance criticism. He knew at first
hand the best classical treatises on poetic and on rhetoric; and he
recognized the distinctions which the ancients had made between them.

With the English literary criticism in the second half of the Seventeenth
Century, when the influence of French classicism was in the ascendant,
this study is not concerned. In the period which has just been surveyed
three points are noteworthy: the character of the English critics, the
slowness with which the classical theories penetrated English thought, and
the modifications which they underwent in the process. Gregory Smith calls
attention to the influence of Sidney and Daniel in establishing "the claim
of English criticism as an instrument of power outside the craft of
rhetoricians and scholars."[262] Of the English critical writers Ascham
is the foremost of the scholarly type; Harvey is the only other example.
Thomas Wilson, although he wrote a rhetoric, wrote a better one in many
ways because he was not a professional rhetorician, but a man of affairs.
Gascoigne, Lodge, Spenser, were poets who incidentally wrote on the
technic of their art or in defence of its value. Sidney, the poet,
courtier, and soldier, wrote not from the musty alcoves of libraries.
Webbe, it is true, was a pedant, but certainly not a scholar. Puttenham
was a bad poet, a well-read man, and a courtier. Jonson's scholarship was
thorough, but sweetened and ventilated by his activities as poet and
dramatist. Bacon was a scholar, but even more a philosopher and a
statesman. Milton, our most scholarly poet, during most of his life could
not keep his mind and pen from church and national politics. Indeed,
during the entire English renaissance there was no professional critic.
Literary criticism was not a field to be tilled, but a wood to be explored
by busy men who could find time for the exploit.

This amateur character of English critics accounts in a measure for the
slowness with which classical and Italian renaissance critical theories
filtered into England; for a statesman or a soldier is less likely to be
up-to-date on theories of poetry than is a professional critic whose
business it is to know what is written on his specialty. Another powerful
influence in the same direction was the characteristic English
conservatism which preferred the traditional paths of thought to Italian
innovations.

This same common-sense conservatism accounts also for the modifications of
Italian renaissance critical theories before they were incorporated into
the fund of English criticism. Classical meters, slavish imitation of the
ancients, close adherence to the rules of unity and decorum never made
much headway in the English renaissance. Such contaminations of poetic by
rhetoric as are clearest seem to arise not from the new Italian influence,
but from the mediaeval tradition.

To sum up, classical critics had recognized two categories of literature:
a fine art, poetic; and a practical art, rhetoric. Poetic they thought
characterized by narrative or dramatic structure or movement, and by
vividness of realization, and by passion. Rhetoric was characterized by a
logical structure determined by the necessity of persuading an audience.
Although most classical critics accepted prose as characteristic of
rhetoric, and verse of poetry, Aristotle pointed out that the distinction
was far more fundamental. As these two kinds of literature had a common
ground in diction, there was a tendency from very early times for them to
merge. In the artistic degeneracy of late Latin literature both rhetoric
and poetic paid less attention to structure and other elements which
distinguished them, and more attention to style, which they had in common.
Moreover, under the influence of sophistical rhetoric, preoccupied with
style, poetic and rhetoric practiced the same rhetorical artifices. As a
result Virgil might be either an orator or a poet. This was the rhetoric
which the middle ages inherited. To them rhetoric was synonymous with
stylistic beauty. Poetry was a compound of _doctrina_ and _eloquentia_, in
other words of theology and style, in verse. In England this mediaeval
tradition persisted into the seventeenth century, as the school rhetorics
and the treatises on poetry show. The English renaissance poetic never
freed itself from this influence of mediaeval rhetoric until the middle of
the seventeenth century. With the recovery of classical literature and
literary criticism, the new theories were interpreted in the light of the
old ideas.

On its creative side the renaissance sought to produce in the vernacular a
literature comparable to that of Greece or Rome. Thus literary criticism
was prescriptive, and the typical treatises were text-books. Rhetoric,
which had long been taught, very naturally furnished the methods, the
teachers, and in many cases the subject matter for this instruction in
poetry. As has been shown in the preceding section of this study, the
renaissance theory of poetry was rhetorical in its obsession with style,
especially the figures of speech, in its abiding faith in the efficacy of
rules; and in its belief that the poet, no less than the orator, is
occupied with persuasion. This latter rhetorical view that the poet's
office is to persuade will be studied more fully in the following section
on "The Purpose of Poetry." The traditional view is that by persuading the
reader to adhere to the good and shun the evil the poet achieves the
proper end of poetry--moral improvement.





Part Two

The Purpose of Poetry




