Chapter II

Mediaeval Ideas of the Purpose of Poetry



With the breaking up of the Empire the stream of classical culture was
restricted to a narrow channel--the Church. Opposed as it was to pagan
morals and theology, the church could honestly retain classical literature
only if it were allegorized. This explains the allegorical nature of
mediaeval poetry and of poetical theory.

From the beginning the learning of the Church was of pagan origin. St.
Augustine was a professor of rhetoric and the author of a treatise on
aesthetics before he wrote the _City of God_, and his _Confessions_. In
fact, he never quite got over being a professor of rhetoric. Clement of
Alexandria was a product of the same rhetoric schools and an excellent
teacher of his subject before he recognized the divine origin of
Christianity. St. Basil was a college friend of Gregory Nazianzen and of
Julian, later emperor and apostate, when the three studied rhetoric at
Athens. Indeed, the most cunningly cruel decree which Julian later
promulgated against the Christians forbade them the use of the ancient
pagan literature of Greece and Rome. This decree Basil bitterly resented.
"I forgo all the rest," he says, "riches, birth, honor, authority, and all
the goods here below of which the charm vanishes like a dream; but I cling
to oratory nor do I regret the toil, nor the journeys by land and sea,
which I have undertaken to master it."[320]

But within the Church the lovers of Greek literature did not have it all
their own way. Tatian, Hermas, Theophilus, and Tertullian savagely
attacked profane poetry, and in defending it Basil, Athenagoras, Clement,
and Origen were forced not unwillingly to rely more and more on the
traditional moralistic theory of poetry which was so familiar to them. St.
Chrysostom records that in the fourth century Homer was still taught as a
guide to morals.[321]



1. Allegorical Interpretations in the Middle Ages


Allegorical interpretation was the main weapon of the apologists for
poetry. The basis, indeed, of the Gnostic heresies of the second and third
centuries was an allegorical interpretation of the Greek poets and
philosophers and of the Scriptures. This soon degenerated into an
extravagant system of speculative mysticism. Clement of Alexandria and
Origen rejected the extravagances, but sought to retain the mysticism of
the Gnostics. They reconciled Greek literature and the Scriptures by
allegorizing both, much as today Darwin and Genesis are reconciled by
allegorizing Genesis.[322] Thus in the declining years of the Roman Empire
the rhetoricians had become ecclesiastics, and the Church had adopted
pagan literature with allegorical interpretation.

This tradition dominated the middle ages; Lady Theology reigned over the
kingdom of the seven liberal arts, and to make Homer and Virgil
theological it was necessary that they be interpreted allegorically. As
Vossler has shown, theology and philosophy furnished, during the middle
ages, the subject matter of poetry; they were the _utile_ of Horace. The
_dulce_ became for them too exclusively the pleasing garment of style and
story.[323]

Throughout the middle ages, however, many continued to look askance at
poetry, and were skeptical as to its value. To Boethius, weeping in
prison, came Philosophy to console him. She found him surrounded by the
friends of his youth, the Muses, who now were inspiring him to write
dreary verses of complaint. But these poetical Muses Philosophy sent
packing. "Who has allowed," said she, "these common strumpets of the
theatre to come near this sick man? Not only do they fail to assuage his
sorrows, but they feed and nourish them with sweet venom. They are not
fruitful nor profitable. They destroy the fruits of reason, for they hold
the hearts of men."[324] Here Philosophy is voicing the objections of
Plato. The arts are attacked because they are not successfully
utilitarian, and because they appeal to the emotions instead of to the
reason. In a later book Boethius gives a clearer key to the objection. He
postulates four mental faculties: sensation possessed by oysters,
imagination possessed by higher animals, reason possessed by man,
intelligence possessed by God. Consequently man should aspire towards God
instead of indulging his faculties of sensation and imagination, which he
shares with the lower animals.[325]

But such objections as those of Boethius were usually explained away by
allegory. When Isidore of Seville (†633 or 636), for instance, was
compiling his book of universal knowledge, the _Etymologiae_, he
incorporated his section on the poets in the chapter entitled _Concerning
the Church and the Sects_. So between a section devoted to the
_Philosophers of the Gentiles_ and a section entitled _Concerning Sibyls_
he wrote concerning the poets as follows:

  Sometimes, however, the poets were called theologians, because they used
  to compose songs concerning the gods. In doing this, however, it is the
  office of the poets to render what has actually been done in a different
  guise with a certain beauty of covert figures.[326]

The poet, to Isidore, was the inspired bard who sings of the gods and the
eternal verities, not directly, but under the veil of a beautiful
allegory. Among these allegorical or indirect means of expression used by
the poet to veil truth are fables.

  The poets invent fables sometimes to give pleasure; sometimes they are
  interpreted to explain the nature of things, sometimes to throw light on
  the manners of men.[327]

His illustrations of a fable show that he is talking about allegory. For
instance, the fable of the centaur was invented to show, by the union of
man and horse, the swiftness of human life.

It is very natural, then, that Dante should as the supreme poet of the
middle ages furnish the supreme example of allegory. In the _Convivio_ (c.
1306), Dante gives a very full and complete exposition of the proper
method of interpreting a text. Any writing, he says, should be expounded
in four senses. The first is the literal. The second is called the
allegorical, and is the one that hides itself under the mantle of these
tales, and is a truth hidden under beauteous fiction.[328] The reason
this way of hiding was devised by wise men he promises to explain in the
fourteenth treatise, which he never wrote. The third sense, he goes on to
say, is the moral, as from the fact that Christ took with him but three
disciples when he ascended the mountain for the transfiguration we may
understand that in secret things we should have but few companions. The
fourth sense is the analogical. Here the text may be literally true, but
contain a spiritual significance beyond. That to Dante, however, all but
the literal sense naturally coalesced as the allegorical is quite clear
from the close of the chapter and from the letter to Can Grande, in which
he discusses the interpretations of his _Commedia_. "Although these mystic
senses are called by various names, they may all in general be called
allegorical."[329] That the "beauteous fiction," the _bella menzogna_, of
allegory is rhetorical in origin is clear from a passage in the _Vita
Nuova_. Dante is defending his personification of Love as one walking,
speaking and laughing on the assumption that as a poet he is licensed to
use figures or rhetorical colorings. These colorings, however, must have a
true but hidden significance. The rhetorical figures are a garment to
clothe the nakedness of truth.[330]



2. Allegory in Mediaeval England


England as well as Italy furnished a congenial soil for allegory in the
thirteenth century. In his _Poetria_, John of Garland[331] explains
allegorically an "elegiac, bucolic, ethic, love poem" which he quotes.
"Under the guise of the nymph," he says, "is figured forth the flesh;
under that of the corrupt youth, the world or the devil; under that of the
friend, reason."[332] In another illustrative poem, this time introduced
to show the proper use of the six parts of an oration, John inserts
between the "_confirmacio_," and the "_confutacio_," an "_expositio
mistica_" in which the Trojan War is allegorized in this fashion: "The
fury of Eacides is the ire of Satan," etc.[333]

As late as 1506 Stephen Hawes's _Pastime of Pleasure_ is as mediaeval as
the _Romance of the Rose_.[334] In this allegory of the education and love
adventures of Grandamour the young man sits at the feet of Dame Rethoryke
to be instructed at great length in her art. To none other of the seven
liberal arts, in fact, does Hawes devote so much space. In the chapter on
_inventio_, however, the lady seems to have forgotten all about her
traditional past, for instead of discussing the method of finding all
possible arguments in favor of a case, she discusses the poets, their
purpose, and their fame.

The purpose of poetry is to her what it had been throughout the entire
period of the middle ages. The poet presents truth under the guise of
allegory.

  To make of nought reason sentencious
  Clokynge a trouthe wyth colour tenebrous.
  For often under a fayre fayned fable
  A trouthe appereth gretely profitable.[335]

This, says Dame Rethoryke, has the sanction of antiquity; for the old
poets, who are famous for their wisdom and the imaginative power of their
invention, pronounced truth under cloudy figures. This fortified the poets
against sloth.

  The special treasure
  Of new invencion, of ydleness the foo!

Then she addresses herself directly to the poets to laud their virtues.

  Your hole desyre was set
  Fables to fayne to eschewe ydleness,...
  To dysnull vyce and the vycious to blame.

Furthermore she praises them for recording the honorable deeds of great
conquerors and for furnishing the modern poets with such illustrious
models of the poetic art. This praise of the poets is complementary to a
condemnation of the foolish public, whose limited intelligence prevents
them from seeing the cloaked truth of the poets. Thus the dull, rude
people, when they are unable to understand the moral implications of the
poet's allegory, call the poets liars, deceivers, and flatterers. This,
she insists, is the fault not of the poets, but of the people. If the
people would take the trouble to understand these clouded truths, they
would praise and appreciate the moral poets.

The conclusion is not difficult. The mediaeval poets are on the defensive,
as their brothers had been through all the past. To justify art, the
middle ages had to show its usefulness not only to morals, but to
theology. Thus Dame Rethoryke in her talk on _inventio_, is conducting a
defense of poetry on the following grounds: it teaches profound truth
under the guise of allegory; it blames the vicious and overcomes vice; it
is the enemy of sloth; it records the honorable deeds of great men.

The chapter on style only continues the song. It is the art, says Hawes,
to cloak the meaning under misty figures of many colors, as the old poets
did, who took similitudes from beasts and birds.

  And under colour of this beste, pryvely
  The morall sense they cloake full subtyly.[336]

The poets write, he continues, under a misty cloud of covert likeness. For
instance, the poets feign that King Atlas bore the heavens on his
shoulders, meaning only that he was unusually versed in high astronomy.
Likewise the story of the centaurs only exemplifies the skill of Mylyzyus
in breaking the wildness of the royal steeds. Pluto, Cerberus, and the
hydra receive like explanations. The poets feign these fables, of course,
to lead the readers out of mischief. A poet to be great must drink of the
redolent well of poetry whence flow the four rivers of Understanding,
Close-concluding, Novelty, and Carbuncles. These rivers are translatable
into: understanding of good and evil, moral purpose, novelty, rhetorical
adornment of figures and so forth.

The poets praised--Gower, Chaucer, and Lydgate--deserve their fame, he
says, for their morality. They cleanse our vices. They kindle our hearts
with love of virtue. Lydgate's _Falls of Princes_ is an especially great
poem,

  A good ensample for us to dispyse
  This worlde, so ful of mutabilyte.[337]

Other cunning poets are, however, not so praiseworthy. Instead of feigning
pleasant and covert fables, they spend their time in vanity, making
ballades of fervent love and such like tales and trifles. This, he
insists, is an unfruitful manner in which to spend one's efforts.

This unanimous judgment of the middle ages that the purpose of poetry is
to teach spiritual truth and inculcate morality under the cloak of
allegory was perpetuated far into the renaissance, especially in England,
where, as has been shown, the recovery of classical culture made slow
progress.[338]




