CHAPTER III.
CONCERNING THE CHARACTER OF JESUS CHRIST, AND HIS HISTORY.


Nothing that is here said can apply, even with the most distant
disrespect, to the real character of Jesus Christ. He was a virtuous
and an amiable man. The morality that he preached and practiced was of
the most benevolent kind; and though similar systems of morality had
been preached by Confucius, and by some of the Greek philosophers, many
years before, by the Quakers since, and by many good men in all ages,
it has not been exceeded by any.

Jesus Christ wrote no account of himself, of his birth, parentage, or
anything else. Not a line of what is called the New Testament is of his
writing. The history of him is altogether the work of other people; and
as to the account given of his resurrection and ascension, it was the
necessary counterpart to the story of his birth. His historians, having
brought him into the world in a supernatural manner, were obliged to
take him out again in the same manner, or the first part of the story
must have fallen to the ground.

The wretched contrivance with which this latter part is told, exceeds
everything that went before it. The first part, that of the miraculous
conception, was not a thing that admitted of publicity; and therefore
the tellers of this part of the story had this advantage, that though
they might not be credited, they could not be detected. They could not
be expected to prove it, because it was not one of those things that
admitted of proof, and it was impossible that the person of whom it was
told could prove it himself.

But the resurrection of a dead person from the grave, and his ascension
through the air, is a thing very different, as to the evidence it
admits of, to the invisible conception of a child in the womb. The
resurrection and ascension, supposing them to have taken place,
admitted of public and ocular demonstration, like that of the ascension
of a balloon, or the sun at noon day, to all Jerusalem at least. A
thing which everybody is required to believe, requires that the proof
and evidence of it should be equal to all, and universal; and as the
public visibility of this last related act was the only evidence that
could give sanction to the former part, the whole of it falls to the
ground, because that evidence never was given. Instead of this, a small
number of persons, not more than eight or nine, are introduced as
proxies for the whole world, to say they saw it, and all the rest of
the world are called upon to believe it. But it appears that Thomas did
not believe the resurrection; and, as they say, would not believe
without having ocular and manual demonstration himself. So neither will
I; and the reason is equally as good for me, and for every other
person, as for Thomas.

It is in vain to attempt to palliate or disguise this matter. The
story, so far as relates to the supernatural part, has every mark of
fraud and imposition stamped upon the face of it. Who were the authors
of it is as impossible for us now to know, as it is for us to be
assured that the books in which the account is related were written by
the persons whose names they bear. The best surviving evidence we now
have respecting this affair is the Jews. They are regularly descended
from the people who lived in the time this resurrection and ascension
is said to have happened, and they say ‘it is not true.’ It has long
appeared to me a strange inconsistency to cite the Jews as a proof of
the truth of the story. It is just the same as if a man were to say, I
will prove the truth of what I have told you, by producing the people
who say it is false.

That such a person as Jesus Christ existed, and that he was crucified,
which was the mode of execution at that day, are historical relations
strictly within the limits of probability. He preached most excellent
morality, and the equality of man; but he preached also against the
corruptions and avarice of the Jewish priests, and this brought upon
him the hatred and vengeance of the whole order of priest-hood. The
accusation which those priests brought against him was that of sedition
and conspiracy against the Roman government, to which the Jews were
then subject and tributary; and it is not improbable that the Roman
government might have some secret apprehension of the effects of his
doctrine as well as the Jewish priests; neither is it improbable that
Jesus Christ had in contemplation the delivery of the Jewish nation
from the bondage of the Romans. Between the two, however, this virtuous
reformer and revolutionist lost his life. [NOTE: The French work has
here: “However this may be, for one or the other of these suppositions
this virtuous reformer, this revolutionist, too little imitated, too
much forgotten, too much misunderstood, lost his life.”—Editor.
(Conway)]




CHAPTER IV.
OF THE BASES OF CHRISTIANITY.


It is upon this plain narrative of facts, together with another case I
am going to mention, that the Christian mythologists, calling
themselves the Christian Church, have erected their fable, which for
absurdity and extravagance is not exceeded by anything that is to be
found in the mythology of the ancients.

The ancient mythologists tell us that the race of Giants made war
against Jupiter, and that one of them threw a hundred rocks against him
at one throw; that Jupiter defeated him with thunder, and confined him
afterwards under Mount Etna; and that every time the Giant turns
himself, Mount Etna belches fire. It is here easy to see that the
circumstance of the mountain, that of its being a volcano, suggested
the idea of the fable; and that the fable is made to fit and wind
itself up with that circumstance.

The Christian mythologists tell that their Satan made war against the
Almighty, who defeated him, and confined him afterwards, not under a
mountain, but in a pit. It is here easy to see that the first fable
suggested the idea of the second; for the fable of Jupiter and the
Giants was told many hundred years before that of Satan.

Thus far the ancient and the Christian mythologists differ very little
from each other. But the latter have contrived to carry the matter much
farther. They have contrived to connect the fabulous part of the story
of Jesus Christ with the fable originating from Mount Etna; and, in
order to make all the parts of the story tie together, they have taken
to their aid the traditions of the Jews; for the Christian mythology is
made up partly from the ancient mythology, and partly from the Jewish
traditions.

The Christian mythologists, after having confined Satan in a pit, were
obliged to let him out again to bring on the sequel of the fable. He is
then introduced into the garden of Eden in the shape of a snake, or a
serpent, and in that shape he enters into familiar conversation with
Eve, who is no ways surprised to hear a snake talk; and the issue of
this tete-a-tate is, that he persuades her to eat an apple, and the
eating of that apple damns all mankind.

After giving Satan this triumph over the whole creation, one would have
supposed that the church mythologists would have been kind enough to
send him back again to the pit, or, if they had not done this, that
they would have put a mountain upon him, (for they say that their faith
can remove a mountain) or have put him under a mountain, as the former
mythologists had done, to prevent his getting again among the women,
and doing more mischief. But instead of this, they leave him at large,
without even obliging him to give his parole. The secret of which is,
that they could not do without him; and after being at the trouble of
making him, they bribed him to stay. They promised him ALL the Jews,
ALL the Turks by anticipation, nine-tenths of the world beside, and
Mahomet into the bargain. After this, who can doubt the bountifulness
of the Christian Mythology?

Having thus made an insurrection and a battle in heaven, in which none
of the combatants could be either killed or wounded—put Satan into the
pit—let him out again—given him a triumph over the whole
creation—damned all mankind by the eating of an apple, there Christian
mythologists bring the two ends of their fable together. They represent
this virtuous and amiable man, Jesus Christ, to be at once both God and
man, and also the Son of God, celestially begotten, on purpose to be
sacrificed, because they say that Eve in her longing [NOTE: The French
work has: “yielding to an unrestrained appetite.”—Editor.] had eaten an
apple.




