CHAPTER XVII.
OF THE MEANS EMPLOYED IN ALL TIME, AND ALMOST UNIVERSALLY, TO DECEIVE
THE PEOPLES


Having thus shown the irreconcileable inconsistencies between the real
word of God existing in the universe, and that which is called the word
of God, as shown to us in a printed book that any man might make, I
proceed to speak of the three principal means that have been employed
in all ages, and perhaps in all countries, to impose upon mankind.

Those three means are Mystery, Miracle, and Prophecy, The first two are
incompatible with true religion, and the third ought always to be
suspected.

With respect to Mystery, everything we behold is, in one sense, a
mystery to us. Our own existence is a mystery: the whole vegetable
world is a mystery. We cannot account how it is that an acorn, when put
into the ground, is made to develop itself and become an oak. We know
not how it is that the seed we sow unfolds and multiplies itself, and
returns to us such an abundant interest for so small a capital.

The fact however, as distinct from the operating cause, is not a
mystery, because we see it; and we know also the means we are to use,
which is no other than putting the seed in the ground. We know,
therefore, as much as is necessary for us to know; and that part of the
operation that we do not know, and which if we did, we could not
perform, the Creator takes upon himself and performs it for us. We are,
therefore, better off than if we had been let into the secret, and left
to do it for ourselves.

But though every created thing is, in this sense, a mystery, the word
mystery cannot be applied to moral truth, any more than obscurity can
be applied to light. The God in whom we believe is a God of moral
truth, and not a God of mystery or obscurity. Mystery is the antagonist
of truth. It is a fog of human invention that obscures truth, and
represents it in distortion. Truth never envelops itself in mystery;
and the mystery in which it is at any time enveloped, is the work of
its antagonist, and never of itself.

Religion, therefore, being the belief of a God, and the practice of
moral truth, cannot have connection with mystery. The belief of a God,
so far from having any thing of mystery in it, is of all beliefs the
most easy, because it arises to us, as is before observed, out of
necessity. And the practice of moral truth, or, in other words, a
practical imitation of the moral goodness of God, is no other than our
acting towards each other as he acts benignly towards all. We cannot
serve God in the manner we serve those who cannot do without such
service; and, therefore, the only idea we can have of serving God, is
that of contributing to the happiness of the living creation that God
has made. This cannot be done by retiring ourselves from the society of
the world, and spending a recluse life in selfish devotion.

The very nature and design of religion, if I may so express it, prove
even to demonstration that it must be free from every thing of mystery,
and unincumbered with every thing that is mysterious. Religion,
considered as a duty, is incumbent upon every living soul alike, and,
therefore, must be on a level to the understanding and comprehension of
all. Man does not learn religion as he learns the secrets and mysteries
of a trade. He learns the theory of religion by reflection. It arises
out of the action of his own mind upon the things which he sees, or
upon what he may happen to hear or to read, and the practice joins
itself thereto.

When men, whether from policy or pious fraud, set up systems of
religion incompatible with the word or works of God in the creation,
and not only above but repugnant to human comprehension, they were
under the necessity of inventing or adopting a word that should serve
as a bar to all questions, inquiries and speculations. The word mystery
answered this purpose, and thus it has happened that religion, which is
in itself without mystery, has been corrupted into a fog of mysteries.

As mystery answered all general purposes, miracle followed as an
occasional auxiliary. The former served to bewilder the mind, the
latter to puzzle the senses. The one was the lingo, the other the
legerdemain.

But before going further into this subject, it will be proper to
inquire what is to be understood by a miracle.

In the same sense that every thing may be said to be a mystery, so also
may it be said that every thing is a miracle, and that no one thing is
a greater miracle than another. The elephant, though larger, is not a
greater miracle than a mite: nor a mountain a greater miracle than an
atom. To an almighty power it is no more difficult to make the one than
the other, and no more difficult to make a million of worlds than to
make one. Every thing, therefore, is a miracle, in one sense; whilst,
in the other sense, there is no such thing as a miracle. It is a
miracle when compared to our power, and to our comprehension. It is not
a miracle compared to the power that performs it. But as nothing in
this description conveys the idea that is affixed to the word miracle,
it is necessary to carry the inquiry further.

Mankind have conceived to themselves certain laws, by which what they
call nature is supposed to act; and that a miracle is something
contrary to the operation and effect of those laws. But unless we know
the whole extent of those laws, and of what are commonly called the
powers of nature, we are not able to judge whether any thing that may
appear to us wonderful or miraculous, be within, or be beyond, or be
contrary to, her natural power of acting.

The ascension of a man several miles high into the air, would have
everything in it that constitutes the idea of a miracle, if it were not
known that a species of air can be generated several times lighter than
the common atmospheric air, and yet possess elasticity enough to
prevent the balloon, in which that light air is inclosed, from being
compressed into as many times less bulk, by the common air that
surrounds it. In like manner, extracting flashes or sparks of fire from
the human body, as visibly as from a steel struck with a flint, and
causing iron or steel to move without any visible agent, would also
give the idea of a miracle, if we were not acquainted with electricity
and magnetism; so also would many other experiments in natural
philosophy, to those who are not acquainted with the subject. The
restoring persons to life who are to appearance dead as is practised
upon drowned persons, would also be a miracle, if it were not known
that animation is capable of being suspended without being extinct.

Besides these, there are performances by slight of hand, and by persons
acting in concert, that have a miraculous appearance, which, when
known, are thought nothing of. And, besides these, there are mechanical
and optical deceptions. There is now an exhibition in Paris of ghosts
or spectres, which, though it is not imposed upon the spectators as a
fact, has an astonishing appearance. As, therefore, we know not the
extent to which either nature or art can go, there is no criterion to
determine what a miracle is; and mankind, in giving credit to
appearances, under the idea of their being miracles, are subject to be
continually imposed upon.

Since then appearances are so capable of deceiving, and things not real
have a strong resemblance to things that are, nothing can be more
inconsistent than to suppose that the Almighty would make use of means,
such as are called miracles, that would subject the person who
performed them to the suspicion of being an impostor, and the person
who related them to be suspected of lying, and the doctrine intended to
be supported thereby to be suspected as a fabulous invention.

Of all the modes of evidence that ever were invented to obtain belief
to any system or opinion to which the name of religion has been given,
that of miracle, however successful the imposition may have been, is
the most inconsistent. For, in the first place, whenever recourse is
had to show, for the purpose of procuring that belief (for a miracle,
under any idea of the word, is a show) it implies a lameness or
weakness in the doctrine that is preached. And, in the second place, it
is degrading the Almighty into the character of a show-man, playing
tricks to amuse and make the people stare and wonder. It is also the
most equivocal sort of evidence that can be set up; for the belief is
not to depend upon the thing called a miracle, but upon the credit of
the reporter, who says that he saw it; and, therefore, the thing, were
it true, would have no better chance of being believed than if it were
a lie.

Suppose I were to say, that when I sat down to write this book, a hand
presented itself in the air, took up the pen and wrote every word that
is herein written; would any body believe me? Certainly they would not.
Would they believe me a whit the more if the thing had been a fact?
Certainly they would not. Since then a real miracle, were it to happen,
would be subject to the same fate as the falsehood, the inconsistency
becomes the greater of supposing the Almighty would make use of means
that would not answer the purpose for which they were intended, even if
they were real.

If we are to suppose a miracle to be something so entirely out of the
course of what is called nature, that she must go out of that course to
accomplish it, and we see an account given of such a miracle by the
person who said he saw it, it raises a question in the mind very easily
decided, which is,—Is it more probable that nature should go out of her
course, or that a man should tell a lie? We have never seen, in our
time, nature go out of her course; but we have good reason to believe
that millions of lies have been told in the same time; it is,
therefore, at least millions to one, that the reporter of a miracle
tells a lie.

The story of the whale swallowing Jonah, though a whale is large enough
to do it, borders greatly on the marvellous; but it would have
approached nearer to the idea of a miracle, if Jonah had swallowed the
whale. In this, which may serve for all cases of miracles, the matter
would decide itself as before stated, namely, Is it more probable that
a man should have, swallowed a whale, or told a lie?

But suppose that Jonah had really swallowed the whale, and gone with it
in his belly to Nineveh, and to convince the people that it was true
have cast it up in their sight, of the full length and size of a whale,
would they not have believed him to have been the devil instead of a
prophet? or if the whale had carried Jonah to Nineveh, and cast him up
in the same public manner, would they not have believed the whale to
have been the devil, and Jonah one of his imps?

The most extraordinary of all the things called miracles, related in
the New Testament, is that of the devil flying away with Jesus Christ,
and carrying him to the top of a high mountain; and to the top of the
highest pinnacle of the temple, and showing him and promising to him
all the kingdoms of the world. How happened it that he did not discover
America? or is it only with kingdoms that his sooty highness has any
interest.

I have too much respect for the moral character of Christ to believe
that he told this whale of a miracle himself: neither is it easy to
account for what purpose it could have been fabricated, unless it were
to impose upon the connoisseurs of miracles, as is sometimes practised
upon the connoisseurs of Queen Anne’s farthings, and collectors of
relics and antiquities; or to render the belief of miracles ridiculous,
by outdoing miracle, as Don Quixote outdid chivalry; or to embarrass
the belief of miracles, by making it doubtful by what power, whether of
God or of the devil, any thing called a miracle was performed. It
requires, however, a great deal of faith in the devil to believe this
miracle.

In every point of view in which those things called miracles can be
placed and considered, the reality of them is improbable, and their
existence unnecessary. They would not, as before observed, answer any
useful purpose, even if they were true; for it is more difficult to
obtain belief to a miracle, than to a principle evidently moral,
without any miracle. Moral principle speaks universally for itself.
Miracle could be but a thing of the moment, and seen but by a few;
after this it requires a transfer of faith from God to man to believe a
miracle upon man’s report. Instead, therefore, of admitting the
recitals of miracles as evidence of any system of religion being true,
they ought to be considered as symptoms of its being fabulous. It is
necessary to the full and upright character of truth that it rejects
the crutch; and it is consistent with the character of fable to seek
the aid that truth rejects. Thus much for Mystery and Miracle.

As Mystery and Miracle took charge of the past and the present,
Prophecy took charge of the future, and rounded the tenses of faith. It
was not sufficient to know what had been done, but what would be done.
The supposed prophet was the supposed historian of times to come; and
if he happened, in shooting with a long bow of a thousand years, to
strike within a thousand miles of a mark, the ingenuity of posterity
could make it point-blank; and if he happened to be directly wrong, it
was only to suppose, as in the case of Jonah and Nineveh, that God had
repented himself and changed his mind. What a fool do fabulous systems
make of man!

It has been shewn, in a former part of this work, that the original
meaning of the words prophet and prophesying has been changed, and that
a prophet, in the sense of the word as now used, is a creature of
modern invention; and it is owing to this change in the meaning of the
words, that the flights and metaphors of the Jewish poets, and phrases
and expressions now rendered obscure by our not being acquainted with
the local circumstances to which they applied at the time they were
used, have been erected into prophecies, and made to bend to
explanations at the will and whimsical conceits of sectaries,
expounders, and commentators. Every thing unintelligible was
prophetical, and every thing insignificant was typical. A blunder would
have served for a prophecy; and a dish-clout for a type.

If by a prophet we are to suppose a man to whom the Almighty
communicated some event that would take place in future, either there
were such men, or there were not. If there were, it is consistent to
believe that the event so communicated would be told in terms that
could be understood, and not related in such a loose and obscure manner
as to be out of the comprehension of those that heard it, and so
equivocal as to fit almost any circumstance that might happen
afterwards. It is conceiving very irreverently of the Almighty, to
suppose he would deal in this jesting manner with mankind; yet all the
things called prophecies in the book called the Bible come under this
description.

But it is with Prophecy as it is with Miracle. It could not answer the
purpose even if it were real. Those to whom a prophecy should be told
could not tell whether the man prophesied or lied, or whether it had
been revealed to him, or whether he conceited it; and if the thing that
he prophesied, or pretended to prophesy, should happen, or some thing
like it, among the multitude of things that are daily happening, nobody
could again know whether he foreknew it, or guessed at it, or whether
it was accidental. A prophet, therefore, is a character useless and
unnecessary; and the safe side of the case is to guard against being
imposed upon, by not giving credit to such relations.

Upon the whole, Mystery, Miracle, and Prophecy, are appendages that
belong to fabulous and not to true religion. They are the means by
which so many Lo heres! and Lo theres! have been spread about the
world, and religion been made into a trade. The success of one impostor
gave encouragement to another, and the quieting salvo of doing some
good by keeping up a pious fraud protected them from remorse.




RECAPITULATION


Having now extended the subject to a greater length than I first
intended, I shall bring it to a close by abstracting a summary from the
whole.

First, That the idea or belief of a word of God existing in print, or
in writing, or in speech, is inconsistent in itself for the reasons
already assigned. These reasons, among many others, are the want of an
universal language; the mutability of language; the errors to which
translations are subject, the possibility of totally suppressing such a
word; the probability of altering it, or of fabricating the whole, and
imposing it upon the world.

Secondly, That the Creation we behold is the real and ever existing
word of God, in which we cannot be deceived. It proclaimeth his power,
it demonstrates his wisdom, it manifests his goodness and beneficence.

Thirdly, That the moral duty of man consists in imitating the moral
goodness and beneficence of God manifested in the creation towards all
his creatures. That seeing as we daily do the goodness of God to all
men, it is an example calling upon all men to practise the same towards
each other; and, consequently, that every thing of persecution and
revenge between man and man, and every thing of cruelty to animals, is
a violation of moral duty.

I trouble not myself about the manner of future existence. I content
myself with believing, even to positive conviction, that the power that
gave me existence is able to continue it, in any form and manner he
pleases, either with or without this body; and it appears more probable
to me that I shall continue to exist hereafter than that I should have
had existence, as I now have, before that existence began.

It is certain that, in one point, all nations of the earth and all
religions agree. All believe in a God. The things in which they
disgrace are the redundancies annexed to that belief; and therefore, if
ever an universal religion should prevail, it will not be believing any
thing new, but in getting rid of redundancies, and believing as man
believed at first. [“In the childhood of the world,” according to the
first (French) version; and the strict translation of the final
sentence is: “Deism was the religion of Adam, supposing him not an
imaginary being; but none the less must it be left to all men to
follow, as is their right, the religion and worship they
prefer.”—Editor.] Adam, if ever there was such a man, was created a
Deist; but in the mean time, let every man follow, as he has a right to
do, the religion and worship he prefers.




THE AGE OF REASON - PART II




PREFACE


I have mentioned in the former part of The Age of Reason that it had
long been my intention to publish my thoughts upon Religion; but that I
had originally reserved it to a later period in life, intending it to
be the last work I should undertake. The circumstances, however, which
existed in France in the latter end of the year 1793, determined me to
delay it no longer. The just and humane principles of the Revolution
which Philosophy had first diffused, had been departed from. The Idea,
always dangerous to Society as it is derogatory to the Almighty,—that
priests could forgive sins,—though it seemed to exist no longer, had
blunted the feelings of humanity, and callously prepared men for the
commission of all crimes. The intolerant spirit of church persecution
had transferred itself into politics; the tribunals, stiled
Revolutionary, supplied the place of an Inquisition; and the Guillotine
of the Stake. I saw many of my most intimate friends destroyed; others
daily carried to prison; and I had reason to believe, and had also
intimations given me, that the same danger was approaching myself.

Under these disadvantages, I began the former part of the Age of
Reason; I had, besides, neither Bible nor Testament [It must be borne
in mind that throughout this work Paine generally means by “Bible” only
the Old Testament, and speaks of the New as the “Testament.”—Editor.]
to refer to, though I was writing against both; nor could I procure
any; notwithstanding which I have produced a work that no Bible
Believer, though writing at his ease and with a Library of Church Books
about him, can refute. Towards the latter end of December of that year,
a motion was made and carried, to exclude foreigners from the
Convention. There were but two, Anacharsis Cloots and myself; and I saw
I was particularly pointed at by Bourdon de l’Oise, in his speech on
that motion.

Conceiving, after this, that I had but a few days of liberty, I sat
down and brought the work to a close as speedily as possible; and I had
not finished it more than six hours, in the state it has since
appeared, [This is an allusion to the essay which Paine wrote at an
earlier part of 1793. See Introduction.—Editor.] before a guard came
there, about three in the morning, with an order signed by the two
Committees of Public Safety and Surety General, for putting me in
arrestation as a foreigner, and conveying me to the prison of the
Luxembourg. I contrived, in my way there, to call on Joel Barlow, and I
put the Manuscript of the work into his hands, as more safe than in my
possession in prison; and not knowing what might be the fate in France
either of the writer or the work, I addressed it to the protection of
the citizens of the United States.

It is justice that I say, that the guard who executed this order, and
the interpreter to the Committee of General Surety, who accompanied
them to examine my papers, treated me not only with civility, but with
respect. The keeper of the ‘Luxembourg, Benoit, a man of good heart,
shewed to me every friendship in his power, as did also all his family,
while he continued in that station. He was removed from it, put into
arrestation, and carried before the tribunal upon a malignant
accusation, but acquitted.

After I had been in Luxembourg about three weeks, the Americans then in
Paris went in a body to the Convention to reclaim me as their
countryman and friend; but were answered by the President, Vadier, who
was also President of the Committee of Surety General, and had signed
the order for my arrestation, that I was born in England. [These
excited Americans do not seem to have understood or reported the most
important item in Vadeer’s reply, namely that their application was
“unofficial,” i.e. not made through or sanctioned by Gouverneur Morris,
American Minister. For the detailed history of all this see vol.
iii.—Editor.] I heard no more, after this, from any person out of the
walls of the prison, till the fall of Robespierre, on the 9th of
Thermidor—July 27, 1794.

About two months before this event, I was seized with a fever that in
its progress had every symptom of becoming mortal, and from the effects
of which I am not recovered. It was then that I remembered with renewed
satisfaction, and congratulated myself most sincerely, on having
written the former part of The Age of Reason. I had then but little
expectation of surviving, and those about me had less. I know therefore
by experience the conscientious trial of my own principles.

I was then with three chamber comrades: Joseph Vanheule of Bruges,
Charles Bastfni, and Michael Robyns of Louvain. The unceasing and
anxious attention of these three friends to me, by night and day, I
remember with gratitude and mention with pleasure. It happened that a
physician (Dr. Graham) and a surgeon, (Mr. Bond,) part of the suite of
General O’Hara, [The officer who at Yorktown, Virginia, carried out the
sword of Cornwallis for surrender, and satirically offered it to
Rochambeau instead of Washington. Paine loaned him 300 pounds when he
(O’Hara) left the prison, the money he had concealed in the lock of his
cell-door.—Editor.] were then in the Luxembourg: I ask not myself
whether it be convenient to them, as men under the English Government,
that I express to them my thanks; but I should reproach myself if I did
not; and also to the physician of the Luxembourg, Dr. Markoski.

I have some reason to believe, because I cannot discover any other,
that this illness preserved me in existence. Among the papers of
Robespierre that were examined and reported upon to the Convention by a
Committee of Deputies, is a note in the hand writing of Robespierre, in
the following words:

“Demander que Thomas Paine soit decrete d’accusation, pour l’interet de
l’Amerique autant que de la France.”

[Demand that Thomas Paine be decreed of accusation, for the interest of
America, as well as of France.] From what cause it was that the
intention was not put in execution, I know not, and cannot inform
myself; and therefore I ascribe it to impossibility, on account of that
illness.

The Convention, to repair as much as lay in their power the injustice I
had sustained, invited me publickly and unanimously to return into the
Convention, and which I accepted, to shew I could bear an injury
without permitting it to injure my principles or my disposition. It is
not because right principles have been violated, that they are to be
abandoned.

I have seen, since I have been at liberty, several publications
written, some in America, and some in England, as answers to the former
part of “The Age of Reason.” If the authors of these can amuse
themselves by so doing, I shall not interrupt them, They may write
against the work, and against me, as much as they please; they do me
more service than they intend, and I can have no objection that they
write on. They will find, however, by this Second Part, without its
being written as an answer to them, that they must return to their
work, and spin their cobweb over again. The first is brushed away by
accident.

They will now find that I have furnished myself with a Bible and
Testament; and I can say also that I have found them to be much worse
books than I had conceived. If I have erred in any thing, in the former
part of the Age of Reason, it has been by speaking better of some parts
than they deserved.

I observe, that all my opponents resort, more or less, to what they
call Scripture Evidence and Bible authority, to help them out. They are
so little masters of the subject, as to confound a dispute about
authenticity with a dispute about doctrines; I will, however, put them
right, that if they should be disposed to write any more, they may know
how to begin.

THOMAS PAINE. October, 1795.




