VII

AN AUTHOR’S POST-BAG

“_You have the letters Cadmus gave_”----


As I sit down to write this paper I am experiencing a quite novel
sensation. Most of us like to talk about ourselves when any one will
listen, and nearly all of us do so now and then. But to write about
one’s self in the reasonable expectation that a large number of
people, friends, enemies and those who are indifferent, will read what
one has written, is curious. There have been times when an interviewer
has come from a Magazine and I have found myself trying to explain my
views, to answer questions that were put, with some degree of fluency,
to do myself justice and yet not to be egotistical in a somewhat
difficult situation. Knowing quite well what I wanted to say, and
exactly how I wished to explain myself, I have listened to my words
with a kind of embarrassed wonder at their inadequacy. “What an ass
this fellow must be thinking me!” has been one’s continual thought.
Then, when the interview appears, sometimes with pictures of “Mr. Guy
Thorne at his desk,” “the dining-room,” “shooting upon the moor,” one
finds that the writer has made a nice smooth sequence of the
conversation, just as the photographer has taken charming pictures of
one’s carefully-arranged furniture. Yet one was rather prevented from
really saying what one would have liked to say because of the
interviewer’s presence as the medium who was to give the words to the
public. This is a foolish self-consciousness, no doubt, but it is not
easy to overcome. Now, and at this moment, there is no such
restriction upon free speech. The snow is driving over the Dover
cliffs, no sound penetrates to the ancient room in which I write, and
for the first time in my life I am sitting down to talk of myself, as
an author to his readers.

The essay has come to be written in this way. There were still some
pages of this book to fill when last week, I was asked to open a
bazaar in Dover. The vicar said a good many absurdly kind things about
my stories when he introduced me to the people there, and afterwards I
had to stand a continuous fire of questions for two hours. I could not
understand, and I do not now understand, why any one should be
interested in the _personal_ explanations of a writer as to how he
writes, what happens when he is writing, and so forth. I do not often
go to a theatre, but when I do I never buy a programme. I don’t want
to know the private name of the lady who plays Ophelia or the
gentleman who is the Hamlet of the night. I pay my money in order that
they shall be Hamlet and Ophelia to me, that I shall watch the agonies
of a dark and troubled spirit, shall sigh over the tender fancies of
an unhappy love-sick girl, and the more I am forced to realize that
the gentleman is Mr. Jones, who was fined five pounds in the morning
for driving his motor-car too fast, the less real he is as the Prince.

But, although this is my way of thinking, I am well aware it is not
the general way; and as I have proved for myself that there is a
demand for some sort of personal explanation, and as I endeavour to
conduct my trade of writing upon common-sense principles, this essay
is getting itself written.

Addison said that “So excessive is the egotism of the egotist that he
makes himself the darling theme of contemplation; he admires and loves
himself to that degree that he can talk of nothing else.” This is an
obvious statement, and made with little of Mr. Secretary’s usual charm
of style. But it is perfectly true. I beg leave to submit, however,
that what I am doing here is not so much an act of egotism--egoism is
the better word--but a legitimate statement for those, if there are
any, who care to read it.

I have strong convictions upon certain points, and I endeavour to pack
my stories with these convictions. That, by doing this, I please many
readers who think as I do I am presently going to show, by quoting
some of their letters which have reached me.

A novel is simply this: it is a certain portion of the lives of
certain people imagined by the author and seen through his
temperament. Very well then; let me proceed to prove that the modern
nonsense which would have people believe that Christianity in fiction
is _against the canons of art_, is simply a lie.

The life of every single human being in England is punctuated and
impinged upon by Christianity. As I pointed out in my first essay, the
usual modern novel never mentions--never even mentions!--Sunday. Yet
on Sunday, the shops, factories, theatres and public-houses close. The
drunkard has as much reason to find Sunday the most dismal day in the
week as the saint to know it the happiest and best. For half-an-hour
in every town and village the bells of church and chapel ring--if
indeed chapels are “ritualistic” enough to have bells, a point upon
which I am not informed!

And again, speaking of the constant reminder we all have of religion,
every coin we have in our pockets bears the inscription REX FID.
DEF.--our King is officially known as the Defender of the Christian
Faith. Every day as I write, the newspapers are full of the
controversy--the religious controversy--of the Education Bill. Each
time you and I go to a concert we finish it with the music of the
National Anthem, which is a prayer to God that he will bless and
preserve the Dynasty. Is it necessary to multiply instances? I think
not.

How can any one say, as the literary critics have sometimes said of my
own books and of others much more important, that “religion” is out of
place in a novel?

As I have pointed out at some length, the greatest novels are one and
all permeated with the sense of religion. Take your Thackeray and read
in _Vanity Fair_ of George Osborne going out to battle and first
saying “Our Father” with his wife. Read the works of this great writer
and regard how, whenever a great emotion, a poignant situation occurs,
so surely the author sends up a prayer to Almighty God either in his
own person or that of his characters. In that almost greatest of
English novels, Charles Reade’s _The Cloister and the Hearth_, the
hero dies with the holy name of Jesus on his lips. There is religion
in _Pickwick!_--we read of the Christmas of Dingley Dell. In _Les
Misérables_, that huge epic novel, Victor Hugo has drawn more than one
saint of God, has made Christianity the motive of his drama.

It _is_ so in life, be certain that it is and always will be.
Christianity is the central thing, the only important thing, and the
attempt to minimize its importance and influence is as the chirping of
a linnet on the roadside as some stately procession passes by.

     _They say. What say they? Let them say!_

But let no one be deluded into believing that the printed sneers of
those who are afraid to recognize our Lord represent any real opinion,
any weight of opinion, as to the public distaste to Christianity as an
integral part of the fiction which they buy.

Sir Arthur Helps once said, “The influence of works of fiction is
unbounded. Even the minds of well-informed people are more often
stored with characters from acknowledged fiction than from history or
biography, or the real life around them. We dispute about these
characters as if they were realities. Their experience is our
experience; we adopt their feelings and imitate their acts.
Shakespeare’s Plays were the only history to the Duke of Marlborough.
Thousands of Greeks acted under the influence of what Achilles or
Ulysses did in Homer.”

All this is entirely true. As a young American novelist once put it to
me, “To-day is the day of the novel.” In no other day and by no other
vehicle is contemporaneous life so adequately expressed, and the
critics of the twenty-second century, reviewing our times, striving to
reconstruct our civilization, will look not to the painters, not to
the architects nor dramatists, but to the novelists to find our
idiosyncrasy.

This is by no means intended as an apologia for the sort of tales I
write. I know that it is my duty to write them, the duty I owe to my
own convictions, and however badly I write them I am doing my best.
No, I am not apologizing for my point of view. I am only trying to
suggest that even in my greatest artistic failures my artistic
standpoint can’t be assailed. Any critic who says that because I write
as a Christian and that _therefore (and for that reason only)_ my
books are inartistic, is wrong.

I have headed this article “An Author’s Post-Bag” et cetera. Probably
you will be wondering when I am going to justify the title. I will
begin to do so now.

Post-time is always a recurring wonder to me. The lowest classes of
all, the people who don’t get letters, are incapable of experiencing
more than a third of the sensations which the highly-organized life of
our time has to offer us.

A novelist, and I have no reason to think that I am any exception to
the rule, receives a very varied correspondence. The business side of
his operations is more extensive than the layman would suppose. The
writer whose output is regular and whose work is in demand has an
almost daily letter to receive from his agent. There is the question
of a serial for this or that paper, an editor wants a short story, a
publisher is writing impatient letters to the agent for a book that is
overdue, “close times” for various books have to be arranged so that
they do not clash between various publishers--he is confronted every
day with an infinity of detail which even such an experienced and
assiduous agent as I myself am fortunate to possess cannot save him.

When the business letters have been read, there is his own private
correspondence, and then the great mass of communications from people
whom one has never heard of and never seen. It is of these letters
that I would speak, and of their varied appeals to one’s pocket, one’s
vanity, the sense of gratitude and the feeling of anger.

As Cowper said, “None but an author knows an author’s cares,” and not
the least of them is the number of letters he receives asking for
money. There is a rooted idea in the general mind that fame and
fortune come immediately a writer publishes his first book. A novelist
is popularly supposed to be a man of affluence in the twentieth
century, just as in the eighteenth century he was known to be a
pauper. “All the vices of the gambler and of the beggar were blended
with those of the author. The prizes in the wretched lottery of
bookmaking were scarcely less ruinous than the blanks. If good fortune
came, it came in such a manner that it was almost certain to be
abused. After months of starvation and despair, a full third night or
a well-received dedication filled the pocket of the lean, ragged,
unwashed poet with guineas.... A week of taverns soon qualified him
for another year of night cellars.” Well, we have progressed since
then certainly. There are beds to sleep in, food to eat and fire upon
the hearth for most of us. Nevertheless the ordinary novelist is
nearly always a poor man, sometimes bitter poor. I _know_ what I am
talking about and there is not an author, agent or publisher who
would not say the same. For the first book I ever wrote I received ten
pounds, and this was paid in two instalments. Until four years ago
thirty pounds was the largest sum I had received for a long novel.

The word “royalty” has a fine sound. It is a purple word and opens
vistas to the outsider of luxury and ease. Yet in its literary
application it is the biggest humbug and liar of a word that ever
masqueraded for what it is not. There are plenty of “royalties” that
will not pay the third-class return fare between London and Penzance.
A great personal friend of mine, a man of culture and real love of
human event, wrote his first novel three years ago. He had something
definite to say, knew how to say it, and had a first-rate plot. For
months and months I saw him toiling lovingly at his novel. When it was
written he found a publisher willing to produce it, and it duly
appeared. In almost every case the reviews were extremely laudatory.
Papers of position and weight praised it unreservedly, to all
appearances the book was a definite success--a minor success, no
doubt, but a success. From first to last his earnings realized five
pounds, and neither he nor I have reason to believe that his publisher
cheated him in the matter of sales. Here is the written testimony of
what I say, given by an author who died after producing four or five
really excellent and successful novels.

“Take, then, an unusually lucky instance, literally a novel whose
success is extraordinary, a novel which has sold 2500 copies. I repeat
that this is an extraordinary success. Not one book out of fifteen
will do as well. But let us consider it. The author has worked upon it
for--at the very least--six months. It is published. Twenty-five
hundred copies are sold. Then the sale stops. And by the word stop one
means cessation in the completest sense of the word. There are
people--I know plenty of them--who suppose that when a book is spoken
of as having stopped selling, a generality is intended, that merely a
falling off of the initial demand has occurred. Error. When a book--a
novel--stops selling, it stops with a definiteness of an engine when
the fire goes out. It stops with a suddenness that is appalling, and
thereafter not a copy, not one single, solitary copy is sold. And do
not for an instant suppose that ever after the interest may be
revived. A dead book can no more be resuscitated than a dead dog.

“But to go back. The 2500 have been sold. The extraordinary, the
marvellous has been achieved. What does the author get out of it? A
royalty of ten per cent. Eighty-three pounds six shillings and
eightpence for six months’ hard work. Roughly less than £3 9_s._ 0_d._
a week. An expert carpenter will easily make much more than that, and
the carpenter has infinitely the best of it in that he can keep the
work up year in and year out, where the novelist must wait for a new
idea, and the novel writer must then jockey and manoeuvre for
publication. Two novels a year is about as much as the writer can turn
out and yet keep a marketable standard. Even admitting that both the
novels sell 2500 copies there is only £166 13_s._ 4_d._ of profit. One
may well ask the question: Is fiction writing a money-making
profession?

“The astonishing thing about the affair is that a novel may make a
veritable stir, almost a sensation, and yet fail to sell very largely.

“There is so-and-so’s book. Everywhere you go you hear about it. Your
friends have read it. It is in demand at the libraries. You don’t pick
up a paper that does not contain a review of the story in question. It
is in the ‘Book of the Month’ column. It is even, even--the pinnacle
of achievement--in that shining roster, the list of best sellers of
the week.

“Why, of course, the author is growing rich! Ah, at last he has
arrived! No doubt he will build a country house out of his royalties.
Lucky fellow; one envies him.

“Catch him unawares and what is he doing? As like as not writing
unsigned book reviews at thirty shillings a week in order to pay his
lodging bill--and glad of the chance.”

This is absolutely and literally true.

Yet novelists are perhaps more pestered than any other people by
requests for help. A writer who, like myself, can live in fair comfort
by means of unceasing labour, but is not even a well-to-do man, to say
nothing of a “wealthy one,” receives innumerable letters to which he
is quite unable to reply as the applicants would wish, but which are
most distressing to read. At a time when I certainly had not a hundred
pounds in the world, I received the following letter--of course I
suppress the name and address.

                                          “---- Vicarage,
                                               “----shire.

     “MY DEAR SIR,

     “Thank you a thousand times for _When it was Dark_. I am now
     looking forward to Friday, when your next book begins in the
     _Daily Mail_. I have been reading about you to-day and have
     taken courage to ask your help. You say ‘Let nothing disturb
     thee,’ etc. How can I help it in such trouble as mine. My
     husband has failed in health from years of hard work, and out
     of an income of _under_ £200 a year we are paying a curate
     £100. At this moment we are in _extremes_. My boy is reading
     for Holy Orders, and we are in need of funds for his expenses.
     He has been two years a licensed lay reader, and is a thorough
     Catholic and has the highest testimonials. Will you help me in
     my need to-day with a donation. I can give references, and for
     any help I shall be so thankful. Please forgive me for
     troubling you.”

I have no doubt that this appeal is quite genuine, and a very poignant
comment it is upon the way in which the priests of the Church of
England are paid. This type of letter is not a pleasant one to receive
when one is sitting down to work. The imagination with which one is
endowed and by which one earns one’s bread, is not a faculty very easy
to discipline or to control, and the power which should be devoted to
the chapter one is engaged upon wanders away and constructs a picture
of want and sorrow which one is quite powerless to alleviate.

Nor is it once or twice that such letters as this arrive. Here is a
far more piteous document still, if it is genuine. I think that when
you have read it you will agree with me that it is genuine enough.
There is nothing of the ordinary begging letter about it; and if the
writer could invent such a story, he ought not to be so hopelessly
unable to earn a single halfpenny by his pen. It is to be observed
also that in this case the writer wants work, not money.

     “London, N.

     “DEAR SIR,

     “About two years ago I arrived in England from Australia, with
     the object of striving to gain a footing in literature, but so
     far have been unsuccessful. I have written two novels and
     numerous short stories and articles, but I have ever had them
     rejected, and all I can show for my work is a pile of
     publishers’ letters. My resources long since gave out, and I
     worked myself into the lowest poverty, and then I was
     prostrated by a long illness. Knowing, sir, that you have had
     much to do with journalistic work, I decided to write and ask
     you if you knew of any one in the city--or elsewhere--to whom
     you could refer me for some employment. I am practically
     destitute, and knowing no one in London makes it extremely
     difficult for me to get anything to do. About six months ago I
     was turned out of my lodgings owing to arrears of rent, and
     then I commenced tramping the country in the hope of getting
     work. I managed to get three weeks’ hop-picking, but nothing
     else, and so for a while I tramped aimlessly about, being
     exposed to all kinds of weather, sleeping in haystacks, or
     wherever else offered, until at last my health again gave way.
     It was then that I called on a well-known novelist, and he was
     very kind and assisted me, at the same time expressing a wish
     to see my works. They were sent for, and duly forwarded on to
     his agents, and I have been advised to write books for boys,
     the agent expressing his opinion that I would succeed in this,
     but as I am situated writing is out of the question. When I met
     this novelist my health failed utterly, and I was compelled to
     go into the infirmary for a while, and whilst there he wrote
     telling me to try and get some practice in journalistic work
     and to study for a while until I gained a little more
     experience.

     “I think he is out of England at present, but he gave me
     permission to use his letter as a reference if I needed it.
     Well, sir, I returned to London about a month ago, and managed
     to get a few days’ work envelope addressing at Morgan and
     Scott’s, in Paternoster Row, but so far I have been unable to
     find anything else to do. I am very anxious to get some work
     immediately, and if you could help me in this I should be
     indeed grateful. I care not of what nature the employment may
     be, manual or otherwise, if I can only get it at once.

     “Apologizing for troubling you,

    “I am,
    “Dear Sir,
    “Yours faithfully.”

Some time ago a drawing appeared in the _Daily Mail_ of a Cornish
cottage where I was then living. Within a week, by a curious
coincidence, I received _three_ water-colour drawings of the place,
made from the sketch in the newspaper. Two were excellent, and
accompanied by the kindest letters; they hang on my walls now. The
third was by no means a work of art, to say the very least of it, and
this letter came with it:--

     “North Kensington.

     “I am sending you a copy of the cottage I have painted from the
     sketch in the _Daily Mail_ of November 16 last, if you will
     accept it.

     “I must explain that I am only a very poor hand at such work.
     The fact of the matter is that through much _illness_ and _lost
     trade_ that I am left very _badly off_, and seeing the sketch
     and account of your work, thought perhaps if I could paint a
     few copies and you would introduce the matter to your many
     friends I could sell some to them, which would assist me to
     earn something, my health being bad and getting on to seventy
     years of age it is not much I can do. You will understand that
     I do not know anything of the appearance of the country around
     the cottage. I have not been in that part, so all I have put in
     is imaginary. Will you please say what you think to it, and how
     much you think I could sell them for. I have not means to buy
     canvas so have painted on card. Your kind assistance in this
     matter will great oblige

     “Yours truly.”

I have quoted but three letters from a vast pile of others. “Que vivre
est difficile ô mon coeur fatigué!” says the French poet, and nobody
knows it better than the English novelist. But with the best will in
the world we cannot help everybody. Charity begins at home, its sun
rises there and should set abroad, but it is limited by the purse of
the giver. Among all the contents of his post-bag such letters are the
most distressing to the author, and add enormously to a difficult and
often very thankless task.

But such letters as these and all worries _ejusdem generis_ are, after
all, only a small portion of my post-bag. During the last year or two
I have received hundreds and hundreds of letters from all parts of the
world--letters which have given me inexpressible happiness. I think I
may be forgiven for quoting some of them here. The real reward of an
author’s labours lies in the sympathy and appreciation of his readers,
and in that alone. When, moreover, a writer works with a definite
object in view, the purpose of leading others to believe what he
himself believes, such letters are indeed a strong stay and holdfast
which console for any amount of misrepresentation and bring a
veritable oil of joy for mourning.

A priest writes:--

     “SIR

     “I don’t ask you because I know you will pardon a stranger for
     addressing you, and I shall not say much. And the little I mean
     to say I hardly know how to express. Some few years ago I was
     a vicar in----. Now I am sick in body and soul. I had lost all
     my faith, but I have been reading _Made in His Image_, and
     to-day I prayed for the first time for more than a year, and
     tears came, and I don’t know if you heard my voice calling to
     you.

     “I should like to see you. _Can it be?_

    “Yours,
    “DE PROFUNDIS.”

A gentleman from Hull tells me:--

     “DEAR SIR,

     “You will please pardon the intrusion of this letter. I am a
     Sunday School teacher, and have been a Christian for three
     years.

     “A month ago, as a result of reading the _Clarion_ and Haeckel,
     I became disturbed in my mind, and wished to resign my class. I
     sought the assistance of my minister. Instead of answering my
     doubts himself he placed a copy of _When it was Dark_ in my
     hand, telling me to read it prayerfully, and go to him again.
     The following evening I completed the reading of a book whose
     influence will live with me. My dear sir, I feel I cannot thank
     you half enough, and I shall never cease to thank God that the
     book was written.

     “I saw my minister, not with any doubts this time, but with my
     faith renewed, and with a fixed determination to work harder
     for my Divine Master.

     “I expect you will receive many letters expressing thanks, but
     I cannot refrain from adding my humble testimony.

     “Allow me to remain, sir,

     “Yours very faithfully.”

And here is another kind letter from Bridgewater, again from a man:--

     “DEAR ‘MR. THORNE,’

     “Will you please accept my best thanks for your book, _When it
     was Dark_. I started to read it as one distinctly prejudiced
     against it, but I finished the last page saying, ‘It is
     wonderful.’ I only wish that those who condemn it would read it
     for themselves and see the forcible manner in which you have
     depicted what the world would be if the Resurrection was a
     myth. Faith cannot but be strengthened by reading it, and the
     coming Eastertide will be more real to me through having read
     _When it was Dark_.

     “Wishing you every success and happiness.”

From Brantford in far-away Canada this letter reaches me:--

     “DEAR SIR AND FRIEND,

     “After reading your splendid edition, _When it was Dark_, I
     take this manner in addressing. The book impressed me very
     greatly from start to finish, and it always will be henceforth
     a great pleasure, and I am sure a great help, to read your
     publications. We greatly need in this world to-day good strong
     men who will set forth their thoughts in a fearless manner.
     This is in a very large measure the way the book appealed to
     me.

     “It is with a great deal of sincere pleasure I note in the----
     Magazine (which publication is in our home) for a coming issue
     the beginning of one of Guy Thorne’s stories. The writer is a
     young man of twenty years and a Methodist, and presume I am
     taking up too much of a good man’s time. But I might say my
     idea in writing was to convey from a Canadian my thanks for the
     good which I have received, and many others in our city, from
     the reading of this one work.

     “Wishing you every success in your work,

     “Yours sincerely.”

From Brixton:--

     “DEAR SIR,

     “Among the shoals of letters which doubtless you now receive
     may I place this, so that I may thank you for the invaluable
     work which you are doing in writing your novels.

     “The article in to-day’s _Daily Mail_ shows me that you have
     grasped the ideal which I have tried to attain since my teens
     (three years).

     “I am one of the lonely digits in ‘diggins,’ who either fall or
     rise, according to the company they keep. I have thus found
     that religion is to man what the rudder is to the crew of a
     ship.

     “I have regularly attended church since my exile, and delight
     to hear the beautiful service of the English Church. Are they
     not precious words and inspiring. The service effectually
     clears me of that ugly black cloak of worldliness which clings
     to me during the working days.

     “This, I believe, is the lesson which you are engraving so well
     on the minds of all people.

     “I conclude with the wish that your pen will ever respond to
     the spirit which now animates you.”

Again from a far country, this time near East Guzna, W. Tarsus,
Cilicia:--

     “MY DEAR SIR,

     “For weeks I have wanted to write and thank you for your book,
     _When it was Dark_, but I have been laid aside with fever. It
     stirs thousands of us, and you must feel thankful as you look
     round to see the success which is granted you in drawing people
     to ponder upon subjects of such weight. You will like to know
     that I have spread your book right and left in Cyprus, having
     obtained three copies, one of which I sent to a Judge.

     “Your account of the ride to Nablous is a vivid word picture,
     and you must, I think, be familiar with the East.

     “May I say that I find a dignity and vivacity in your book,
     dealing as you do with so solemn and glorious a subject as our
     Lord’s Resurrection, which I firmly hold, and have been
     accustomed to put in the forefront of my teaching as missionary
     both in Australia and Russia.

     “At present my work lies in Cyprus, where I find good
     opportunities of helping on friendliness with the Greek Church.

     “I am now on holiday, and have just given away my last copy of
     _When it was Dark_ while staying in the Carmelite Monastery at
     Haiffa, with those charming French Pères, to an American canon
     who was also there.

     “Sir, what I want to do is to suggest that you should have your
     book translated into French and German. I lent it to a French
     engineer a month ago, and I feel sure it would do good in those
     countries. Think this out. You might take the advice of some
     competent friend.

     “I should like to do the translating myself, but I should make
     so many mistakes, _Magna est veritas, et prævalebit_.

     “Have sent home for _A Lost Cause_, and am expecting another
     treat, with some salt of sarcasm.

     “With sincere respect and gratitude.”

My kind correspondent’s idea has been carried out, I am glad to say.
The book in question has been translated into French and German and
several other languages. And in this regard I may perhaps mention the
surprise I have felt on learning that the French issue has already
gone into three editions. I am in France a good deal each year, and
know something of the temper of the reading public there to-day. I had
not thought that many people would read the book.

From San Remo, in Italy, this letter comes:--

     “DEAR SIR,

     “I read last week _When it was Dark_ and wish each of my
     children to have a copy, as it will show them what the
     Christian Faith means to the world. I still hold to the simple
     faith of my childhood taught me by my dear parents, which
     carried each through a _peaceful death-bed_. Our Heavenly
     Father, the King of kings and the only Ruler of princes,
     sacrificed His beloved Son for His people, and allowed His
     cruel death, knowing that in the future the thought of His
     terrible sufferings would touch the hearts of most and often
     keep them from sinning. I have never doubted _His
     Resurrection_, neither would I allow any person to suggest that
     doubt in my presence. And to me the convincing proof that He
     was indeed the Son of God is, that He rose again from the dead,
     He ascended to Heaven and sitteth on the right hand of His
     Father--God only could possess this power. How very lax we are
     apt to become and take as our due that great sacrifice.

     “I send to Mr. Guy Thorne my little testimony and best wishes,
     as I cannot thank him personally for _reminding me so fully_
     how dark it would indeed be for us all had we not our beloved
     Saviour always ready and willing to intercede with His Holy
     Father for us poor erring mortals. Some one said to me, of
     course Guy Thorne makes a good thing out of his book. I
     replied, certainly, it is his due to be paid for the labour of
     his brain, and in this case he fully deserves it, as he might
     have written a book leading many farther away instead of
     bringing them nearer to the Cross. Also the interesting style
     of _When it was Dark_ will induce many to read it. Whereas, if
     it were very dry, none of us would wade half through.”

An old clergyman in Wales writes thus:--

     “Rectory, Brecon.

     “DEAR SIR,

     “I am seventy; at seventeen I had read more novels and other
     literature than nine out of ten lads of my age. For years past
     I can’t read novels. My daughters sometimes induce me to start
     one, but after a couple of chapters I throw it on one side
     feeling strongly inclined to exclaim with Conan Doyle’s
     school-boy, ‘Rot.’

     “After reading the _Life of Father Dolling_, one of my married
     daughters brought me _When it was Dark_, which I promised to
     read, and enjoyed it very much. My wife _devoured_ it.

     “This won’t interest you very much, but the following fact may.
     A few days after finishing your book our rural
     post-messenger--an old army man--we live quite in the
     country--came to me, quite confidentially, and said he had a
     book he was quite sure I should enjoy; he produced it--it was
     _When it was Dark!_ Poor fellow! he seemed so disappointed when
     he found I had read it. A fortnight ago an Irish lady and her
     daughter stayed with us. They were _good church women_. They
     left me a book for perusal. It is _A Lost Cause_. I have read
     it and enjoyed it. It reminds me of Father Dolling and Kensit
     and Son.

     “I hope you will give us many more. We want Catholic truth
     placed before people in an attractive dress. We want to break
     down the great wall of Protestant ignorance and prejudice. Your
     books are doing this.

     “Don’t heed letters in the Daily Press. I saw a letter in the
     _Daily Mail_. These letters are only a proof that your books
     are _telling_. Go straight forward and may every success and
     blessing attend your efforts. This is the earnest wish of

     “Yours truly.”

I was intensely interested to receive this letter from India:--

                                                “---- Mission,
                                                    “Madras,
                                                       “South India.

     “DEAR SIR,

     “As you are not unwilling to receive letters from strangers,
     perhaps this from a distant land might not be unacceptable to
     you. I am a missionary and have not read two novels during the
     last five years (but thousands before then), but a friend of
     mine having read your _When it was Dark_ persuaded me to read
     it.

     “I was greatly interested in the first few pages describing the
     scenes of my birth and young manhood. I suppose Walktown is
     meant for ----, if so, I was born in that part of Salford, and
     although I belonged to St. ---- Church, I attended very
     frequently St. ---- as the senior church of the district.

     “I enclose an account of my conversion which will no doubt
     interest you. I have thought many a time that it would be an
     admirable theme for a novel. There are many other incidents in
     my life that would lend interest, especially my association
     with some of the most notorious anarchists of England and the
     Continent, and America, I was also a journalist on the
     _Clarion_, and a bosom friend of Robert Blatchford for fourteen
     years, John Burns, the new Cabinet Minister, slept at my house
     when he was an unemployed mechanic in 1885. I was personally
     acquainted with Mrs. Annie Besant for many years, and now she
     is here in Madras, the head-quarters of the Theosophical
     Society. I have renewed my acquaintance with her.

     “I have come to think that much good might be done by treating
     of sacred subjects in the form that you have done, as you can
     by this means reach the minds and souls of those millions whom
     the Church cannot reach.

     “The University here is turning out educated Hindus who, having
     parted with their heathenism have taken up Western scepticism
     in its place, and our Christian Missionaries are helpless to
     avert it, the youth here are swamped by the cheap Rationalist
     reprints. Could we but supply them with novels of Western life
     showing up the folly of Haeckel, Blatchford, Spencer and Co.,
     in the manner you have done, it would be a powerful
     counter-attraction.

     “Yours in Him we love.

     “P.S.--The British people also need a novel that will show up
     ‘Blatchfordism,’ and you now have the ear of the reading
     public.”

It is curious that in many of the letters I receive Mr. Robert
Blatchford’s name is mentioned. With some minds his writings have
great power and influence, probably I imagine because of their real
sincerity of purpose. It is the more cheering to know that an honest
effort to render the Incarnation increasingly credible to the man in
the street is not without reward. It is as difficult for me to
disbelieve in the fact that Christ was God as it is difficult for Mr.
Blatchford to believe it. Where one man sees a landscape the other
sees only a map. But there are, nevertheless, a great many people who
deny the Catholic Faith because, while they desire to retain the name
of Christians, they are unwilling to accept the obligations of
Christianity. And while looking about for something to believe, a
necessity of the human soul, they either find it in Mrs. Eddy and
other false prophets, or finally join issue with the editor of the
_Clarion_.

An author’s letter-bag is always full of surprises, and such a
correspondence as I am privileged to receive often entails a vast
amount of extra work. But it is almost impossible not to reply to at
least two-thirds of the letters that reach one, and though reply
sometimes leads to a lengthy interchange of letters all are helpful
and encourage one to continue, while some are full of the most
illuminating suggestions.

Of this the following letter from one of the Canons of Durham
Cathedral is a typical example:--

     “DEAR SIR,

     “In your coming story I hope you will lay stress on the fact
     that our ‘higher’ education is practically a Pagan one. All
     University honours, fellowships, scholarships, prizes are for
     proficients in Pagan literature; interesting (for some people).
     Beautiful in language as this literature is, it lacks the
     spirit and power of the Christian Faith. The common rooms smell
     of Plato and Aristotle. There is no cross in a Don’s life, as
     such, though a few rise above the normal standard.

     “This system filters through the public schools down to the
     smallest private schools, in most of which the daily bread, the
     upholding of Christ as Saviour, teacher, master, example and
     king is left out.

     “At Eton, where I was myself, religious teaching did not exist.
     We had Sunday questions of which one specimen will suffice,
     given to my nephew the other day.

     “‘Of what judge is a curious incident recorded and what was the
     incident?’ The result of this is far-reaching and deplorable.

     “In Parliament the members assemble by troops to hear about
     some personal scandal, but when the happiness of English
     girlhood is in question there is hardly a ‘house.’ And so with
     other questions that concern the personal holiness and
     happiness of our men and women and children.

     “Forgive me for this taking up of your time, but your pen may
     do what I feel myself unable to do.”

I have received a good many letters from clergymen endorsing the views
I expressed in my book called _First it was Ordained_, views which I
have consolidated in the previous essay, “The Fires of Moloch.” I give
only one example owing to reasons of space. In view, however, of the
strong opposition which exists, and of which I have had plenty of
evidence, to any attempt to tell the truth, the following short
letter, which is typical of many others, was a great pleasure to
get:--

                                             “The Clergy House,
                                                 “---- E.C.

     “May I say how much I have enjoyed your last book? _First, &c_.
     It was hard to put it down without finishing it straight off.

     “I hope it will do a power of good to stop the fearful and
     widespread sin.

     “I do not think it at all too outspoken. The Bishop of London
     is quite plain on the matter. I believe a learned gynæcologist
     has an article supporting the statements made in his speech, in
     last month’s _Nineteenth Century_.”

I began by complaining that my post-bag often contained distressing
letters asking for help which I was generally unable to supply. When I
read over the correspondence which I have printed here I feel that I
ought to regard my letter-box as a coffer of treasure, that my postman
is indeed that same Hermes who brought the magic herb to Odysseus, my
letters--

    “--Wing’d postilions that can fly
    From the Atlantic to the Arctic sky--
    The heralds and swift harbingers that move
    From East to West on embassies of love.”

I only made what at the time I thought was a very small collection to
print here--just a thin bundle taken from hundreds. Yet already I find
that a third of the little pile has nearly filled my space and I fear
that my readers will weary, even if they have read so far.

“The man is printing his testimonials like a pill-maker!” I can hear
Meletus snarl. “Who cares whether a few stupid people _do_ like his
twaddle!” Lycom answers. Yet bear with me a little, brethren; you need
not have read this paper, you know. Laugh if you will; laughter is the
great agent that preserves a sense of proportion among us, and the man
who laughs sounds the keynote of tolerance. But laugh kindly,
remembering the vanity of authors and the wish of all of us to stand
well with the world.

My post-bag day by day contains a certain missive which is not a
letter. It is a little green, printed wrapper which most authors,
painters, players, and musicians are in the habit of receiving--it is
the batch of press-cuttings which show how the critics regard my books
and what the paragraphists have to say. The critics are always being
criticized by authors. Mr. Jones gravely points out the duty of
appreciating his work that the reviewer owes to literature. Nor is it,
as Mr. Birrell pointed out, in the days when he wrote delightful
essays and had not been forced to dance to the dictates of political
dissent, the unsuccessful author who is the loudest in complaint. The
beginner, the men and women who cannot say as yet that they have
achieved a definite position, these seem to have digested the poet
laureate’s neat advice--

    “Friend, be not fretful if the voice of fame,
        Along the narrow way of hurrying men,
        Whereunto echo echo shouts again,
    Be all day long not noisy with your name.”

But others are not so reticent. For my part I cannot understand the
attitude of the novelist who publishes shouts of resentment at
criticism which is not to his liking--remember, in view of what I am
going to say later, that I use the word _criticism_. The other day,
while on a journey to the Riviera, I bought a copy of Miss Marie
Corelli’s last book of essays, in Paris. I read it through the night
until I fell asleep, and when the sun flooded the olive trees I took
it up once more, and finished it just as we ran into Marseilles. I
suppose that this lady is the most popular writer of the day. She is a
great modern force; she reaches an enormous audience, and speaks
straight to their hearts. I have heard dozens of men and women say
that they prefer her to any author alive or dead. Now this is surely
to be in a very splendid position, is it not? Why, then, should a
woman whose talents have won for her such place and power, print an
angry, comprehensive, and I am afraid sometimes, spiteful indictment
of all critics? I can’t see her reason.

Destouches wrote:--

    “La plainte est pour le fat, le bruit est pour le sot;
    L’honnête homme hue s’éloigne et ne dit mot!”

Miss Corelli assumes that all the reviewers are venal and dishonest,
and that because they do not praise her books, books which are so
influential and popular, they are bad critics. Reviewers, take them
all in all, are nothing of the sort. I have written hundreds of book
reviews. I have reviewed for the _Saturday Review_, the _Academy_, and
the _Bookman_, among other journals. Therefore you may assume that I
met plenty of other critics, and know their polity and ways. We were
all honest enough in those days--that I say without any doubt at all.
I remember Mr. Frank Harris, the then editor of the _Saturday_, giving
me a certain novel to review, and expressing himself with great point
and freedom about it. As I was leaving his room he called me back, and
said, as well as I can remember his words, “Remember that this is only
_my_ point of view, and what I want in this case is yours. You may
like the stuff, and if you do, of course you will say so.”

I _didn’t_ like it, and said so, but I have never forgotten the
incident.

As I said in the beginning of this paper, directly my stories began to
be occupied with religion as the force, _qui fait le monde à la
ronde_, some of the critics began to be unkind. But what on earth is
the use of wasting one’s own time, and the time of the public, in
fussing and complaining? The people who said this about my work were
quite sincere. Their opinion is quite as good as mine, however much I
don’t agree with it. _Quot homines tot sententiæ._ My business is to
earn a living for myself and for those who are dependent on me. Thank
God I can do so. My duty is to hammer away at the doctrines in which I
believe, and endeavour to get others to believe in them. Therefore I
must not “call or cry aloud.” I must go on doing what I am doing, and
doing it _sans rançune_.

Remember, and I wish Miss Corelli, for example, could see this also,
that criticism of novels in our day is a purely _literary_ criticism.
The theory of modern criticism is that Art is a thing by itself and
owes no duty to Ethics. The reason for Art is, art. Ten years ago I
think I would almost have gone to the stake for this doctrine. I
believed in it devoutly; I couldn’t be patient, even, in the presence
of any one who argued otherwise. I well remember the indignant anger
with which I repudiated the suggestion of my father, a clergyman, that
when I grew older and had suffered, when I came into real contact with
the great central facts of life, I should think very differently. He
was perfectly right. Art is the essential part of fiction, but it is
not destroyed because it is employed as the handmaid of an ethical
standpoint.

But this truth is no reason for “answering back” the critics who do
not appreciate it. Nothing is quite true--except The Incarnation--a
naïve statement you may call it, but as a corollary of the epigram,
true too! It is better, by far, to realize that modern criticism is
most valuable from the purely literary point of view, and yet that the
purely literary point of view is only one side of the model the artist
must study before he learns how to draw.

Therefore, when any critic tells me of this or that fault in
technique, I take his expert opinion for what it is worth--an expert
opinion--and try to learn from his criticism. I try to learn and do
better. When the post-bag discloses a criticism obviously animated by
personal prejudice or dictated by the religious politics of the paper
in which it appears, I grin and bear it--though I don’t like it!--and
console myself with the verse composed by the American poet whose
critics were _always_ unfair, or at least he said so--

    “The cow is in the garden,
    The cat is in the lake,
    The pig is in the hammock,
    What difference _does_ it make!”

No author, who has a public at all, suffers from _criticism_ which is
fair or even from _criticism_ which is unfair.

An author is not well advised in publicly answering or combating
either.

When Disraeli said that the critics were the “people who had failed in
literature and art,” he forgot that bad wine often makes excellent
vinegar. I am quite certain that I have never suffered in the
suffrages of my readers--and so in pocket!--from hostile criticism.
And I have had any amount of it--the little green wrapper is not
always pleasant reading. But I have never shouted out that I have been
personally hurt or wounded by hostile criticism, and I certainly never
shall. The days are past when the _Quarterly_ could kill Keats, and
the days have not arrived when the reprobatory finger which is
sometimes wagged at one can take one’s bread-and-butter away.

But sometimes--and now, please, I unsheathe my toy sword, or at least
flourish my cane--the postman brings something that cannot hurt one
seriously, though it stings. This something is not criticism at all.
It stings, not because of the actual attempt--even the smallest plants
cannot grow unhampered by insect life--but because, puny as it may be,
it is so manifestly unfair. In this regard I can sympathize with Miss
Corelli because, however the critics may write of her books from the
literary pedestal, they sometimes write of her, from a shelter
trench, in a very different way.

One morning I read a little sneer about myself which was entirely
without justification or explanation. It occurred in a Catholic
magazine, which I will call _The Thesaurus_, dated June 1906, and was
written by the editor, who may be designated as the Rev. Mr. Roget.
Here it is:--

     “Perhaps one of those authors whom the public love--Miss
     Corelli, Mr. Hall Caine, or Mr. ‘Guy Thorne‘--may be preparing
     a novel with the education controversy as its theme. In that
     case, one can only hope devoutly that the Bishop of London will
     _not_ think it advisable to advertise the book from the pulpit.
     Yet if one could only have heard a frank opinion of _When it
     was Dark_ expressed by the last Bishop of London--Dr.
     Creighton--that would indeed have been a joy.”

_The Thesaurus_ is a pleasant little magazine devoted to quite
innocuous fiction and articles. It has, in the number I quote above,
nine pages of advertisements, an article called “In the Engadine,” a
“Few hints on church embroidery,” a very happily named story called
“In a Dull Moment,” etc, etc. Indeed it could not hurt a fly. I say
this much, not because I have any dislike for this nice little
periodical, but in order to point out that in answering its editor’s
remarks about me, I am not endeavouring to become known to the world,
and to advertise myself by the endeavour to link my name to its
editor’s.

There is a certain sort of hurried and sporadic writing which is not
criticism, but is irresponsible nonsense set down to fill a page no
less than to gratify a prejudice.

It’s all give and take in literary polemics. People are always going
for one in the press, and very often with perfect justice. But when
one reads remarks like those I have quoted, and remarks written by a
Mr. Roget, then, if it amuses one, there is at least a text for a
small monition.

Miss Marie Corelli is very well able to look after herself. However
much Mr. Roget may endeavour to pillory this lady in his “Study
Window,” I don’t suppose she cares. She is a great modern force; Mr.
Roget isn’t. Mr. Hall Caine will not, I imagine, try to stop being one
of the authors “whom the public love” because of the editor of _The
Thesaurus_. Nor have I, the humblest person in the trilogy, yet
suffered.

And, believe me, it is not because I personally care much that I am
writing like this, nor is Mr. Roget any armed assassin in a narrow
path. But such an one ought to be laughed at a little, because he is
typical of a class of young men who should be taught the economy of
reserve.

Mr. Roget did not explain his reasons for attacking me, though I,
quite frankly, give mine for attacking him. But as--through the
lamentable chances of war--my remarks will be read by a great many
more folk than his were read by, we are quits, and I can start fair,
though with all the rigour of the game.

The Editor in his paragraph not only states that he himself does not
like one of my stories--_i. e., When it was Dark_, but implies that the
Bishop of London was not justified in liking it, and saying that he
liked it in public.

It is quite within Mr. Roget’s right not to like the book--thousands
of people didn’t like it. But what are his functions for sneering at
it with confidence and weight?

First of all his age is thirty-six, and he is the editor of _The
Thesaurus_.

We can dismiss those qualifications at once.

Then he is the Vicar of a Worcestershire church, and a well-known
writer of light verse.

He began his journalistic career in 1890 by contributing “turnovers”
to the _Globe_, has contributed to _Punch_ and _The Nineteenth
Century_, is a leader writer on a Church paper, and reviews
theological books.

This is his journalistic career, and he has written seven little books
in all, mostly verse. I take these particulars from _Who’s Who_.

All this is very well. It is a good thing for all of us to be in
_Who’s Who_, though, by the way, it does the latter-day “celebrity”
more harm to be out of it than it does him good to be in it!

Mr. Roget’s record for a young clergyman of thirty-six is honourable
enough. He has done better for himself than most young priests of that
age. But this does not constitute him “An author whom the public
love,” etc.

I am very glad to find my own name in the fat red book, which is so
useful, though in my little autobiography I never thought it necessary
to mention the first “turnover.” I certainly did venture to say that
one of my stories had sold 300,000 copies; but that was probably
vanity, and I regret it.

But, to be serious, has my critic done as much in journalism or the
literary world as your deponent? I’m not going to catalogue my work
any more, but, frankly, he has not. All I ask, with proper humility,
is just this--Is this gentleman qualified to sneer at me--not to
_criticize_ me, which is quite another thing--just because the public
have approved of what I have tried to sell them and have bought it?

In sneering at me he sneers at the public, whose taste I have been
fortunate enough to please, and whose opinion of what I have to sell
has lifted me and those who are dear to me from poverty to comfort. I
have worked enormously. I have put all I have got in me into my work,
and I feel that work honestly done has been honestly rewarded. If I
could write better than I do, I should be very happy. I know perfectly
well how inadequate my work is, but I know what this “critic” of mine
does not know, and has not inquired into, how much it costs me to do
it and how deeply I believe in what I say.

And does not Mr. Roget also seek the suffrages of the public? In the
same issue of _The Thesaurus_ to which I have referred above, he uses
the phrase “...us who are trying to make an income out of literature.”

Of course, he is trying to be “one of those authors,” etc. He admits
it. He tells us he is trying to make an income out of the public. And
yet, while he is doing this, he insults the public for preferring
“those other authors”--or, at least, that’s how one can hardly help
taking it!

Moreover he is a priest as well as a literary man. As a literary man,
I attack one who has not yet shown himself to have the slightest right
to sneer at people who write--whatever their literary faults may seem
to him--always on the side of good, with a belief in the saving power
of the Christian faith, and in the same hope as that in which he
writes.

A million people read one of Miss Corelli’s books, and they pay her to
do so.

Two hundred people listen to one of Mr. Roget’s sermons, and he is
paid to preach them. But do authors go down into Worcestershire and
sneer at the sermon of the priest because his own congregation love to
hear him?

This is the first time in my life that I have ever answered any one
who has written unkindly of me. And it will be the last. _Literary_
criticism is a thing done by specialists, and with every right on
their side. _Literary_ criticism is in the main correct. When I
publish a book, and a literary writer points out this or that fault, I
am myself literary man enough to know that he has put his finger on
the weak spot nine times out of ten. Then I try again. I have said
this before.

But mere unqualified contempt on the part of one who has not been able
to qualify himself to express any contempt of value for public
judgment deserves remark.

And now it is necessary to say a word about this gentleman’s
reprobation of the Bishop of London’s sermons about _When it was
Dark_. It is not a nice thing to have to say, but this young clergyman
is typical of a small tribe which make it necessary for me to say it.

The obvious suggestion is that I went out of my way to induce the
Bishop of London to advertise one of my books. That is not the case.

I have never met the Bishop of London in my life. I have never even
seen him. I have had one letter from him about my book, which I will
not quote here, but which I will send Mr. Roget whenever he asks for
it. It is the only communication I have ever had from him. Neither
directly nor indirectly did I attempt to get the bishop to advertise
me.

Yet his lordship preached about the book six or seven times--once in
Westminster Abbey. He advised his ordination candidates to read it,
and in his addresses to these gentlemen--subsequently published in
book form--the passage remains.

The late Bishop of Truro advised the clergy to read it in several
diocesan meetings. He also wrote a long signed article in a great
London daily paper about my books, in which he said:--

     “A story written by Guy Thorne, who has proved his gift and its
     purpose, may well touch the sore place of our race with a hand
     that is more human than statistics and more sympathetic than
     many organizations.”

Dr. Gott is just dead as I write this. I have many letters from him.
In one of them--which again I will not quote, but which I will send my
critic for his private reading when he asks for it--his lordship said
that the book had helped him greatly.

There have been thousands of personal letters from readers about this
one book. Dozens of them were from clergymen, from pastors of the
Nonconformist and also the Anglican Churches. All this also I have
said before, and the half-dozen letters which I have quoted have their
own value, bear their own witness.

One of the greatest Nonconformist divines of England preached about
the book.

There--I have said enough. It is sickening to have to say it. But Mr.
Roget leaves one no alternative. He is not fair. For some reason or
other--I do not know or care what it is, for he is an utter stranger
to me--he takes this line. In the same issue of his magazine he
writes of the President of the Congregational Union--“Mr. Jowett’s
presidential address, as well as the speeches which followed it, were
not remarkable, to say the least, for the charity of language used
about the Church. All the old sectarian bitterness was expressed in
the usual way.”

...I have been writing for many hours. The snow was blowing in from
the Channel over the South Foreland when I began. The sky was a great
pewter-coloured dome from which Mother Hulda’s feathers were falling,
when I took up the pen.

As the day waxed there came a faint, yellow, and almost menacing gleam
of sunshine, and as it waned the leaden-grey grew black, and night
came silently over the landscape until at last she opened her great
funereal black fan.

They brought me lamps and set them on my table. Those who love me and
look after me came noiselessly up the stairs, silently into the room
and put logs upon the study fire and left me alone once more.

It is nearly midnight, and the winter wind pipes sadly outside this
old Kentish house, so remote from other habitations, so renowned in
the annals of the Channel cliffs. With all its faults, all its
egoisms, take this last essay in my first book of essays, and do not
think hardly of me. Forgive what you discern here of petulance, of
arrogance, and of conceit. I have done my day’s labour, and I have
tried to be sincere. I have done my day’s labour, and now I am going
to descend to an old room, with its oaken beams and aroma of the past,
to take the supper of a man who has toiled. The dear people, and
unfortunate ones! who wait upon the erratic hours of an author are
waiting for me there.

And then to bed, and may the humble supplication I shall send up to
Almighty God for myself and those I love, for those who read what I
have written, have its hearing in the place where “hearts and wills
are weighed.” May I become a better and worthier man because I have
the opportunity of addressing you who read. And may God grant me to
mend a faulty life.

Good-night and Amen.

    _Wanstone Court,
    December, 1906._


       *       *       *       *       *


    RICHARD CLAY & SONS, LIMITED,
    BREAD STREET HILL, E.C., AND
    BUNGAY, SUFFOLK.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of 'I Believe' and other essays, by 
Cyril Arthur Edward Ranger Gull and Guy Thorne

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK 'I BELIEVE' AND OTHER ESSAYS ***

***** This file should be named 41178-0.txt or 41178-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/1/1/7/41178/

Produced by Mark C. Orton, Matthew Wheaton and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
book was produced from scanned images of public domain
material from the Google Print project.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

