II

THE FIRES OF MOLOCH

“_There is a lion in the way; a lion is in the streets._”


Every three months with unfailing regularity small paragraphs appear
in the daily papers headed “RECORD LOW BIRTH-RATE.” Some figures
follow, and then occurs the sentence--unhappily a stereotyped one in
our day--“_This is the lowest rate recorded in any quarter since civil
registration began._”

Now and again a blue-book upon the subject of the birth-rate is
dissected by a journalist and the result appears in his newspaper as a
series of startling figures. The story of England’s decadence is set
out in the plainest language for every one to read.

At rarer intervals still, some prominent clergyman or sociologist
writes or lectures in order to call attention to what is going on, and
thus to bring home the spiritual and economic dangers of our racial
suicide.

A few people read or listen and are convinced. A good many other
people are too utterly ignorant of either the Philosophy of
Christianity or the Science of Sociology to understand in the least
what the point of view of the protesters is. According to their
temperament, they smile quietly and dismiss the subject, or bellow
their disgust at such a subject being mentioned at all.

    “He who far off beholds another dancing,
          And all the time
    Hears not the music that he dances to,
          Thinks him a madman.”

A party which has the fools at its back is always in the majority, and
discussion is stifled, alarm is lulled by the anodyne of indifference
and the great number of honest folk who call themselves both Patriots
and Christians have no time to spare from fighting and squabbling for
money--in order that the dishonest men may not get it all.

Half-a-dozen problems of extreme national importance confront every
thinking English man and woman in 1907. The air is thick with their
stir and movement, and so great is the noise and reverberation of them
that true “royalty” of “_inward_ happiness” seems a thing impossible
and past by in these troubled times. Be that as it may, it is quite
certain that one of the most real and pressing of these problems is
that summed up in the stock phrase “Record Low Birth-rate.”

We hear a great deal about the doings of a class of people who are
referred to as “The Smart Set,” and it is actually said that its
influence is having a serious effect upon the national character. I do
not believe it for a moment. It seems a folly to suppose that a
handful of champagne corks floating on a cess-pool has any
far-reaching influence upon the English home. I mention that small
section of society constituted by the idle and luxurious rich,
because, whatever their vices are, they are being used as whipping-boy
for enormous numbers of people whose lives are equally guilty with
theirs in at least one regard--in the matter of which I am writing
now.

I propose in this essay to discuss the question of the decline in the
birth-rate from the Christian and Catholic standpoint. There is only
one perfect philosophy, and all other half-true philosophies in the
light of which we might consider such a momentous matter as this, lead
only to the conclusion that expediency is the highest good. Without
the incentive of the Christian Faith and without the light of the
Incarnation one may sit in a corner and think till “all’s blue in
cloud cuckoo land.” Christianity can alone be reconciled with
Economics, theory and practice celebrating always the marriage of the
King’s son, the wedding of Heaven and Earth, the spiritual and the
material. Plato knew that it was impossible to raise the Greek state
to the level of his philosophic principles, and Aristotle frankly
abandons the attempt to connect ethics and politics with the highest
conclusions of his creed. We are in the same position to-day if we
ignore the supreme truth which is our possession and which was not
vouchsafed to the great Greek thinkers.

       *       *       *       *       *

There is one cause and one cause only of the decline in the birth-rate
and the beginning of the country’s spiritual and material suicide.

The way of Nature is for every species to increase nearly to its
possible maximum of numbers. This is a proved law, and nothing but the
limitation of families by artificial means, or infanticide, can check
its operation.

The truth is exactly as Dr. Barry put it nearly two years ago, “It
stands confessed that the great, proud, English race, famous as a
people for manly virtues, once the very Stoics of Christian Europe
decline more and more to be fathers and mothers, will not be worried
with children, and--cannot be spoken of in decent language.”

It is a truth of history that when a nation begins to refuse the
responsibility of providing for posterity it begins to decline.

The doctrines of Malthus in his great _Essay on the Principles of
Population_, are no longer believed in by the Christian philosopher.
Malthus was perfectly sound upon the ethical problem, and the
“Neo-Malthusians,” of whom I shall presently speak, have no right
whatever to use his name upon their banners. Malthus, so the modern
socialistic thinker, such as Mr. H. G. Wells avers, “demonstrated for
all time that a State whose population continues to increase in
obedience to unchecked instinct can progress only from bad to worse.
From the point of view of human comfort and happiness the increase of
population that occurs at each advance in human security is the
greatest evil of life.”

Malthus, however, never once suggested or advocated the limitation of
population by mechanical means. He believed that it was a patriotic
duty of men and women to _abstain from producing more children_ than
the State could bear, and it is as well to remove at once a popular
misconception which stains the name of a good man and a powerful
though mistaken thinker.

Otter says of him in a memoir, “His life was more than any other we
have ever witnessed, a perpetual flow of enlightened benevolence,
contentment and peace; it was the best and purest philosophy,
brightened by Christian views and softened by Christian charity.”

It is economically and from the sociological point of view that the
modern student condemns the theories of Malthus and those who follow
him.

Socialist thinkers disregard the entity of nations, and treat of the
world and its population as a whole. The Christian Patriot loves his
own country, believes in its destiny no less than he reveres its past,
and knows that if our English nation is going to live, it must go on
reproducing itself.

The “no room to live” theory is preposterous upon the face of it. In
1879, Lord Derby asked a somewhat obvious question. “Surely,” he said,
“it is better to have thirty-five millions of human beings leading
useful and intelligent lives, rather than forty millions struggling
painfully for a bare subsistence.”

This has been made into a watchword by those who advocate the
limitation of population.

It can be answered by a simple statement of fact--in our colonies
there are places for a hundred million wives.

While I have not lost sight of the main object of this paper--to
summarize the weight of Catholic Christian feeling upon the
_mechanical_ limitation of population, and to tell how this is being
accomplished--I find that there is yet some ground to be cleared
before coming to the main issue.

I have said that there is only one material cause of our decadence,
but there are many reasons.

More than a year ago in one or two newspapers, particularly the _Daily
Chronicle_, various sociologists gave the results of their thought
upon the matter. I print a few extracts here.

The outspoken Dr. Barry wrote:--

     ......”‘As for religion, Christian or any other, when its
     dogmas are no longer believed, its ethics pass away,’ and he
     draws a picture of the rotten state of society in our Western
     world, which he attributes directly to the growth of
     agnosticism. The fact that the birth-rate in England has been
     declining for twenty-five years, and was lowest in 1904, seems
     to Dr. Barry to be due to several causes--‘poverty and luxury,
     pleasure-seeking and disbelief in the Bible,’ and he adds, ‘The
     spirit of anarchic individualism that cries, “No God, no
     Master!” is needed to tell us why Englishmen and their wives,
     once dedicated to a blameless and lasting union, have fallen
     into the pit which Malthus or his followers digged for them.’
     England alone is not at fault. ‘Wherever unbelief has taken
     hold, or doubt saps the ancient creeds, there Malthus reigns
     instead of Christ.’”

A “well-known public man” wrote:--

     ......“It is within my knowledge that certain flats in Mayfair
     and elsewhere for the married servant and artisan class are let
     on the express or implied condition that not only no children
     shall be brought into the tenements, but that none shall be
     born there. The direct consequence of this embargo on natural
     increase is terribly disastrous. Many footmen and coachmen in
     Mayfair could tell a tragical story of the results of
     compulsory sterility.

     “A Japanese friend was telling me the other day that after an
     absence from England of a dozen years he is startled at the
     visible deterioration of the race and the great increase of
     penniless British weaklings, who add strength to no nation.
     ‘You English are losing both patriotism and religion, and
     consequently you are not only decadent but doomed, unless you
     mend your ways in the treatment of women and children.’”

I take the following from a leading article in the _Church Times_:--

     ......“After making all allowances for minor contributory
     causes, the fact remains and may be proved by a little inquiry,
     that married people have come to regard a large family as a
     curse instead of a Divine blessing. The birth-rates in London
     are instructive. Residential districts, with fewest poor, show
     the lowest rates. Hampstead 16·6 and Fulham 32·3 may be taken
     as typical districts at each end of the scale. Stepney with its
     Jewish population has a rate of 37. If the Aliens Bill is to be
     effective it will need a clause compelling Jews to limit their
     families, just as their Christian (!) neighbours do. The misery
     of it all is that we find the practice of child murder, for
     such it is in plain English, defended by men of education;
     lawyers, medical men, and even priests make no secret of their
     approval of it, if no more. And as working men become aware of
     what their ‘betters’ are saying and doing--and they are not
     slow to follow a similar course--the evil spreads. Our proper
     leaders, the Bishops, ought long ago to have dealt with this
     subject resolutely and firmly. But apparently a grain of
     incense is a more terrible thing to them than the murder of an
     existing if unborn personality. We can only judge by their
     public utterances, but we have yet to learn that as a body
     their lordships have spent a thousandth part of the time over
     this supreme question of national morality that they have
     devoted to the suppression of things disapproved of by Lady
     Wimborne and her league. The spectacle of disproportionate
     interest and action is melancholy, and indicative of incapacity
     to observe the real dangers to be faced.”

Again--

     “The personal causes of this mischief are fear of pain (_i. e._
     failure to see in pain the discipline of God which elevates
     human nature), hatred of duty, shirking of responsibility, love
     of pleasure, the substitution of hedonism for the religion of
     Jesus Christ the Lord, and ignorance of the Holy Spirit as Lord
     of _all_ life. How far religious teachers are accountable for
     this we leave to their own consciences to say. The same causes
     are at work in the high mortality of infants. The honour of
     doing her best for her child is cast aside by many a mother
     because it involves a certain amount of self-restraint and some
     seclusion from the gaieties of the hour; and recourse is had to
     all sorts of patent nostrums and infants’ ‘food’ (often the
     cause of rickets) until the hospitals are over full of young
     children, whose sufferings are the result (God grant that they
     may be the atonement also) of their mothers’ negligences and
     ignorances. Where there is not deliberate and wilful avoidance
     of maternal duty, there is neglect through awful ignorance.”

In the _Daily Mail_ Mr. H. G. Wells writes:--

     .......“On the other hand think of the discouragements. While
     the mother toils in a restricted anxious home amid her
     children, she sees through her imperfectly cleaned window (one
     can’t do everything) the childless wives having a glorious
     time, going a-bicycling with their husbands, dressed gaudily
     with all his superfluous income, talking about their ‘Rights.’
     As her children grow up to an age when they might help drudge
     with her or drudge for her, the State, without a word of thanks
     to her, takes them away to teach them and make good citizens of
     them. If the husband presently becomes bored by his restricted
     prolific household and its incessant demands, and absconds, or
     if he is simply unlucky and gets out of work, the State deals
     with her in a spirit of austere ingratitude. She is subjected
     to ‘charity’ and every conceivable indignity; she undergoes
     profounder humiliations than fall to the lot of the most
     dissolute women. If a husband ‘goes wrong’ and a woman has kept
     childless, she can get employment, she can shift for herself
     and be well quit of him, but a family disaster for a mother is
     catastrophe.

     “I submit the situation is preposterous. I do not believe that
     with increasing intelligence and refinement women will go on
     marrying and bearing children under such conditions. I gather
     that the statistics of marriage-rates and birth-rates bear me
     out in this.”

And in the _Daily Chronicle_ the Rev. Cartmel-Robinson:--

     ......“This phenomenon of the falling birth-rate is of course
     not confined to England; it is to be met with, you might say
     generally, in all Christian countries. It would be far more
     marked but for the tremendous decline in the death-rate,
     especially among infants. We ourselves should be vitally
     bankrupt but for this factor, and in France, as you know, the
     population is slowly dropping. That is an old story, but it is
     startling to learn, as President Roosevelt tells us, that the
     native-born American population is actually declining.

     “One of the main causes, no doubt, is the determined pursuit of
     pleasure by all classes. The man will not take the burden of
     providing for a family, or, at any rate, a large family, upon
     himself, because that would mean a curtailment of his luxuries,
     perhaps even his necessities, while the woman refuses to spend
     all the prime of her life in child-bearing and child-rearing.
     She also wants to enjoy herself, and the pure, simple joys of
     maternity, which we used to think ought to be sufficient for a
     woman, have in many cases become irksome.

     “For my part I do not think that you will ever rouse England to
     this question of home and children by an appeal to patriotism.
     The Englishman has become too cosmopolitan for that, and I am
     afraid the feeling is growing.

     “The reason for the decline in America is said to be that women
     are becoming neurotic, and will not face the dangers and
     responsibilities of motherhood. No doubt that is true to a
     certain extent here also, and it is quite certain that among
     intellectual and highly-educated women, such as are trained at
     our universities in increasing numbers, the maternal instinct,
     the capacity for love, if you like to put it in that way, is
     apt to be destroyed.

     “Then, among the middle classes thousands of young women, who
     not many years ago would have looked to marriage as their
     natural career, are earning their own livings, and are less
     eager to rush into matrimony.”

I have taken these extracts from the words of a few people crying in
the wilderness. All of the dicta are at least eighteen months old. I
am writing now, in November 1906, and three days ago the apparently
inevitable paragraph again made its appearance:--

     “RECORD LOW BIRTH-RATE.

     “The births registered in England and Wales during the three
     months ended September 30--234,624, or 26·9 per 1,000 of the
     population--was the lowest rate recorded in any third quarter
     since civil registration was established.

     “The average in the same quarters of the past ten years was
     28·8.”

These opinions as to the reasons for the terrible decadence of England
are doubtless all true. They are all contributory causes, and I do not
think we can put a single one of them aside. Nothing could be more
dismal or more hopeless reading. As one goes on, one experiences a
sense as of a chill, deepening shadow.

Few people who read will be able to adopt the average man’s attitude
towards unpleasant and disturbing matters--to sidle by with a
deprecatory shrug of the shoulders.

Where then do we stand?

So far I have endeavoured to show (_a_) the entire indifference of the
ordinary man and woman to the fall in the birth-rate; (_b_) the only
light, in which, as I understand it, one can see the problem as a
whole--in the light of the Incarnation; (_c_) the fact that the
Christian Sociologist to-day is inclined to condemn the theory that
the limitation of population is necessary at all, even by legitimate
methods of abstinence and control; (_d_) the varied reasons which, in
the opinion of those who have studied the question deeply, contribute
to the one central and shocking fact--

_That incredible numbers of English men and women many of them
professing themselves Christians, are constantly using methods to
prevent the birth of children._

Every parish clergyman in England is perfectly aware of what is going
on. Every Nonconformist minister, and indeed every one whose work
brings him in touch with large masses of people in the capacities of
leader, adviser, or friend, knows it also. Just as the figures of the
Registrar General form a gauge by which to measure the generality of
the malignant influence, so the personal experience of any man of the
world will supply particular evidence of the state of things within
his immediate purview and surroundings.

Always remembering that the evil is progressive, is hourly increasing,
the observer of social phenomena at once asks himself if there is not
some definite and organized control and direction of it. The desire
to obtain the gratifications of passion while evading its
responsibilities is, perhaps, the strongest feeling implanted in the
fallen nature of mankind. This is sufficient to create a demand for
knowledge of how to obtain the desired end, and the demand has in its
turn created the supply.

There is a definite literature upon the subject, there is a large body
of highly-trained and cultured men and women ready and anxious to
disseminate the necessary information to produce these results.

I propose to deal briefly, in the first instance, with the literature
which urges and explains practices which the laws of God, the laws of
Nature, and the teachings of the Church utterly and emphatically
condemn.

The people who call themselves “Malthusians” (and to avoid an
injustice to the memory of Malthus I shall here style them
Neo-Malthusians) have an organ of their own in the shape of a
periodical which is the official voice of a league into which they
have formed themselves. The periodical has, I believe, an extensive
circulation, and it is published at the lowest possible price.
Moreover, in each number of it which I have seen the following notice
appears:--

     “The Secretary of the Malthusian League will be glad to send
     copies of back numbers of this journal to friends willing to
     distribute them for propagandist purposes.”

We see that an ordered press campaign is in progress. This periodical
is most ably written and edited. Signed articles appear in it by men
and women of standing and position. I find it impossible to doubt for
a moment that these economists and scientists are not absolutely
sincere, and actuated by a high and laudable desire to benefit the
world in which they live.

It is unnecessary to give the title of the periodical, but immediately
beneath it the following sentence is printed in large letters--

“A CRUSADE AGAINST POVERTY.”

Here is the _raison d’être_ of the journal plainly stated, and so far
it is no more than indicating the precise aim of Malthus--to find an
economic remedy for the sufferings of poverty.

I proceed to give some examples of the teaching inculcated in the
journal, and in the first place quote from a review of _L’Instinct
d’Amour_, by Dr. Joanny Roux, a very distinguished French physician:--

     “Must all who refuse to procreate refrain from love? How easy
     it is to clothe one’s self in the robes of social purity when
     replying to this question! The social purists tell the world
     that chastity is obligatory if procreation be not intended. It
     is impossible to carry out this view. The philosopher contents
     himself with studying sterile love and its consequences. He
     rejoices to think that thousands of infants are left out of the
     world who would have been doomed to suffer. The inconveniences
     resulting from some selfish people who refrain from parentage
     are as nothing in the balance when weighed against the horrors
     of indigence.

     “Should we not, by acting thus, lead to a progressive
     diminution of the population? Certainly; but that would be a
     good thing. As if, forsooth, human progress depended on
     quantity, and not on quality! Take China as an example of
     quantity without quality. Some writers seem to wish that the
     earth should be filled up with miserable and suffering people.
     Malthus, that gentle clergyman, in 1798, was the first to
     protest against such a view. Over-reproduction, he showed, was
     the cause of poverty. He, however, thought the only remedy for
     this was chastity, and was quite opposed to _sterile love_.

     “To accept sterile love, some say, is to run counter to Nature
     and natural morality. ‘No,’ says Dr. Roux, ‘it is the
     preserving of these laws. In all cases where we construct
     houses or warm ourselves, we get one law of Nature to defend us
     against the other which injures us. We must not forget that our
     instincts are fixed customs of very ancient date; and there can
     be no doubt that man has the right to intervene in questions of
     that sexual instinct if morality (_i. e._ happiness) requires
     it of him.’”

When one reads these passages a flood of light as to the real
influence and direction of such teachings comes to us at once. The
writer, no doubt sincerely enough, assumes as an axiom of his whole
position, that there is no law but “Nature,” no morality but what he
calls “Natural Morality.” We are, in fact, under no obligations to
anything but the promptings of animal instinct which are part of our
human nature.

We see immediately the inherent negation of Christianity implied in
this attitude, and apart from the definite teaching of the Faith upon
the question, which I shall enter into later, it is most important
that we should realize that the holders and preachers of
Neo-Malthusianism must always be opposed to Christianity. Even those
people who do not profess their hatred for, or disbelief in our Lord
in so many words, logically imply them. Christians who may not have
troubled themselves about this menace to the State and its morals must
be told in no uncertain voice that the movement is purely heathen in
its position and built upon a basis of heathenism. Let us call things
by their right names, and realize that the Neo-Malthusian worshipping
Nature and the Chinese Coolie worshipping his Joss are only two
manifestations of exactly the same thing.

Nor are the people who are attempting to turn marriage into a polite
and recognized form of prostitution always so reticent as to their
attitude towards the Christian Faith. In an article which professes
to sum up the work of the Malthusian League I read:--

     ......“The medical profession in England is still too much under
     the sway of the Church and conventional opinion to be able to
     discuss the population difficulty, except to censure those who
     are wise enough to follow science instead of theological
     traditions derived from the _juventus mundi_. Dr. Taylor, of
     Birmingham, who is said to be an ardent Churchman, in a
     presidential address to the Gynæcological Society, attacked the
     views of the Neo-Malthusians.”

And again:--

     .......“We have to chronicle the prosecution of a new organ of the
     League, _Salud y Fuerza_, published in Barcelona, on account of
     an admirable article by Señor Leon Devaldez. Spain is the most
     retrograde of all our European nations; but the prosecution, we
     believe, will end in the defeat of the clerical party, as has
     been the case in England and in France. Science is destroying
     our traditional superstitions.”

I feel sure that a great many people have not the slightest idea that
not only is this detestable propaganda utterly incompatible with the
profession of Christianity, but must logically be opposed to it.

Here is a case in point. The official organ of the Malthusian League
quotes a letter from “a warmhearted clergyman,” whose name is not
given, in which he says:--

     “The theory of Neo-Malthusianism finds a way out of the
     difficulty. It is the use of preventive checks which, while
     they make possible to all married persons the gratification of
     their natural desires, will prevent the possibility of the
     ordinary results of such gratification following. ‘This
     clergyman,’ adds the editor, ‘is one of the few who are fit to
     follow in the footsteps of Malthus, Whately, and Chalmers.’”

It is a not uninteresting speculation, which we may permit ourselves
for a moment, as to the probable identity and character of this
“clergyman.” One hopes, of course, that he was not a clergyman, and
that the editor of the journal, naturally unfamiliar with
ecclesiastical affairs, gives the title to some minister of one of the
Unitarian sects. But if the writer of the letter is really an ordained
priest, then he must surely be either--

(1) An honest fool who means to do right, and does it as far as he
knows how.

(2) A dishonest fool who means to do wrong, and does it.

(3) A fool who does whichever of the two he finds most convenient in
this or that regard.

We need not, therefore, take the anonymous writer very seriously, but
I quote him because the incident throws a side-light upon the
psychology of the half Christian. It would be as unwise as it is
unnecessary to quote freely from any of the Neo-Malthusian
publications. My business in this essay is to make it quite clear to
readers that there is a powerful and able organization which is
constantly producing literature teaching the limitation of families.
There are now six or seven “Malthusian Leagues” in existence, in
England, Holland, Germany, France, Belgium, and Spain, and a Woman’s
International Branch uniting the women of these countries, while the
printed matter issued by these organizations is enormous.

In the English journal to which I have been referring there are many
advertisements of books and pamphlets in which the wording is
undoubtedly designed to attract others than the earnest seeker after
truth. I read, to give one example, that for eightpence post free I
can obtain “_The Strike of a Sex_; or, Woman on Strike against the
Male Sex for her ‘Magna Charta.’ One of the most advanced books ever
published; intended to revolutionize public opinion on the relation of
the sexes. Should be read by every person.”

And lower down in the same column I am informed that the publishers of
this sort of thing not only sell books advocating Neo-Malthusian
practices, but are also willing to provide the means for committing
them.

So much for the unsavoury products of the Neo-Malthusian press,
products which would make the gentle old clergyman of Haileybury turn
away in loathing and disgust could he but see them. Large as the
output of this pseudo-economic obscenity is, it does not reach a
twentieth part of the people who are responsible for the decline of
the birth-rate. They have derived their knowledge from another
channel, from the instructions of the medical man or his lesser
colleague the chemist.

The poorer classes who, a few years ago were ignorant of this
propaganda, are now being instructed in it by the men from whom they
buy their medicines. Doctors, in the majority of cases, are perfectly
willing to explain to married people how they may avoid having
children by means other than those of self-control. As a rule the
medical man seems to have no conscience at all in this regard. His
point of view is too often merely materialistic and concerned with
nothing but physical function, and he has become in many cases, the
active agent of the malignant forces which are sapping our national
honour and prosperity. In discussing the question, more than one
person has expressed his amazement at the readiness of doctors to
explain and advocate the limitation of families. The doctors of
England form one of the finest classes in the community. I will
venture to say that very few men and women arrive at middle life
without experiencing a lively feeling of gratitude, friendship, or
even affection for some medical man. The devotion to his high calling,
of even the average English doctor, is a fact in the lives of nearly
all of us. It is the more surprising, and alarming also, when we
realize, as inquirers are forced to realize, how wrong and mistaken
the general attitude of the physician is towards this aspect of the
sexual relations of men and women. It is said that infidelity is rife
among those who are educated to cure our bodily ailments, that the
agnostic habit of mind is frequent in this profession. I am not
competent to judge of this, or to pronounce an opinion upon such a
statement, though my own experience is directly opposed to it. But it
is certain that until the last fifteen years the scientific
temperament was disinclined to believe in anything it could not weigh,
measure, analyze, touch, or see. Huxley, for example, was a striking
instance of this position. But science has been revolutionized within
the experience of one generation, and the “cock-sureness” has
disappeared. We are all realizing that “unseen” simply means that
which does not appeal to our sense of sight, or perhaps that which
does not appeal to any of our senses. One of the most famous and
honoured scientific men of to-day, Sir Oliver Lodge, says in regard to
miracles, “I think we should hesitate very much before saying that
they are impossible, because we do not know what may be the power of a
great personality over natural forces.”

As the years go on, we may have great hopes that the regarding of
psychology as just as much a necessary part of a doctor’s education as
biology, or therapeutics will produce a better feeling among medical
men in regard to the great question of which the statistics of the
birth-rate form the gauge. Doctors will probably understand that harm
done to the body and harm done to the soul react upon one another with
remorseless certainty, and that there can be no real separation of
spirit and matter. And directly this is understood we shall never find
medical men recommending and assisting what Dr. Roux calls “sterile
love” though some of us could find a very different name for it.

The layman unhesitatingly accepts the advice of his physician, and
here “private judgment” hardly exists. If a priest tells a certain
type of Englishman that Evening Communions spoil and maim our holiest
sacrament, and are bad for the soul, he will resent it, and say that
he will choose for himself in the matter. Yet if a doctor tells the
same person that it is dangerous to eat mushrooms that have been
gathered for more than two days, or that the irritation at his wrists
is a symptom of uric acid in the blood, there will be no question of
disbelief. The influence of doctors is incalculable, they rule us by
our fear of death and our instinct of self-preservation, and rarely do
we find that they abuse the trust reposed in them, or use their great
power for ill always excepting the instance under discussion. When,
therefore, the medical profession can be brought to see the preventive
check system as it really is, when doctors understand that
interference with natural laws induces a deterioration of character
and temperament which eventually acts upon the body for its harm, and
tends to race-degeneracy, then much will be gained. And when they
progress still further in the coming reconciliation of science with
the Christian Revelation, and own that the laws of God, set out and
promulgated by His Holy Church, are no less binding than the laws made
known by the revelation of science, then the battle will be half won.
The final victory or defeat will be with the priests and ministers of
every church and sect, the men who are the physicians of our souls.

The last few pages have been occupied with a statement of the
Neo-Malthusian propaganda. I have been careful rather to understate
than exaggerate the case. Much that I might have included,
corroborative testimony from people who know, individual instances,
letters, and so forth, has been rejected for the purposes of this
essay. Were I writing another book upon the subject I should have used
this material. In a collection of papers devoted to various subjects,
and which will have a more general appeal than a work devoted entirely
to vital statistics, it is impossible. But any one who has followed me
thus far may be sure that I have been strictly temperate in statement.

We have seen what the Neo-Malthusians, avowed and secret, are doing.
What is the Church doing to stem the evil? and what is the teaching of
the Church upon the subject?

The teaching of the Church is perfectly clear; my contention is that
it is so rarely taught as to be practically unknown to large masses of
Christians.

No one ever goes to his parish priest and asks if adultery is wrong.
Yet innumerable clergymen have told me that they are constantly asked
by parishioners if there is “any harm” in the use of methods to limit
families.

Such people are not, of course, of a very spiritual life, or very
acute intelligence, or they would easily find the answer to such a
question for themselves. But very few of us are either spiritually
minded or of uncommon intelligence, and legislation must be for the
average man. Voltaire said, “_on dit que Dieu est toujours pour les
gros bataillons_,” and what was spoken as a sneer contains the germ of
a great truth. Let me say once more, and I am certain of what I say,
that the “_gros bataillons_” are quite ignorant of their moral
obligations in marriage in so far as they relate to the question under
discussion.

Why?

The truth is, in the first instance, very difficult to convey from the
pulpit and to a mixed audience, though, to take three great names at
random, the President of the United States, and our own Bishops of
Ripon and London have spoken out. In accusing the clergy and
nonconformist ministers of shirking their duty we must remember the
enormous difficulty of their task. I have no responsibility but that
of my own conviction, and no one is compelled to buy this book who
does not wish to do so. It is therefore quite easy for me to sit in my
study and write as I am doing. But the preacher, great as his
opportunity and influence are, must by the nature of the case, be in a
very different position. He is an official and recognized leader of
his flock in spiritual affairs, a hundred considerations weigh with
him; he is constrained on all sides by prejudice and convention which
might do incalculable harm in other directions if the one was outraged
and the other ignored. The position of the priest is admirably summed
up in a pamphlet which Father Black has sent me. In it he explains
that it is impossible for a preacher when addressing a general
congregation to speak in other than general terms, or to say all that
he may feel it is, in some cases, very desirable or even necessary to
convey. He cannot but be aware that with sins of impurity especially,
the very persons who commit them are generally of too delicate ears to
endure to hear them called by their right names. This _sentimental_
purity is not incompatible with corruption of life. He wishes to warn
the innocent without enlightening their innocence, to lift the veil
sufficiently to show their sin to the guilty, and yet to teach them by
delicacy and not bring a railing accusation which would probably only
harden instead of converting.

It is gravely necessary to realize how difficult the priest’s task is,
but at the same time it is extraordinary how little organized
condemnation of the evil exists. No one can accurately measure or
gauge the influence exercised by clergy in private conversations and
admonitions, and this is doubtless considerable. But it is sporadic
and not systematic, there is too much timidity and hesitation, and
while the enemy is well organized and equipped we are without a plan
of campaign and have no regular army in the field.

The Prayer-book, in the Marriage Service, tells us explicitly, “First
it was ordained for the procreation of children, to be brought up in
the fear and nurture of the Lord, and to the praise of His Holy Name.”
Here we have the voice of the Church speaking plainly enough, and both
it and the authority of Scripture are unanimous in clear expression or
unmistakable implication. The Christian attitude has been admirably
summed up in Father Black’s pamphlet, to which I acknowledged my
indebtedness in the preface of my book _First it was Ordained_, and
from which strong, lucid, and outspoken statement I quote a few
sentences:--

     “Of this systematic wickedness, unfaithfulness is the natural
     consequence in many cases. Logically there is nothing but a
     sense of commercial honesty to keep a woman who has lost the
     reverence of marriage to one man. The obligation has no hold on
     her higher nature, and when passion or convenience press the
     balance there is no sufficient reason why she should be very
     scrupulous.

     “If women treat themselves, and are treated by their husbands
     as mere animals, all idea of chivalry is at an end; and this,
     no doubt, is in a measure the ground for a license of speech
     and action in even our public amusements, contrary not only to
     the _ethos_ of Christianity, but to the principles of a
     civilization worthy of the name.

     “Women who interfere with the natural end of marriage--the
     bearing of children--are wives in name, in reality prostitutes.
     Men who require or encourage such acts are corrupters, not
     husbands. When I said in my sermon that trifling with God’s
     laws of marriage was a horrible sin, I was thinking chiefly of
     the woman’s side of the matter.

     “True manliness is, however, no less to be desired than true
     womanliness. In the words of Lord Tennyson--

     “‘Self-reverence, self-knowledge, self-control,’ the man should
     find in himself and display to his wife. Philosophy and
     religion are in accord here. St. John writes to young men,
     ‘because ye are _strong_ and have overcome the wicked one.’
     Professor Huxley, ‘that man has had a liberal education who has
     been so trained that his body is the ready servant of his will;
     whose passions are trained to come to heel by a vigorous will
     the servant of a tender conscience, who has learned to love all
     beauty and to hate all vileness, to respect others as himself.’
     To me that judgment seems a manly one which pronounces the
     corruption of a wife by a husband a viler thing than the
     gratification of lust in the common stews. This latter less
     deeply degrading to society or injurious to the nation at
     large.

     “But you and I, my dear sir, are Christians; and our concern is
     with Christian marriage. Here, as in everything else, the truth
     of Christ will deliver men from mistakes. Christian marriage in
     common with all other Christian things has in it the law of
     self-denial and self-conquest. Such is the Apostolic view of
     it; thus it is to be ‘in the Lord,’ and only ‘in the Lord’ is
     it permitted to the Christian.

     “Holy Scripture is of course everywhere clear as to the end of
     marriage, and God’s condemnation express against the perversion
     of it, ‘the Lord slew him.’ St. Paul wills ‘that women marry
     _and bear children_.’”

Is not this plain speaking? and could it be bettered as an expression
of a militant Christian’s hatred and horror of what is debasing and
foul?--I think not. We are not all given the power of feeling the
intense loathing for a very generally committed sin which is
manifested here. A life in the world and of the world induces a
tolerance which is very often laziness and cowardice. We are not to
hate the sinner, of course, but only the sin, but which of us cares to
inveigh against the vice of a friend? Savonarola was not a popular
parson, though Santa Maria del Fiore was always crowded when he was in
the pulpit. We ought to be thankful for such bludgeon-sturdy words as
these which show us the carrion-passions which war against the soul
in their true light.

I know, you know, most men know, how extraordinarily easy it is to
become familiar with our vices so that in a short time they become no
vices at all, but just little pleasant failings which we share with
some of the best fellows in the world. And all becomes dim and misty
in the shadowy thoroughfares of thought, while it is only now and
then--perhaps never at all--that some bugle-breeze blows over us and
sounds _réveillée_ to the sleeping soul.

If we are sensualists, though we don’t realize it, we always live as
though we were immortal; immortal in the sense that we shall never die
and once more be born. Yet it is a strange truth in life that the man
or woman who is converted to a clean life from sins of the body, has
often more power than any one else to warn and exhort against
sensuality. It is the man from whose eye the mote and beam has been
removed who can speak most convincingly of the horrors of the dark.
“Experto crede!” he calls out to mankind, and out of the uncleanness
is brought forth meat. Let us see what Aurelius Augustinus--that old
Father of the Church we call Saint Augustine--has to say of this
danger and sin which we are considering. We all know what the Saint’s
early life was like, what was the life of a young man at a Pagan
University in the fourth century. From his eighteenth year until he
was thirty-two the Saint whom we revere lived in open vice at
Carthage. On Easter Eve, April 387, he was baptized, and tradition
tells us that then the massive harmony of the _Te Deum_ was composed.
No theologian has influenced the mind of Christendom more greatly than
this man, not only by his writings, but by the spectacle we find in
them of the fervour and devotion of his inner life. Remember that he
knew all the bitter knowledge of lust, and hear how he writes of those
who would prevent conception:--

     “Quia etsi non causa propagandæ prolis concumbitur, non tamen
     hujus libidinis causa propagationi prolis obsistitur sive voto
     malo, sive opere malo. Nam quid hoc faciunt quamvis vocentur
     conjuges, non sunt, nec ullam nuptiarum retinent veritatem, sed
     honestum nomen velandæ turpitudini obtendunt.”

And of those who use drugs to prevent the birth of children, he
further says:--

     “Aliquando eo usque pervenit hæc libidinosa crudelitas, vel
     libido crudelis, ut etiam sterilitatis venena procuret.

     “Prorsus si ambo tales sunt, conjuges non sunt, et si ab initio
     tales fuerunt, non sibi per connubium, sed per stuprum potius
     convenerunt. Si autem non ambo sunt tales audeo dicere aut
     illa est quodam mode meretrix mariti, aut ille adulter uxoris.”

What is to be done? What is the duty of Christians, and how shall they
combat this evil? Unless it is to spread and spread till every part of
our natural life is infected, something must be done. The
Neo-Malthusians are not only teaching married people how to avoid the
responsibilities of marriage, but they are teaching unmarried people
to do so as well. This is a fact which must not be lost sight of, as
more than one clergyman has pointed out. If fear of consequences is
removed chastity becomes more than ever threatened. If there is the
wish and inclination to sin, and that wish is only not gratified
because inconvenient results may lead to discovery, it is true that
the moral value of people in such a case is small. But a general
recognition of the fact that it is easy to sin will have incalculable
influence for harm on those who are as yet on the border-line between
the claims of self-gratification and control. Public sentiment becomes
lax and unstrung. Simultaneously with the decline of the birth-rate
the newspapers show every day that the old ideal, the sacred English
ideal of the family is departing. Our greatest living novelist says
openly, “Certainly one day the conditions of marriage will be changed.
Marriage will be allowed for a certain period, say ten years.” In
many parts of America, where the President is ceaselessly urging his
countrymen to denounce and give up Neo-Malthusian practices, the home
has already disappeared. From a large collection of information and
statistics I take only one example, quoted in a leading English
newspaper. There is no need for a single word of comment, save that I
do not vouch for the truth of the newspaper report which, in its very
appearance, proves my point.

     “Mrs. Le Page, a New York lady who has just married her eighth
     husband, crystallizes her experience in life.

     “Five of her seven former husbands are still alive, and they
     have just sent messages of encouragement to the new incumbent.
     The other two have died.

     “Mrs. Le Page’s maiden name was Mary Johnson, and she was the
     daughter of a Connecticut farmer. She was only fourteen, but
     well grown for her age, when she contracted a runaway marriage
     with a seventeen-year-old Danbury clerk named William Wakeman.
     In accordance with the American practice of hyphenating family
     names, she became Mrs. William Johnson-Wakeman. It was a happy
     marriage for three days, and then her family interfered, and
     the marriage was annulled.

     “Two years later, while in a New York elevated train, she made
     the acquaintance of Mr. Harry Saunders, a rich contractor’s son
     and a commercial traveller. After two days’ courtship she
     became Mrs. Henry Johnson-Wakeman-Saunders, and lived in
     perfect happiness, accompanying her husband on his travels for
     three years, until he died.

     “Shortly afterwards the lady married a railroad man, and was
     happy as Mrs. Joseph Johnson-Wakeman-Saunders-Powers, until he
     was killed in an accident. She next married a Jersey grocer,
     but the bonds being severed in the Divorce Court, she married a
     hotel-keeper, becoming Mrs. John
     Johnson-Wakeman-Saunders-Powers-Lindley.

     “Being once more disappointed, she was again freed by
     the Divorce Court, and continued her search for the ideal
     husband, whom she thought she had found when she became
     Mrs. Thomas Johnson-Wakeman-Saunders-Powers-Lindley-Godfrey.
     But John Godfrey compared unfavourably with his predecessors, and
     the Divorce Court restored her freedom. On the following day she
     became Mrs. Wilbury-Johnson-Wakeman-Saunders-Powers-Godfrey-Gay-
     (she says that the name too well described his character, as she
     shortly proved to the satisfaction of the Divorce Court) Crowther.
     This husband soon revealed his true character, and she had no
     difficulty in regaining her maiden liberty.

     “Mrs. Benjamin (many hyphens) Le Page believes that her
     husband, who is English born, and has made considerable money
     in this country, is the long-sought ideal, but if he does not
     prove so--she is only thirty-nine, and there is still plenty of
     time to continue the search. She says that she had long wished
     to marry an Englishman, having been favourably impressed by
     what she had heard of their high qualities as husbands. She
     intends giving the experiment a thorough trial. So far, it has
     proved satisfactory, but she says that it is impossible to form
     a correct judgment of any man until she has been married for
     two or three weeks.

     “Marriage, she says, is such a lottery, but it is the blessed
     state which it is ordained every woman shall occupy. Her life’s
     mission is to find a pre-ordained mate, and she would not be
     deterred as many women, by a first failure, but should try and
     try again until successful.

     “‘My experience,’ she says, ‘is that women make a mistake in
     waiting for a man to do all the wooing. When I was young and
     inexperienced I fell into that error, and consequently I had
     several disappointments. But when I was thirty I realized that
     a woman’s duty--well, right--was to do the wooing.’”

Again I ask what is to be done to influence public opinion, to rouse
Christians in the same way that the National Conscience has been
roused upon the Drink question?

An enormous amount of good can be done by the personal efforts and
example of those in a position to influence others--pastors, doctors,
Christian layworkers. Yet is it an impossible hope that some day a
league or confraternity to fight the battle may be started? Are there
no people of sufficient weight and importance in the world’s eye to
come forward and do this, no folk whose place will secure them a
hearing, whose convictions will interest and convert others?

Eighteen months ago I published, in my book _First it was Ordained_,
the sketch of an organized society on definite lines. In the course of
the tale the founder of this league writes to an official in the
Census Office who is alarmed at the decline of the birth-rate, and
outlines the lines on which the society is to be started.

With some necessary elisions this is the letter:--

     “You will see, therefore, that though there has been, and
     doubtless will continue to be, a great deal of windy talk on
     these matters, there is no organized body of men and women, no
     league, no union, either religious or political or both, which
     is devoted to dealing with the question, to rousing the
     national conscience and fighting the Neo-Malthusians tooth and
     nail.

     “Wifehood--which generally means motherhood--is the predominant
     profession of women all over the world. The future of the
     world, and of course of any state in it, rests upon the quality
     and the quantity of its children. A prominent sociologist has
     just written, ‘If the conditions under which the profession of
     motherhood is exercised are silly and rotten, our fleets, our
     armies, do no more than guard a thing that dies. In Great
     Britain, now, I think they are more or less silly and rotten.’
     Let us admit that this writer is correct. He does no more than
     voice conclusions at which even the most superficial student of
     the census returns must have arrived.

     “What is to be done, then? How are we who are Christians and
     love our Lord, citizens who love our country, to fight the
     present conditions?

     “That is what a band of people, including those I have
     mentioned, are discussing. They have arrived at a definite
     conclusion.

     “A great league is to be formed of English men and women. Great
     names will be at the head of it, it is to be national. I have
     already pointed out to you that even the revelations of the
     census have not stirred the ordinary person. His patriotism has
     not been roused, and, you may be certain--as I am certain--that
     no question of national expediency on this point _will_ stir
     the ordinary person, who is either indifferent or actually
     engaged in helping England’s decadence by the restriction of
     his own family. A league started on the grounds of expediency
     and the common good alone would be an egregious failure.

     “Utilitarianism never fired a great moral movement yet. It
     never will; because, before a man becomes a national
     utilitarian, he must get over _personal_ utilitarianism. And in
     this case of the restriction of family, the degradation of
     marriage, _personal_ utilitarianism is directly opposed to
     national welfare, and the personal wins.

     “We must come back to the one Power and Force over the hearts
     and minds of men and women. We must come back to religion.

     “Here is the Church’s great opportunity. There has never,
     perhaps, in the whole history of the Church in England been
     such a chance given to her. Our crusade must be a crusade made
     in the light of the Incarnation, under the auspices of God the
     Holy Ghost--_the Lord and Giver of Life_.

     “Do you begin to see what I mean, what we hope for? The part of
     the Holy Spirit’s work, which we recite in the Creed, has been
     largely forgotten. Lord and Giver of Life! We are about to
     revive the recognition and memory of the fact. We are going to
     use this cardinal point of Christian belief as our watchword
     and battle-cry.

     “The gradual decline of literal belief in the Incarnation, the
     growth of a Protestantism which is on its way towards
     Unitarianism, the spread of Unitarian doctrines under other
     names, among the varied sects of dissent, have meant that an
     appalling disregard of life as the gift of God, its Author, has
     come among us. It is because you and I believe that Jesus was
     God as well as man that we insist upon the sacredness of human
     life.

     “To-day, the loss of thousands of lives in a battle is printed
     as a piece of casual news. There is no particular sense of
     horror in the minds of any one. Murders are committed every day
     in momentary bursts of passion over trifles. Suicides increase,
     not only when some long-continued misery may seem to give a
     shadow of excuse, but when there has been some trivial
     disappointment. And so, leaving out a hundred other instances,
     one comes down to the truth of which every priest, every
     doctor, and every nurse is aware, the frustration of God’s
     intention of childbirth--the reason for the terrible
     disclosures which you and your colleagues have given to the
     world in your census returns.

     “Our league will be, therefore, a great _Church_ League. We
     shall invite every English man and woman to join it, who
     believes that Christ was God. This is the only way in which we
     can make such a society do its work and accomplish its end.
     Directly we begin to allow the political altruist who has no
     definite belief in Christianity to join us, so surely our
     influence and opportunity will begin to decline. Compromise is
     no use whatever. We shall be bitterly assailed, and for a time
     we shall not seem to make much headway. I say _seem_, and for
     this reason: people who belong to us will not advertise their
     membership. The press, which is not interested, as a whole, in
     religious affairs, will not understand our aims, nor will it
     be--so I imagine--in sympathy with them. And any movement that
     has for its object, as this will have, the improvement of
     sexual morality, will be fought by the methods of ridicule and
     contempt. But this will be but surface, and in time the
     influence of our work will not only be felt, but seen. The
     wizards of figures will be at work once more.”

Is this a dream and impracticable? It is for the great middle classes
of England to answer during the coming years. The middle classes
really rule. They do not command public opinion, but they do what is
more than that--they persuade it. They represent more than the
remaining classes the austerity and also the Christianity of the
United Kingdom and the Dominions beyond the seas.

The question rests with them, and there are many who still hope and
believe they will be faithful to their trust who are convinced--“DABIT
DEUS HIS QUOQUE FINEM.”




THE HISTORICIDES OF OXFORD




