III

THE HISTORICIDES OF OXFORD

        “_Et quidquid Graecia mendax,
    Audet in historia._”
                                JUVENAL.


Sir Robert Walpole, who sometimes spoke with an eloquent crash that
echoes in our ears to-day, once said, “Do not read history to me, for
that, I know, must be false.” Walpole may have read the _Scienza
Nuova_ of Vico probably in the French translation, and could hardly
have failed to know something of Bossuet and Montesquieu. The result
of his deliberations on the labours of contemporary historians is
expressed thus, in a short, sudden bark of contempt.

Sir Robert made history, and did not dare to attempt the far more
arduous task of writing it. When he gave it, his judgment had not so
much value as it has to-day. Some of us read the limpid prose of
Bossuet still, nor is the _Grandeur et Décadence des Romains_
forgotten. Yet if at this moment a statesman were to repeat the
opinion in reference to most of the history taught and written in
Oxford, he would only be speaking the literal truth. The youth of a
nation are Trustees for posterity, and it is to them in the first
place, and to those who are responsible for their education in the
second, that this paper is addressed.

I am aware that I am going to say some astonishing things, nor am I,
under the sense of a strong conviction, confounding antipathy with
duty. My words may fail to penetrate into the gloom of that temple
where the fanatic priests of the inarticulate, inaccurate, and dull
still sacrifice victims to the idols Freeman and Stubbs. But I have a
reasonable expectation of a wider audience, and it lies in the hands
of that audience, the undergraduate members of the University and
their parents, to say if the present state of things shall continue.
The Hebdomadal Council, Congregation and Convocation represent an
insignificant minority. It is to the Pupil not the Tutor, to the
Parent not the Fellow, to the Majority not to the Minority that I
propose to speak.

It is axiomatic that no sum which the well-to-do undergraduate is
prepared to pay could be too high for a perfect education and a
learned environment. It is the fact that neither the one nor the other
is provided, which deserves the attention, and should excite the
alarm, of those who expect the former, the latter, or a combination of
them both.

The poor man, to whom a good degree means a knife with which he will
open the world’s oyster, suffers more greatly than the wealthier man.
But both suffer, and both have a right to expect that in paying money
for a genuine article they shall certainly obtain it.

The object of this essay, therefore, is to awaken the majority upon
the whole matter, more especially that portion of the majority that
designs to read history. The power lies in your hands. It is only by
your acquiescence that the scandal continues, and it is the money of
you and your parents which runs the machine. Once supplies are
stopped, the present state of things will also stop with automatic
suddenness. The art of history--for it is an art and not a
science--will then revive in its full splendour, as the frescoes glow
out upon the walls of an ancient church when the disfiguring whitewash
is removed. The art of history will take its proper place and exercise
its right function in the University, and the Historicides will remove
their activities to a sphere in which they will be more appreciated. I
believe that a University exists in Hayti....

I purpose a comprehensive summary of this question, and have spared no
trouble to make the indictment as fair and accurate as I can. For a
considerable period I have been steadily gathering data and forming
opinions. Documents of importance and value have been furnished to me,
and if something actual and conclusive does not result, then the fault
is that of the writer, who has failed to deal adequately with the
material which he has himself collected and with which he has been
lavishly and generously supplied.

“Doest thou well to be angry?” was the question asked of the Hebrew
prophet, who thereupon “went out of the city, and sat on the east side
of the city, and there made him a booth, and sat under it in the
shadow, till he might see what would become of the city.” And finally
came the answer of Jonah, “I do well to be angry, even unto death.” My
friends and I have built our modest place of espial, and we have our
idea of what would become of the city were it left in the hands of
certain rulers. That we do well to be angry I hope to show.

In the first place, it is really necessary to define history, and the
duties of the historian. Until we have done this we have no
standpoint. The axiom must always precede the syllogism just as the
epithet concludes it. No one can build a basis in a vacuum.
Innumerable minds have been at pains to define history.

From the remote time when Lucian published his treatise _How History
ought to be Written_ until the depressing moment when Bishop Stubbs
first attempted to write it, there has been an enormous divergence of
thought on this point. Kant believed that Dynasty and Nation, Emperor
and Clown were alike incidents and puppets illustrating the theory
that an irresistible, all-pervading Force works through history
towards one end--the development of a perfect constitution. If Kant
had written history and applied his method instead of indicating it,
he would have had us believe that history is a science to be studied
under the limiting influence of a rigid formula.

Ranke thought, and thought rightly, that the analysis of original
documents alone made possible the synthesis of the past, while the
trained historian in his endeavour to get at the truth should be chary
of accepting contemporary authors, unless eye-witnesses of the events
they chronicled. Yet Ranke definitely placed himself with those who
were beginning to believe that history was a science and nothing more.

Guizot, who edited Gibbon, freshly defined the labours of the
historian. Guizot’s view was that faithful research, _with its
results duly applied, ought to enable the historian to supply such a
picture of the past that it should be both to his readers and himself
a veritable present_. I know of no more illuminating conception. But
how can an historian supply the picture unless he has a competent
knowledge of psychology? To write about human beings in the past
without a knowledge of psychology is exactly like writing a history of
locomotives without understanding anything whatever about the nature
and properties of steam.

It is only quite lately that the scientists have allowed psychology to
be a science, with, for example, as fixed a place and purpose as
biology. If any one asked me for a list of authors from whom he would
learn something of psychology I should probably commend to him Maher
(1900), Spencer (1890), Stout (1899), James (1892), M’Cosh (1886), and
so on.

You see the dates, do you not? You realize what every one who lives in
the realm of thought, as also many who work in the sphere of action,
must realize? Briefly it is this. The old historians were concerned
only with the simple results of investigation; the best modern
historian adds to his equipment a knowledge of the processes of
thought. The older sciences are joining hands with the new science of
psychology. It is discerned that the individual temperament must
clothe the bones of fact with the colour and movement that
psychological knowledge alone can give.

It is discerned, but only by the important people as yet--only by the
people who matter and count. The Oxford historians whom I am attacking
have not realized it and will never realize it, which is the precise
reason why we must reform them or give them the alternative of
staffing the upper grade board schools.

James Anthony Froude did realize this certainty, and his works are not
recommended to be read by candidates for history honours. The
malignant personal hatred of Freeman, the stupidity of lesser men,
long endeavoured to crush and limit the influence of the greatest
historian, because the completest artist, who wrote history in our
era. The endeavour to suppress him continues, but it is no longer
anything but an endeavour. The times are changing very rapidly, and
the triumphant war-whoops of some years ago have sunk to-day into the
moribund whimpers of the discredited and deposed.

Everybody in Oxford is waking up to the fact that if history is to
have unity of organism and purpose it must have artistic proportion
and be informed by art. The leaven has been working for a long time,
unobserved by the people it is destined to destroy at the moment of
completed fermentation. It is always thus with revolutions. The
period of gestation is lengthy and its processes are obscure. But the
completed moment arrives, the goddess bursts in full armour from her
sire, or Gargantua is born “crying not as other babes used to do,
miez, miez, miez, miez, but with a high, sturdy, and big voice!”

The occasion that has set in motion forces which in no short time will
destroy the little eminence of the Oxford Historicides, was the
publication of Mr. Herbert Paul’s _Life of James Anthony Froude_.
Everything had led up to that; I was cognizant of all the restlessness
and disgust which were seething below the surface, and when at last
the volume fell into Oxford with the noise and reverberation of a
thunder-bolt, I was daily informed of the hideous consternation of
those who realized that their day was over, that the judge was set and
the doom begun, that no one could stay it.

I wish that I could write frankly and openly of the disturbance and
alarm the book occasioned. If I were publishing this essay in the
first instance in America I should certainly do so. However, as it
will appear in England and afterwards in the Land of Freedom of
Speech, this joy is not permitted to me. As Mr. H. G. Wells would say,
“Figure that the bomb fell upon the green of All Souls’ while the
clock in the gateway of Christ Church was in the act of striking
twelve.”

The rush and hurry, the frightened consultations, the squeaks of those
who realized that Nemesis was at hand at last and was beating at the
door, were, I can assure the public that will read this paper,
comparable to nothing so much as the occasion when the feet of the
ferret are heard drumming down the hollow burrows of the warren, while
the rabbits know the day of irresponsible frolic is over and that they
must die in the dark or in the open, but must die.

The Historicides of Oxford have always feared an extended public and
distrusted a name that has been made without their connivance, and
which is beyond their reach. I find it difficult to suppose that those
who do not realize the incredible narrowness and stupidity of a
certain type of history don, will believe the anecdote I am about to
tell. Nevertheless, it is true. A pedant, whose name I will not give,
was recently heard to refer to Mr. Thomas Hardy in these words,
“Hardy? Hardy? Oh, do you mean the little novelist man?”

Let me put it before you quite plainly and in antithesis. Hardly
anything could better illustrate the appalling mental position of the
_camarilla_ that has got to go. Here is a priggish person, whom no
one has ever heard of outside Oxford, piping out his contempt for a
man who is generally recognized as one of the most distinguished
novelists and one of the chief artists alive in our time.

It is possible that many people will not immediately appreciate the
reason for all the terror excited by Mr. Paul’s biography. The outside
man cannot quite know how Froude is, and always was, hated and feared
by a certain section of the Oxford historians. They were always trying
to hit him below the belt because he hit them above the intellect.
There was a definite conspiracy among the malignant, from Freeman
downwards, to lie about Froude in every conceivable way, and to
complete their malicious impudence by calling Froude himself a liar.
Froude was a master of English prose; the highest praise that can be
given to the jargon which his detractors wrote, and write, is that it
is not exactly Esperanto. Froude understood the colour of words, the
movements of a paragraph, the harmonic rhythm of an emotion expressed
in prose. His words were the incarnation of his original thought,
theirs but accentuated their borrowings. While the genius of this
great man was coming into its own, while it burned brightly and yet
more bright, while all thoughtful England was beginning to be moved
and stirred by a new force, and the possessor of it was living with
intellects as great and gracious as his own, the Oxford historians
slept in their padded rooms, and because they snored loudly imagined
they were thinking. Too indolent to search for the truth, they
contented themselves with dodging difficulties, and persuading each
other that their ostentatious obscurity was fame.

There came a time at last when James Anthony Froude could no longer be
ignored. His achievement was beginning to be a national possession,
and he shared the councils of the rulers. The echoes of his fame
reached the ears of the troglodytes, and, led by Freeman, they swarmed
to the attack, yelping a pæan to mediocrity and brandishing weapons
from a more than doubtful armoury.

Froude, as Mr. Paul has pointed out, “toiled for months and years over
parchments and manuscripts often almost illegible, carefully noting
the calligraphy, and among the authors of a joint composition
assigning his proper share to each. Freeman wrote his _History of the
Norman Conquest_, upon which he was at this time engaged, entirely
from books, without consulting a manuscript or original document of
any kind.”

Freeman,--the head of the daguerreotypical historians,--attacked a
man whom he very well knew was his superior, pretending publicly to a
greater knowledge of the special subject under discussion, and
cynically denying any special knowledge in private. In public Freeman
represented his hostile attitude as the natural outcome of his zeal
for truth; in private it was known that he was actuated by personal
hatred, and the discoveries made by Mr. J. B. Rye on the margins of
Freeman’s books in Owens College library have discredited him for all
time. Again I quote from Mr. Paul’s _Life of Froude_:--

     “Freeman’s biographer, Dean Stephens, preserves absolute and
     unbroken silence on the duel between Freeman and Froude. I
     think the Dean’s conduct was judicious. But there is no reason
     why a biographer of Froude should follow his example. On the
     contrary, it is absolutely essential that he should not; for
     Freeman’s assiduous efforts, first in _The Saturday_, and
     afterwards in _The Contemporary Review_, did ultimately produce
     an impression, never yet fully dispelled, that Froude was an
     habitual garbler of facts and constitutionally reckless of the
     truth. But, before I come to details, let me say one word more
     about Freeman’s qualifications for the task which he so lightly
     and eagerly undertook. Freeman, with all his self-assertion,
     was not incapable of candour. He was staunch in friendship, and
     spoke openly to his friends. To one of them, the excellent Dean
     Hook, famous for his _Lives of the Archbishops of Canterbury_,
     he wrote, on the 27th of April, 1857, ‘You have found me out
     about the sixteenth century. I fancy that from endlessly
     belabouring Froude, I get credit for knowing more of those
     times than I do. But one can belabour Froude on a very small
     amount of knowledge, and you are quite right when you say that
     I “have never thrown the whole force of my mind on that portion
     of history.”’ These words pour a flood of light on the temper
     and knowledge with which Freeman must have entered on what he
     really seemed to consider a crusade. His object was to belabour
     Froude. His own acquaintance with the subject was, as he says,
     ‘very small,’ but sufficient for enabling him to dispose
     satisfactorily of an historian who had spent years of patient
     toil in thorough and exhaustive research. On another occasion,
     also writing to Hook, whom he could not deceive, he said, ‘I
     find I have a reputation with some people for knowing the
     sixteenth century, of which I am profoundly ignorant.’ It does
     not appear to have struck him that he had done his best in _The
     Saturday Review_ to make people think that, as Froude’s critic,
     he deserved the reputation which he thus frankly and in private
     disclaims.

     “Another curious piece of evidence has come to light. After
     Freeman’s death his library was transferred to Owens College,
     Manchester, and there, among his other books, is his copy of
     Froude’s _History_. He once said himself, in reference to his
     criticism of Froude, ‘In truth there is no kind of temper in
     the case, but only a strong sense of amusement in bowling down
     one thing after another.’ Let us see. Here are some extracts
     from his marginal notes. ‘A lie, _teste_ Stubbs,’ as if Stubbs
     were an authority, in the proper sense of the term, any more
     than Froude. Authorities are contemporary witnesses, or
     original documents. Another entry is ‘Beast,’ and yet another
     is ‘Bah!’ ‘May I live to embowel James Anthony Froude,’ is the
     pious aspiration with which he has adorned another page. ‘Can
     Froude understand honesty?’ asks this anxious inquirer; and
     again, ‘Supposing Master Froude were set to break stones, feed
     pigs, or do anything else but write paradoxes, would he not
     curse his day?’ Along with such graceful compliments as ‘You’ve
     found that out since you wrote a book against your own father,’
     ‘Give him as slave to Thirlwall,’ there may be seen the
     culminating assertion, ‘Froude is certainly the vilest brute
     that ever wrote a book.’ Yet there was ‘no kind of temper in
     the case,’ and ‘only a strong sense of amusement.’ I suppose it
     must have amused Freeman to call another historian a vile
     brute. But it is fortunate that there was no temper in the
     case. For if there had, it would have been a very bad temper
     indeed.”

Until Mr. Herbert Paul’s _Life of Froude_ appeared a year ago, the
Historicides had been continually repeating the lie that Froude
garbled documents, was untrustworthy, and wrote not history but
fiction. History, of course, often imitates fiction, for good fiction
always deals with realities. But these slanderers did not pause for a
definition. They continued to abuse Froude, to prevent their pupils
from reading him, and to refuse him a place in the recognized
curriculum of historical study at the University.

From time to time a doubter or inquirer arose and was promptly
suppressed. Nor was it likely that a man, whatever his private opinion
of those in authority might be, was going to jeopardize his chance of
a good degree by publishing it. There were awkward moments, of course,
for the slanderers. A lie is like a forged promissory note. When it
becomes due another must be forged in order to take up the first. But
the Historicides had the whip-hand. They controlled the examinations,
and they could do what they pleased.

I once wrote a little story which I will outline here, because I think
it illustrates the method of these people whenever any ugly fact was
discovered and some one required an explanation.

There was once a simple-minded old gentleman of a philosophic temper
and an inquiring mind. Blessed with an ample fortune and untroubled by
any business instincts, he devoted his life to the search for truth.
On the whole his life was a happy one, because he possessed the
faculty of going on. His failures were not made tragic with courage,
but were minimized by persistence, and so were not very different from
successes. Yet, as the years went on, he began to feel that in his
time he would never achieve his end. Seeing him somewhat downcast, and
becoming indifferent to his chop and Chambertin, his butler, a
faithful person, came to him one day, and, after venturing a
privileged remonstrance, stated that he had something to disclose. “I
have lately heard, sir,” said the butler, “that truth is really hidden
at the bottom of a well. It may of course, sir, be mere idle talk, but
I think, as far as I remember, we have not looked there yet? There was
the church, sir--we found nothing there--and then I held the lantern
for you in the chapel, too. There was none behind the art wall-paper,
nor did Liberty have any in stock. And it wasn’t in history, sir,
because I turned over every leaf of them Oxford books myself, and
shook them well, too. You did think you’d found it in science, sir, I
remember, there was something that you thought was truth in the bottom
of the test-tube, but then you told me it wasn’t, though I forget what
you said it was after all.”

“Merely a note of a recorded fact, Thomas,” said the old gentleman
sorrowfully. “But do you _really_ think there is anything in this idea
of yours?”

“I cannot be positive, sir,” the butler replied; “but I see it stated
definite at the end of a leading article in the _Artesian Engineer_.”

“Have we a well on the premises, Thomas?” the old gentleman asked,
putting on his spectacles and rubbing his hands briskly together.

“I asked the gardener this morning, sir,” Thomas answered, “and he
informs me that there is an old disused well by the cucumber-frame
which could be opened easily enough by a couple of men working for a
week.”

“Engage some men at once,” said the old gentleman, now thoroughly
interested and pleased, and that day he enjoyed his chop with all his
accustomed pleasure. The faithful butler, who had all his life lived
worthily and well without truth, was overjoyed at the success of his
suggestion. Anticipating, however, another disappointment, he gave
private instructions, received _con amore_ by the workmen, that they
were not to hurry over their task of opening the well, and for a month
the old gentleman’s appetite whetted by hope, was all that his
faithful retainer could desire.

At length the work was done, the well was fully opened, and the
page-boy (an adventurous youth) descended in the bucket. There was a
tense silence in the garden as the boy disappeared, until his
hollow-sounding voice hailed them from below vibrating with
excitement.

“I’ve got un, sir,” ascended in a triumphant pipe; “he be here, sir,
sure ’nuff!”

In a moment more the young fellow came to the surface, holding a large
and speckled toad in his hand. On the back of the reptile an
arrangement of orange-coloured spots spelt out the word TRUTH.

The old gentleman saw it, fell into uncontrollable rage, snatched the
wondering reptile from the page-boy’s hand and stamped out its life
upon the ground.

“To the house all of you,” he cried; “and never let me hear the name
of truth again!” With that he forswore all his former theories, and in
bitter irony started a society paper. However, the gardener, a wise,
silent, and pawky person, came along later, and, picking a diamond
from the crushed _débris_ of the toad took it home and hid it away for
the rest of his life, fearing discovery. When the gardener died, his
relatives discovered the jewel, and knowing nothing of its value threw
it away.

The old gentleman made an enormous fortune out of the society paper.

Forgive the digression. This, or something like it, was what the
Historicides of Oxford did before the publication of Mr. Paul’s book.
Whenever any one showed them the truth they snatched it from him, and
ordered him back into Stubbs’s Charters.

I have already said something of the terror the _Life of Froude_
excited. In a swift moment pretensions were exposed, lies were shown
to be lies, and people began to read _Froude_. Mr. Paul made it quite
plain that the accusations of dishonesty against Froude were utter
fabrications. Mr. Paul, himself a learned historian, an artist and a
man of letters, has gone into the charges _seriatim_, and triumphantly
disproved them. No one can ever make them again. _They are lies, they
have been proved once and for ever to be lies._ I cannot quote here
the mass of refutation which has brought about the complete
vindication of the accused historian. This is a summary and nothing
more. It stands for all to read in Mr. Paul’s book, a volume which
should be in the hands of every man who is reading, and means to read
history at Oxford.

This memorable book is a protest against the charlatanry of the
pseudo-scientific school of history. The acts and intentions of people
in the past cannot be known better than the intentions and acts of
people in the present. No one man can possibly sift all, or anything
like all the evidence for any period. Much of the important evidence
is missing. No one can be examined or cross-examined, and for an
historian to write as if he were a judge delivering a decision is a
piece of impertinence. The abler man, assuming his honesty, will make
the abler historian, and the mere bookworm is not the best judge of
what probably happened. It is the dull and incompetent who formerly
invented the fable that brilliant writers are superficial. This is the
lie behind which the “dry as dusts” have lurked for years; it was
their last line of defence, and Mr. Paul has destroyed it.

The historian must be able to write distinguished English, and he must
understand the enormous possibilities of his medium. He must add a
sense of artistry to his scholarship. He must be a man of experience
in human event, a man who has done and suffered; must have been in
crowds and seen “how madly men can care about nothings,” and he must
disabuse his mind of formula and theory before he begins to write. Sir
Arthur Helps said this years ago:--

“To make themselves historians, they should also have considered the
combinations among men and the laws that govern such things; for there
are laws. Moreover our historians, like most men who do great things,
must combine in themselves qualities which are held to belong to
opposite natures; must at the same time be patient in research and
_vigorous in imagination_, energetic and calm, cautious and
enterprising.”

History, in short, is the complement of poetry, and with this
definition as a basis let us proceed to examine some of the Oxford
historians of to-day. But first let me recapitulate the points at
which we have so far arrived.

I have endeavoured to make plain, that--

(_a_) The Oxford historians of the moment enjoy an unjust monopoly,
and exercise a disastrous power of veto.

(_b_) That the _power_ to stop all this, to force these people to
their duty or to send them about their business lies with the
majority.

(_c_) That the majority is composed of those who pay for the education
of their sons, and of those who proceed to the University for an
education.

(_d_) That the historian must be not only a scholar, but an artist and
man of letters also.

(_e_) That the fear of Froude provoked the attack on him in the past,
and has maintained it until a year ago.

(_f_) That Mr. Paul’s _Life of Froude_ has silenced the misstatements
of mediocrity and incompetence for ever.

The whole business of Froude has provided one with a lens in which to
focus the question upon the page, and no one was ever provided with a
better text than I have been. Excuse me, however, if I make a brief
personal explanation. While engaged upon this piece of work an Oxford
man, an old-fashioned High Churchman of the Freeman type, has been
staying with me. It is forty years since he was in residence, and he
did not see with me at all in this matter when we discussed it.

“I cannot understand,” he said, “how you are going to champion Froude
and Mr. Paul against Freeman, who was perfectly sound on Church
matters, as I believe you to be. All you have ever published has been
in support of Catholic Truth, and yet you are earnestly advocating a
historian who was the incarnation of Protestantism.”

It was, in the first place, difficult to make my interlocutor see that
I was writing of the art of the historian, and not the trend of his
opinions. In the second place, I do not agree with him as to the
essential Protestantism of Froude. Froude’s religious attitude has
been summed up once and for all by one of the most brilliant writers
of our time, an historian, artist, and scholar, whom Oxford dons
rejected, but for whom Oxford calls aloud, and for whom St. Stephen’s
has naturally a greater attraction--much as one deplores it.

Mr. Belloc writes:--

     “See how definite, how downright, and how clean are the
     sentences in which Froude asserts that Christianity is Catholic
     or nothing:--

     “‘... This was the body of death which philosophy detected but
     could not explain, and from which _Catholicism_ now came
     forward with its magnificent promise of deliverance.

     “‘The carnal doctrine of the sacraments, which they are
     compelled to acknowledge to have been taught as fully in the
     early Church as it is now taught by the Roman Catholics, has
     long been the stumbling-block to Protestants. It was the very
     essence of Christianity itself. Unless the body could be
     purified, the soul could not be saved; or, rather, as from the
     beginning, soul and flesh were one man and inseparable, without
     his flesh, man was lost, or would cease to be. But the natural
     organization of the flesh was infected, and unless organization
     could begin again from a new original, no pure material
     substance could exist at all. He, therefore, by whom God had
     first made the world, entered into the womb of the Virgin in
     the form (so to speak) of a new organic cell, and around it,
     through the virtue of His creative energy, a material body grew
     again of the substance of His mother, pure of taint and clean
     as the first body of the first man when it passed out under
     His hand in the beginning of all things.’

     “Throughout his essay on the Philosophy of Christianity, where
     he was maintaining a thesis odious to the majority of his
     readers, he rings as hard as ever. The philosophy of
     Christianity is frankly declared to be Catholicism and
     Catholicism alone; the truth of Christianity is denied. It is
     called a thing ‘worn and old’ even in Luther’s time, and he
     definitely prophesies a period when ‘our posterity’ shall learn
     to ‘despise the miserable fabric which Luther stitched together
     out of its tatters.’”

I can add nothing to Mr. Belloc’s criticism or his quotations.

Let us now take a survey of the history which the powers that be in
Oxford have substituted for the work of Froude. Let us shake the
upas-trees which shadow the quadrangle of the Schools and wonder how
these astonishing vegetables have managed to produce such fruit as
that of which I have to set samples before you.

The Examination Statutes in the section containing the regulations for
the Honour School of Modern History recommend, among other books, that
candidates who take the period 1559-1715 should study _Gustavus
Adolphus_, by Mr. C. R. L. Fletcher, M.A., late Fellow of All Souls’
College, Oxford. The gentlemen who compile the Examination Statutes
would “recommend” almost anything, but I imagine that I am about to
astonish the general reader.

I will begin with Mr. Fletcher’s preface. He himself says in the very
first line that his book “demands little preface.” It would have been
perhaps better for him had he been guided by his own pious opinion and
resisted the temptation to print his confessions in nine
closely-printed pages. I say “confessions” advisedly, for rarely in
the course of a wide experience of books have I set eyes upon a more
candid and almost disarming statement than the one before me here.

In his preface Mr. Fletcher asserts that his book--

(1) “Makes no pretensions to be based upon original research,” and he
follows up this curious admission with ...

(2) “And I cannot claim to have read even all the modern authorities
on the subject.”

And (3) “My knowledge of the Swedish language is by no means
independent of the assistance of a dictionary, nor can I hope to have
escaped that tendency to partiality for which the natural fascination
of such a subject is the only excuse.”

Mr. Fletcher then proceeds to tell us that he was

(4) “Obliged to include accounts of many things of which I had made
no special study. The military history of the Thirty Years’ War is in
itself a case in point. No satisfactory monograph on the subject
exists, and I have often been obliged to confess myself at fault in
grasping the exact meaning of military terms, and the exact effect of
manoeuvres, in an art of which even in its modern shape I know
nothing.

(5) “But the times have so far changed,” he continues, “that I am able
to plead that I am probably not much more ignorant of the art of war
than the majority of my readers are likely to be.

(6) “In those archives” (the archives of Stockholm), “if anywhere, it
is probable that the true Gustavus Adolphus is to be found.” But

(7) He, Mr. Fletcher, “is a man who has no pretension to be a student
of archives.”

Here, then, we have an historian who admits that even the little he
has to offer is borrowed from the books of other people. He has not
taken the trouble to search and inquire for himself, and, content with
profiting by the labours of others more conscientious, he has of
course been unable to verify the accuracy of such labours. Nor has he
even taken the trouble to borrow from the latest sources, for he
informs us, “_and I cannot claim to have read even all the modern
authorities on the subject_.”

Mr. Fletcher does not thoroughly know the language of the country of
which he writes; he has included accounts of many things “of which I
had made no special study” in this precious book; and finally, the
historian of the Victor of Breitenfeld and Lützen knows absolutely
nothing of military history, the art of war, or the meaning of
military terms, in spite of which, at page 119, he declares (_a_) that
Gustavus was “certainly a greater master of tactics than Wallenstein,”
but “not a greater cavalry captain than Pappenheim;” and (_b_) “that
Pappenheim had not the _coup d’oeil_ which enables a man to grasp a
whole battle at once.”

How a man can dare to print such a cataract of admissions I do not
understand. At any rate, tested by the lowest standard, treated with
the utmost leniency, his book stands self-confessed as worthless.
However modest the author’s estimate of his work and the humility of
Heep was as nothing to the assumption of this preface, the book
_cannot_ under any conceivable circumstances be of the least use to
the student. It outrages every canon by which the most amateur of
historians should guide himself to write.

YET THIS BOOK IS RECOMMENDED IN THE EXAMINATION STATUTES TO BE READ BY
MEN WISHING TO TAKE HONOURS IN HISTORY WHILE THE WORKS OF JAMES
ANTHONY FROUDE ARE RIGIDLY EXCLUDED.

I would fain linger a little longer with Mr. Fletcher, possibly one of
the richest unconscious humourists who have ever written history. He
deserves to be known to a wider circle than the mere academic. In
these drab, hurried days, anything that makes for innocent gaiety is
to be welcomed. I think it was Ruskin who said that Edwin Lear’s _Book
of Nonsense_ was one of the most valuable books ever written. It is a
pity that Mr. Ruskin did not live to read Mr. Fletcher’s other work,
_An Introductory History of England_.

_Gustavus Adolphus_ was published in 1900, and Mr. Fletcher was then
described as “Late Fellow of All Souls’ College.” The later and more
mature work was published in 1904, and we then see Mr. Fletcher as a
Fellow of Magdalen.

In _An Introductory History of England_ we have, of course, the usual
preface, from which I wish I had space to quote largely. I have not,
but in turning the leaves, the eye at once falls on another
apologia:--

“I have no pretensions to be a scholar in the original document
sense;” and, “I fear it will be very easy for those who are such
scholars to find many mistakes in detail, as well as to question my
conclusions.”

Further, he speaks of the Honour School of Modern History in language
which I, for one, heartily endorse. “I do not consider,” he says (p.
vi.), “that the immense growth of the History School at Oxford ... is
at all a healthy sign for English education.”

I do not intend to do more than give one specimen of Mr. Fletcher’s
style in this book, though I have read the whole of it with pleasure
and amusement. The paragraph I am about to quote should live in the
annals of the Oxford Historicides for ever. I imagine that in writing
it, Mr. Fletcher had been slyly reading _Oceana_ in secret, and longed
to emulate the vividness of that august prose. The volume of Froude
was obviously out of the way when the purple passage was produced, but
if it loses in style owing to this circumstance, it gains in interest
as the unconnected revelation of a truly extraordinary mind.

“As the ice-sheet advanced, the wild animals gradually moved
southwards; the primitive Briton, unhindered by English Channel or
Mediterranean Sea, walked after the mammoth and the hippopotamus,
shooting at them with wooden arrows tipped with flints. And the
grizzly bear and the sabre-toothed tiger walked after the primitive
Briton.”

We must bid farewell to Mr. Fletcher, the historian preferred to
Froude by certain people! I do not wish to give pain to any one in the
world, much less to one who has given me so much pleasure. But even at
the cost of that, I would ask gentlemen who are reading history at
Oxford, and gentlemen who are sending their sons to read history at
Oxford, to pause and reflect before they entrust grave interests and
momentous personal issues to the mercies of such writers as Mr.
Fletcher, to the direction of the historian _manqué_.

Let us leave the _mala gaudia mentis_ provided by Mr. Fletcher, and
proceed to more considerable men.

In his case we have a person, though ill-equipped by nature or
temperament, engaged in an honest endeavour to write with vigour and
picturesqueness. Grotesque as it may seem to us, the “Primitive Briton
walking after the hippopotamus, and the sabre-toothed tiger walking
after the primitive Briton” shows a genuine attempt at style. It is
from the rude carvings of savage races that the Venus of Milo has been
evolved, and from the mural decoration of the cave-dwellers has the
perfected art of Velasquez or Murillo come.

There are, however, other writers in Oxford to-day who merely
chronicle facts. This is not writing history, of course, but a careful
chronicle of _accurate_ fact is certainly valuable to the student, and
may serve as a ladder by which he may mount into the realms of true
history. Some one must do the spade work, dull and uninteresting as it
may be, and all we ask of the gardener’s labourer is that his toil
should be accomplished thoroughly and well.

One of the books that is put into the hands of history students at
Oxford as a useful work of reference is _European History_ 470-1871,
by Mr. Arthur Hassall, a student and tutor of Christ Church, Oxford.
Let me here explain for the general public that “a Student” of Christ
Church is in the same position as the “Fellow” of another college.

The book at first sight does certainly seem to supply a need. It is a
chronicle, in parallel columns, of the events which occurred in every
country between the dates named. A man who is preparing an essay for
his tutor might well be at a momentary loss for a date. “What was the
exact year in which so-and-so succeeded, or the battle of
such-and-such a place occurred?” he might ask himself, and turn to Mr.
Hassall’s book for answers.

Let us take a particular instance. When was Napoleon III. proclaimed
Emperor? According to Mr. Hassall he was proclaimed twice; in 1852 and
again in 1853. Under _1852_ I read: “The French nation, by a large
majority, sanction the restoration of the Empire (November), and
Napoleon is proclaimed Emperor (December 2).” Lower down, on the same
page, under _1853_, I am told that “Napoleon consults the people on
the subject of the restoration of the Empire, and secures a large
majority in its favour (November 21).... Napoleon is declared Emperor
of the French as Napoleon III. (December 2).”

The right date is 1852. These strange contradictions occur in the
second as well as the first edition of Mr. Hassall’s book, for which
minute accuracy is the only _raison d’être_.

Another “handbook,” this time purporting to be an outline of the
_Political History of England_, and much in use by the long-suffering
student of to-day is published by the Right Honourable Arthur H. Dyke
Acland, M.P., and Cyril Ransome, M.A., Merton College, Oxford. This
book also makes no pretensions to style and any one who buys it has a
right to require that its statements should be minutely accurate.
Nevertheless, in it I find the following conflicting statements.
“1792, April 23. WARREN HASTINGS IS ACQUITTED,” and “1795, Acquittal
of Warren Hastings.” Which is right? A later edition of the handbook
tells me that 1795 is. Yet it is odd, to say the least of it, that in
the seventh edition the wrong date was impressed on the student by the
words, “Warren Hastings is acquitted” being printed in larger type
than they were under 1795.

I am not going to multiply instances of this sort of thing. When it is
necessary to produce a completer indictment of the pseudo-scientific
historians I am able to assure them that it will be done. A great
awakening has come to the University, and a hundred keen, hostile eyes
are focussed upon its chief anachronism. There are many men in Oxford
to-day who can say in their hearts: “So will I break down the wall
that ye have daubed with untempered mortar and bring it down to the
ground.”

I will pass at once to Professor Oman, Commander-in-Chief of
retrograde Dondom.

Much of what Oxford has to bestow of honour and distinction Professor
Oman has received. Some of the rewards of the greatest University have
been his. He may be called the leader of the pseudo-scientific school
now publishing, and in the past has enjoyed such eminence as this
confers, among a corporation whose members are not so famous for the
books they have written as for the books they ought not to have
written.

Professor Oman, in his _Inaugural Lecture on the Study of History_
(1906) said: “I am indignant at all the cheap satire levelled against
the college tutorial system, the curriculum of the schools, the
examinations and their results, which forms the staple of the
irresponsible criticisms of the daily, weekly, or monthly press, of
the pamphlets of a man with a grievance, and of the harangues
delivered when educationalists (horrid word) assemble in conclave.”

I can well understand it. Three months before this lecture was given,
I remember reading an article in the _Army Service Corps Quarterly_,
certainly neither irresponsible nor cheap, though composed by two
writers whose grievance was the inaccuracy of the Chichele Professor.

       *       *       *       *       *

“Napoleon was so profoundly ignorant of the character of the
(‘Spanish’) nation that he imagined,” wrote the Professor in his
_History of the Peninsular War_, “that a few high-sounding
proclamations and promises of liberal reforms would induce them to
accept from his hands any new sovereign whom he chose to nominate.”

At the date when Napoleon is supposed by the Professor to have been
behaving like a Professor, not of war but of history, he was writing
to Murat (May 16, 1808): “Je vous recommande de prendre toutes les
mesures nécessaires pour donner du mouvement dans l’arsenal. _Ce sont
là les meilleures proclamations pour se concilier l’affection des
peuples._” Three days before (May 13), he had warned Murat not to
“flatter the Spaniards too much.... I have,” he wrote, “more
experience of the Spaniards than you. When you told me that Madrid was
very tranquil, I said to every one that you would soon have an
insurrection.”

The article referred to utterly contradicts this statement of
Professor Oman’s. Hundreds of original documents were examined, and
the point was proved with entire brilliance and clarity. The pamphlet
is quite unanswerable, and has never been answered. The quotation from
the Professor’s lecture illustrates the temper and attitude of the
typical unprogressive. Why all criticism of the Professor and his
friends should be cheap and irresponsible I do not know. When Mr.
Herbert Paul writes of Stubbs’s _Constitutional History of
England_--the Bible of the pseudo-historians--that it “may be a useful
book for students. Unless or until it is rewritten, it can have no
existence for the general reader,” and “a novice whose mind is a blank
may read whole chapters of Gardiner without discovering that any
events of much significance happened in the seventeenth century” is
Mr. Paul irresponsible and cheap? Mr. Paul obtained the highest honour
possible in his degree examination; he was a member of Parliament for
South Edinburgh, one of the most cultured constituencies in the
kingdom; he is a member of the present Parliament. As historians,
indeed, the relative positions of Mr. Paul and Mr. Oman, are those of
banker and pawnbroker respectively.

This publicly expressed irritation of the Chichele Professor is
symptomatic.

When Froude gave _his_ inaugural lecture Mr. Oman was present, and
was, he tells us--

...“carried away at the moment by his eloquent plea in favour of the
view that history must be written as literature, that it is the
historian’s duty to present his work in a shape that will be clearly
comprehensible to as many readers as possible, that dull, pedantic,
over-technical diction is an absolute crime, since by it possible
converts to the cause of history may be turned back and estranged.”

Mr. Oman was not carried away very far. The works of the man who was
genius and moralist, man of letters and historian, are still excluded
from the “curriculum,” while the works of the Professor who was
temporarily carried away are still included in it.

It is, indeed, perfectly true, as Mr. Oman very candidly admits, that
“even five years spent as a Deputy-Professor have not eradicated the
old tutorial virus from his system.” He suffers, and I suppose must
always suffer, from the inability to write his history so that it is a
pleasure to read it. The literary instinct is wanting, the artistic
temperament is absent, and like all those writers of whom he is the
most able and the chief, the Chichele Professor can repeat but can
neither create nor recreate.

On the very page where I read “educationalists” (horrid word), I also
read these melodious and polished sentences “equipped with a severely
specialistic curriculum.” _Quip! lis! tic! ric!_ how horribly these
words jar and offend, what a barbarous jargon is this!

Again, “they hope to find this one rather less rebarbative than Law or
Mathematics.” From what sewer of language did the writer drag
“rebarbative” to grace his prose?

It is the same with everything this gentleman writes, or to be exact,
in everything I have read of his.

He speaks of Cæsar’s “chequered and oragious political career.”

He tells us of himself, “I was one of those exceptionals.” You have
only to open any single page of any single book Professor Oman has
written to realize that he either knows nothing of or cares nothing at
all for the art of writing prose. I admit that it is easy enough to
find, and print, faults in the writings of any one, even, here and
there, in the work of a Master. I was re-reading _Oceana_ the other
day, and noticed that Froude has written, “there was no undergrowth,
no rocks or stones, only fresh green grass.” ... But an error such as
this is exactly like a musical discord, inadmissible in the exercise
of a student of harmony, but as nothing in the composition of a
Master.

I do not wish to say whether, in my opinion, Professor Oman’s views of
history are generally sound or if they are not. He would not be where
he is, I suppose, were he not credible and generally accurate. But
what I do know, and what I have a right to say, is that his prose is
turgid, clumsy and without flexibility. He can only tell us that
something has happened, he cannot make that happening live and pulse
within the brain. He is without the first quality of the true
historian, the knowledge and mastery of the medium in which he
expresses his thoughts, and lacking all kinetic power he does not even
know of what wood to make a crutch.

Mr. Oman and all his school are the legitimate descendants of their
Master, Stubbs--the Great Cham of the Historicides. It is a mournful
fact that the incredibly vicious style of William Stubbs has had a
most malign influence over that of lesser men.

The samples of it that I give here will amaze those people who have
not read the learned Bishop, and who have been in the habit of
regarding him as a literary man as well as a historian.

“The steam plough,” Stubbs writes at p. 636, vol. iii. of _The
Constitutional History of England_, “and the sewing machine are less
picturesque, and call for a less educated eye than that of the
plough-man and the seamstress, but they produce more work with less
waste of energy; they give more leisure and greater comfort; they call
out, in the production and improvement of their mechanism, a higher
and more widespread culture. And all these things are growing instead
of decaying.” With what is the historian comparing the steam plough
and sewing machine? And does a sewing machine “call out” a higher
_culture_? and do the things that are “growing instead of decaying”
include a steam plough?

We are also told on page 634, that religion ... “has sunk on the one
hand into a dogma fenced about with walls which its defenders cannot
pass either inward or outward, on the other hand into a mere
war-cry.... Between the two lies a narrow borderland.” Religion,
therefore, “sinks into a war-cry.” Between the war-cry and the dogma
is a narrow borderland. The dogma is “fenced about with walls.”

The recurring word is a constant phenomenon. In paragraph 498, for
instance, we find the sequence “evil,” “debased,” “noble,”
“beautiful,” “good,” “noble,” “beautiful,” “evil,” “debased,” “evil,”
“good,” “good,” “great,” “great,” “greatness,” “greatness,” “noble,”
“greatness,” “great,” “greatness,” “greatness,” “greatness,” “evil,”
“good,” “evil,” “good,” “evil,” “evil,” “good,” “good,” “evil,”
“good,” “good.”

It is true that the devoted and determined fellowship of Oxford men
who are destroying the last position of the Historicides have long
known that Bishop Stubbs was nothing more than a writer of slovenly
text-books. But the general public has not known, and, occupied with
wider interests, has been forced to take the statements of the
pedants on trust.

Yet, if Oxford is to continue to be the chief University of the world,
it will only be by permission of the public. This is a truth which the
pedants will only realize when it is too late. If every father who has
a son whom he hopes will proceed to the University reads what I have
set down here--reads it, and trusting nothing to the assertions of one
man’s pen, makes further and more exhaustive inquiries--we shall very
soon see the frantic capitulation of the Old Guard. I believe the dons
and pedants of whom I have been writing to be honest men enough. They
are sincere in their attitude, no doubt. It is comfortable to think
that everything is for the best in the best of all possible
Universities, but the obstinacy of a dozen mules in a mountain pass
impedes the progress of an army, and because his stupidity is not the
hybrid’s fault is no argument against his removal.

A certain number of Oxford dons are convinced that the Oxford system
is without flaw.

The Historicides are the worst offenders, though some of their
brethren who control the study of Pagan Theology and Philosophy are
not far behind them. Both classes alike are convinced of their
infallibility.

Yet let the educated public realize that--

_No one who wishes to become a B.A. and M.A. of Oxford is forced to
study_

(_a_) English Composition or Literature;

(_b_) The History of the British Empire;

(_c_) The geography of the globe we inhabit;

(_d_) The scientific discoveries and inventions which have profoundly
altered the conditions of modern life;

(_e_) Any of the Fine Arts;

(_f_) Any of the Laws of England;

(_g_) The rules which guide the Law Courts in estimating the value of
human testimony;

(_h_) The Art of Government and Economics;

(_i_) The Art of War;

(_j_) French, German or any Modern Language.

       *       *       *       *       *

In my discredited trade of a novelist--that is to say, the trade of
people who create out of their own brains new things--we have a
technique of phrase. Unimportant to the pedant, as are the methods by
which we are sometimes able to secure a great, and even grateful
public, we still have our little catchwords and there is a certain
freemasonry of craft.

One finishes up, it is generally understood, with “a canter down the
straight.” Bursting away from the restrictions of the Essay, glad to
have finished with an academic convention which says one must write
this way and so, let me attempt to crystallize just what this paper
means, from my own, and doubtless limited, point of view. It means
this.

Upon the sturdy oak, generations old, in which the University may be
typified in allegory, a dusty parasite of ivy has been clinging. This
parasite, which has clogged the newer shoots from the old tree, is a
parasite of the classical and especially of the history don and
pedant. Law, Science and Mathematics have entered Oxford as a bright
light comes into the dark. Here, all is well. And in regard to the
older arts, I think, and many other people who are in the centre of
the ferment of change think with me, all is about to be reconstituted
in a freer air. It remains as a wonder that past and present
undergraduates, the guests of the hotel, remain so individually and
cumulatively distinct from the obstructionist section of its managers
and landlords.

In the darkest days it is astonishing to see how many men reading
history have been able to educate themselves brilliantly in spite of
all opposition. And if Oxford can send out into the world such men as
she is giving to the community now, in spite of the influences which
have checked and hampered them, what may she not do in the days which
are at hand, when the parasite shall be cut down from the old tree and
growth shall be unhampered by the incompetent?

Those days, I am convinced, are at hand, and, curiously enough, it is
the influence of James Anthony Froude which is precipitating the
revolution. What the great historian could not do in his life, the
immortality of his writings is accomplishing. Under Froude’s banner a
devoted and influential band is enlisted. The work of change is
proceeding with wonderful vigour and rapidity.

Let us gird up our loins to push and elbow out the discredited and
effete, and if necessary pay hirelings, and employ executioners to end
the unfortunate history of the immediate past, to destroy the
Obstructionists, the Historicides, and those whom only annihilation
will convince of error.

In conclusion I submit that I have neither been conjecturing what I
cannot find, nor insinuating what I dare not assert; and if a sincere
conviction and a prolonged scrutiny give one title to a part in the
growing condemnation of the Historicides I shall be proud to think
that I have taken a very humble place in the coming renaissance.




THE BROWN AND YELLOW PERIL




