VI

VAGROM MEN

[AN ADDRESS DELIVERED TO THE WORKING MEN’S CLUB, ST. MARGARETS’]

“_In the sweat of thy face shall thou eat bread, till thou return unto
the ground._”--GENESIS iii. 19.


In the November of last year--1905--I was invited to consider the
problem which is known as “The Unemployed Question,” and to write
something about it in a London daily paper. In 1905 the subject was
attracting the attention of every one, and it was thought that by
means of my own method--the method of Fiction--I might possibly
interest people.

I welcomed the opportunity, and wrote a story expressing my views,
which was published among the news columns of the _Daily Mail_.

Before the tale began to appear I had several conferences with Lord
Northcliffe, then Sir Alfred Harmsworth, the editor of the newspaper.
Certain facts were told me; a mass of expert opinion and evidence was
placed at my disposal, and I was enjoined to study my new material and
write exactly as I felt about the question. No restrictions were
placed upon my point of view. I suppose that very rarely indeed has it
happened to an ordinary novelist that the ruling powers of a journal
which has one of the largest circulations in the world have said,
“Here are our columns; come and say what you think in them.”

It is, no doubt, good journalism to print a single article written by
a man whose conviction on the subject of the article is diametrically
opposed to that of the newspaper in which it is published. A standard
of value is created by an exhibition of contrasts. It is good
journalism also to print the views of experts such as Mr. Booth or Mr.
McKenzie. Both these things are constantly done. But to give a
novelist columns of enormously valuable space for some weeks--“news
space,” not the space generally reserved for fiction--in order that he
may express his own ideas, is very unusual. At the time when this was
offered to me I thought it a very great compliment. I can hardly
believe that I was mistaken, and I think so still.

I wrote the story, and called it, _Made in His Image_. When it had run
through the newspaper it was published in book form. Fourteen months
have gone by, and during them I have endeavoured to keep myself
informed as to the position of affairs. With the additional knowledge
that the past year and its inquiries have given me, I find myself
still of precisely the same opinion as I was before. If anything, my
conviction is stronger than before. What my opinions are, such
conclusions as I have come to, I have been invited to tell you
to-night.

I will get to the point at once without further preamble, save only to
say how much I value the privilege of addressing you.

For a long time past every class of the community has been exercised
by the problem of the unemployed. The question has steadily become
more acute year by year, and at the present moment its solution is the
most pressing and necessary of all that confront thinking men and
women.

I propose to touch briefly upon the existing state of things, to
explain what I conclude to be the cause of it, and to set before you
my belief as to the only remedy.

In London, Manchester, Birmingham, and all the great cities of
England, the streets are full of men with bright eyes, and faces cut
and whittled to an edge by hunger. Men and women with kindly hearts
and sympathetic natures cannot go abroad in winter unless they taste
the bitterness of sights and sounds that tear the heart and lacerate
the soul.

Dismal and terrible processions move throughout the streets of our
capitals like spectres from the underworld. I have myself, in the
course of my investigations, been packed tight among a crowd of
tattered, coughing humans in London. I have walked with them, brethren
of yours and mine, men who offended and distressed every sense, men
who groaned and sighed because they had not eaten, men who exhaled an
odour like the caged animals in a menagerie, men who fed, when they
fed at all, upon garbage, men who could not wash.

I have seen faces all round me like the faces that the great Italian
poet Dante describes as flitting through the gloom of hell. On one
side is a face grown witless from hunger, sorrow, and foul
environment. It is a horrible face, a face like a glass of dirty
water. Another face is simply a grey drawn wedge of cunning; a third
man has a face that might have been that of a saint, but the horror of
his life has put its heel upon the countenance, and has ground the
possibility to pulp. I have stood among living bodies which have no
heat in them, a company of ghosts that cough and curse in bloodless
voices. And among these gaunt, dismal, and hopeless men the one who
can snarl and cry his sorrows loudly is the one who is envied by all
the rest. He must have had a meal that day.

I expect many of you have seen something of what I describe, and those
who have had this sad experience will bear witness that I am
exaggerating nothing. This is not Fiction; it is melancholy Truth. In
the opening chapter of the story I wrote on the Unemployed question, I
described a meeting of the Unemployed in Trafalgar Square. In the
course of the chapter I told how some charitable people drove up with
a cart full of buns and bread and butter. Immediately there was a
riot. The poor starving people fought with each other for the food
like wolves. The scene was horrible. This first chapter appeared on
November 18, in the _Daily Mail_. Two days afterwards I met a friend
in my London Club who had read it. “My dear fellow,” he said, “you’ve
let your imagination run away with you. A story is all very well, but
it should closely follow the lines of fact. Don’t you tell me that
English workmen are in such a pass that they will fight for a morsel
of food in the heart of London. You’re coming it a bit _too_ tall, my
dear chap.”

He was a ruddy, prosperous friend. As he came into the Club
smoking-room he gave a heavy fur coat, which probably cost him fifty
guineas, to one of the waiters. He called for a whisky and soda, and
sank into an arm-chair of red leather with a comfortable sigh of
pleasure. He stretched out his legs towards a blazing fire of logs,
and said again, “You novelist johnnies are always coming it a bit too
thick, don’t you know!”

My worthy friend was one of those who have eyes but see not; because
they won’t see, and don’t wish to see.

Now listen to the sequel--

Three days after this a procession of Unemployed marched along the
Embankment in London. Some charitable people did actually bring down a
cart of food. _There was a riot and a fight for the food exactly as I
had foreseen in my imaginary tale._ It was reported in the newspaper.
Five days after I had imagined that, under existing conditions,
something _might_ happen, that thing actually _did_ happen--men came
fighting for a scrap of bread in the heart of the Metropolis.

This is what we see in the great streets of London and other
towns--the streets full of shops which are crammed with costly and
beautiful things, thronged with prosperous people. What we see when
we follow the procession of the Unemployed back to the awful dens in
which they live is impossible to do more than hint at. To tell the
absolute unvarnished truth in a public assembly, to publish a faithful
description in a public print is an utter impossibility. These
dreadful facts are those which despairing clergymen and ministers,
doctors, nurses, would-be helpers, tell to each other in whispers.

I knew a lady whose husband had turned out worthless, and who finally
deserted her. Her one source of income was a row of small houses in
the East End of London, houses that were let out in rooms to the very
poor. My friend was too poor to employ an agent to collect her rents
and draw a commission for his work. Every week she did so herself, and
one week she invited me to accompany her. I did so, and it was the
most horrible day I ever spent. No working man in a district such as
this can form any idea of the filth and misery in which the lost,
degraded tenants of these houses lived. I shall not attempt to
describe it, for it would be a poor return for your kindness in coming
here to-night to rob you of your night’s rest!

I will merely quote some lines written by Mr. F. A. McKenzie, one of
the foremost sociologists of the day. They deal with the lives of the
Unemployed in the East End of London, and they are guarded, reticent
words.

I read--

     “To say that scores of thousands of them are facing the coming
     winter with fear and dread is but mildly to imply their
     situation. They are the derelicts of London, whom the changes
     in modern conditions have left hopelessly behind. Without
     crafts, without knowledge, many of them with hope dead, they
     face a future that good trade can do little to relieve, and bad
     trade must greatly darken.”

“The prodigal son” of to-day plays out the last act of his tragedy, not
before a fatted calf, but in a Poplar back room. The shiftless and
incapables, attracted by low rent, by the chance of casual work, and
by the abundance of relief, drift here. To them are added the scores
of thousands of locally born people who are trained in such a way that
they cannot be anything else than casuals.

The very streets proclaim the lives of these people. Apart from the
main thoroughfares and from certain more prosperous avenues, you are
swallowed up in an endless succession of long roads of cheaply built
houses. The walls are crumbling, and the bricks seem as though they
would fall at a blow; many houses have broken, paper-stuffed windows;
there are whole streets where the doors and windows have not seen
paint for a generation. The children, babies with ophthalmic eyes,
girls dirty beyond belief play in the gutters. The women gossip at the
doors. The men, strong, yet none wanting their strength, lounge at
street corners.

In home after home you will find that the sole regular wage earned is
by a young son, who obtains ten shillings a week as errand boy in the
City. On this, with occasional additions from the others, the whole
family exists. The mother may obtain a few shillings a week at
‘charing,’ although such work is scarce in Poplar.

Twenty years ago the poverty of the East End was lessened by the home
work which the women could obtain. It is one of the most serious,
although often overlooked, factors of to-day that such home work
cannot be had save by a few. The aliens in Whitechapel and in Stepney
absorb almost all of it. The foreigners are more capable, more
thrifty, and more sober, and, save where brute strength is required,
our own derelicts stand no chance before them. The homes inside are
often enough indescribable. Here and there you find the one room kept
clean, but generally dirt is the outstanding feature. The beds are
black masses of filth. The walls of the rooms prevent real
cleanliness. I went into one two-roomed tenement inhabited by a man,
wife and three children. The kitchen was overrun with rats, which had
free entrance and exit through numerous holes in the wall. In the
bedroom a large part of the lath and plaster wall underneath the
window was torn away, leaving great gaps open to the yard. ‘Why
doesn’t your landlord do some repairs here?’ my companion asked. ‘He
won’t, sir; he says it is healthy for us to have holes in the walls,’
the woman replied. Many of these Poplar rooms urgently require the
active intervention of the local sanitary officers.

In such fetid dens, badly built, ill kept, and furnished with the
strangest of oddments, most of the Poplar poor live.

If it were necessary and part of my scheme this evening, I could take
up the whole of our time in telling the truth about the existing
horrors. But I do not think that any one will deny them. They exist,
and no one can disprove the fact. Let us rather consider _why_ they
exist, and what their existence means to the working man.

Stated in a few brief words, this is my theory and my unalterable
belief.


IF THERE WERE NO UNEMPLOYABLES THERE WOULD BE NO UNEMPLOYED.

To amplify my statement I will say--and in a moment I will endeavour
to prove--that if the idle, vicious, hopeless and sullen scoundrels
who act as a drag upon the wheel of the Commonwealth, who have been
allowed too long to clog social progress, were removed, the whole
problem would be solved.

I beg you to listen carefully to me while I tell you how the
_Unemployables_ have created the problem of the Unemployed, how they
are throttling charitable enterprise, how they are making economic
methods of relief impossible, how they are destroying the present and
the future of the honest working man. Who are the people I have called
“The Unemployables”? What is _their_ idea of work and what is the
_real ideal_ of work? I will answer these questions. I will show you
who and what the Unemployables are. I will contrast their attitude
towards honest toil with the attitude of honest men towards toil, and
when I have done this I will try to explain how these people are
injuring you and me, what a terrible burden they are upon our backs.

The month before my story dealing with the Unemployed appeared in the
_Daily Mail_, a series of articles on the same subject was published.
In some of them the Unemployables were painted with perfect fidelity
and vividness. I take some paragraphs here and there to make a
connected picture.

“Half-past eleven on Friday morning in a back street in the most
poverty-stricken and most largely relieved district in Canning Town. A
group of women wait around the gates of a chapel, from which doles are
being issued. Dirty, ragged and untidy, they certainly are, but
hunger-stricken--No! Their children playing in the roadway near by are
ill-clad, filthy, and in many cases bare-footed, and do show signs of
under-feeding, but not the mothers.

These are the wives of the habitual Unemployed seeking relief.

The curious stranger notices that some of the women go from the relief
station to the public-houses. Let us look inside a few of these
establishments. In a side bar of the first place we enter, we find
eleven women, exactly of the same type as those soliciting charity
without. One of them carries a recently-born baby in her arms, and
another has a little girl two years old clinging to her apron. Each
woman has a glass in front of her. Some of them have been here since
half-past nine in the morning, and will stay for hours yet. In the
next drinking shop is a party of nine, in the next but two, while in
the last of all we find seven. Now one rises to go out, for her hour
has come to beg for aid from school or parson or Unemployed fund.

An hour later we can see the husbands of these women amusing
themselves at the street corner higher up. Five bookmakers’ touts are
busy among them at one cross roads alone.

At this time, when we are threatened with a new Unemployed agitation,
it is as well that the causes of much of the distress in some of the
Unemployed areas should be understood. For several years the public
has tried to deal with the sufferings of the very poor by sentimental
means. Each winter has brought increase of relief, and each increase
of relief has helped to render more permanent the problem it has set
about to cure.

We have now in one district alone, a large number of people, totalling
many thousands, incapable of regular work and unwilling to attempt it.
They have been taught to lean on charity to aid them, and they have
proved themselves apt pupils. Their homes will, as a rule, for sheer
uncleanliness, bear comparison with the dwelling of an Australian
aborigine. Their children are systematically made untidy, and are
given a neglected air in order more successfully to extort outside
aid. Parental love is so dead that, in very many cases, the mothers
will sell the boots given to their children in order to buy gin.

This is no vague, general charge. Three years ago the readers of the
_Daily Mail_ entrusted the writer with a sum of money to spend on
meals and shoes for needy children in this district. Teachers from
many schools assured me that such effort would be wasted. ‘Buy the
shoes and give them to the children to-day,’ they said; ‘and to-morrow
the shoes will be in the pawnshops, and the mothers will have drunk
the proceeds.’ It was necessary for us to construct a careful system
of guard checks to save the children from their own mothers.

Last year four separate general funds were distributing doles and aid
among these people in one district. A fund for the children, the best
of all, kept them from starvation. Two outside agencies collected many
thousands of pounds and scattered them about. The West Ham Corporation
spent over £26,000 on relief works. What has been the result? The
first outcome was to draw to this district many of the loafers from
other parts, who saw the chance to obtain something for nothing. The
more money that came, the more the number of Unemployed grew.

There is, without question, an amount of perfectly genuine distress,
distress that should be relieved. But it is not, as a rule, found in
the ‘Unemployed’ processions. The men who are making the most noise
could not work properly if they would, and would not if they could.

This is a hard saying. Some facts may help to prove it. Many employers
of labour around the docks agree in testifying that their difficulty
is to induce casual men to remain long at their work. A man will take
on a job for a couple of hours, and then ask for his 1_s._ 2_d._
(7_d._ an hour) and go. ‘Look here, guv’nor, I’ve had enough of this,’
he exclaims, with perfect truthfulness. He has secured enough to see
him through the day--why should he trouble after more?

The labourer of the casual loafing type who works for two days a week
thinks that he has done all his duty. His work is worth comparatively
little when it is done. The municipal relief work at West Ham last
winter spent £14,000 on material and £12,000 on labour. On the most
liberal estimate, the labour value obtained was worth not more than
£4500, and the tasks would have been done by any contractor for that
amount. Many whose names were down on the Unemployed Register refused
work when offered to them.

Last winter the workhouse authorities began to distribute relief on a
more liberal scale. A number of distressed cases were taken in without
labour. The number increased until it reached 473. Then the guardians
resolved to re-establish the labour test, and to make the applicants
do some work for the aid they had. The numbers at once fell to 119.

The people have been taught to look upon the outside public as a milch
cow, and the guardians and municipal authorities as officials from
whom everything possible is to be extorted. The members of an
‘unofficial’ relief committee invited me last week to one of their
meetings. A bloated woman came asking them for aid. They gave her a
small dole, with repeated injunctions that she was to lie to the
relieving officer if he asked her if she had had anything. ‘Take care
that your fire is out and your cupboard is bare when the relieving
officer comes,’ one member added.

Here, then, is the problem to be solved. A great army of habitual
loafers and incapables live off the woes of the genuine Unemployed.
The latter, too, often suffer in silence. The spongers, hardened by
long experience, adepts in every trick to impress a generous public,
ply their calling more boldly each year.

Such are the men who will not work--the ‘work-shy’ men, the
‘bone-idle’ men, the ‘wasters,’ the scoundrels who turn the holy
virtue of charity into a foolishness, and who recruit the ranks of
those who keep society in a state of siege.

These people form the majority of the Unemployables. Please remember
that I am not talking of the _Unemployed_, but of the Unemployables.
The men who won’t work form the majority, but the hopeless herd of
Unemployables is also swelled by those who _can’t_ work. They can’t
work because their life has never taught them how to work. From
infancy they have been trained to depend upon charity, from childhood
they have been denied an education which will enable them to earn a
living.

Their very birth has been charitably conducted. The parish doctor has
given free aid, the blankets have come from a local fund, and probably
there has been a Salvation lass scrubbing the room for the mother.
From infancy they are accustomed to look to charity for their very
comfort. A boots fund supplies them with shoes, free meals are their
main sustenance, and if they are very fortunate a holiday fund gives
them a week in the country. Their first lessons are in begging, and
they are taught to lie and to cringe to the givers of doles.

When such children leave their slum schools, what awaits them? There
is little or no possibility of the slum boy learning a trade, while
the girl finds it impossible, even if she desires, to learn
housewifery by going to service. The factory awaits the girl, and odd
jobs, as potboy, errand boy, runner for bookmakers, or the like, await
the lad. At seventeen or so the youth becomes a man, and applies for
casual labour at the docks or elsewhere. About the same time he mates
with a girl who has been working at the factory.

By this time he has forgotten nearly all he learned at school. What
can reasonably be expected of him?

It is impossible to condemn this second class of Unemployable. If you
and I had been brought up in the same way, we should live as they do
and behave as they do, in all probability. If a child has seen his
father and mother, his grandfather and grandmother, his uncles, aunts
and all the friends of the family habitually go to bed in their boots,
he will sleep in his boots too. If he lives in a village where every
one goes to bed in boots, and has never been out of that village nor
witnessed the customs of any other village, who is to tell him that
sleeping in boots is an unpleasant trick which spoils the sheets? A
stranger who came upon a child of this village and told him that he
was a dirty little boy who ought to be punished, would be an idiot who
understood nothing of the power of environment, the truth of education
or the facts of life.

But the first, and largest, class of Unemployables who have worked,
can work, know how to work, but _won’t_ work, is in a very different
case, and is formed of very different people.

These are the men who are lost.

For my own part, I believe that idleness is the greatest of all sins,
the chief of all crimes. It is not those offences against the law of
God and the ordinance of man that we punish which are always the
worst. I may be wrong, but I give it as my opinion that sloth is the
prime sin of all those lusts and iniquities that war against the soul
and destroy manhood. I believe that the thief who works, the drunkard
who works, the liar who works, the adulterer who works, may often be a
better man than the boneless, bloodless idler who is neither thief,
drunkard, liar, or adulterer.

Work--all work--has in it a fine spiritual element, just as the
smallest and meanest thing in the world has a divine side, inasmuch as
God made it and saw that it was good. All temporary forms, it has been
said, include essences that are eternal. Whatever be the meanness and
loneliness of a man’s occupation, he may discharge it on principles
common to himself and the Archangel Gabriel. The man who spends his
whole life in cleaning codfish in Leadenhall Market is a better and
finer man in the eye of God, a worthier and more valuable man to the
Commonwealth, than the poor man who loafs away his life in a four-ale
bar, or the rich one who lounges through his existence in a palace.

However far I may go in my belief that idleness is the greatest vice
of all, hardly any one here would attempt to combat the general view
that it is a vice and a very bad one.

But leaving the purely moral standpoint for a moment, let me point out
to you the value of work as an aid to _material_ success and
happiness.

For a moment we will put aside the fact that toil is a virtue and
laziness a sin. Let me briefly repeat what has been said a thousand
times by far abler and more important lips than mine--

Work pays.

In the spring of this year I was staying in the South of France with
a friend who is a great employer of labour. He employs nearly 16,000
men. He told me that, quite unknown to every one, he has established a
system of reports upon the work and ability of each separate man. His
agents inform him that Jack Smith, whom he has never met and will
never meet in this world, is a hard worker. The next promotion goes to
Jack Smith.

Genius, the highest and rarest attribute of the human being, has been
said to be “an infinite capacity for taking pains.” A capacity for
work which is not infinite but finite, yet which is still strong and
vigorous, ought always and in all circumstances to secure a livelihood
and ensure respect. This is the very least that it should do. It may
do much more. It may command success.

What was it but work that enabled Heyne of Gottingen, the son of a
poor weaver, to become one of the greatest classical scholars; that
enabled Akenside, the son of a butcher, to write _The Pleasures of the
Imagination_; Arkwright, the barber, to become Sir Richard Arkwright,
inventor of the spinning-jenny; Beattie, the school-master, to become
Professor of Moral Philosophy; Prideaux to become the Bishop of
Winchester from being the assistant in the kitchen at Exeter College;
Edmund Saunders, the errand lad, to become Sir Edmund Saunders, Chief
Justice of the King’s Bench; Jonson, the common bricklayer, to become
Ben Jonson the famous? Adrian VI. rose to his great fame as a scholar
from being a poor lad in the streets, who, for want of other
convenience, had to read by the lamps in the church porches; Parkes,
the grocer’s, and Davy, the apothecary’s apprentice, became the two
greatest chemical investigators of their age. What enabled Dr. Isaac
Milner, Dean of Carlisle and Professor of Mathematics at Cambridge, to
rise from the humble position of a weaver; and White, who was also a
weaver, to become Professor of Arabic at Oxford; Hunter, the
cabinet-maker, to attain the first rank among anatomists? Incredible
labour enabled Demosthenes to become the greatest orator of antiquity.
_The Economy of Human Life_ and _The Annual Register_ were the
production of Dodsley, who by labour raised himself from the position
of a weaver and a footman. Labour enabled Falconer, the barber’s son,
to write his celebrated poem of _The Shipwreck_. The editor of _The
Quarterly Review_, Gifford, somehow acquired the needed capability
from being a cabin-boy and shoemaker’s apprentice. Haydn, the son of a
poor cartwright, became the eminent composer; Johnson, through
sickness and poverty, rose to be the immortal linguist; Jeremy
Taylor, a barber’s son, ended as theologian and bishop; Barry, from a
working mason, became the renowned painter. Dr. Livingstone attained
his celebrity from being a “piecer” in a factory. Indeed, if we read
the lives of distinguished men in any department, we find them
celebrated for the amount of labour they could perform. There is no
exception to this rule even in the military profession. Julius Cæsar,
Cromwell, Washington, Napoleon, and Wellington, were all renowned as
hard workers. We read how many days they could support the fatigues of
a march; how many hours they spent in the field, in the cabinet, in
the court; how many secretaries they kept employed; in short, how hard
they worked. Superficial thinkers are ready to cry out, “Miracles!”
Yes! but they are miracles of industry and of labour.

Great success came to these great workers I have enumerated, people
who started life as working men. If they had lived to-day they would
have achieved the same, though the task would have been a more
difficult one. Men of this stamp cannot be crushed. But more ordinary
men who have the capacity for hard work and are willing to do it, what
shall we say of many of them in the year 1906? What shall we say of
the thousands who want work and can’t get it, of the Unemployed?

We must say just this--the Unemployed are the victims of the
Unemployable, and all working men suffer to support the idle and
worthless classes of the community.

Every one suffers, every one has to pay for the maintenance of the
Unemployable. But the working man pays most and suffers most. Let me
put it to the working men here to-night.

Out of every pound I earn I have to pay a shilling to the Government
in income-tax. I call this hard, because every penny of my income is
made by hard mental work. The parson and the doctor, the farmer, the
lawyer, the author, are taxed exactly the same as the man who has not
earned his income, but who has been left land or other property by his
father. I work ten hours a day nearly every day of my life, and I only
make nineteen shillings out of every pound I earn, while the man who
has an income without working for it pays not a penny more. You are
probably wondering what this has to do with your side of the question.
You do not pay income-tax, you may say, it is only the people who make
more than three pounds odd a week who have to pay this tax.

You are quite wrong if you think this. In proportion to your earnings,
you pay, even here in this country, more than I do, more than the
doctor, more than the farmer--more than almost any one, except the
parson, who is always the most heavily taxed man in proportion to his
means and his duties in the community. It is true that you don’t get
yellow papers “On His Majesty’s Service” by the post demanding this or
that sum. You don’t get polite gentlemen calling for money, and backed
up by the whole force of the British Constitution. You pay in other
ways. Take the case of a farm labourer. The farmer rents his land from
the original owner, and he makes as much as he can out of it. The
farmer has to pay the Government a proportion of every shilling he
makes. It stands to reason, therefore, that he can’t afford to pay his
labourers as much as he would were he himself less heavily taxed. And
there are other ways in which the working man pays out of all
proportion to his earnings. The working man who buys a pound of tea, a
glass of beer, or an ounce of tobacco, pays exactly the same duty on
these articles as people with ten times his income. I may buy a pound
of tea at two shillings and the working man may not be able to pay
more than a shilling. But that is merely a question of quality, and
does not affect the argument. The working man with a very small
income pays the same duty as the man with a much larger one.

The working man also pays other taxes, called rates, in his
house-rent. They are not collected direct from him, they are collected
from the landlord, who puts up the rent accordingly.

Therefore, although a superficial view would tend to show that the
working man is without many of those burdens which fall upon the
shoulders of larger earners, such a view would be utterly wrong.

I have still so much to say that I cannot go further into the economic
aspect of the question. Detailed proof, abundant and overflowing,
could be easily supplied. I have no time to do so now, I merely repeat
the indubitable fact that the working man has to pay for the
workhouses, the asylums, and the prisons; poor as he is, he must
support the Unemployables.

In the workhouses, at any rate in the London unions, he must support
them in a comparative luxury which he himself can by no means afford.

In one great workhouse, for example, we find that the finest butter,
the best Irish bacon, the whitest bread, the most expensive cuts of
beef are for the pauper. Outside the workhouse the working head of a
family who is struggling to bring up his children in honourable
independence has none of these luxuries. In place of the best butter,
he and his family have the cheapest margarine or dripping; their
bacon, if they have any, is bought in inferior scraps; their bread is
of common description, and instead of costly cuts of beef, they too
often have to content themselves with the cheapest form of food in
London--fried fish. At no time have they too much of even this food.
Yet, while they are existing in such pinching poverty, fighting their
way from day to day and from hour to hour, an enormous tax is levied
on them in the form of rates, to maintain in unnecessary comfort those
who are living an idle and unprofitable life.

The contrast to the worker must seem poignant. On the one side of the
workhouse gate are poverty and incessant misery, with insufficient
food to eat. On the other side are warmth and light, complete freedom
from care, and abundance of food to eat, with no necessity whatever to
earn the day’s food by labour. All the prizes are to the unfit; all
the effort and misery are to the laborious. If the honourable working
man loses his employment through some change in industrial
organization or through the growth of foreign competition, he finds it
too often impossible to struggle back to his feet. He sees the help
which might have carried him through his misfortune diverted by the
blatant outcries of the worthless. He must be content to suffer and
die in proud silence, while those who have never done or wished to do
an honest day’s work absorb the contributions of public and private
charity.

Mr. McKenzie, to whom I am indebted for so many illuminating facts,
completes the picture in a few vivid paragraphs. He takes the huge and
poverty-stricken London district of Poplar for his text, and he tells
us--

     “Had the Poplar poor law authorities contented themselves with
     dealing adequately with the old and the sick, and the maimed
     who are among them, all their resources would have been taxed,
     for the district is now very, very poor. They went further.
     They deliberately attracted to themselves the great shifting
     army of loafers and of idlers from all parts of London.

     “How has this been done? By two means. Outdoor relief has been
     freely granted to all kinds of folk, and the people inside the
     workhouse have been treated in a sumptuous manner far above the
     style of their class.

     “The guardians decided that the stone-yard is derogatory, and
     abolished the labour test. They had no sufficient labour for
     men, so they allow them to remain in practical idleness. There
     are over two hundred and fifty young men in the workhouse
     to-day, amply fed, well clothed, and maintained week by week,
     and month by month, in idleness. They are lazy,
     good-for-nothing scamps, many of them, as their records clearly
     show. Naturally they take advantage of the glorious prospect of
     plenty to eat and nothing to do. There is another army, only
     less numerous, of young women in the prime of years and of
     health, equally idle.

     “A few days since, I went over the ‘workhouse’ at midday, and
     watched the great rooms packed with legal idlers, all busy
     eating a dinner such as few labourers outside have. ‘Do you
     mean seriously to tell me that these men have no proper
     employment?’ I asked my guide, as we stood in a great room
     thronged with not far short of three hundred men, mostly
     varying in age from eighteen to forty, all sound limbed, all
     physically fit. ‘We use them as far as we can in cleaning up,’
     my informant replied.

     “The next extraordinary point at Poplar is the feeding of the
     inmates. No one denies that the pauper should have a
     sufficiency of wholesome food, and most of us would willingly
     support the generous feeding of the old and the infirm. But the
     Poplar guardians have gone to the extreme here. They work on
     the policy avowed by some of them that ‘the poor man ought to
     have the best sometimes.’ They are going to give him the best
     when he is in the workhouse, and they do! The butter costs,
     bought by the ton, 1_s._ 2-3/4_d._ a pound. I am informed that
     the contractors are required to supply only ‘Denny’s best
     Irish’ bacon. The meat is of the very finest quality to be
     bought, and the bread is of a grade and perfection rarely to be
     had in shops or restaurants. I examined the dinners being
     served in the course of an ordinary visit, and I declare in
     sober truth that the quality was at least as high as that given
     in an average West End club. The mealy potatoes and the fine
     boiled meats certainly equal those served in the modest club
     where I lunch.”

This, my working-men listeners, is what you and I are paying for. The
obvious result upon any district where the rates must be raised to an
impossible height in order to support the idle and worthless, is that
such a district ceases to be an area of employment.

The great manufacturing firms decline to continue their operations in
a place where local taxation is so heavy that it prevents them from
paying a dividend to their shareholders.

The firms go, but their labourers do not go with them. These, after a
brief struggle, swell the ranks of the Unemployed, that sorrowful army
for which the Government has just voted £200,000 as a small temporary
relief.

Now I do not think that I need say much more as to the manner in which
the Unemployables have created the class of the Unemployed, and as to
how the working man suffers. I have given a brief summary enough--in
the endeavour to be as thorough as possible--but it is already
somewhat lengthy.

I wish to come at once to the principal point of this lecture--_the
remedy for it all_!

I am personally convinced that the remedy I am about to propound is
the only satisfactory one, and the object of my presence here to-night
is to outline it for you.

There is a time in the history of certain diseases when any malignant
growth must be removed with the knife. Cancer, the tiger of all
physical ills, can only be treated in this way. The hideous thing
which has fastened on the human body must be cut away from it, or the
body dies. The gentle measures of medicine and diet are useless. Life
must be preserved by the scalpel and knife of the surgeon. “Is there
no other way, doctor?” the nervous patient asks. “Don’t you think that
I might get well if I kept on the Chian Turpentine treatment or the
injection of Tryptic Ferment?”

The surgeon of to-day who knows his business will answer “No.” He will
proceed to the stern though inevitable operation.

And that is what we have got to do in regard to this social cancer,
this economic disease of the Unemployed question. We must stop the
whole thing. You working men have the power to do it, and this is the
way in which you must do it.

In the first place, you must realize your own power over the councils
of the nation, in the ordering and determining of the laws of England.
You who are working men are already beginning to do this. To take only
one instance, the Trades Unions have already combined to send a number
of labour members to Parliament, and a working man holds a high
ministerial position with conspicuous honesty and ability. I don’t in
the least agree with most of the aims of what is known as the Labour
Party. My reading, education, and experience have taught me that
Socialism is the dream of an impossibility, and that the witness of
history, the experience of nations, and the laws of God are all
hostile to it alike. There has never yet been a continuing
Commonwealth in which all men were equal inasmuch as they were State
officials. There never will be.

But working men have now the power to remedy the unjust conditions
under which they live. The more they realize that power the more able
will they be to bring about the change.

One of the first things that they must do is to relieve themselves
and others of the burden of the Unemployables--this is the way in
which I believe it can be done.

We must follow the plan adopted with signal success by Germany,
Denmark, Belgium, and other foreign countries, only, in proportion as
our own problem is more menacing and acute than in other States, we
must adapt, amplify, and extend their plan to our needs. In these
countries every effort is made to assist the deserving poor, while the
undeserving are not merely repelled; they are also punished. Relief is
given, after a careful visitation of the distressed case and thorough
personal inquiry, in the shape of a loan, and repayment of the loan is
required except in cases where the assisted are not able-bodied. The
lazy and worthless are relegated to labour colonies, or to penal
workhouses, whence they can return to ordinary life after a term of
labour has been served. The old are cared for, when deserving, in a
different kind of workhouse, and receive indulgent treatment. In this
way sturdiness and independence of character are assured, and there is
no danger of the excessive multiplication of paupers, or of enormous
expenditure on relief.

This is speaking generally. The two chief agencies for dealing with
the Unemployed question are the systems of insurance against
unemployment and the establishment of labour colonies in which the
Unemployables are forced to work.

It is impossible for me to-night to do more than sketch the working of
these two institutions in a single country. I will, therefore, outline
the method of insurance adopted in Germany, and give an account of the
greatest labour colony in existence--that of Merxplas in Belgium.

A month or two ago I was in the great German city of Cologne. There I
found the following system in operation:--

“The ‘City of Cologne Office for Insurance against Unemployment in
Winter’ was established in 1896. The object of the office is to
provide, with the assistance of the Cologne Labour Registry, an
insurance against unemployment during the winter (December to March)
for the benefit of male workpeople in the Cologne district. In order
to insure with the office, a man must be at least eighteen years of
age, must have lived for at least a year in Cologne, and must not
suffer from permanent incapacity to work. He is required to pay a
weekly premium, payment of which must commence as from April 1, and
must continue for thirty-four weeks.

“The amount of the premium was originally 3_d._ per week for both
skilled and unskilled workmen; in 1901 the rate of premium was fixed
at 3_d._ for unskilled and 4-1/4_d._ for skilled men; in 1903 the rate
was raised to 3-1/2_d._ per week for unskilled and 4-3/4_d._ per week
for skilled workmen. In no case must a man be more than four weeks
late in paying his weekly premium, otherwise he loses all claim upon
the office; but in special cases the operation of this rule may be
suspended by the committee of the insured.

“In return for these payments the insured workman, if and when out of
work in the period named above, receives, for not more than eight
weeks in all, a daily amount, which is 2_s._ for each of the first
twenty days (nothing being paid for Sundays), and then 1_s._ on each
subsequent day. These payments begin on the third week-day after the
date on which the man has reported himself as out of work.

“While out of work, a man must report himself to the office twice
daily, and if work is offered him, he must take it, provided that the
nature of the employment and the rate of pay be, so far as
practicable, similar to what the man had been getting while in work.
But he cannot be asked to fill a place left vacant in consequence of a
trade dispute. Unmarried men, with no dependants living at Cologne,
are required to take work away from that city, if offered to them,
their fares being paid for them.

“No money is paid in respect of unemployment caused by illness or
infirmity, or by the man’s own fault, or by a trade dispute.

“The administration of the affairs of this Insurance Office is in the
hands of the Executive Committee, the Committee of the Insured, and
the General Meeting of Members.

“The Executive Committee consists of the head of the Cologne
Municipality (_Oberbürgermeister_) or his delegate, of the President
for the time being of the Cologne Labour Registry, and of twenty-four
members, twelve elected by the insured workmen, and twelve patrons or
honorary members (six employers and six employees) chosen by the
patrons and honorary members.

“The twelve representatives of the insured on the Executive Committee,
together with the business manager of the office, form the Committee
of the Insured, referred to above.

“The Executive Committee has the right to decline to make any further
insurance contracts, should it become doubtful whether the fund is
adequate to meet further liabilities; and on two occasions (in 1901-2
and 1902-3) it became necessary to suspend operations in this manner.”

What an excellent plan this is! The working man has, I know, his sick
club, his benefit society, to which he must subscribe. If he is a
member of a Trades Union there again is another claim upon his purse.
But all working men are not members of Trades Unions. The greater the
skill of the trained mechanic, for example, the more the disfavour
with which he regards the Trades Unions. It is a splendid thing to be
a member of a great and powerful organization which has for its object
to ensure that every man shall be paid a living wage. But when a Union
forces all its members to a dead level of equality with that of the
least skilled, when the good workman is compelled to do no more work,
and no better work, than the worst workman in the confederation, then
the good workman very naturally takes his name off the books. Once
more, many working men, especially in the country, are fairly sure of
always being able to obtain work if they are prepared to do it. But in
the great, crowded, competitive centres of England, the uncertainty of
regular employment, especially in regard to unskilled labour, the
establishment of such a system of insurance would be of incalculable
benefit, nor do I believe that the infinitesimal premium would be
regretted or missed by any sensible and hard-working man.

You may object that probably the funds of the insurance companies
might possibly come to be diverted to the support and assistance of
the _won’t_ works--the Unemployables. Please hear me to the end and
you will see that this objection cannot be upheld.

I do not appeal to the experience of despotic Germany but of
democratic Belgium when I describe the largest Continental Labour
Colony, that of Merxplas in Belgium. During the present year I have
spent some months in Belgium, and have been enabled to gather the
opinions of all sorts of people upon the subject. Every thinking man I
have consulted in this country is emphatic in his praise of the
institution.

The Law of November 27, 1891, “for the repression of vagrancy and
begging,” which came into operation on January, 4, 1892, imposed upon
the Belgian Government the duty of organizing correctional
establishments to be called (A) Beggars’ Depôts, (B) Houses of Refuge,
and (C) Reformatory Schools. The Labour Colonies are maintained in
order to fulfil the requirements of the Law under (A) and (B).

All persons confined in a Beggars’ Depôt or in a House of Refuge, not
suffering from incapacity, are to be put to work of such nature as may
be prescribed, and shall, unless deprived thereof as a measure of
discipline, receive a daily wage, part of which shall be kept in hand
and credited to the “leaving fund” of the inmate in respect of whose
labour the same shall be paid.

The Minister of Justice fixes, with respect to the Beggars’ Depôts and
Houses of Refuge, the rate of wage which the inmates shall receive,
and the deductions to be retained out of this wage towards the
“leaving fund.” This fund is handed over partly in the shape of cash,
partly in that of clothing and tools, when the inmate is discharged.

The internal regulations of the Beggars’ Depôts and Houses of Refuge
are settled by Royal Decree. Any person confined in either class of
institution may be ordered to undergo solitary confinement.

The classes of persons whom the magistrates are directed (by Article
13 of the Law) to send to be confined in a Beggars’ Depôt, are all
persons not suffering from incapacity, who instead of providing
themselves with the means of existence by labour, abuse the charity of
the public by habitual mendicancy; those persons who, through
laziness, or drunken or immoral habits, pass their lives in vagrancy,
and those who live on the earnings of vice (_souteneurs de filles
publiques_).

Merxplas is reached from Antwerp by a steam tramway running through a
cultivated country with occasional stretches of pine plantations.
There are only a few villages, all small, and there is no place which
can be in any way styled a town on the way to Merxplas, or indeed,
within a considerable radius round the colony. The surrounding country
is sandy heath, with pine plantations, but this is transformed at
Merxplas by the manual labour of the colonists into excellent
agricultural land, with fields and gardens neatly cultivated and
well-grown avenues of oak, poplar, and pines. Such a transformation
has been rendered more easy by the nature of the sub-soil, which is
clay everywhere underlying the top-soil of sand. The buildings are
large and handsome, and of good design. They seem excellently built.
The main block consists of a large quadrangle, and is entered by a
principal gate on the western side. The offices of administration are
centred round this gate, with dining-halls capable of seating 1500
colonists at a time, on the left, and reception-rooms, baths,
fire-engine house, etc., on the right. The _quartier cellulaire_ as
the prison for refractory colonists is named, is easily marked by the
exercise grounds. To this is attached on one side a barracks for 150
soldiers and on the other a building set apart for the _immoraux_.

The east side, opposite to the main gate, is occupied by the hospital
in the centre, and by two wings on each side for the _infirmes_, who
are still capable of light work, and for the _incurables_, who are
unfit for any kind of labour. The remaining side on the north consists
of four long galleries, _chauffoirs_, which are intended for the use
of the colonists in inclement weather. Between these, placed
centrally, are the lavatories and the canteen. There also is a
library, from which they can obtain books on Sunday, in which at the
time of our visit a tramp choir was practising with considerable skill
under a tramp organist, and without any supervision.

The dormitories are four large buildings on the west front flanking
the approach to the main gate, and beyond these lies the large new
church which the colonists have just erected. This will hold 1500 men
standing, and is a very effective building. Adjoining are the
farm-buildings, which are nearly all on a very lavish scale, and
thoroughly modern in construction. To the northward are the
workshops. All these also are admirably built, and are thoroughly
suited to their purposes. Beyond these lie the brickyards, stoneyards,
pottery works, tannery, cement yard, etc.

The inmates are divided into six classes--

     Class I. Men sentenced for offences against morality and for
     arson.

     Class II. Men sentenced to Colony life as a sequel to a term of
     imprisonment of less than one year.

     Men whose past history shows them to be dangerous to the
     community.

     Class III. Habitual vagabonds, mendicants, inebriates, and men
     generally unable to support themselves.

     Class IV. Men under twenty-one years of age.

     Class V. (_a_) The infirm and (_b_) the incurable.

     Class VI. First offenders.

These come under the normal conditions of Colony life; that is to say,
they are obliged to do about nine hours work a day, of a character
suited to their capacity, in return for which they receive board and
lodging, and in addition, a small amount of pay.... This is partly
paid in tokens valid only at the Colony stores and canteen, and partly
it is banked against the time when the colonist leaves. The normal
day is as follows: the colonists rise at 4.30 (summer), and after
leaving the lavatory each man receives his ration of bread for the day
(1-1/2 lbs.) and as much coffee (chicory) as he likes. What bread is
not eaten then is kept for dinner and supper. At 6 they enter the
shops, where they remain until 11.30, with a half-hour interval from 8
to 8.30 a.m., when they can go outside and smoke. At 11.30 they are
all marched back to the quadrangle and go into the dining-halls in two
relays. After this they rest until 1.30, when they re-enter the shops
until 6, with another half-hour interval at 4 o’clock. On their return
supper is served, and immediately afterwards they go to bed, when the
roll-call is made, requiring every man to stand to his bed, and those
missing are noted.

In the winter the short day necessitates the farmhands retiring very
early to bed. Those who work in the shops begin their work at 7.30 in
the morning, and work on after dusk by artificial light.

The colonists are given no meat, but the soup of vegetables is very
good, and each man has a large quantity. They have a sweet drink made
of liquorice-wood boiled in water, with their meals; coffee and bread
for breakfast; potatoes or other vegetables, with a meat sauce for
supper; and chicory-water in large cans in their dormitories. To
supplement the above they can make purchases from the canteen of beer,
tobaccos, lard, herrings, etc., which are sold at exceedingly small
prices, representing only the actual cost price of the article when
produced by the Colony labour itself.

The staff is small, and consists of a Director-in-Chief at
Hoogstraeten, who exercises a general financial supervision over all
the Colonies, a Director at Wortel and Merxplas, and at the latter
place the following officers: Deputy-Directors, 2; Doctor, 1; Priests,
2; Teachers, 5; Clerks, 19; Manufacturing Manager, 1; Warders, 81;
Sisters of Mercy, 6.

All offences against the regulations of the Colony and all cases of
slack work are summarily dealt with by the Director, who has full
power to transfer men from one class to another, and from a more to a
less remunerative form of work. He can also award imprisonment or
solitary confinement, and bread and water diet in the Colony cells for
any period up to sixty days at a time. This power can also, in case of
necessity, be used repeatedly, so that a bad character can practically
be permanently locked up.

A further help to the maintenance of discipline is undoubtedly the
privilege of earning wages and of spending them directly on beer and
tobacco, etc.

There is one feature of Merxplas which is at first rather startling;
that is, that every day there are a certain number who escape. This
does not seem to give the authorities much concern, because they are
nearly always brought back again in a short time, either through
capture, or because their mode of living brings them again to the
notice of the police.

A beginning was once made of digging a moat round the grounds, but it
was abandoned because it was thought that the possibility of escape
helped to prevent disaffection. The colonists also, in the eyes of the
law, are patients rather than criminals. Those in Classes I. and II.
are, of course, much more closely guarded. Escape, like all other
breaches of Colony discipline, can be punished by the Director with
imprisonment in the Colony cells.

The results of the work done at the Colony is thus summed up in the
“Blue Book” from which the greater part of the detailed particulars
have been taken.

“Even more important than the economy of the system is its effect on
the colonists. The men at Merxplas have retained a large proportion of
whatever manual and technical skill they possessed when they first
began to slip out of employment in the outside world. They have
entered the Colony before the rapid deterioration, which is the
inevitable result of the tramp life, has had time to take effect, and
the opportunity afforded them to practise their trades has, in most
cases, prevented their ever sinking to the level of the average
English tramp. In every shop the keen interest the men take in their
work is most noticeable; only one foreman and one warder are employed
in each shop, and without coercion the men seemed all working with
remarkable energy and real interest. This is, in our opinion, perhaps
the most striking feature of the whole establishment.

“The permanent effect on the individual is less, perhaps, than one
would at first sight expect. About ninety per cent are habituals. The
reason given by all the authorities was always the same. Outside, this
class of man of weak moral fibre, and generally of inferior physique,
cannot keep from drink. Sooner or later he breaks down, loses his
place and returns. Inside, away from temptation, they work well, and
as long as the sentence does not exceed two or three years, seem
content to remain. The colonies, it must be remembered, do not claim
to deal largely with the temporarily unemployed, but with a class that
is more or less permanently inefficient. In this connection, however,
it seems that no attempt has been made to bring any strong religious
influence to bear. There are the usual masses and other observances
of the Roman Church, but there seems to be little personal mission
work undertaken.”

I come to my remedy.

As I see it, what we have to do is this--we must establish colonies in
which the Unemployables shall spend their lives. When once a man has
been proved to be irreclaimable by ordinary methods, when a properly
established tribunal, after searching inquiry, has pronounced him a
burden and a drag upon the community, then I would put him away for
life, if he is irreclaimable, and continues to remain so.

I would make his life just as pleasant as he himself chose to make it.
If he refused to work, then his lot should be a prison cell and bread
and water until he did. If he made the best of the situation in which
his own fault had placed him, he should be enabled to earn enough to
keep him in considerable comfort, and to provide him with harmless and
judicious pleasures.

Such a man should live in a state of almost freedom. The one thing
denied him would be the privilege of mixing with the outside world and
of reproducing his kind. Such gratifications and amusements as he had
earned should be supplied him with no ungrudging hand. The
consolations of religion should be always at his command and should
be constantly brought before him.

But he should not be allowed to beget children who would swell the
ranks of the Unemployable and increase the intolerable burden already
carried by the honest working man. It is just about as certain as
science and economic experience can make it, that the child of an
Unemployable will become an Unemployable too. It is possible that one
child in a thousand may turn out a decent citizen. That is about the
maximum percentage, and if, for the sake of possibly producing one
ordinary worker we ought to allow nine hundred and ninety-nine
hopeless idlers to come into existence, then I have nothing more to
say.

I do not think such a position can be maintained for a moment. I
venture to think that you will agree with me.

I admit that such a method would be inhuman, immoral and unchristian,
if we were to treat the hopeless social failure as a criminal pure and
simple. Let us make his life as happy as he chooses to make it; treat
him as a criminal if he won’t work in the colony, comfort and pet him
if he will. But we need go no further than this. I do not honestly
think that our duty as Christians or sociologists imposes more
consideration upon us than just this. “If thine arm offend thee cut it
off.”

Sir Robert Anderson, for many years Assistant Commissioner of
Metropolitan Police, has long held the view that the professional
criminal is not a necessity of civilization, and that a reform of the
method of dealing with him would soon bring about his complete
extinction. Sir Robert, with his extensive Scotland Yard experience
behind him, declares that the number of high-class criminals in
England does not exceed a few dozen, and that if these were got out of
the way organized crime against property would cease. The plan which
Sir Robert Anderson has conceived is that of providing asylums in
place of the present prisons, where a man who has proved to have
devoted his life to crime would be sent for life and made to earn his
living.

We must provide asylums for the Unemployables also, in order to
preserve ourselves. It is no use being sentimental. We must relegate
social parasites to a state and condition where they can no longer
infest the social body and cannot increase in numbers. When we have
done this, when you working men have done this, in less than a
generation the question of the Unemployed will be satisfactorily
settled. It may well be, moreover, that such a method will change the
least degraded Unemployables into honest, hard-working citizens who
can be once more admitted into the world on probation.

These are my opinions, and though I have given you but a sketch of
them to-night, I submit that they are at least reasonable and worth
consideration.

The words of the poet Shelley are no less applicable in the present
than they were in the past. He had an unconquerable faith in the
spiritual destiny of our race, and his lines, when he wrote his “song
to the men of England” were filled with flame:--

    “The seed ye sow another reaps;
    The wealth ye find another keeps;
    The robes ye weave another wears;
    The arms ye forge another bears.

    Sow seed--but let no tyrant reap;
    Find wealth--let no impostor heap;
    Weave robes--let not the idle wear;
    Forge arms, in your defence to bear.”




AN AUTHOR’S POST-BAG




