The Project Gutenberg EBook of 'I Believe' and other essays, by 
Cyril Arthur Edward Ranger Gull and Guy Thorne

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license


Title: 'I Believe' and other essays

Author: Cyril Arthur Edward Ranger Gull
        Guy Thorne

Release Date: October 25, 2012 [EBook #41178]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK 'I BELIEVE' AND OTHER ESSAYS ***




Produced by Mark C. Orton, Matthew Wheaton and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
book was produced from scanned images of public domain
material from the Google Print project.)









    “I BELIEVE”

    AND OTHER ESSAYS

    BY

    GUY THORNE

    Author of “When it Was Dark,” “First it was Ordained,”
    “Made in His Image,” etc., etc.

    LONDON

    F. V. WHITE & CO., Limited
    14, BEDFORD STREET, STRAND, W.C.

    1907


    RICHARD CLAY & SONS, LIMITED,
    BREAD STREET HILL, E.C., AND
    BUNGAY, SUFFOLK.




CONTENTS


      I. “I BELIEVE”
     II. THE FIRES OF MOLOCH
    III. THE HISTORICIDES OF OXFORD
     IV. THE BROWN AND YELLOW PERIL
      V. THE MENACES OF MODERN SPORT
     VI. VAGROM MEN
    VII. AN AUTHOR’S POST-BAG




DEDICATION

To F. V. WHITE, ESQUIRE.


MY DEAR WHITE,

The publication of this book is a business arrangement between you and
me. Its dedication however has nothing to do with the relations of
author and publisher in those capacities, but is merely an expression
of friendship and esteem. This then is to remind you of pleasant hours
we have spent together on the other side of the channel, in your house
at London, and my house in Kent.

Yours ever sincerely,

GUY THORNE.




“I BELIEVE”




I

“I BELIEVE”

“_Multitudes, multitudes in the valley of decision_.”


When I was a boy I made an occasional invasion of my father’s study,
and in the absence of more congenial matter tried to extract some
amusement from the shelves devoted to Christian apologetics. At any
rate the pictures of the portly divines, which sometimes prefaced
their polemics, interested me, and I was sometimes allured to read a
few pages of their scripture. I remember that I enjoyed the sub-acid
flavour of Bishop Butler’s advertisement, prefixed to the First
Edition of his _Analogy_, at an early age, and I have thought lately
that in certain circles one hundred and seventy years have not greatly
modified the mental attitude.

Hear what the Rector of Stanhope who, as Horace Walpole said, was
shortly to be “Wafted to the see of Durham in a cloud of metaphysics,”
says about his literary contemporaries--

“It is come, I know not how, to be taken for granted, by many persons
that Christianity is not so much as a subject for inquiry, but that it
is now at length discovered to be fictitious, and accordingly they
treat it as if, in the present age, this were an agreed point among
all people of discernment, and nothing remained but to set it up as a
principal subject of mirth and ridicule, as it were, by way of
reprisals for its having so long interrupted the pleasures of the
world.”

Perhaps the difference between the times of George the Second and
Edward the Seventh may be best discerned in the status and calibre of
the popular penmen who in either age have found, or furnished
amusement in a tilt against the Catholic Faith.

The man in the street, as we know him, did not exist in the eighteenth
century. He is the predominant person to-day, and he requires the
services of able authors to assure him of immunity, when he is
inclined to frolic away from chastity or integrity, much as did the
county members who pocketed the bribes of Sir Robert Walpole and
prated of patriotism.

Fortunately for society the man in the street is a very decent fellow,
and generally finds out before long that Wisdom’s ways are ways of
pleasantness. A man may enjoy posing as an agnostic when he wants an
excuse for--as the negro said--“doing what he dam please,” but when he
takes to himself a wife, and children are born to him, a certain
anxiety as to the continuity and perpetuation of these relationships
begins to show itself. A man who has lost a little child, or waited in
agonizing suspense to hear the physician’s verdict, when sickness
overshadows his home, discovers that he needs something beyond
negations, something that will bring life and immortality to light
again within his soul.

Moreover, the man in the street finds it necessary to come to some
decision on other problems of existence. He is a citizen and must
needs exercise his enfranchisement and give his vote at an election
now and again. He must help to decide whether the State shall ignore
religion and establish a system of ethical education, of which the
ultimate sanction is social convenience, or maintain the thesis that
Creed and Character are mutually inter-dependent.

As he pays his poor rate wrathfully, or with resignation, its annual
increase reminds him of the necessity of curing or eliminating the
unfit. When he reads of Belgian and Prussian colonial enterprise, or
ponders on the perplexing problem of the Black Belt which the Southern
States must solve, he is compelled to consider whether it is true
that “God has made of one blood all nations of men for to dwell on all
the face of the earth,” or whether this shall be accounted as another
of the delusions of Saul of Tarsus whom Governor Festus found to be
mad.

Indeed, our friend, the man in the street, when he becomes a family
man, without any pretensions to be a man of family, very often finds
himself face to face with other problems. Shall he simply sing with
the Psalmist “Like as the arrows in the hand of the giant, even so are
the young children. Happy is the man that hath his quiver full of
them,” or shall he be guided by the gloss of a modern interpreter who
maintains that the oriental quiver was designed to hold but two or
three arrows at most?

Even when the plain man confines his interests to his business and
seeks relaxations in “sport” alone, endeavouring to evade the puzzles
of politics and avoid all theologized inquiry, he cannot escape from
ethical consideration. Professionalism in athletics and questions of
betting and bribery contend with his conviction that there is
something which ennobles man in running and striving for mastery, and
it is futile to curse the bookmaker when his clients are so many, his
occupation so lucrative.

The average man gets little guidance from pulpit or press. It is dull
work reading sermons, even if sermons came in his way. From time to
time some eloquent bishop or canon is reported in the Monday morning
papers, but journalists know that the publication of a summary with,
in the case of a few of the preachers, some epigrams or denunciations,
is all that can be permitted or expected. These may arouse the
attention to the existence of evils, but give no guiding principle for
their cure.

The habit of attendance at some place of worship is easily abandoned
in the days of bachelor freedom, and rarely regained in maturer years.
Men for the most part find the preacher unconvincing. The usual
audience does not desire discussion of difficulties. When the honest
instinct of devotional worship is gratified by common praise and
prayer, the people who regularly go to church, elderly, and orthodox
in their own way, resent a demand upon their intellectual exertion,
and the Northern farmer of Tennyson hardly misrepresents them, “I
thought he said what he ought to ha’ said and I comed away.” The great
Nonconformist societies may, in some congregations, give a larger
latitude to the preacher, but his freedom is rather in the direction
of divinity than of ethics. Mr. Rockefeller is a prominent pillar of
Protestantism in the States, and Mr. Jabez Balfour, in another
congregation at Croydon, apparently knew no qualms of conscience
before his actual conviction, which was public, of sin.

There is an old proverb which tells us that “A man is either a fool or
a philosopher at forty”--and, though proverbs are often only venerable
prejudices in disguise, it is true that a man, who has attained his
eighth lustrum and is of average ability, generally has come to
certain definite conclusions as to the rudimentary laws of health. He
knows enough about his body to avoid fatal errors in diet, and has
learned the necessity of exercise and fresh air. But when he is called
upon, as a member of the body politic, to decide questions of ethics
on which the sanitation of society must depend, he feels himself at a
loss. To many people it will seem a hard saying that a man must be
either a fool or a philosopher at forty, but long ere he has reached
that age he will have encountered problems of philosophy which it is
impossible to shirk if he is to do his duty as a free man.

St. Paul, it is true, when writing to a Christian Community in Asia
Minor, bids them “beware lest any man spoil you through philosophy.”
And the unfortunate habit of Bible Christians, of tearing a text from
a treatise and making it into a precept, has thrown a sort of
discredit upon philosophic thinking, while the mass of mankind will
always prefer rules to principles of conduct. But in vain do we
clamour against intellectual complications which are the inevitable
endowment of these days. Life is necessarily intricate, subtle and
anxious, and Democracy has made of each man a ruler and governor in
his degree. Is it possible to point to a single principle which shall
be a motive and a standard of duty, which shall establish a synthetic
method after the ruthless analysis of the later Victorian days?

How searching that analysis has been! Fifty years ago the man in the
street might rarely read the Bible, but he had a tolerably assured
conviction that the Bible was infallible, however resolutely he might
refuse its interpretation by an infallible church.

Then

     “...the Essays and Reviews debate Begins to tell on the
     public mind, and Colenso’s views have weight.”

Plain people were taught to look on the Old Testament as a library of
Hebrew literature containing not only poetry and history, but romance.

When Colenso’s book first appeared, Matthew Arnold deprecated its
publication since it brought criticisms familiar to men of culture
before the notice of the public, without considering how the beliefs
of “the vulgar” might be upset.

The supercilious apostle of “sweetness and light,” himself contributed
largely in later years to the general confusion in men’s minds, and
the New Testament criticism has been introduced to the general public
by Mr. Arnold’s accomplished niece.

Our friend, the man in the street, was all unprepared!

What had he ever been taught of theology, the Divine word to man? In
his school-days, if his father was an income tax payer he probably had
a weekly lesson in “Divinity,” when he construed a few verses of the
Gospels in the Greek Testament, and showed up to his master, now and
then, a map of the journeying of the Apostle Paul in Asia Minor and
Eastern Europe. If his father expected him to be confirmed, in due
course, some lessons in the catechism were added for his benefit, but
prudent pedagogues took care not to endanger the popularity of a
school, whether public or private, by any definite teaching which
might be accused of being dogmatic. The head-master was probably a
person of unsuspected orthodoxy, with a possible deanery or bishopric
in view for his days of superannuation. His sermons in chapel used to
set a fine standard of conduct before the boys, and were gracefully
free from all mention of controversial questions. In due course they
were published with the title _Sermons at Yarrow_, and enterprising
parents turning over their pages would find little to criticize and
much to admire. The Cross, if presented at all in these publications,
was so bespangled with rhetorical jewellery that “Jews might kiss and
Infidels adore.” And the children of Israel as public-school boys were
never painfully conscious of any great difference between themselves
and their baptized companions. But unfortunately only a few of the
boys came under the civilizing instruction of the Chief. Bright young
athletes from Oxford and Cambridge, lured into the ranks of pedagogy
by their love of football and cricket, were the assistant-masters. A
regular salary with holiday for a fourth of the year, the prospect of
early marriage, and a remunerative boarding-house, attracted them to a
pleasant position, and they had no wish to rebel against the
time-table which made them teachers of “Divinity” for at least one
hour in the week. All educated people should be tolerably familiar
with a book so largely used in quotation as the Bible, and the
succession of the Kings of Israel and Judah could be used in
strengthening the memory, whilst the stories of “Jehu and those other
Johnnies you know” were by no means devoid of picturesque incident.
Greek Testament could also be made useful in the acquisition of a
vocabulary, or in a lesson showing the difference between classical
and vernacular Greek. “Of course we must leave the application of
these studies to conduct to _Home influence_,” the headmasters would
blandly observe, and between parent and pedagogue the teaching of the
Christian Faith fell neglected to the ground.

What chance had the boys so brought up, of forming any conception of
the essential truths of Religion? A superficial acquaintance with the
stories of Hebrew history, a perfunctory attendance at chapel, some
well-meant exhortations on the subject of temperance and chastity, as
the catechism was revived in their memories before they were brought
to be confirmed by the Bishop, and some ability “to translate and give
the context” of a few phrases from the Greek texts of the Gospels,
these were their intellectual religious equipment for a life of fierce
temptation from within and without. And when they encountered the
storm and stress of modern social life they found that the critics had
taken from them the old reverence of nursery days for “God’s Book,”
their school training had taught them only a rough code of honour, and
their chief restraint from any ignoble impulse was a feeling that to
do certain deeds was not “good form.”

A little lower down the social ladder the man in the street has fared
no better in his boyhood. In the public elementary schools he has had
a half-hour’s lesson in Scripture and catechism five days of the week,
and annually the Diocesan, or the School Board, Inspector came round
to ascertain whether the Syllabus of religious teaching had been duly
followed. But only when devout parish priests had a talent for
teaching and a love for boys and girls was any attempt made to give
children a _religion_, and even in this case not very much could be
done for those who left school for ever when they were twelve years
old.

A generation ago Lord Sherbrooke, on the extension of the franchise,
told his contemporaries that it was time to begin “to educate our
masters”--but we have not gone very far in our instruction of
Christian Sociology, though as yet we have not adopted the Utilitarian
basis of morals accepted by the French Republic, and endeavoured to
establish principles of duty towards man without any reference
whatever to a duty towards God.

Can any one be surprised if the plain man be perplexed when he is
called upon to decide questions of economy and morality without any
guiding principle? As a matter of fact he makes no such effort.
“Multitudes, multitudes in the valley of decision, for the day of the
Lord is near in the valley of decisions,” but the sun and the moon are
darkened, and the stars withdraw their shining. The puzzled popular
vote is but as the swing of the pendulum, first to this side, then to
the other. “These fellows have been no good, let us give the others a
show.”

Yet assuredly there is a principle which is guidance and strength if
only men could discern it. There are Teachers who can tell men of its
beneficent power, but they are as yet few in number, and their voices
are not sufficiently strong. When once these can get a hearing, men
welcome their evangel and find in it a guide of life.

I am persuaded that just as Bishop Butler, when he perused the preface
of his _Analogy_, had no prescience of the young fellow of Lincoln,
who was in a few years to give the Christian faith a fresh hold in the
hearts of the common people, who gladly heard him, so in our time many
of our Bishops seem unable to perceive the dawn of another “day of the
Lord.”

Indeed, it is our misfortune in England that Bishops are almost
necessarily bad leaders. We are told when an election to the Papacy is
imminent that this or that Cardinal is in the list of “Papabili”--a
possible Pope--so in like manner we may almost select amongst the
undergraduates of Oxford and Cambridge our future diocesans. These are
men clever, shrewd, and hard-working, of estimable private character,
and not without some modest patrimony. Early entered in the race for
preferment, ambitious, and yet, _mirabile dictu_, devout, they are
endowed first of all with the true qualification for episcopacy, a
capacity for compromise and a pliant political mind. _Sic itur ad
astra_ the excellent curate or tutor, the courteous and accomplished
chaplain to the Bishop, the eloquent canon and ecclesiastical courtier
is consecrated and enthroned. Henceforward for the rest of his days he
must hurry from his study table, crowded with correspondence, to his
confirmations, his diocesan society meetings, and his weary,
humiliating attendance at the House of Lords. What wonder if Bishops
discourage new ventures of faith, who have no time for thinking, no
time for reading, and perhaps, sometimes, too little opportunity for
prayer!

And so we find them not unwilling to accommodate the Catholic Faith to
the popular prejudice of the moment, acquiescing in an undogmatic,
undenominational, more or less Christian creed. Popularity becomes the
very breath of their nostrils, and they proceed to hide in an
appendix to the Prayer-book, the hymn _Quicunque vult_.

Yet the discerning can see that now is no time for keeping in the
background the great truths of religion. Already men are being
prepared in many ways to receive them.

The Christian Faith in England is no longer hampered by certain
arbitrary axioms of the Puritan Divines. In the sixteenth century men
were almost compelled by the exigencies of the situation to discover
some Infallible authority which they could set up over against the
Infallibility of the Church of Rome, and they endeavoured to treat
Holy Scripture as though the great library of Jewish and Christian
writers contained a complete code of consistent legislation. A text
was a convincing argument for the Divine right of Kings, or for
binding them in chains, for the burning of witches or the destruction
of a shrine, and although in the two following centuries the
Protestant ministers taught men to modify this conception, and to
realize the difference between the Old Testament and the New, the
popular idea of Revelation allowed small scope for theological
inquiry. The biographies of our literary men of the Victorian period
have shown us how they were tempted to separate themselves from all
public communion with the Church, by their misgiving that the Church
was committed to an impossible position. Carlyle groaned for what he
called an “exit from Houndsditch,” some deliverance from the Rabbinic
interpretation and use of the Bible. Things are very different to-day,
as Henry Sidgwick says in a letter to Alfred Lord Tennyson published
by his son in a recent memoir. “The years pass, the struggle with what
Carlyle used to call ‘Hebrew old clothes’ is over, Freedom is won.”
And in the result a scientific criticism of the Old and New Testament
is found to be compatible with, and often a compulsion to an
acceptance of the Christian creed, not the creed of Calvin, or the
Westminster Confession, but the reasoned statement of Nicæa. The
student of physical science no longer believes that if he goes to
church he must be taken to accept the cosmogony of Genesis, and on his
side he no longer stumbles at the difficulty of miraculous events. He
knows too much about the influence of mind over matter to say that it
is impossible that Jesus Christ and His Apostles should have healed
the paralytic and made the blind to see and the deaf to hear. He is no
longer “cocksure” of his capability of drawing a line of division
between the organic and the inorganic. He can conceive of the
existence of spirits which can control and modify the ordinary laws
of life. He finds it probable that evolution is not exhausted when Man
has come into being, and can look forward to a spiritual existence
without suspecting himself of superstition. Sacraments, the union of
the spiritual with the material, seem to him to be in accordance with
the laws of the Universe, and he would never now-a-days stigmatize
them as “Magic.” However he may explain the methods by which cures
were wrought upon the afflicted, the scientific man of to-day would
not accuse St. Luke of falsehood because he tells us that, “God
wrought special miracles by the hands of Paul, so that from his body
were brought unto the sick handkerchiefs or aprons, and the diseases
departed from them and the evil spirits went out of them.” Indeed the
man of science knows himself to be on the track of discoveries which
will show us secrets of personality and spiritual possession which
will banish for ever the absurd incredulity of the eighteenth and
nineteenth centuries.

Who now-a-days would assert that “miracles do not happen,” when men
like Sir Oliver Lodge are laboriously discovering some few of these
laws of the Universe which give us these portents and signs? Who dares
to sneer at Parthenogenesis or repeat the slander of Celsus about the
Mother of God? Men only who have grown rusty in reposing on their past
reputations and cannot see that materialism as a philosophy is dead.
Day by day fresh evidence of the power of the spirit over matter
bursts upon us. A plea for “philosophic doubt” of Professor Huxley’s
infallibility is no longer necessary. The very distinction between
matter and spirit grows more and more difficult as science develops
analytical power. The minds of men are being prepared again to receive
that Supreme revelation which told of the wedding of the earth and
heaven, the taking of the Manhood into God.

In truth, this is the one principle which can give men guidance in the
tangled intricacy of modern life. It is necessary to salvation, _now_,
not hereafter only, to believe rightly the Incarnation of our Lord
Jesus Christ.

For, first of all, men need to be saved from the apathy of despair.
They need some hope that there is an answer to the riddle of the
Universe. Let them once begin to feel that it _may_ be true that the
very God cares for His creatures and has made His love for them
manifest by taking to Himself the body, mind and spirit of man, and
joining for ever human nature to the Godhead, then through the
darkness comes a human voice saying--

    “O heart I made, a heart beats here!
    Face, my hands fashioned, see it in Myself.
    Thou hast no power nor mayst conceive of mine,
    But love I gave thee, with Myself to love,
    And thou must love Me who have died for thee.”

A man regains his self-respect when once he has escaped from the
paralyzing sense that his is only

    “a life of nothings nothing worth
    From that first nothing ere our birth
    To that last nothing under earth.”

And there is only one starting-point for those who journey on this
quest of an answer to the enigma of life. They must resolutely abandon
the long travelled “_a priori_ road.” They must understand that the
science of to-day is not tied to any materialistic axioms, that
metaphysic cannot be ignored by the physician, and that no competent
scientist to-day would say of the Resurrection of Jesus on which
ultimately depends His claims to our adoration, “_That could not
happen_.” We know enough now of the laws of the Universe to know that
we do not know them all.

So some of us perceive that what is needed to-day is to arrest the
attention of the man in the street, to get him to perceive that
Christianity has much more to say for itself than he suspected, and
that Christian Philosophy will place in his hand a clue which will
guide him in the labyrinth of life.

    “I say the acknowledgment of God in Christ
    Accepted by thy reason, solves for thee
    All questions in the earth and out of it.”

We must set men free from phrases and get them to think. It suits the
game of the party politician to pretend that ethics are easily
self-evident, and that there is a simple fundamental religion on which
all men are agreed; but there is a question which must be insistently
urged, and upon the answer to which all things depend, “What think ye
of Christ?”

Probably nothing has done more to alienate the man in the street from
religious observance than the hypocritical pretence that all men are
agreed about “simple Bible teaching.” He knows well enough that what
really matters is whether a man believes or not that God became man.
If ever the Labour Party should definitely declare for elementary
education without religious teaching it will be because the men whose
children attend the elementary schools know that they cannot read the
New Testament without asking, “Is it true?”

“Did Jesus Christ really die and rise again the third day according to
the Scriptures?” “Did Jesus Christ go up into heaven in the sight of
the apostles till a cloud received Him?” “Did Mary’s Son come to her
as other babies come?” “Was Joseph Jesus Christ’s real father?” Our
members of Parliament who have no leisure to know their own children,
who keep them in the nursery till it is time for them to go to the
Preparatory School, who leave their training to the governess and the
head-master, may talk about “the cruelty of the religious differences
which hinder the establishment of an efficient system of education for
the children of the State.” But the men and the mothers who live with
their children and talk to them about their lessons, know that a child
will insist upon an answer to its questions. A father of a family in
the artisan and labouring classes, if he be at all intelligent, loses
all respect for ministers of the Gospel who pretend that there is no
difficulty about the simple Gospel story, and losing his self-respect
for the men who have appointed themselves his teachers, he is tempted
to throw all theology aside. And if he ventures on this despairing
expedient he finds himself in mental confusion again over ethics
instead of theology, and there arises a prospect of anarchy and
disorder. Capital is timid, so enterprise is checked. Poverty
increases and riot follows, and it all ends, not now-a-days in the
Napoleonic “whiff of grape-shot,” but in the rattle of the maxim in
the streets and the desolation of a thousand homes.

The experience of all civilization is that you cannot separate
morality from religion. When the Romans lost their faith in the old
gods and became “undenominational,” civic virtue decayed. When the
genius of the Empire was set up for a universal Deity and men were
bidden as good citizens to burn their few grains of incense before the
statue of the reigning Emperor--the representative of an ordered and
moral state--we know what happened. You cannot make an abstraction
alive and deify Government. Laws, which have the sanction only of
expediency, do but furnish mankind with exercise in evasion.
Indefinite belief in the existence of “something not ourselves which
makes for righteousness” has no motive force, and though men may rub
on in some fashion or other by following ancient custom, and the law
of use and wont, this can only be done in quiet times. And ours are
not quiet times; indeed, the air is thick with principles which are
forcing themselves into expression. The principles of Nationality or
Cosmopolitanism, the comity of nations and the limits of destruction,
international trades unionism, and the laws of marriage are recurring
items upon the programme of every social science congress. All these
dark questions are forced upon the attentions of men, and never was
there greater need of some synthetic philosophy which may help us in
their exploration. Are we going to put Christianity aside and rule out
theology from our calculations?

I may quote the testimony of the late Sir Leslie Stephen here. Every
one knows that he held no brief to defend orthodoxy--

     “To proclaim unsectarian Christianity is, in circuitous
     language, to proclaim that Christianity is dead. The love of
     Christ, as representing the ideal perfection of human nature,
     may indeed be still a powerful motive, and powerful whatever
     the view which we take of Christ’s character. The advocates of
     the doctrine in its more intellectual form represent this
     passion as the true essence of Christianity. They assert with
     obvious sincerity of conviction that it is the leverage by
     which alone the world can be moved. But, as they would
     themselves admit, this conception would be preposterous if,
     with Strauss, we regarded Christ as a mere human being. Our
     regard for Him might differ in degree, but would not differ in
     kind, from our regard for Socrates or for Pascal. It would be
     impossible to consider it as an overmastering and all-powerful
     influence. The old dilemma would be inevitable; he that loves
     not his brother whom he hath seen, how can he love Christ whom
     he hath not seen? A mind untouched by the agonies and wrongs
     which invest London hospitals and lanes with horror, could not
     be moved by the sufferings of a single individual, however
     holy, who died eighteen centuries ago.

     “No; the essence of the belief is the belief in the Divinity of
     Christ. But accept that belief; think for a moment of all that
     implies, and you must admit that your Christianity becomes
     dogmatic in the highest degree. Our conceptions of the world
     and its meaning are more radically changed than our conceptions
     of the material universe, when the sun instead of the earth
     becomes its centre. _Every view of history, every theory of our
     duty, must be radically transformed by contact with that
     Stupendous Mystery._ Whether you accept or reject the special
     tenets of the Athanasian Creed is an infinitesimal trifle. You
     are bound to assume that every religion which does not take
     this dogma into account is without true vital force. Infidels,
     heathens, and Unitarians reject the single influence which
     alone can mould our lives in conformity with the everlasting
     laws of the universe. Of course, there are tricks of sleight of
     hand by which the conclusion is evaded. It would be too long
     and too trifling to attempt to expose them. Unsectarian
     Christianity consists in shirking the difficulty without
     meeting it, and trying hard to believe that the passion can
     survive without its essential basis. It proclaims the love of
     Christ as our motive, whilst it declines to make up its mind
     whether Christ was God or man; or endeavours to escape a
     categorical answer under a cloud of unsubstantial rhetoric. But
     the difference between man and God is infinite, and no effusion
     of superlatives will disguise the plain fact from honest
     minds. To be a Christian in any real sense you must start from
     a dogma of the most tremendous kind, and an undogmatic Creed is
     as senseless as a statue without shape or a picture without
     colour. Unsectarian means un-Christian.“--From _Freethinking
     and Plainspeaking_ (pp. 122-4), by Leslie Stephen. (Longmans,
     London.)

The considerations which seemed to compel the clearheaded author of
this extract to his own well-known intellectual position no longer
apply. In England, at any rate, the Church is not bound down to any
mechanical theory of the inspiration of the Bible, and accepts all the
discoveries of Modern Physical Science without misgiving. Such books
as the late Archbishop of Canterbury (Dr. Temple) gave us in his
Bampton Lectures have long ago shown the futility of attempting to map
out the exact terms of a reconciliation between the claims of science
and religion, but they have shown that religion and science are _not_
destructive and contradictory of each other.

“The same principles are found in each. The principle of evolution,
for instance, is as evident in the gradual development of religion as
in the age-long process by which the natural world was created; the
order and beauty and regular succession manifest in Nature can be
traced also in the spiritual universe. The revelation which was
formerly held to be violation of law is seen to be a revelation of
higher law. The great postulate of science, the uniformity of Nature,
is not infringed.”

We know now that there are laws of the Universe which, if we knew more
about them, would tell us how it was that a Virgin could conceive and
bear a Son. It is not to us an inconceivable superstition that “The
Son of Man” should have in His own person powers of which the
rudimentary signs can be traced in all humanity, manifesting
themselves from time to time. The day is long past when the
resurrection of Jesus Christ can be set aside as a “cunningly devised
fable.” No scientific man, who has not deliberately shut himself in an
hermetically sealed materialism would say to-day that “Miracles” do
not happen. It is a question of evidence.

And educated men know that there is a science of metaphysics, that
there is a science of psychology, that literary criticism is
scientific, that the age of a document can be decided, that cumulative
evidence cannot be ignored, and that simply to put aside the claims of
Christianity without examination is absurd.

But, as Sir Leslie Stephen shows, it is the Christianity of the
Catholic creed that matters, and it is this Christianity of which the
man in the street has need. It gives him a solution of those social
and ethical problems which he must solve, which he can only neglect at
the peril of natural degradation. For example, the position of women
depends upon our belief or disbelief that Christ was born of the
Virgin Mary. To say that monogamy is the natural evolution of
humanity, that chastity in the young unmarried man is a product of
civilization, that a high conception of a man’s duty to posterity will
keep him from harlotry, is simply to show ignorance of history, of
human nature, and of the world as it is. A man who talks now-a-days
about the respect of marriage being a Teutonic contribution to the
evolution of civilized society, is behind the times. We _know_ that
respect for women, and marriage held in honour, are the creations of
the Holy Catholic Church, which insists on the Incarnation of the Lord
Jesus Christ.

But the man in the street does not know these things. The discoveries
in science, whether physical or psychical, do not reach him. Technical
treatises are too strong meat for his intellectual digestion. The
pulpit does not appeal to him. At every baptism in the Church of
England the priest solemnly instructs the god-parents of the child,
“Ye shall call upon him to hear sermons,” but for the most part the
admonition is in vain. As a matter of fact, he picks up his religious
notions from the newspaper press. And the newspaper press is not now
controlled by men who have a distinct and definite belief in
Christianity. It depends upon Finance, and financiers have other
interests. The assertion of the Psalter, “Notus in Judæa” has been
changed now-a-days into an interrogation, and we ask, “In Jewry _is_
God known?” Let any man who has an intimate acquaintance with the
newspaper world run over in his mind the names of the great newspaper
proprietors, the editors of our journalistic press, the writers of
leading articles, the rising young journalists; and when he has
excepted a few Irishmen, who may happen to remain faithful to the
Roman Catholic Church, to which they owe their education, how many men
will he find who honestly believe the Nicene Creed, and are habitually
present on the first day of the week at the Breaking of the Bread?

The tone of the daily paper is tolerant. There is no rude hostility
displayed towards definite Christian doctrines, but the toleration is
politely contemptuous. “All wise men are of the same religion, and
what that religion is wise men do not say.”

It is true that in political matters the press has less power than it
used to have. A magnate of finance cannot now seriously affect public
opinion, though he may buy newspaper after newspaper, and sweep out
the editorial staff to supply their places with men of his own choice.
One wealthy wirepuller has other plutocrats to reckon with in
questions of party politics, and a newspaper man who is dismissed by
the proprietor of the _Tariff Reformer_ may find another editorial
chair placed at his disposal by the owner of _The Standard of Free
Trade_.

The man in the street looks out for a newspaper which may strengthen
his own party proclivities. He expects to find political questions
discussed, but so far as religion is concerned he accepts without
knowing it the current convention of the pressman, and imbibes a
semi-sceptical atmosphere without misgiving or suspicion.

And yet, as Sir Leslie Stephen saw, every theory of duty depends upon
Belief or Disbelief in the Divinity of Christ. We may talk of duty to
Society, duty to the Race, duty to Posterity, duty to Civilization;
but the plain man will recall the question of Sir Boyle Roche: “I do
not understand, Mr. Speaker, all this talk about our duty to
Posterity! What has Posterity ever done for us?”

You cannot control conduct by asserting that a man owes a debt to an
abstraction which you vivify by printing it with a capital letter,
and there remains always the question of the dying Lucretius--

    “Thy duty? What is duty? Fare thee well.”

The problem, then, which we have to solve is--how to arrest the
attention of the average man to those Christian principles, of which
the acceptance or definite refusal will determine the course of
civilization during the next twenty years.

The mere assertion of authority will not suffice, and men are not
impressed in favour of Catholic doctrine simply by dignified ceremony
and Ritual. We have only to look across the English Channel to be
assured of this. Frenchmen have not been encouraged to study the
evidences of Christianity. Bishops and priests have only advertised
sceptical books by forbidding their perusal to the faithful; and as
the devout have been instructed to live by faith, but not how to give
a reason for the faith which is in them, in the result M. Viviani’s
atheistic rhetoric has been placarded at the cost of the State in
every commune throughout France.

We may consider, then, if there be any method by which the man who
does not read theological or scientific or philosophical books, the
man who has left off going to church, or gets no help from the
average sermon, the man who has no reverence for mere authority, may
be induced to consider the Christian Revelation as offering him a key
to those riddles of life which his civic responsibilities are
perpetually propounding.

Remember that his present condition may be roughly described as
consisting of religious haziness and moral laziness. The moral
laziness is being subjected to a series of rough shocks. He _must_
make up his mind about some questions of morality. The relation of the
sexes, the duties of property, the treatment of the subject savage,
the survival of the unfit, the ethics of commerce, the control of the
sale of alcohol, the education of children, these things he has to
decide and he will ultimately decide. But he is at present perplexed,
and his religious haziness is the reason of his perplexity. He perhaps
has not reached the conclusion of his contemporary in France, but he
is on the way to it. Those heavenly lights which M. Viviani declares
that his Government has extinguished still shine faintly for men in
England, though the mists obscure them.

Can we get men to look upwards for light, and instead of cursing the
ancient creed in a confused commination, to take Arthur Clough’s
advice--

    “Ah! yet consider it again.”

I believe that there is a method, and as I mention it I am prepared
for derision from all the “chorus of irresponsible reviewers, the
irresponsible indolent reviewers.”

I believe that Fiction will find those that can be reached by no other
means. Fiction sometimes sets a man seeking for Fact.

Very diffidently and very reverently I may remind my contemporaries
that one, who has, at any rate, profoundly influenced the course of
history, whatever view we may take of His person, did not disdain this
method, “He taught them by parables.”

“Let me tell you a story.” Is there any age of mankind which does not
respond to the invitation and give audience? A story stilled the
tumult of the nursery in our earliest days, when heavy storms shook
the windows and the tedium of a long, wet afternoon had turned play
into fretfulness. A story beguiled us into interest when our History
lesson had seemed an arid futility in Fourth Form days, and our
magisterial enemies began to show themselves human after all when they
bade us read _The Last of the Barons_ as we were painfully plodding in
the Plantagenet period, and found the War of the Roses a very thorny
waste.

It is strange to turn over the pages of eminent evangelical sermons
of the early Victorian days and to notice how “Novel reading” is
denounced. Probably the worthy divines who fulminated against fiction
were thinking of their own boyhood, and the mischief which came to
them from Fielding and Richardson and Smollett surreptitiously
perused. Sir Anthony Absolute’s detestation of the circulating library
survived in some provincial circles even when Sir Walter Scott had
come to his own. The last forty years have altered things
considerably, and though some men may pretend to despise novels,
now-a-days they must take them into account. Wise and learned persons
began to prescribe them, not only as a vehicle for the exhibition of
wholesome but unattractive information, but as having a remedial value
of their own. “The intellectual anodyne of the nineteenth century,” I
remember that somebody called them--perhaps it was Sir Arthur Helps.
It came about that those who had a secret and timid predilection for
the story-book, but blushed a little if at Mudie’s counter they
ventured to ask for a novel, found that their ordinary reading of
Biography and Memoirs revealed some unsuspected sympathies of the
illustrious and wise. Who would have thought that Darwin devoured
novels and Dean Church did not disdain them, and that Mr. Gladstone
sat up all night to finish _John Inglesant_? The respectable
pater-familias has long ceased to proscribe novel reading, and the
most austere biographer no longer hides as a revelation of weakness
his hero’s literary divertisements. Finally, in this year of Grace
1906 we are boldly told that Archbishop Temple could stand an
examination in Miss Yonge’s novels, and on one occasion was heard
keenly discussing with Lord Rosebery the careers of the May family in
the _Daisy Chain_ as though they were living acquaintances. From being
recognized as a recreation the novel has developed into a power, and
Charles Dickens was a pioneer in its progress. It is the custom
amongst certain “superior persons” to sneer at the novel with a
purpose, and to suggest that authors attained remunerative results by
taking some subject which was already ripe for discussion and weaving
round it a web of fiction.

Undoubtedly there is danger to-day of such artifice, but I maintain
that the great reforms of the past century owed much to writers whose
purpose was perfectly innocent. Cardinal Newman has told us of the
literary influence of Sir Walter Scott, who turned men’s minds in the
direction of the Middle Ages.

“The general need,” he said, “of something deeper and more attractive
than what had offered itself elsewhere, may be said to have led to
his popularity; and by means of his popularity he reacted on his
readers, stimulating their mental thirst, feeding their hopes, setting
before them visions, which when once seen are not easily forgotten,
and silently indoctrinating them with nobler ideas, which might
afterwards be appealed to as first principles.”

If Cardinal Newman could thus maintain the value of Fiction in the
great ecclesiastical movement which has regenerated the Church of
England, I may claim without apology that the reform in Poor Law
Administration gained the attention of the public when Dickens made
“Bumbledom” ridiculous, and that the Court of Chancery was swept
cleaner by the breezes which were blowing from _Bleak House_. Let any
man run over in his mind the undoubted improvements in social matters
during the last fifty years, and it will be seen how Fiction has
assisted in their promotion. Did Charles Reade’s _Hard Cash_ do
nothing to arouse the attention of the public to the condition of the
insane? Did Sir Walter Besant’s novels turn no light on the sins of
the sweater, or Charles Kingsley’s _Alton Locke_ show no reason for
legalizing the Trade Union and the reform of the Law of Conspiracy?
Mrs. Harriet Beecher Stowe may to-day be forgotten, but the southern
states of North America would not dispute the influence of Fiction
upon the public mind.

The fact is that men, who generally read nothing else but newspapers,
will read a good novel, and if the book brings before them principles
which they have hitherto neglected, they will very often consider
those principles again. It is necessary, however, that the novel shall
appeal to them as being a fair record of the present or the past. They
may as they read it be unable to pronounce on the thesis which is at
the back of the book, but they will be led to consider and discuss it
if the story, as a story, holds them. And it is here that the story
which has a genuine religious motive often fails. Most of the great
artists in fiction, when they have taken in hand a subject which is of
religious interest, have written in a spirit of detachment. George
Eliot’s _Romola_ is an example, and the result is that men are more
interested in Tito Melema than in Savonarola. Novels in which religion
is necessarily much in evidence have been written either by literary
artists who have studiously endeavoured to lay aside their own
personal convictions, or if the books have been written with a
distinctly religious purpose the hero and heroine have been
unconvincing, the people in the story have not been alive.

When Cardinal Newman had abandoned prematurely his hope of maintaining
the Catholic character of the Church of England, he did not disdain to
employ his pen in the production of a novel with a religious purpose;
but we are amazed to find that the exquisite grace of style which is
one of the charms of the _Apologia_ could not render Charles Riding
interesting, or the novel _Loss and Gain_, of which he is the hero,
readable.

It is perhaps dangerous to give another example from contemporary
fiction, but those who justly admire Mrs. Humphry Ward’s subtle
discernment of character and great and increasing mastery of form and
style, will not be inclined to dispute the opinion that when, in
_Robert Elsmere_, she undertook the defence of the modern Unitarian
position, her hero was hardly a “Man’s man.”

The reason is not far to seek. The average man knows too much of the
darker side of life; and the necessary effort made by the author of
religious novels to depict that of which they, fortunately for their
own souls, have had no experience, is not successful. Charles
Kingsley’s undergraduate days were perhaps not without knowledge of
the shadows, but he is happier in the Schools of Alexandria, or in the
spacious days of Great Elizabeth, than in a tale of modern life such
as _Two Years Ago_. His Broad Church Catholic teaching does not always
find its way to the man in the street, and Henry Kingsley, whose life
was so different from that of his illustrious clerical brother, has
more of human interest in his stories.

The novel with a purpose, and especially with a religious purpose,
fails only, when it does fail, because the author’s knowledge of the
average man in his sins and his temptations to sin, is altogether
incommensurate with his familiarity with the great religious and
social problems of which his story would suggest a solution.

It is often supposed that the men do not care to find the subject of
religion introduced in fiction, that they resent religion in a novel,
as children resent the administration of a medicinal powder in a
spoonful of jam; but the expert witness of publishers demolishes this
opinion. After all, the religious claim is insistent, and life is
untruly depicted when men and women are described in a story as
uninfluenced by it. There is something unreal in a book which has no
Sundays in it. Critical opinion as expressed in the notices of books
in the daily papers, and in more weighty reviews, is very misleading,
simply because the reviewers are generally very young men or women
who know more or less of literature but very little of life. The wrath
of the young man fresh from the University at the success of those
books which do not ignore the spiritual needs of men and women amuses
the experienced author.

“Faugh!” cries Mr. Jones of Balliol; “another batch of sin and
sentiment!” “The Christian creed and the conjugal copula! Religion and
Patchouli!” Yet the critic forgets that those who would reach the
minds and hearts of men must deal with the problems of creed and
character which men have to solve, each one for himself.

Our censors, dilettante, delicate-handed, with their canons of
criticism might do worse than reckon up the number of English novels
which have lived on into the twentieth century. They will be surprised
to find that they are nearly all novels with a purpose and a religious
purpose for their “motif.” Charles Reade when he wrote _Never too late
to mend_, not only helped forward the humane and intelligent treatment
of criminals, he showed how the Divine Image was stamped indelibly on
human nature, and where it seemed to be obliterated could be restored.
But Charles Reade drew real men and women. His characters are not
puppets of the play-house but are alive. And Thackeray--_Clarum et
venerabile nomen_--making hypocrites his quarry, and raining his
quiver full of satiric shafts upon the hateful crew, never scoffed for
a moment at reverent things, but with bowed head and hushed footsteps
passed by the sanctuary. Therefore, these men are still living forces.
Men will read other novels of the past as women look at old-fashion
plates, and amuse themselves with the differences and contrasts of
succeeding generations, but the novels which men buy in their hundreds
of thousands, the novels which are reprinted again and again, the
novels for which the publishers wait as their copyright is expiring,
like heirs expecting a rich man’s death, that each may endeavour to be
first in the field with an edition which pays no royalty to the
author; these novels are those which truly represented life as it
seemed in other days, life seeking ever to be reassured that One has
come who offers to those who walk in darkness the light of life.

It is exasperating to some minds to discover that the man of the world
is not altogether worldly, and that he finds in books which recognize
religion as a considerable part of man’s life, something which gives
to them reality and truth. Immature minds and inexperienced penmen are
not impressed by the things which really matter, and in the interval
between the University and man’s settlement in life much nonsense is
written and spoken.

I speak from personal experience; and when I look back upon the
reviews I wrote ten years ago, it is with invariable consternation,
and sometimes a real sense of shame.

Nevertheless, there is some criticism of the religious novel which
must be taken seriously. I have maintained that men generally in
England are in a state of theological confusion, but that they are
interested in religion if they can be induced to consider it. There
is, as the great African Presbyter wrote seventeen hundred years ago,
a natural response in the hearts of men to the chief articles of the
Christian Faith. There is a _Testimonium animæ naturaliter
christianæ_. But there are some who can only be described by a
quotation: “They are the enemies of the cross of Christ.” They are
determined that the Catholic creed shall have no place in the counsels
and considerations of social legislation. Of Jesus Christ they have
said, “We will not have this man to reign over us;” and if there be
any chance that a man’s books may catch the eye of the public and
rouse people to think whether opportunism is really statesmanship, and
empiricism in politics really prudent, if, in a word, the principles
of Christianity are offered as a solution of social problems, then
the author is attacked on every side. It is suggested that his
intention is insincere, that his knowledge is inadequate. The things
which have been part of his painful discipline and development are
described as his accepted environment. If a Bishop happens to find an
illustration for a sermon in his pages, or a prominent Nonconformist
divine recognizes that the laity like to read them, and says so; if
any of those true hearts who love the Lord Jesus Christ in sincerity
have been ready to see that men who have been rescued _de profundis_,
men who have had experience of [Greek: ta bathea tou satana] are not
thereby disqualified for duty in the field of Faith; if, in a word,
books which claim for Christianity the first place in the thought of
the time are successful, a very malignant hostility is aroused.

It is most probable that this hatred of Christianity will grow and
increase. The world has never before been as it is to-day. The system
of party politics has placed power in the hands of the democracy. The
“working man” has at last discovered what he can do. He must make his
choice between the secular and the religious principle. Hitherto the
Christian pastors of the people have appealed to his emotions, and not
without success. The emotions will always be the chief guides in
conduct for many; but the leaders of the working men are hard-headed,
well read in social science and politics; and, owing to the
insufficient training of the clergy in these subjects, the politicians
of the _proletariat_ have conceived a sort of contempt for the parson
and the minister and the priest. The small body of Unitarians, wealthy
from their constant intermarriage with the great Jewish families, and
opposed to an aristocracy which has only in the last forty years been
willing to receive them, has been quick to see that the working man
must be alienated from the Catholic creed, and his vote secured at any
cost. On the railway bookstalls we may note the activity of the
Unitarian propaganda committee. Fifty years ago it was not necessary
to consider the opinions of the man in the street: the Unitarian
minister and his congregation were comfortable in the assurance of
their own intellectual culture and their kindly interest for the
poorer classes. In politics they were Liberals, for an Established
Church interfered with their sense of superiority, and the landed
proprietors and the hereditary aristocracy socially ignored them. But
they had no notion of calling into existence an electorate which
should endanger the supremacy of the capitalist, and, like
Frankenstein, they are afraid of their own creations, now that the
working man has become the dispenser of Parliamentary power. It is
vital to their interests that he should be diverted from further
attacks upon capital, and encouraged to believe that it is the priest
who is his true foe. “_Le cléricalisme voilà l’ennemi_” is a
convenient cry. A vague Deism is not dangerous to wealthy
manufacturers; but if the clergy are going to take up Christian
Socialism it is time to be up and doing. So every weapon against the
creed of Christendom is being taken down and examined, and many an old
fallacy is refurbished and employed once more. Celsus is disinterred
from the tomb in which Origen had buried him, and his filthy slander
of the Blessed Virgin is printed as though it were a new discovery of
historical research. Collins is called into court again as though
Bentley had never exposed his ignorance, and Hume’s _a priori_ method
is revived as though it had never been discredited; whilst Strauss and
Renan are quoted as authorities, as if Westcott and Lightfoot had
never been known. Shunt the working classes on a new line of rails.
Set them shrieking against sacramentalists, and swearing at
sacerdotalists, and we may quietly arrange our commercial combinations
and protect our manufacturing interests!

I want to see the seats under the dome of St. Paul’s filled not by
only the middle-aged middle classes, who for the most part are
Christian in creed, but by the young artisans and craftsmen, and the
strong politicians who fill the Free Trade Hall in Manchester, and
crowd the great Assembly Rooms of Birmingham and Liverpool when an
election is drawing near. The timid members of the Episcopate who may
be reminded that “He that observeth the wind shall not sow; and he
that regardeth the clouds shall not reap,” are not our only Bishops.
Occasionally a Prime Minister offers for election and consecration a
man who can reach the minds and consciences of men. Is it too great an
ambition for a storyteller to try to arouse in people’s minds a
suspicion that after all something may be said for the Catholic Faith,
and so to bring them to listen to those who know and can teach it?
Each man must do his work with such tools as have come in his way. The
Mission preacher will use his magnetic power, the artist whose skill
it is to build or to paint, will make his appeal to the love of order
and beauty, the musicians will meet the heart through the ear. May not
the writer of fiction use his psychological training and his knowledge
of many sides of human life to create a story which shall set men
thinking about the old doctrines which he believes to have lost none
of their regenerating power?

There is danger lest men with good intentions should go blindly to
work to redress and diminish social grievances. Individualism with its
hateful cry, “Each man for himself and the devil take the hindmost,”
is now at a discount, but it may be replaced by a despotism of State
regulation which will destroy the family and the home. There is, I
believe, only one creed which can make the capitalist unselfish and
the sons of labour satisfied, which will tell men that wealth means
responsibility and that there is dignity in toil, which will teach the
rich man to order himself lowly and reverently to those who are _his_
betters and to hurt nobody by word or deed, which will teach the
labourer that his chief need is not other men’s wealth, but the
“carrière ouverte aux talents” and the determination to do his duty in
that state of life, whatever it may be, unto which God _shall_ call
him.

It is the Holy Catholic Faith which makes equality of opportunity for
all men its earthly ambition, and offers refreshment and hope to those
who are not strong enough to strive with the rest. The old men saw
visions and we have found that they were prophecies, a young man may
dream dreams. My dream is that the men who are doing the work of the
world to-day may be taught that Christ is their best teacher and the
Incarnate God their refuge and strength.

There is a tale of an acrobat and juggler who knew well that his
tricks were the outcome of years of concentrated effort and constant
exercise, and being moved by the Grace of God, he desired to offer the
best thing he had to give to the Lord of Life. His best was his skill.
He lived by it. Shown in the streets and the play places, it won for
him his daily bread. His work was to give men amusement in their hours
of recreation by an exhibition of his feats of strength and
nimbleness. Could this, his one talent, be consecrated and devoted to
God? So he considered, and humbly sought the sanctuary, and there
before the Presence he performed his fantastic tricks which had cost
him years of endeavour. The story is a parable which men have not been
slow to read, and it has become the theme of the musician and artist.

Shall I offend my fellow-writers if I repeat it here in this
connection?




THE FIRES OF MOLOCH




