





                              REGENERATION

                               A REPLY TO
                               MAX NORDAU

                          WITH INTRODUCTION BY

                         NICHOLAS MURRAY BUTLER
                  Professor of Philosophy and Education
               in Columbia College in the City of New York

                                New York
                           G. P. PUTNAM’S SONS
                    London: ARCHIBALD CONSTABLE & CO.
                                  1896




                             Copyright, 1896
                                   BY
                           G. P. PUTNAM’S SONS


              The Knickerbocker Press, New Rochelle, N. Y.




INTRODUCTION


Max Nordau is perhaps the most daring toreador of recent years. He
challenged Modern Civilization to mortal combat in the presence of
assembled thousands. Had the customs of the Roman arena prevailed, the
thumbs of the interested spectators would doubtless have been extended
or pressed down in about equal numbers, when the huge beast lay
momentarily stunned by his blow. That Nordau had ingeniously tormented
the monster was apparent; had he earned the right to put an end to
its existence? The shrill cries of the excitable and easily moved
predominated for a moment, but they were soon drowned by the insistent
demands of the sober-minded for a calm consideration of the fairness of
the blows that had been struck, as well as of the permissibility of the
weapons that had been used. Yet the contest, whether fair or unfair,
had been exciting; and it was not without its uses.

It stimulated thought among the habitually unthinking. The habit of
reflective analysis, like letter-writing and other accomplishments that
require much leisure, is slipping away from us under the pressure of
our complex modern life. The newspaper, with its surges of insensate
passion and unreasoned opinion, thinks for large portions of the
community; and its thinking, like the amusements of the nursery,
expresses itself in ways that appeal chiefly to the eye and to the
ear. Information about things is too often mistaken for knowledge of
things. Highly specialized activities on the one hand, and the task of
adjusting our part in the struggle for existence to economic conditions
wholly new in the world’s history, on the other, mark off our
civilization from any that have preceded it. The activities of modern
men are so numerous, so varied, and so interesting, that we often omit
to ask on what principles they are based and whither they are tending.
Apparent success has led us to forget sometimes that all sound practice
has a reason behind it, and reasons are seldom asked for or given.

To say the least, then, it is somewhat surprising to be stopped on
the street corner and assured, with due emphasis and the appearance
of authority, that nineteenth-century men and women are absorbed in
interests that mark a diseased type of mind, and are given over to a
literature, an art, and a music that, themselves produced by madmen,
are rapidly reducing us all to the mad-house level; in other words,
that we and our boasted civilization are degenerates.

There is, as I have said, a certain use in this brutal proceeding, for
it causes us to stop and think. It shatters our conceit and shakes our
confidence. If we pause only for a moment, yet pause we must. The mere
daring of the attack forces this. So it has come about that Nordau’s
_Degeneration_, quite apart from its intrinsic merits or demerits, has
been widely read and much talked of throughout the civilized world. It
has provoked some anger, not a little amusement, and a fair measure
of contempt. Yet in a certain subtle way it has set us to examining
the reasons that lead most of us to deny the essential viciousness and
abnormality of some of the most salient and striking characteristics of
contemporary culture.

If Nordau’s indictment be classed as pessimism, it at least has the
merit of novelty of statement. From Homer’s time to the present poets
and philosophers have not forgotten, even in moments of highest
exaltation, to remind man that his life has a dark and hopeless side.
Our own century has listened to Leopardi, who envied only the dead,
and to Schopenhauer, who called man both the priest and the victim of
nature. And yet we have not been altogether unhappy.

But Nordau is no ordinary pessimist. He does not lead us to despair
through the by-paths of metaphysical subtlety, nor does he take
advantage of the awful mystery of pain to perplex and distract us.
Rather he drags us into the laboratory and, stretching us on a table
of definitions made for the purpose, proceeds to measure our faces
and our skulls, our teeth, the lobes of our ears, and our palates;
we pay the penalty of our individuality in being found to be “morbid
deviations from an original type,” and are therefore degenerate. Next
comes an examination of a selected group of man’s newer interests. The
music of Wagner, the dramas of Ibsen, the romances of Zola, the art of
the pre-Raphaelites, the mystics, the symbolists, the Parnassians—who
but a “decadent” would treat all these alike?—are passed in review
and pronounced to be proofs of the decadence of mankind even more
conclusive than those based upon physical measurements. All this is
done in the name of Science, which, reversing the procedure of Saturn,
thus hastens to devour the parent that begot it, Modern Civilization.

A long chapter might be written on the credulity of men of science.
The hypotheses that they have chased out of the door complacently fly
in at the window. Many scientists, fresh from apparently important
discoveries in narrow fields, need to be reminded of the lesson
contained in the legend of St. Augustine, who when walking on the shore
one day, absorbed in meditation, suddenly perceived a child that with
a shell was ladling the sea into a hole in the sand. “What are you
doing, my child?” asked St. Augustine. “I am emptying the ocean,” was
the reply, “into this hole.”—“That is impossible.” “Not more impossible
than for you to empty the universe into your intellect,” said the
child, and vanished. Nordau is particularly prone to regard the small
achievements of a certain school of alienists as having supplied him
with a conclusive test of all excellence. Indeed, no part of his
diatribe is more open to criticism than the use he makes of Science.
If modern science is demonstrating any one thing more clearly than
another, it is that the insights of the seers of our race as to the
highest human aspirations and the deepest needs of the human spirit,
meet not with contradiction but with support as knowledge of the cosmos
becomes more extensive and more accurate. Nordau has neglected to
reckon with the profound truth that finds expression in the celebrated
saying of Lotze:

“The more I myself have laboured to prepare the way for acceptance of
the mechanical view of Nature in the region of organic life—in which
region this view seemed to advance more timidly than the nature of the
thing required—the more do I now feel impelled to bring into prominence
the other aspect which was equally near to my heart during all these
endeavours.... It is in such mediation [between the two aspects] that
the true source of the life of science is to be found; not indeed in
affirming now a fragment of one view and now a fragment of the other,
but in showing how _absolutely universal is the extent_, and at the
same time how _completely subordinate is the significance, of the
mission which mechanism has to fulfil in the structure of the world_.”

There is also hidden from Nordau’s view that noble conception of the
place and significance of Science to which Tyndall gave expression in
the eloquent peroration of his Belfast address more than twenty years
ago:

“Science itself not unfrequently derives motive-power from an
ultra-scientific source. Some of its greatest discoveries have been
made under the stimulus of a non-scientific ideal.... The world
embraces not only a Newton, but a Shakspere—not only a Boyle, but a
Raphael—not only a Kant, but a Beethoven—not only a Darwin, but a
Carlyle. Not in each of these, but in all, is human nature whole.
They are not opposed, but supplementary—not mutually exclusive, but
reconcilable. And if, unsatisfied with them all, the human mind, with
the yearning of a pilgrim for his distant home, will still turn to
the Mystery from which it has emerged, seeking so to fashion it as to
give unity to thought and faith, so long as this is done, not only
without intolerance or bigotry of any kind, but with the enlightened
recognition that ultimate fixity of conception is here unattainable,
and that each succeeding age must be held free to fashion the
mystery in accordance with its own needs—then, casting aside all the
restrictions of Materialism, I would affirm this to be a field for the
noblest exercise of what, in contrast with the knowing faculties, may
be called the creative faculties of man.”

Why, then, should not literature and art and music enter and occupy
the very field that the apostles of Science assign to them, without
being exposed to the alienists’ sneers for their symbolism and their
mysticism? The truth is that Nordau is the slave of one idea, and that
the logical outcome of his definition and conception of abnormality.
Ribot described such a case perfectly when he said that “nothing is
more common or better known than the momentary appropriation of the
personality by some intense and fixed idea. As long as this idea
occupies consciousness, we may say without exaggeration that it
constitutes the individual.” Degeneration constitutes Nordau. He is
himself an abnormality and a pathological type. Every large hospital
for the insane knows his representative—the one sane man in a world of
lunatics.

To perceive the true direction and to estimate the relative force of
a large human movement requires a long interval of time. Caught in
an eddy of the moment, we may seem to be drifting backward, when in
reality to the spectator on the shore we are being swept onward with
great rapidity. The same world of experience seemed to Parmenides to
exclude by its very nature all motion, and to Heraclitus to derive its
only reality from its perpetual change. It is the standard and the
point of view that control such judgments, and we are entitled to ask
of any standard or point of view, _Quid juris?_ Nordau, however, has
not asked himself that question. Seizing upon some partially completed
anthropological investigations, with their half-speculative inferences,
he has fashioned for himself a yard-stick with which to measure
civilization. Aristotle long ago pointed out that the true difference
between the poet and the historian is to be found in the fact that the
former relates what may happen, the latter what has happened. One might
similarly distinguish the man of science, who applies what has been
proved, from the charlatan, who seeks to apply what has not been proved.

As a result of dissenting from Nordau’s premises, method, and
conclusions, it is by no means necessary to be forced to defend all the
phases of modern civilization that he attacks. Some of them, no doubt,
are unwholesome, but for reasons other than those which this critic
adduces. Many of them are mere fleeting phenomena, confined within
the narrowest limits, and the world at large first heard of them from
Nordau’s pages. It is only a lack of humour that can elevate such
traits and tendencies into the position of powerful forces in human
culture, such as Platonism, Humanism, or Christianity. The old Sophist
was right when he commended humour as the test of gravity.

The author of _Regeneration_ is successful in turning the flank of
Nordau’s attacking forces at more points than one. He is able at times,
without over-exertion, to convict Nordau not only of lack of knowledge,
but of what is far worse—knowledge of things that are not true. His
view of life is more sane and better-balanced than that of Nordau,
despite an anti-Teutonic tendency that perhaps partakes of the nature
of an argument _ad hominem_. The judgment of the average man who knows
the history of the past two centuries will sustain him in holding that
“there are a host of indications in all civilized countries pointing
to an increase in intellectual power, moral strength, and æsthetic
refinement.” Those to whom Lincoln applied the affectionate designation
of “the plain people” have advanced and are advancing by tremendous
strides in knowledge and refinement. They, and not a group or two of
men and women in each of the capitals of Europe, are the real index
to the degeneracy, or the contrary, of modern life. If democracy is
to establish itself more widely and more efficiently as a form of
government, it must rest upon the common sense of the plain people.
So far from being influenced by the tendencies that Nordau exploits
with so much vigour, it is not improbable that even the names of the
representatives of most of those tendencies are unknown to them.
Progress in education, in philanthropy, in commerce and industry, and
in the comforts of life, has developed a seriousness and a sense of
responsibility that have brought into many an English and American face
the lines that distinguished the countenance of the typical Senator
of Rome. The higher altruism of our time believes that life is not
only worth living, but worth working for. Long ago Mr. Herbert Spencer
remarked that the current conception of progress is vague, and that it
is in a great measure erroneous. It takes in, he said, not so much the
reality of progress as its accompaniments—not so much the substance
as the shadow. Nordau, with all of the superficiality, the absence of
any sense of proportion, and the lack of humour that so often mark the
extreme specialist, has hardly come in sight of even the shadow.

                                             NICHOLAS MURRAY BUTLER.

  Columbia College,
    _January, 1896._




CONTENTS


  CHAPTER I                                       PAGE

  Who is the Critic?                                 1

  CHAPTER II

  Dusk or Dawn!                                     27

  CHAPTER III

  Mysticism and the Unknowable                      44

  CHAPTER IV

  The Bankruptcy of Science                         73

  CHAPTER V

  Symbolism and Logic                               94

  CHAPTER VI

  The Light of Russia                              108

  CHAPTER VII

  The Real Ibsen                                   132

  CHAPTER VIII

  Richard Wagner                                   183

  CHAPTER IX

  The Religion of Self                             230

  CHAPTER X

  An Ethical Inquisition                           241

  CHAPTER XI

  Vigorous Affirmations                            258

  CHAPTER XII

  Regeneration                                     290




REGENERATION




CHAPTER I

_WHO IS THE CRITIC?_


Voltaire said that if all the celestial bodies are inhabited, our earth
must be the mad-house of the universe. To us who know the era of the
great cynic only as recorded by the history of Dryasdusts, and the
flippant memoirs and autobiographies of his contemporaries, his biting
sarcasm cannot be considered undeserved. But, with regard to our own
times, most of us would probably hesitate to brand our present state of
culture, our modern civilization, as a fool’s paradise.

It is a truism that an historical epoch can only be correctly studied
at a distance in time, as the outlines of a mountain can only be
studied at a distance in space. The actor in a piece, though intimately
acquainted with his own part and the accessories with which he comes
in contact, cannot form a just idea of the impression which the play,
with its more or less successful rendering, its scenery, and other
spectacular effects, produces on the mind of the average spectator. A
super who is ignorant of stage management and of the precise results
the manager aims at might deem many things going on behind the stage
both foolish and ridiculous. To him the frantic efforts of some actor,
or scene-shifter, to produce some ordinary effect might well appear as
lunacy.

The judgment we form concerning the time we live in runs a great risk
of being biassed by the narrowness of the vista we can command. The
interdependence of causes simultaneously at work, the co-operation of
impulses active at a great distance, the peculiarities of circumstances
surrounding each leading phenomenon, the real intentions of leading
characters, secret motives in groups and parties—all this represents so
many sealed books to the contemporary to be gradually opened only by
future historians.

There are no doubt many facilities ready to hand for the man who in
modern times desires to study his own epoch, which were not available
in the past. Distances are practically suppressed, the whole of
civilized humanity has been placed in intimate connection, a highly
developed Press records daily events everywhere in a minute fashion,
to the making of books there is no end, and in every direction an
elaborate mechanism is established for the obtaining of rapid and
precise information. In fact, the _Kammergelehrte_, who, like Kant,
would study the world-phenomenon without leaving his native town, would
in our days stand a better chance of obtaining completer and exacter
information than any philosopher before him.

But, despite the quasi-ubiquitousness the modern philosopher enjoys, he
would indulge in self-deception were he tempted to believe that he had
secured all the data requisite to judge the contemporaries of his race
as they act, live, feel, and think during the closing years of this
century.

For, against the easy access to information, must be placed the mass
of intricate problems that arise with every step of progress, the
multitude of ideas which strive for realization, the bewilderment
which ensues on crumbling systems and religions, new discoveries,
new theories, new and complicated associations of ideas, new and
hazy aspirations, sympathies, and yearnings—for all of which words
cannot be coined fast enough. Every day we witness political, social,
economic, and psychological phenomena, the explanation of which would
demand not only an enormous amount of knowledge, but reasoning powers
and a freedom from bias seldom blended in one human mind. Facts,
circumstances, theories, human actions, and human ideas, change and
intermingle so constantly and so rapidly as to produce bewilderment
capable of misleading any philosopher who attempts to gauge them with
the instruments of the past and in conformity with the doctrines of the
school to which he belongs.

What renders it still more difficult to appraise any epoch, and
especially the present one, is the intimate interdependence of all
the phenomena to be observed. The idiosyncrasies of a sovereign, or
of a minister, influence legislation, legislation influences public
institutions, public institutions influence the upper classes, and the
upper classes influence the masses. But legislation, institutions,
the upper classes, and the people are influenced from a great number
of other directions, while they again influence the sovereign and
the minister. Thus it would be impossible to attribute with accuracy
a given number of effects to special causes: for every cause is the
effect of another cause, and every effect produces other effects.
For instance, art and literature may strongly influence men in power
as well as the masses, while no one will deny that men in power, as
well as the political and social condition of the masses, exercise
a strong influence on art and literature. And then, on top of it
all,—as if worse to confound the confusion of the man with a system,
trivial incidents intervene and bring about a new series of causes
and effects evidently destined to operate as long as humanity lasts.
So interdependent are the actors in the human drama, so complete is
the intricate and sensitive mechanism of causes and effects, and so
overcharged with energy are the social dynamos, that any fool, any
child, any trivial accident, may move one of the countless points
arranged by circumstances, and thus hurl the engine of events in new
and dangerous directions.

These and many other difficulties encountered by the student of his own
time are largely responsible for his opinions, often savouring as much
of his idiosyncrasy, his professional and national prejudices as of an
independent inquiry. In order to choose between the maze of highways
and by-ways, in order to judge whether he moved forwards, backwards,
or in a circle, he gropes for some kind of a compass and naturally
clutches at that which his idiosyncrasy proffers. When we therefore
meet with an appraiser of his own epoch, it behooves us to bear in mind
the standpoint from which he has contemplated the world-phenomenon,
and with what bias and prejudice his views have been coloured. The old
Greek story of the sandal-maker who became prejudiced against a work
of art because the artist had made a mistake in the arrangement of the
sandal-strings, points its moral. The prejudices arising from trade,
personal interests, and many other palpable sources are not difficult
to trace and to evade, but where is the man whose views have not been
influenced by his nationality, his religion, his favourite science or
art, his love, his hatred, or his ambition?

It is to such influences, often considered by the influenced as so many
advantages and seldom sufficiently noticed by his critics, that we
often owe the apparent profundity and exhaustiveness of an appreciation
which in reality is one-sided.

Education, and, still more, an intense study of one special branch
of knowledge, rich in important and striking results, naturally tend
to strengthen the student’s faith and his belief in the capabilities
of his favourite science. The brain-cells, influenced by the will,
and habitually becoming stimulated by presentations—emanating from
the subject on which the student has concentrated his attention—adapt
themselves gradually to the perception of such presentations, and by
re-acting on other cells render the whole organism disposed to seek
such presentations. In plain language, the specialist in one science
has a great aptitude for discovering such causes and such effects
as his favourite science has best elucidated, while he is tempted
to overlook other causes and other effects which may be of equal or
greater importance.

The specialist attains to a mastery of his own subject, and often
acquires a strong bias regarding other subjects, because he pursues his
inquiries somewhat after the same fashion as the dog follows the scent
of the game. By training, the dog is familiar with the smell of the
animal pursued, and, bent on following the trail, he pays no attention
to any other scents or smells that he encounters in his course. In
the same way the specialist rapidly perceives and minutely studies
any phenomena, however slight, with which his favourite science has
rendered him familiar, while he is apt to disregard phenomena demanding
fresh studies and threatening to be inexplicable by investigation
confined to the lines which he prefers to follow.

Thus, if a law-student were to write a treatise on our epoch, he would
endeavour to show that the jurisprudence, the law, and the courts—in
fact, the whole legal mechanism—is the most important feature in our
civilization, and that on which progress or retrogression most depends.
As remedies for our evils, he would propose simpler or more complicated
forms of procedure, more or less enactments, according to his own
idiosyncrasies.

A military man would consider a development on military lines as true
progress. He would yearn to draft the whole nation into the army! He
would favour universal conscription, as Lord Wolseley does, and might,
like Count Moltke, look upon war as a healthy bracing, an epuration, of
a race, and as an indispensable corrective to over-population. He would
cite the expansion of the chest in Germany as a proof of the power of
military training to further physical development, and would look upon
strict military discipline as the means of establishing moral order in
a country.

A theologian would point to the immense influence exercised by
Christianity upon humanity, and would insist upon the religious aspect
of every question, and, like Mr. Drummond, would see in every new
discovery a confirmation of his peculiar dogmas. His remedy would be
more ritualism, or more liberal doctrines, or more emotion in religion,
according to his High Church, Broad Church, or Low Church creed.

Philosophical religionists, like Mr. Benjamin Kidd and others who
pin their faith to the development of the altruistic feeling in
human beings, would endeavour to reconcile all phenomena under their
observation with their theory of social evolution.

If therefore we wish to form a correct judgment of our own time and
our own contemporaries, we must not allow ourselves to be guided
exclusively by a scientist of one specialty. We ought to be all the
more on our guard, as the great erudition and the profound study which
each modern specialist has brought to bear on his subject gives to his
theories a striking plausibility, a savour of exact science to such an
extent as to sway our opinions in favour of the latest treatise we have
read.

Politicians, sociologists, economists, biologists, theologians, and
the æsthetes have had their say and have each in their turn exercised
a periodical spell over the public mind. It is now the turn of the
alienists. Dr. Max Nordau has by his book entitled _Degeneration_
produced no small sensation throughout the world, and not least
in this country. Though his work may not have made the stir of a
sensational novel read by the millions, there can be little doubt
that it has imposed itself on every educated mind in the country. It
is no exaggeration to say that, like a sharp trumpet-blast, it has
awakened the educated classes from the lethargy consequent upon the
din of clashing opinions and contradictory systems. This volume has
once more roused us to the fact that we, as individuals, as a nation,
as a race, are travelling at comet-speed towards a goal of which we
have no inkling. It sternly suggests that we are on the wrong road and
that a fate of a most horrible description is rapidly befalling us—an
affliction in most people’s view worse than annihilation. Madness is
shown to be insidiously invading our minds, and by its contagious
nature threatening to prove Voltaire’s biting sarcasm a stern prophecy.

It is no wonder that his work has become as it were a nightmare
to millions of minds. If its diagnosis and its conclusions are as
irrefutable as to most people they appear to be, we indeed live in a
fool’s paradise: our leaders, our authorities, our men of genius,
are not the beacons we have held them to be, but will-o’-the-wisps
luring us into the bottomless quagmires of lunacy; the progression we
vaunted is a slippery plane sliding us back to bestiality; our means
for raising the masses are so many slashes at the bonds of moral
order and decency, calculated to unloose the brutish Loke of modern
democracy; unbridled animal appetites threaten to take the place of
law and religion; all social order is being undermined; and the vilest
instincts press for gratification in lust, rapine, and murder. With
all the solemnity, moral persuasiveness, and scientific authority of
a medical practitioner, Max Nordau tells us that a mortal disease is
invading our race, and that with the end of the century the “dusk” of
humanity begins.

Before we accept the views of Max Nordau, before we have recourse
to the drastic remedies he seems to recommend, it is right that we
should subject his theories to the closest investigation. If his work
were one of exact science, there would be no necessity to refer to
the personality of the author, to his peculiar point of view, and to
his predilections. But, as his work partakes largely of the nature
of special pleading, as his methods of reasoning are those of the
enthusiastic specialist, and as his postulates are strongly coloured
by racial, national, and professional bias, the more we know of him
the more easily shall we follow him in his progress on the highways of
logic and in his deviations from them. Human language is not so perfect
as to allow us to dispense with the additional light on expressed
ideas which may be derived from one’s knowledge of the speaker who
gives utterance to them. To study the author as well as his work is
all the more permissible, as this volume is not intended as a complete
refutation of Max Nordau’s conclusions, but rather aims at separating
the dross from the gold and at giving him, as well as his work, their
right place and their true value as telling factors in the development
of our race. Indeed, this is exactly the method adopted by Max Nordau
in his study, not to say dissection, of his contemporaries.

It must be clearly understood however that there is no intention of
going to the length to which Max Nordau has gone in speaking of men of
the day—an abuse of literature which recalls the literary squabbles
of past generations. The gross vituperation and the coarse calumny
he levels against those he denounces will certainly not enhance his
popularity or inspire confidence in his methods in England. In fact,
his frequent indulgence in personalities would have prejudiced his work
enormously were it not for the overwhelming testimony it offers of the
fact that its author’s mind is conspicuously devoid of the sense of
the ridiculous. Had it not been for this peculiar mental defect, his
treatment of his opponents could not have failed to remind him of the
disputing doctors in Molière’s _Malade Imaginaire_.

Here we have to do not with the man, but with the author,—not with his
relations to his private surroundings, but with his relation to the
presentations he receives, the ideas he elaborates, and the conclusions
he proclaims.

In _Degeneration_ Max Nordau evidently strives to take a cosmopolitan
standpoint. Only in three or four places does he speak of Germany as
his own country, while he displays a remarkable erudition in foreign
literature, but only a superficial knowledge of foreign circumstances.
Unconsciously however he constantly betrays his German nationality.
To say that he is a typical German involves by no means any slur upon
his views, has nothing to do with the fact that the Germans are at
this moment—for reasons entirely independent of German worth—rather
unpopular in this country. It is his book that clearly announces him
as a German, just as the books of Drummond and Benjamin Kidd announce
them to be English. In other words, his methods, his views, his
predispositions, his standards, his ideals, are thoroughly German.

Few countries have so strong a power of inspiring love for their
institutions and their characteristics as Germany. Not only is the
German spell over those who are born and bred in the country, but
foreigners who reside there any length of time generally become
thoroughly Germanized. Even English people, whose characteristic it is
to create a little England around them wherever they go, are remarkably
susceptible to German influence when living in the country.

Despite the propensity of many Germans, complained of by Max Nordau in
his book, to imitate French art and literature, the German people have
strongly pronounced characteristics, opinions, feelings, and views.
We, here in England, have ample opportunity of observing the tenacity
of the German bias. We sometimes meet with Germans who have conquered
their native propensities and thoroughly assimilated themselves with
the English nation. But, on the other hand, many Germans, when settled
among us, continue to look on everything through German spectacles,
and utterly fail to grasp, or even superficially to understand, the
English spirit. This refers, of course, only to those who are actually
born in Germany. The second generation is invariably more English
than the English. We often meet with Teutons who have come young to
England, gained a position here, married English wives, brought up a
large family of English children, and who yet remain as German as any
_Spiesbürger_ in Berlin. They do not appear so to the casual observer.
Their business relations, their acquaintances, their wives, and their
children, being all English, expect them to be English. They therefore
assume an English outward garb, but as soon as circumstances allow them
to drop their English character the German characteristics of these
“tame Englishmen” come out as strong as ever. These facts are elicited
in no critical spirit, but simply as proofs of the tenacity of the
German bias.

The practical result of this bias is an open or secret contempt for
English views, a distrust in English institutions, a want of sympathy
with the English race, and doubts about the future of the British
Empire.

If we wish Max Nordau’s nationality to throw light on the working of
his mind, we must realize what are the most essential traits of the
average German.

Not yet completely freed from feudal institutions, it is natural that
the German people should associate moral and political order, good
administration, and personal protection, with feudal institutions.
Hence an immense respect for those in authority and a contempt for
the masses, even on the part of the masses. Democratic government and
individual liberty inspire the German with great distrust, because he
considers that the introduction into Germany of such features would
mean a social upheaval in which the meagre advantages which now each
individual enjoys might be lost.

As in Germany all initiative belongs to the authorities, the people
have become accustomed to bend to superiors, and where an Englishman
would attempt to establish a Free Order, the Germans can conceive
nought but discipline. A great number of enlightened Germans submit
tacitly to all kinds of authorities because they are morally convinced
that this is best for themselves and their country; but a large part
of the masses, having always found that the authorities gain their
ends by the use of police and military force, submit only because they
are obliged. Hence a deep-rooted feeling of discontent in a nation
constantly compelled to do the bidding of others. This discontent has
engendered a hatred against the upper classes similar to that which in
France paved the way for the first Revolution. The fear of the outbreak
of this hatred gives, in the eyes of the German middle-class, an extra
halo to authority.

The love of following authorities, instead of standing alone, is in
Germany not confined to the domain of politics. While Englishmen, down
to the wage-earning labourer, have, or believe they have, their own
opinions about politics, administration, religion, social affairs, and
even scientific problems, the Germans have an accepted authority in
each of these branches. Were we to question, say, a hundred Germans
in a _Bierhalle_, or any other public place, as to their opinions on
the above-named subjects, the replies would be simply an enumeration
of their authorities in each branch of knowledge. Though this
characteristic is a misfortune to Germany, to the Germans it savours
of a quaint reasonableness. A German Socialist, asked why he blindly
accepted Liebknecht’s views, replied: “I should be both silly and
conceited if I, a scantily educated man, with no leisure and means for
study, could believe myself capable of forming a better opinion than
Herr Liebknecht, who has brought a remarkable mind and great knowledge
to bear on political questions.”

This reasoned self-depreciation, this blind faith in authorities,
accounts for much in Germany which would be impossible in England. The
way, for example, in which the youths of the country are forced into
the ranks of the army against their will and inclination would be out
of the question with us. Here, the great majority of young men would
simply refuse, and to coerce them by military executions would involve
a wholesale slaughter against which the whole nation would revolt.
There have been young men in Germany who, on principle, have resisted
the compulsory service, but brutal punishment has quickly dissuaded
those of their comrades who secretly admired them from following their
example. Nothing could be more unjust to the German people than to
attribute to cowardice this lamb-like submission. German youths are
as brave as those of any other nation, and what to us English might
appear a want of both moral and physical courage is simply the powerful
influence of the German bias.

Enough has been said to show that German education and German
surroundings tend to foster in the human mind veneration for authority
and aristocracy, contempt for the plebeian, distrust of liberty, a firm
belief in the unquenchable power of man’s lowest instincts, a nervous
demand for authoritative repression of human passions, contentment with
a prosaic existence, small resources, and poor prospects.

It is natural that a nation whose mind is moulded in such a form
should despair of the practical realization of its ideals; that the
aspirations of the German race for liberty, enjoyment, and romance
should seek an outlet in the realms of the imagination; and that the
Germans should be a sentimental race. In this they differ diametrically
from our nation. The young German, when his humdrum work-day is over,
will plunge into books of poetry, romance, and adventure. He will
worship and eagerly follow his pet heroes, but to emulate them in
practical life, as a rule, does not occur to him.

His romantic admiration of female beauty, and his sentiment of love,
have nothing to do with his marriage. He postpones, as a rule, the
taking to himself a wife until he is fairly successful in life, when
pure romantic love has ceased to exercise any spell over him, and
he expects that his marriage should improve his social position and
procure him a circle of desirable friends. His poetical notions of love
do not interfere with the choice of a wife. What he looks for is a
young woman with practical qualities, likely to be a useful _Hausfrau_,
and when he has found her, he loses no time in suppressing all her
poetical notions and soon reduces her to a submissive drudge.

No suspicion of inconsistency enters the mind of an average German
when he reads or writes romances of love and chivalry in which the
hero shows the most refined courtesy, commits deeds of self-abnegation
and daring in honour of his lady-love, and exercises the utmost tact
in shielding her from every harsh and unpleasant impression, and at
the same time treats his wife as one devoid of all claims upon his
consideration. He will exact from her such small menial services as the
slave performs for his master. He will expect her to work constantly
for him, the family, and the house. He will not allow her enough
time or money for her toilet, for pleasure, for book, and social
intercourse. He will not stir to save her trouble or fatigue. He will
come to the table in dressing-gown and slippers, and coolly look for
special dishes for himself, while his wife and children have to content
themselves with cheap garbage.

Germans of the middle-class who come to England frequently express
their amazement at the way in which English husbands constantly pay
attention to their wives. They call it undignified for the breadwinner
and master of the house, on return from a day of professional work, to
“dance attendance” on his wife, whose duty it is to serve her husband.

The German, prior to marriage, allows his poetical notions to be
disturbed as little by his sexual emotions as by his marriage plans.
In a methodical and business-like way he gratifies the former
in police-supervised establishments, and what he looks upon as
“constitutional sprees” are never allowed to interfere with the course
of his affairs. After a night of debauch he will turn up in his studio,
his office, or his home, smiling and happy as if nothing had happened.

We record these observations with no desire to criticise or to
underrate the German character. Nor do we wish to insinuate that
hypocrisy and profligacy are non-existent in England. We simply wish
to show that the development of the German race has induced them to
conceive ideals entirely unrealizable, and to dream of aims so far off
in time as to render them unattainable.

It will be evident to all who have read _Degeneration_ that Max Nordau
is under the influence of a strong German bias. As we proceed, we shall
have occasion to point out how in many instances this bias has warped
his perceptions, his reasoning, and his conclusions.

From characteristics revealed in his work, the observant reader will,
no doubt, conclude that Max Nordau belongs to the Jewish race. The view
he takes of the disgraceful Jew-baiting tendencies now prevailing in
Germany is based on exactly the same mistakes committed by the Jews
themselves, as we shall have an opportunity of verifying later on. He
is evidently a free-thinking Jew, a type which we meet with everywhere,
and against which as few objections can be raised as against any
other type of man. The free-thinking Jew is generally clever,
well-instructed, moral, and cheerful. His good qualities however
do not prevent him from having his peculiar characteristics, which
naturally influence his perceptions and his feelings. He has generally
a cut-and-dried life-philosophy based on science and common-sense as
well as on Jewish authorities. He distrusts democracy, especially
Christian democracy, and feels never quite safe except under laws and
institutions which allow him to assume such ascendancy as his mental
qualifications can secure for him, and those who think with him. He
does not seek for primary causes, and sets up no spiritual ideals.
Though he may not be religious, he has yet retained something of the
monotheist creed, the predilection for worldly affairs, and the habit
of looking forward to a future life rather in his descendants than in
a heaven—a view which always characterized his race. His philosophy is
nothing if not practical. His aims are immediate, and, as a rule, he
eagerly embraces all the teachings of the materialist scientists.

Max Nordau is a modern scientist. He is not a pioneer in science, but
a most persevering and plodding student of the works of others. He
belongs to that class of _savants_ who spend almost all their time and
all their energy in reading up the authorities. So vast an erudition
as he has acquired cannot be attained to without some sacrifice in
other directions. The constant absorption of other peoples’ opinions
and theories compels the judgment to lean more and more on authorities,
and this unfits it, to some extent, for independent action. It is the
indefatigable readers who most blindly follow authorities, and it
suffices to glance at Max Nordau’s dedication to Professor Lombroso
to understand to what an extent he is subject to the influence of
“Masters.”

The pride taken by a scientist in his science, and the great practical
results achieved by scientific investigations, naturally tend to
foster an implicit confidence in its tenets. This has been especially
the case during the last decades, so remarkable for religious
tolerance. As the faith in old dogmas has receded, science has
advanced, and in many cases taken its place. That such has been the
case has naturally flattered the votaries of science, and tempted them
to become prophets as well as investigators. They have come to look
upon systems as dogmas, speculations as absolute truths, and in this
fashion scientific superstition tends to take the place of religious
superstition.

The scientifically superstitious man is an example of the dangers
of a little knowledge. Not that our men of science, including the
superstitious scientists, are defective in such knowledge as is
attainable at our present stage, but the sum total of all human
knowledge is still, and is probably destined ever to be, only partial
and extremely superficial. Compared with the knowledge in the past,
modern science represents an immense progress, but as to throwing light
on the great secret of the Universe, far from having done anything of
the sort, it has, on the contrary, revealed more and more inexplicable
wonders, and placed us face to face with more insoluble problems.
Though trite, the aphorism that the more we learn the more we realize
our ignorance is truer to-day than ever. It is natural and excusable
that devotees of a science which to them has revealed wonderful
results should raise abnormal expectations with regard to its future
possibilities, and also that vanity, a weakness often co-existent with
vast knowledge, should prompt a scientist to extol and glorify science
far beyond the bounds of reason; for any worship offered to science
rebounds necessarily on its high priests. This impossibility to realize
the limits in which science moves, and the yearning for admiration, lie
at the base of scientific superstition.

The scientifically superstitious man believes that science has
adequately replied to those great questions which humanity has been
asking itself for the last five thousand years. How was creation
originated? For what purpose did it come into existence? What is man?
What does the scheme of humanity involve? Have we existed before our
birth? Shall we live after death? What is the origin of evil? What
is eternity? What is boundlessness in space? What is reason? What is
instinct? and so on.

If his excessive study has not seriously impaired his independent
reasoning powers, the superstitious scientist may confess that these
questions have not been replied to by science, but there will still
lurk in his mind the belief that one day science will answer them.

He does not distinguish between nomenclature, registration, and
classification on the one hand, and explanation on the other. When he
has named any newly-discovered substance, force, or phenomenon, he
imagines that he has explained them. He believes that he has accounted
for what is called matter when he has evolved the atom, and that he has
unveiled the secret of life when he has discovered the protoplasm or
the cell.

All scientists are not affected by scientific superstition. They
generally suffer from it in an inverse ratio to the actual knowledge
they have acquired. The pioneer in science generally exhibits less of
this weakness than those who simply act as commentators and elaborators
of other men’s discoveries.

The votaries of certain sciences are less apt to indulge in scientific
superstition than those of other branches. Thus, astronomers rarely
exhibit any such symptoms, while biologists are more apt to do so, and
psychologists are more scientifically superstitious than any other
class of scientists. It might be hazardous to attempt an explanation
of this fact, but may it not be found in the obviousness of outward
infinity, and the impalpability of inward infinity?

Later on we shall have ample occasion to show to what an extent Max
Nordau’s mind has been clouded by scientific superstition.

Finally, it must be pointed out that Max Nordau is an enemy to France.
It is only human in any German. The stupendous armament of France
is ostentatiously promoted with the object of revenge upon Germany.
France, in her sulks over the lost provinces, takes every opportunity
of showing animosity, and this despite the conciliatory attitude of her
Government.

Though nearly a quarter of a century has elapsed since the disastrous
war between Germany and France, the bad feeling between the two
nations has unfortunately been kept up. France cannot forget the loss
of her provinces, and, though the attitude of the French Government
is conciliatory, outbursts of a feeling of hatred against Germany,
accompanied by provocative language on the part of irresponsible men,
constantly occur.

The German people, with a vivid recollection of the French invasion
early in the century, and perhaps taking the expressions of the
war-party in France too seriously, look upon the French nation as
their arch-enemies. By the celebration of anniversaries painful to the
French, and other means, the German Government keeps the animosity
between the two nations alive, and impresses the people with the
opinion that the heavy taxes it has to pay for armaments are made
indispensable by the enmity of France. It, is therefore, natural that
hatred against France should prevail in Germany.

We understand that Max Nordau for a considerable time was the Paris
correspondent of German papers, and we may take for granted that he
would not have been able to please his German readers had he not been
strongly biassed in favour of Germany against France—a fact to which
his work bears ample witness.

Such is, then, the man who, in his undaunted faith in his science and
in himself, in the name of truth and the welfare of humanity, and
undeterred by the penalties of the Great Council and Hell Fire, has
said to his brethren,—to the one, “You are Raca!” and to the other,
“Thou fool!”




