IV

ART AND APPRECIATION

It may be that some reader of the foregoing pages will attempt to
apply the principles therein set forth to the pictures shown in the
next exhibition he happens to attend. It is more than probable that in
his first efforts he will be disappointed. For the principles discussed
have dealt with art in its authentic manifestations; and not every
painter is an artist, not every picture is a work of art.

At the very outset it should be said that an exhibition of paintings as
ordinarily made up is confusing and wholly illogical. We may
suppose that a volume to be read through in one sitting of two hours
is placed in the hands of an intelligent reader. The book consists of
essays, poems, short stories, and dramatic dialogue, each within the
compass of a few pages, each contributed by a different writer as an
example of his work for the year. We may suppose now that the
reader is asked to gather from this volume, read hastily and either
superficially or in random bits, some idea of the significance of each
author and of the import and scope of contemporary American
literature. Is it a fair test? This volume, we may further suppose, is
practically the only means by which the writer can get his work
before the public. A public means a purchaser, and of course the
writer must live. Is it reasonable to think that every number
contributed to such a volume will be a work of art, wrought with
singleness of heart and in loving devotion to an ideal? There are still
with us those who "work for money" and those who "work for
fame." There are those who believe in "giving the public what it
wants," and the numbers they contribute to the yearly volumes are
samples of the sort of thing they do, from which the public may
order. In the table of contents stand celebrated names; and to the
work of such men, perhaps, will turn the seeker after what he thinks
ought to be the best, not realizing that these are the men who have
known how to "give the people what they want," that the people do
not always want the good and right thing, and that it is somewhat the
habit of genius to dispense with contemporary recognition. If there
is here or there in the book an essay or a poem the product of
thought and effort and offered in all seriousness, how little chance it
has of being appreciated, except by a few, even if it is remarked at
all in the jumble of miscellaneous contributions.

This hypothetical volume is a fair parallel of an annual exhibition of
paintings. In such an exhibition the number of works of art, the true,
inevitable expression of a new message, is relatively small. The
most celebrated and most popular painters are not necessarily by
that fact great artists, or indeed artists at all. Contemporary judgment
is notoriously liable to go astray. The gods of one generation are
often the laughing stock of the next; the idols of the fathers are torn
down and trampled under foot by the children. Some spirits there
have been of liberal promise who have not been able to withstand
the demands made upon them by early popular approval. Such is the
struggle and soul's tragedy which is studied convincingly in Mr.
Zangwill's novel, "The Master." No assault on the artist's integrity is
so insidious as immediate favor, which in its turn begets the fatal
desire to please.

To the "successful" painters, however, are for the most part accorded
the places of honor on academy walls. The canvases of these men
are seen first by the visitor; but they are not all. There are other
pictures which promise neither better nor worse. Here are paintings
of merit, good in color and good in drawing, but empty of any
meaning. Scattered through the exhibition are the works of a group
of able men, imitating themselves, each trying to outdo the others by
a display of cleverness in solving some "painter's problem" or by
some startling effect of subject or handling. But it is a sad day for
any artist when he ceases to find his impulse and inspiration either
in his own spirit or in nature, and when he looks to his fellow
craftsmen for the motive of his work. Again, there are pictures by
men who, equipped with adequate technical skill, have caught the
manner of a master, and mistaking the manner for the message it
was simply intended to express, they degrade it into a mannerism
and turn out a product which people do not distinguish from the
authentic utterances of the master. The artist is a seer and prophet,
the channel of divine influences: the individual painter, sculptor,
writer, is a very human being.

As he looks over these walls, clamorous of the commonplace and
the commercial, the seeker after what is good and true in art realizes
how very few of these pictures have been rendered in the spirit of
love and joy. The painter has one eye on his object and one eye on
the public; and too often, as a distinguished actor once said of the
stage manager whose vision is divided between art and the box
office, the painter is a one-eyed man.

A painter once refused to find anything to interest him, still less to
move him, in a silent street with a noble spire detaching itself
vaguely from the luminous blue depths of a midnight sky, because,
he said, "People won't buy dark things, so what's the use? You might
as well do bright, pretty things that they will buy, and that are just as
easy to make." A portrait-painter gives up landscape subjects
because, as he does not hesitate to declare, it hurts his business. And
the painters themselves are not altogether to blame for this attitude
towards their work. The fault lies half with the people who buy
pictures, having the money, and who have not a gleam of
understanding of the meaning of art. A woman who had ordered her
house to be furnished and decorated expensively, remarked
to a caller who commented on a water-color hanging in the
drawing-room: "Yes, I think it matches the wall-paper very nicely." When
such is the purpose of those who paint pictures and such is the
understanding of those who buy them, it is not surprising that not
every picture is inevitably a work of art.

But what is the poor seeker after art to do? The case is by no means
hopeless. In current exhibitions a few canvases strike a new note;
and by senses delicately attuned this note can be distinguished
within the jangle of far louder and popular tunes ground out, as it
were, by the street-piano. Seriously to study contemporary painting,
however, the logical opportunity is furnished by the exhibitions of
the works of single men or of small groups. As the reader who
wishes to understand an author or perhaps a school does not content
himself with random extracts, but instead isolates the man for the
moment and reads his work consecutively and one book in its
relation to his others; so the student of pictures can appreciate the
work and understand the significance of a given painter only as he
sees a number of his canvases together and in relation. So, he is able
to gather something of the man's total meaning.

Widely different from annual exhibitions, too, are galleries and
museums; for here the proportion of really good things is
immeasurably larger. In the study of masterpieces, it need hardly be
said, the amateur may exercise judgment and moderation. He should
not try to do too much at one time, for he can truly appreciate only
as he enters fully into the spirit of the work and allows it to possess
him. To achieve this sympathy and understanding within the same
hour for more than a very few great works is manifestly impossible.
Such appreciation involves fundamentally a quick sensitiveness to
the appeal and the variously expressive power of color and line and
form. To win from the picture its fullest meaning, the observer may
bring to bear some knowledge of the artist who produced it and of
the age and conditions in which he lived. But in the end he must
surrender himself to the work of art, bringing to it his intellectual
equipment, his store of sensuous and emotional experience, his
entire power of being moved.

For when all is said, there is no single invariable standard by which
to try a work of art: its significance to the appreciator rests upon his
capacity at the moment to receive it. "A jest's prosperity lies in the
ear of him that hears it." The appreciator need simply ask himself,
"What has this work to reveal to me of beauty that I have not
perceived for myself? I shall not look for the pretty and the
agreeable. But what of new significance, energy, life, has this work
to express to me? I will accept no man entirely and unquestioningly,
I will condemn no one unheard. No man has the whole truth; every
man has some measure of the truth, however small. Let it be my task
to find it and to separate it from what is unessential and false. In my
search for what is true, I will conserve my integrity and maintain my
independence. And I shall recognize my own wherever I may find
it."

"Man is the measure of all things," declared an ancient philosopher.
And his teaching has not been superseded to-day. The individual is
the creator of his own universe; he is the focus of the currents and
forces of his world. The meaning of all things is subjective. So the
measure of beauty in life for a man is determined by his capacity to
receive and understand. Thus it is that a man's joy in experience and
his appreciation of art in any of its manifestations are conditioned by
the opportunity that nature or art furnishes for his spirit to exercise
itself. In the reading of poetry, for example, we seek the expression
of ourselves. Our first emotion is, perhaps, a simple, unreflecting
delight, the delight which a butterfly must feel among the flowers or
that of a child playing in the fields under the warm sun; it is a
delight wholly physical,--pure sensation. A quick taking of the
breath, the escape of a sigh, inarticulate and uncritical, are the only
expression we can find at that instant for what we feel: as when an
abrupt turn of the road spreads out before us a landscape of which
we had not dreamed, or we enter for the first time the presence of
the Apollo Belvedere. We know simply that we are pleased. But
after nerves have ceased to tingle so acutely, we begin to think; and
we seek to give account to ourselves of the beauty which for the
moment we could but feel. Once arrived at the attitude of reflection,
we find that the poetry which affects us most and to which we
oftenest return is the poetry that contains the record of our own
experience, but heightened, the poetry which expresses our desires
and aspirations, that in which we recognize ourselves elevated and
idealized. In so far as we see in it the ennobled image of our own
nature, so far it has power to hold us and to stir us.

An elementary manifestation of the tendency to seek in art the
record of our own experience is seen in the popularity of those
pictures whose subjects are familiar and can be immediately
recognized. On a studio wall was once hanging a "Study of Brush,"
showing the play of sunlight through quivering leaves. A visitor
asked the painter why he did not put some chickens in the
foreground. To her the canvas was meaningless, for she had never
seen, had never really seen, the sunlight dancing on burnished leaves.
The chickens, which she had seen and could recognize, were the
element of the familiar she required in order to find any significance
in the picture.

This tendency, of which the demand for chickens is a rudimentary
manifestation, is the basis of all appreciation. The artist's revelation
of the import of life we can receive and understand only as we have
felt a little of that import for ourselves. Color is meaningless to a
blind man, music does not exist for the deaf. To him who has never
opened his eyes to behold the beauty of field and hill and trees and
sky, to him whose spirit has not dimly apprehended something of
that eternal significance of which these things are the material
visible bodying forth, to such a the work of the master is only so
much paint and canvas. The task of the appreciator, then, is to
develop his capacity to receive and enjoy.

That capacity is to be trained by the exercise of itself. Each new
harmony which he is enabled to perceive intensifies his power to
feel and widens the range of his vision. The more beauty he
apprehends in the world, so much the more of universal forces he
brings into unity with his own personality. By this extension of his
spirit he reaches out and becomes merged in the all-embracing life.

If the conception be true that a supreme unity, linking all seemingly
chaotic details, ultimately brings them into order, and that this unity,
which is spiritual, penetrates every atom of matter, fusing everything
and making all things one; then the appreciator will realize that the
significance of art is for the spirit The beauty which the artist reveals
is but the harmony which underlies the universal order; and he in his
turn must apprehend that beauty spiritually.

From this truth it follows that the condition of aesthetic enjoyment,
or in other words the appreciation of beauty, is detachment of spirit
and remoteness from practical consequences. The classic illustration
of the truth is the saying of Lucretius, that it is sublime to stand on
the shore and behold a shipwreck. It is sublime only as one's
personal interests and feelings are not engaged. It would not be
sublime if it were possible for the spectator to aid in averting the
catastrophe; it would not be sublime if one's friends were aboard the
ship. One is able to appreciate beauty only as one is able to detach
one's self from what is immediate and practical, and by virtue of this
detachment, to apprehend the spiritual significance. The sublimity of
the shipwreck lies in what it expresses of the impersonal might of
elemental forces and man's impotence in the struggle against nature.
That sublimity, which is one manifestation of beauty, is of the spirit,
and by the spirit it must be apprehended.

To illustrate this truth by a few homely examples. A farmer looking
out on his fields of tossing wheat, drenched in golden sunlight,
exclaims, "Look, isn't that beautiful!" What he really means is: "See
there the promise of a rich harvest, and it is mine." If the fields
belonged to his neighbor, his feelings towards them would be quite
different. No, their _beauty_ is to be seen and felt only by him
whose mind is free of thoughts of personal enrichment and who thus
can perceive the harmony with life of golden sunshine and nature's
abundant gifts. The farmer could not see beyond the material and its
value to him as material. But beauty lies deeper than that, for it is
the expression of spiritual relations.

Two men are riding together in a railway carriage. As the train
draws into a city, they pass a little group of tumble-down houses,
brown and gray, a heap of corners thrown together. One man thinks:
"What dreary lives these people must lead who dwell there." The
other, with no such stirring of the sympathy, sees a wonderful
"scheme" in grays and browns, or an expressive composition or
ordering of line. Neither could think the thoughts of the other at the
same time with his own. One feels a practical and physical reaction,
and he cannot therefore at that moment penetrate to the meaning of
these things for the spirit; and that meaning is the harmony which
they express.

From the tangle of daily living with its conflict of interests and its
burden of practical needs, the appreciator turns to art with its power
to chasten and to tranquillize. In art, he finds the revelation in fuller
measure of a beauty which he has felt but vaguely. He realizes that
underlying the external chaos of immediate practical experience
rests a supreme and satisfying order. Of that order he can here and
now perceive but little, hemmed in as he is by the material world,
whose meaning he discerns as through a glass, darkly. Yet he keeps
resolutely on his way, secure in his kinship with the eternal spirit,
and rewarded by momentary glimpses of the "broken arcs" which he
knows will in the end take their appointed places in the "perfect
round."



