CHAPTER VI

A TRUCE

 As Tirant came near the port of Transimeno they saw the whaling
ships that had been with the Turkish armada quickly entering the
port of Bellpuig, shouting out the bad news about the capture of
the kings, and the loss of the armada and all its men.  When
Tirant reached port, he found many of his ships there, and many
of the enemy's that had been captured.  After Tirant had been
there for two days, all his men had returned except Hippolytus.

Earlier, when Hippolytus had not been able to find his captain,
he thought Tirant must have gone toward Turkey, so he ordered his
pilot to set that course.  While not finding the captain, he did
see a new ship from the armada.  When he followed the ship, it
fled and stopped at an island that was nearly unpopulated.  The
wind was against it, and the men abandoned ship and made land by
boat.  When Hippolytus drew alongside, he captured the ship that
was empty of men but full of riches, and took possession of it.

When the captain saw that everyone was there except Hippolytus,
he sent out three ships to search for him.  And they found him
coming back with his prize.  When the captain got news of it, and
saw that he was returning with such great honor, he was very
content.

This Hippolytus turned out to be a very valiant knight, generous
and courageous.  And he accomplished singular acts in his life
because he tried to imitate his master and lord.

When Lord Malvei learned that Tirant had come back triumphant and
victorious, he was very glad, and he rode out to meet him.  But
before going, he sent one messenger to the emperor and another to
the camp, and then everyone rejoiced.  On hearing the news, the
emperor had all the bells in the city rung, and there were great
celebrations.

When Lord Malvei found Tirant, he advised him to go to the
emperor as soon as he could.  And there was nothing Tirant wanted
more, because he wanted to see the princess.  He assembled all
the men who had been with him, and they set sail.

When they were in sight of the city of Constantinople, the
emperor was told that their captain was coming with the entire
armada, and the ships were already in sight.  The emperor quickly
had a wooden bridge constructed that extended thirty paces out
over the water, entirely covered with rich satin cloths.  And he
had a cenotaph placed in the center of the marketplace, covered
with brocade and silk, for himself, the empress, the princess and
all the maidens.  And from the cenotaph to the end of the bridge
where they would disembark, he had cloth of red velvet put down
so that the captain would step on silk instead of on the ground.
(And when it was over, whoever managed to take a piece of silk
was able to keep it, and many hands were wounded with swords and
knives as they tried to cut a piece of silk.)

As the ships came into port, the captain's ship drew alongside
the wooden bridge, and he came out with the Grand Caramany on his
right, the King of Upper India on his left, and all the barons in
front.  They were met by all the townspeople, and led in a great
procession to the marketplace where the emperor and all the
ladies were.

When Tirant was up on the cenotaph with the emperor, he knelt and
kissed his hand, and he told the Grand Caramany to kiss his hand.
But the Caramany answered that he would not; then Tirant
immediately dealt him such a hard blow to the head with his
gauntlet that the Caramany was forced to put his head to the
ground, and Tirant said to him:

"Dog, you son of a dog, now you're going to kiss his feet and his
hand whether you want to or not."

"I won't do it of my own free will, or even by force," said the
Grand Caramany.  "And if you and I were in a different place, I'd
show you what it means to come close to a king. You still don't
know how far my power extends.  But I swear to you by our holy
prophet, Mohammed, and by this beard, that if I ever get my
freedom back, I'll make you kiss the feet of one of my blacks."

And he said no more.  But his companion, the other king, so that
he would not be dealt the blow too, knelt on the hard ground and
kissed his hand and foot. Then the emperor had them seized and
placed under a stiff guard inside an iron cell.

The emperor and all the ladies came down from the cenotaph, and
they went to the great church of Saint Sophia.  Tirant took the
empress by the arm and escorted her, and she said to him:

"Captain, you are the most glorious man in the world.  If only
you had come to the kingdom of Germany in my time, when my father
was emperor of Rome, in those days when I was wooed by a thousand
suitors.  If I had seen you, out of the thousand I would have
chosen you.  But now that I am old and belong to another, my hope
comes along too late."

The princess heard all these things, and when they got to the
palace, she said to Tirant:

"That old mother of mine is pitying herself, and she would like
to play too.  She thinks that if you had come in her day, she
would be worthy of your love."

Then the emperor came out and asked the captain about his wounds.
Tirant answered that they felt a little feverish:

"And I think the sea voyage has made my fever rise."

The emperor ordered the doctors to take him to his quarters.
When they had treated him they told him to stay in bed so that
his arm would not be permanently injured.  Tirant followed the
doctors' advice, and the emperor visited him every day, and told
the empress and his daughter to visit him twice a day, in the
morning and in the afternoon.  Widow Repose, moved more by love
than mercy, served him continually.

Now let us go back and see how the Turks are dealing with the
Christians who stayed in the camp.  After they heard of the cruel
battle between the captain and the Grand Turk, they often came to
the city of Saint George and killed or captured many Christians.
They made many forays, engaging them in a cruel war, so that very
few survived if they fell into their hands.  How the Christians
suffered when they thought about Tirant not being there, and that
they would have to go out and fight without him.  Not even wise
Diafebus or Lord Agramunt could save their lives by placing
themselves in the most dangerous positions during the battles.
And they all cried out for Tirant as if he were a saint.  They
never felt safe, but were terrified of the Turks, because the
great courage they had had during their victories when Tirant had
been there, was lost now that he was gone.  And they offered a
special prayer to Our Lord to help Tirant, for they felt that all
their hope lay with him.

At this time, in the palace, the doctors were coming to Tirant's
room.  The empress had finished her hours, and she and the
princess and other ladies went to Tirant and asked the doctors
when they would allow Tirant to come to the palace.

"My lady," answered the doctors, "he'll be able to walk in three
or four days."

When the princess was back in her chamber, a sweetness came into
her heart because of her great love for Tirant, and she fell to
the floor in a swoon.  When the maidens saw her lying on the
floor they raised such a cry that it reached the emperor's ears,
and he came running, thinking the world was about to collapse
around him.

He saw his daughter sprawled on the ground as though dead, and he
threw himself over her, crying piteously.  The mother had placed
her daughter's head in her lap, and was crying and wailing so
that the entire palace heard her, and her face and clothing were
bathed in tears.  Word was quickly sent to the doctors who were
in Tirant's lodging.  A gentleman came who told them, in secret:

"Come quickly.  The princess is in such a state that you'll be
lucky to find her still alive!"

The doctors hurried to the princess's chamber.  Tirant sensed
that something had happened to the princess because of the outcry
the men and women were making.  He got up quickly, sick as he
was, and went to the princess's chambers, where he found her
conscious and lying in bed.

He learned that the doctors had used all their efforts to bring
back her health.  When the emperor saw that his daughter had
recovered, he went to his rooms with the empress, and the doctors
went with him because they saw that he was exhausted from what
had happened to his daughter.  Tirant went into the chamber,
nearly out of his mind, and when he saw the princess lying on the
bed, he said, pitifully:

"I have never felt greater pain than now, when I thought I might
lose the greatest treasure I had in the world.  I heard shouts,
and as soon as I thought of Your Majesty I said to myself, 'If
something is wrong with her, she'll let me know.'  But I've come
myself to see what Your Highness' illness is.

The princess quickly replied:

"Tirant, my lord, you alone were the cause of my illness: it was
brought on by the thought of your love.  Love already has more
power over me than I would like.  I beg you to go see the emperor
so that he won't know that you came to see me before you did
him."

She put her head under the covers, and told Tirant to put his
there too.  Then she told him:

"Kiss my breasts to bring me consolation and to give you peace."

And he did it very willingly.  After he had kissed her breasts,
he kissed her eyes and her face.  Then Tirant left, very content.
When he was in the emperor's chambers, and the doctors saw him,
they reprimanded him soundly because he had gotten out of bed
without their consent.  Tirant answered:

"Even if it cost me my life, I wouldn't refrain from coming to
see His Majesty, the emperor, for anything in the world.  When I
saw you leaving my side so quickly, I could only suppose that he
was in some great difficulty."

Meanwhile, the men in Tirant's camp were desperate because of his
illness, and they had no hope for victory without him.  The
sultan sent ambassadors to the camp to deal with Tirant.  When
they arrived the captain was not there, and they were
disappointed.  They sent a message to the emperor, and he told
them to come and see him, for they would be allowed to come and
go safely.

So they went to the emperor, and he welcomed them very
graciously.  He honored them highly because the King of Armenia
was with them as an ambassador, and he was the brother of the
Grand Caramany.  Abdalla Salomon, who was more knowledgeable than
the others, was asked to speak, and he said:

"My lord, we are sent to Your Majesty by that feared and most
excellent and great lord of the Mohammedan sect, the great Sultan
of Babylonia, and also by the Grand Turk and Lord of the Indies,
and the other kings in his camp.  We come before Your perfect
Majesty for three things (not counting the first, which is to
know about your health, life, honor and condition).  The first
is: a three month truce will be given to you, on land and sea, if
you would like it.  The second: knowing that this virtuous
captain of the Christians has captured that powerful lord, the
Grand Caramany, with his mighty sword, and the King of Upper
India who was with him, if you would like to give him to us, we
will pay three times his weight in gold as ransom.  And we will
give you one and a half times the weight of the King of Upper
India.  Let us come to the third item: If Your Excellency would
like a treaty of peace (with no iniquity or ill will; but only
peace and love), he will think of you as a father, and you can
think of him as a son.  And as a token of that peace you would
give him your daughter, Carmesina, as his wife--under this
condition: if a son is born to them he will have to be raised in
the sect of our holy prophet, Mohammed; and if a daughter is
born, she will be given to the mother to live under Christian
law.  He will live under his law, and the princess under hers.
In this way we can put an end to all our misfortunes, and as a
reward for such a marriage he will give you all the cities, towns
and castles that he has taken in your empire.  In addition, he
will make a lasting peace with you and your people.  And he will
defend you against anyone who tries to harm you."

The emperor held counsel, and then invited all the ambassadors
in.  He told them that out of love and consideration for the
Moorish sultan and the Grand Turk, he would sign the three month
peace treaty, but about the other things he would reserve
judgment.

One day, while Tirant was in the princess's chamber, with many
other maidens there, he said:

"Oh, Tirant!  Why are you hesitant about dying when you see the
father in alliance with his council against his daughter?  To
think that so much beauty, virtue and grace, along with greatness
of lineage, will be subject to a Moorish enemy of God and our
holy law, and it will be destroyed and fall into decay!"

The princess quickly answered:

"How could you think that I would subject myself to a Moor, or
that I would stoop to be a friend of a Moorish dog?  They have as
many wives as they like and not one of them is really a wife,
because they can leave them whenever they wish.  Forget all those
thoughts, virtuous knight, and trust your Carmesina.  She will
defend all your rights just as you have defended hers.  And you
can command me in everything you wish, as if you were my lord."

Another day Tirant was going to the princess's chamber and he met
Plaerdemavida.  He asked her what the princess was doing, and she
answered:

"Oh, you saint!  Why do you want to know what my lady is doing?
If you had come earlier you would have found her in bed.  And if
you had seen her the way I've seen her, your soul would be in
paradise.  The more a person sees what he loves, the more he
wants it.  That's why I think it's more delightful to see
something than to imagine it.  Come in if you'd like: you'll find
her dressed in her skirt.  I want to talk to you about my own
desire: Why doesn't my Hippolytus come with you?  It's hard to
think that I hurt inside when today's pleasure shouldn't be put
off for later."

"Maiden," said Tirant, "I beg you to tell me in all truth if the
empress or anyone else I should fear is inside."

"I wouldn't tell you one thing if it were something else," said
Plaerdemavida.  "It would be bad for both of us: You for going
in, and me for letting you go.  I know that the princess doesn't
want your love for her to go unrewarded.  And since I know how
much you hunger for your heart's desire, I want to help you."

Then Tirant went into the chamber and found the princess combing
her hair.  When she turned and saw him she said:

"Who gave you the right to come in here?  You shouldn't come into
my room without my permission: if the emperor knew about this he
could charge you with disloyalty.  I beg you to leave: my breast
is trembling in fear."

Tirant paid no attention to the princess's words, but took her in
his arms and kissed her again and again on her breasts, her eyes
and her mouth.  When the maidens saw Tirant playing with their
lady that way they were silent, but when they saw Tirant putting
his hand under her skirt they came to her aid.  While they were
frolicking this way the empress was coming to her daughter's
chamber to see what she was doing, and with their games they did
not hear her until she was at the chamber door.

Tirant quickly lay on the floor and they spread clothes over him.
Then the princess sat on top of him, and began combing her hair.
The empress sat down at her side, nearly on Tirant's head.  Only
God knows how shamefully afraid Tirant was then!  He was in
anguish while they talked about the celebrations they were
planning, until a maiden came with the Hours.  Then the empress
got up and withdrew to one side of the room to say the Hours.
The princess was afraid the empress might see him, and did not
dare move.  When the princess had finished combing her hair, she
put her hand under the clothes and combed Tirant's hair, and from
time to time he kissed her hand and took the comb away.  All the
maidens went in front of the empress, and then Tirant got up
quietly and left with the comb the princess had given him.

When he was outside the room, thinking he was safe and that no
one had seen him, he saw the emperor and a chamberlain coming
directly to the princess's chamber.  When Tirant saw them passing
through the great hall he panicked and quickly went back into the
princess's chamber and said to her:

"My lady, help me.  The emperor is coming."

"Oh!" said the princess.  "We get out of one bad situation, and
then go into one that's even worse.  I told you what would
happen, but you're always coming at the worst times."

She quickly had the maidens stand in front of the empress again,
and they quietly led him to another chamber.  There they put
mattresses on top of him so that if the emperor came in, as he
often did, he would not see him.  When the emperor came into the
chamber he found his daughter combing her hair.  He stayed there
until she had finished and the empress had said her Hours, and
all the maidens were dressed.  When the princess was at the
chamber door she asked where her gloves were.  Then she said:

"Oh, I put them in a place none of you knows about."

She and her maidens went back inside the chamber where Tirant
was, and took off all the mattresses covering him.  Then he
jumped up and caught the princess in his arms, dancing around the
room with her and kissing her again and again.

"Oh, how beautiful you are!  I have never seen a maiden as
perfect as you.  Your Majesty is so superior to all women in
knowledge and discretion that I'm not surprised the Moorish
sultan would want to have you in his arms."

"Appearances are deceiving," said the princess.  "I'm not as
perfect as you say I am.  That light shining in your eyes is
love.  Kiss me and let me go; the emperor is waiting for me."

Tirant could not answer her because the maidens were holding onto
his hands so he could not muss her hair with his playing around.
When he saw her leaving, and that he could not touch her with his
hands, he stretched out his leg and put it under her skirt so
that his shoe touched her where it should not, and he put his leg
between her thighs.  Then the princess ran out of his chamber to
be with the emperor, and Widow Repose took Tirant out through the
garden door.

When Tirant was in his own lodging he took off his shoes and
stockings.  Then he had the stocking and shoe that had touched
the princess embroidered with pearls, diamonds and rubies worth
more than twenty-five thousand ducats.

On the day of the joust he wore the shoe and stocking, and
everyone who saw it was amazed at the fine jewels, for a shoe
like that had never been seen before.  And on that foot he wore
no armor, but only on the left foot.  As a crest for his helmet,
he wore four golden rods, the Holy Grail. And upon that was the
comb the princess had given him, with a motto that read: "There
is no virtue but that which exists in her."

Everyday Tirant was in the court, talking and taking his ease
with the emperor and much more so with the ladies.  And he
changed clothes every day, but he always wore the same stocking.
One day the princess said to him in a mocking tone:

"Tell me, Tirant this custom you have of wearing an embroidered
stocking on one foot but not on the other, is it something they
do in France or in some other place?"

This was the day the festival had ended, and they were on their
way to Pera.  And the princess said these words with Stephanie
and Widow Repose close by.

"What, my lady!  Doesn't Your Majesty know what this custom
means?  Doesn't Your Excellency remember that day when the
empress came in and I was hidden with your maiden's clothing on
top of me, and the empress nearly sat on my head?  Afterward your
father came in, and you hid me in the little chamber under the
mattresses, and when they were gone, while I was playing with
Your Highness, since I couldn't reach you with my hands, my foot
had to take their place, and I put my leg between your thighs,
and my foot touched higher up, where my soul wishes to find its
happiness."

"Oh, Tirant!" said the princess.  "I remember very well what you
told me that day, and my body still bears the marks.  But the day
will come when, just as you have one leg embroidered today, you
will be able to embroider both of them, and you may place them
where you will, at your pleasure."

When Tirant heard her saying these words so full of love, he
quickly dismounted from his horse, saying that his gloves had
fallen, and he kissed her leg above her skirt, and said:

"The place were grace was granted should be kissed."

As soon as they reached the city of Pera, and when they were
about to don their armor, they saw nine galleys approaching land.
The emperor would not allow the tournament to begin until they
found out where the galleys were from.  The galleys put into port
in less than an hour, and they turned out to be French. Their
captain was a cousin of Tirant.  He had been a page to the king,
and the king had made him Viscount of Branches.  This viscount
had decided to come and help his cousin in his battles against
the infidel, and he and other nobles had come, along with five
thousand French archers that the King of France had given to
them.  And each of the archers had a page and a squire.  And when
the galleys had docked at Sicily, the king there had given them
many horses.

The emperor postponed the tournament for the following day.  Then
eight hundred knights with gold spurs came out to the grounds,
and no one was allowed to participate if he had not been dubbed a
knight and unless he wore silk or brocade or gold trappings.  The
Duke of Pera was captain of half the men, and Tirant commanded
the other half.  So that each would know who the other was, they
had small flags attached to their helmets, some green and others
white.  Tirant had ten knights enter the field of battle, and the
duke ten others, and they began to fight very well.

Then twenty entered, then thirty, and they began to mix together.
Each of them did as well as he possibly could in using his
weapons.  Tirant kept an eye on his men, and when he saw that
they were not doing well, he entered the fray with his lance
poised, and he went against another knight so ferociously that he
thrust his lance completely through him and it came out the other
side.  Then he drew his sword and dealt terrible blows all around
so that he seemed like a ravenous lion, and all the onlookers
were amazed at his great strength and spirit.

The emperor was very satisfied at this singular display of arms.
When it had gone on for nearly three hours, the emperor came down
from the cenotaph, mounted a horse and quickly rode into the fray
to separate the men, because he saw that tempers were rising, and
many were wounded.  After all the knights had disarmed
themselves, they went to the palace.  There they talked about
their singular display of arms, and the foreigners said they had
never seen such valiant men.  The sultan's ambassadors, who had
seen them, were filled with wonder.

That night the emperor returned with his men and all the ladies
to the city of Constantinople.  The following day, after mass,
they all went to the market place which was as nicely decorated
as it had been the first day.  When the sultan's ambassadors
arrived, and everyone was present, the emperor gave them this
reply:

"Nothing brings greater anguish than to have His Majesty hear
abominable words that offend God and the world.  I pray that His
immense goodness will not permit me to do things against His holy
catholic faith, like giving my daughter as wife to a man who is
outside our law.  For all the treasure that the Grand Caramany
and the King of Upper India could pay, they cannot have their
liberty unless they restore all my empire to me."

When they had heard these words the ambassadors stood up and took
their leave, and went back to the sultan.

After the celebration was over and the ambassadors had gone, the
emperor held war councils many times.  Tirant fostered his
romance, and was very insistent about staying near the princess
because he saw that the end of the truce was approaching.  The
emperor indicated that he wanted the captain to be in camp to
take charge of the men, and the captain showed that he was
attending to the men going with him so that they would be ready,
since he was very eager to confront the Turks.

Tirant pleaded insistently with the princess to give him the
satisfaction he wanted.  The princess saw how great Tirant's
passion was, and she said:

"Tirant, I know full well what you want, but my reputation is
spotless.  Tell me, what gave you the hope of being in my bed?
Just to imagine it is great infamy.  If I gave in to you, I
couldn't hope that it would not be known.  What could I use to
excuse my transgression?  I beg you, Tirant, my lord, do not rob
me lightly of my tender virginity."

And she would say no more.  Tirant was rather stunned by the
princess's words which showed how little she loved him.  For he
thought he had progressed in his love affair, and now he found it
was entirely the opposite.

While they were talking the emperor came into the chamber, and
took his daughter Carmesina by the hand.  They went upstairs
together to the treasure-tower to take out money and give it to
Tirant so that he would go to the camp.

When they had gone Tirant was left with the maidens.  He thought
about what the princess had said to him, and he realized that
Widow Repose had overheard his secret, and everything he had said
to her.  Tirant decided to see if he could win the Widow over
with promises, and with warm and tender words he said:

"I believe I have been offended by my lady.  I want to do great
services for the princess so that she will see that I am worthy
of her love.  Although Stephanie already has many possessions and
great wealth, I would like to give her even more.  I would give
Widow Repose a duke or count or marquis for a husband, and as
many possessions as would make her happy.  And I would like to do
the same for Plaerdemavida and all the other ladies."

Stephanie thanked Tirant for herself and for all the other women.
Widow Repose said to Stephanie:

"You thank him for yourself.  I know how to thank him on my own."

And, smiling, she turned to Tirant and said:

"Thank you very much for your thoughtfulness.  But I want no
other husband, no matter how great a lord he is, except the one I
adore day and night.  He has not killed me yet, but he has given
me reason to die.  I won't say any more about that because this
isn't the time or place."

When Widow Repose finished, Plaerdemavida said:

"My lord and captain, don't you know that repentance follows sin?
You've come to my lady's rooms, and found them like a tomb, since
you can find no mercy in them.  Please don't lose hope, I beg
you.  Rome wasn't built in a day.  Are you discouraged because of
some trifle my lady said to you?  When you're in a hard-fought
battle, you're like a lion, and you always come out victorious,
and yet are you afraid of a lone woman who, with our help, you'll
conquer?  Do you remember that pleasant night in the castle of
Malvei when I was dreaming?  You saw how mercifully you dealt
with that situation.  I'm only trying to tell you that we'll all
help you in this affair.  And I know what the solution is: you
have to mix in a little force, because your fear--which comes
from ignorance--stops you from using it.  It's a terrible thing
for maidens to have to say those awful words: 'I like it.'  I'll
work as hard as I can for you in this affair, I promise you.  And
I think that as a just reward--very inferior to my work--I
deserve to have your grace help with the love of my Hippolytus.
But I'm more than a little afraid, because I can see where his
wayward steps are taking him, and I don't like the way he's going
at all.  I'm afraid of the danger he'll place himself in, because
he is a very good swordsman, and he strikes not at the legs but
at the head.  And he knows much more than I have shown him."

Tirant brightened up a little at Plaerdemavida's jokes, and he
stood up to tell her:

"Maiden, it looks to me as though, instead of hiding your
advances toward Hippolytus, you don't care who knows about them."

"What do I care if everybody knows?" said Plaerdemavida.  "You
men think that just because we're maidens we won't dare to say
anything.  It's your nature to be good at first, and then bad
afterward.  You're like the ocean: when someone starts to go in
the water it seems soft, and then later, when he's all the way
in, it's a torrent.  That's the way love begins: at first you're
soft, and later on you're harsh and terrible."

While they were talking, the emperor came in.  He took Tirant by
the hand and led him out of the room, and they talked at great
length about the war.  When it was time to eat, Tirant and his
men went to their quarters.

That night, when the princess wanted to go to bed, Widow Repose
said to her:

"My lady, if Your Majesty knew about the things Tirant said to us
ladies, you would be amazed.  He took me aside and told me things
about Your Excellency that I am loathe to repeat, because his
words show how little he cares for you."

Widow Repose's words had a great effect on the princess.  Without
letting her say another word, she put her cloak back on, and they
went into a tiny chamber where no one could overhear them.  First
the Widow told her what Tirant had said to all the ladies, and
how he wanted to arrange honorable marriages for them all.  Then,
with great wickedness and deceit, the evil Widow gave vent to her
malice:

"Tirant is a cruel man.  He doesn't have the good sense of the
others, but he is more shameless and daring.  If Your Highness
knew what he says about you, you would never be able to love
him."

"Tell me at once," said the princess, "and don't make me suffer
so."

"He spoke to me secretly," said Widow Repose, "and he made me
swear on the Gospel that I wouldn't say a word to anyone.  But
since you are my mistress, and I would be going against the
loyalty I owe you, any oath I've made is worthless.  First, he
told me that Stephanie and Plaerdemavida are in alliance with him
so that, with your consent or by force, he will possess Your
Majesty.  And if you don't do it of your own free will, he'll
plunge his sword through your neck and kill you cruelly, and then
he will do the same thing to your father.  He will steal all your
treasure and they'll get on their ships and go back to their
land.  And with the treasure they carry off, the clothing and
jewels, they'll find maidens there who are much more beautiful
than Your Highness, for he says that you don't look any better
than a serving girl and that you are completely shameless: that
you'll give it to anyone who wants it.  Watch out for your
virtue, my lady.  You can see what that mad traitor thinks of
Your Highness!  And that faithless man says even more: that he
didn't come to this land to fight, and that he has been hurt too
many times because of his misfortune of knowing you and your
father.  Do you think, my lady, that that way of talking is
proper for knights?  Look at what he thinks of the honor of Your
Excellency and the emperor, who have granted him so many benefits
and honors.  Anyone who says things like that should burn in
flames!  Do you know what other things he says?  That he doesn't
love any woman alive, unless it's for her wealth.  He says many
other wicked things too.  I remember he told me that if he ever
had another night like that one in Malvei, even if he made you a
thousand promises, he wouldn't keep any of them.  With your
consent or by force, he would take you, and then he would say to
you, 'You evil woman, I don't thank you, now that I've had my
pleasure.'  Oh, my lady, my heart cries blood when I think of all
the terrible things he said about Your Highness!  That's why, my
lady, I want to give you some advice even though you haven't
asked me for it.  There's no one who has more compassion for you
than I have.  I cradled you in my arms and fed you from my own
breast, and Your Highness has hidden from me to entertain that
wicked Tirant.  You've had more faith in Stephanie and
Plaerdemavida than in me: and they have betrayed you and sold
you.  Oh, poor you!  How they've defamed you, and they'll do it
even more from now on!  Keep away from friendships like those
since you know the truth, because what I tell you is the Gospel
itself.  You must swear that you'll never tell a soul about these
things I've told Your Majesty.  I'm afraid that if that traitor,
Tirant, hears about it, he'll have me killed and then he'll
leave.  So, my lady, make pretenses, and break off your
friendship with him little by little, because if Your Highness
suddenly stopped seeing him, he would think that I told you.  And
those two ladies deserve to be whipped.  Don't you see how big
Stephanie's belly is?  I'm astonished that the emperor hasn't
noticed it.  And the same will happen to Plaerdemavida."

The princess was very upset.  With tears flowing from her eyes,
she began to lament angrily:

"Oh, God!  Where is Your justice?  How is it that fire does not
descend from heaven to turn that cruel, ungrateful Tirant into
ashes?  He was the first knight that I considered my master.  I
thought he would bring an end to all my troubles, and now I see
everything turned around.  Oh, who would ever have thought that
words like these could come from the mouth of such a virtuous
knight?  What have I done to him, to make him want the deaths of
my father and my mother and their miserable daughter?  Oh,
Tirant!  What happened to the love we shared?  What crime did I
commit for you to think me vile and abominable?  Did you really
say that you love no lady or maiden unless it's for her wealth,
and that you want to take my virginity by force?  Oh, if I wanted
to be cruel, before the sun came up your chamber would be full of
blood; yours and the blood of all your men."

And she said no more.  But hearing the call for matins, she
added:

"Widow, let's go to bed, even though I'll get little sleep
tonight with the great hate I have for Tirant--the one I used to
love so much."

The Widow answered:

"My lady, I beg you, please.  Don't say a word about this to
anyone.  Who knows what might happen?"

"Don't worry," said the princess.  "I'll protect you."

When they were in their chamber, Stephanie saw them come in, and
said:

"It looks to me, my lady, as though you've had a great deal of
pleasure listening to the Widow--you've been with her so long.
I'd like to know what you're thinking about."

The princess climbed into bed without answering, and began to cry
bitterly.  When the Widow had gone, Stephanie asked her why she
was crying.  The princess told her:

"Stephanie, let me be, and take care that this doesn't happen to
you."

Stephanie was surprised at this, not knowing what it could mean.
She did not reply, but drew close to her as she usually did.  All
that night the princess could not sleep a wink and cried and
lamented continually.

In the morning she got up, ill, because of her lack of sleep.
Nonetheless, she forced herself to go to mass.

When Tirant learned of her condition, and when Stephanie told him
about her tears and crying all night long, he was very surprised,
and wondered what he had done.  Going up to the princess, he
said:

"If Your Excellency would like to tell me what is wrong, I would
be very pleased."

Tirant could say no more because of the great emotion that he
felt, and the princess softly began to say the following words:

"I will spend the rest of my life hiding the cause of my grief.
And don't think that it doesn't cost me a great deal of effort to
keep such terrible pain hidden."

She could say no more because the doctors came, along with the
empress.  Tirant took his leave to go to his lodgings, immersed
in thought about what the princess had told him, and he felt
distressed.  He could not eat, and did not want to leave his
chamber until the constable went to the palace and spoke at
length with Stephanie and Plaerdemavida.  He told them what great
anguish Tirant was in because of what the princess had said to
him.

"How can we help him," said Stephanie, "if everything I mend by
day the Widow tears apart at night?  If it weren't for the Widow,
I would have had him in her chambers, not once, but a hundred
times, like it or not, the way I did that night in the castle of
Malvei."

As they finished talking, they went into the princess's chamber.
She was deeply involved in conversation with Widow Repose, and
Stephanie could not talk to her.  The emperor, knowing that the
constable was there, thought that Tirant must be there too.  So
he had them summoned, and as they had to hold counsel, the
emperor said:

"Let us go to Carmesina's chambers, and we will see how she is,
because she has not felt well all day long."

The constable went first, then came the emperor and Tirant, and
then everyone in the council who wished to go.  They found the
princess playing cards with the Widow, withdrawn to a corner of
the chamber.  The emperor sat at her side, asking about her
illness, and she quickly answered him:

"Sire, as soon as I see Your Majesty, my illness suddenly
disappears."

Then she turned her eyes on Tirant and smiled.  The emperor was
very happy at Carmesina's words, and much more so when he saw her
in such a good mood.  They spoke of many things, and the princess
answered everything Tirant said to her, because Widow Repose had
advised her to be nice to Tirant.

What the Widow wanted was not for Tirant to return to his
country, but to lose hope of having the princess, and for him to
love the Widow instead.  That is why she spoke so wickedly to the
princess.

When it was nearly night, the emperor and all his men went to
their chambers, and the next day the emperor expressed his regret
that all the men had to leave for the camp.  Tirant and his men
got ready as quickly as they could.  While Stephanie was talking
with the princess that evening, she gave her the news about
Tirant, and the princess quickly said to her:

"Be quiet, Stephanie.  Don't make me any angrier.  All those who
make appearances of love are not made exactly of gold."

Stephanie tried to talk but she would not let her.

So two or three days went by, and the princess showed a smiling
face to everyone, including Tirant, because she knew that soon
they would have to leave.  And to the emperor she said:

"Sire, here is Tirant, your virtuous captain, who will shortly do
to the sultan what he did to the Caramany and the King of Upper
India, or what he did to the King of Egypt.  If everyone in the
world went into battle, he would certainly be the only one to win
honor and lasting fame.  And that is worthy of a singular prize,
for he is a great warrior, and he has gone into battle with true
courage."

The emperor said:

"Virtuous captain, I thank you for all the honors you have
brought me, and I beg you to do the same from now on, or better,
for this is the hope I place in you."

When Tirant heard so many superfluous words, and saw that the
princess had brought them on, almost in mockery, he could utter
only:

"Perhaps."

Tirant wanted to go to his chambers, and he went down a
staircase, into a room where he found the High Constable,
Stephanie and Plaerdemavida in animated conversation.  Tirant
went to them and said:

"My sisters, what are you talking about?"

"My lord," answered Stephanie, "about how little love the
princess is showing your lordship when you are about to leave.
Now, more than ever, she should be showering you with love.
Then, my lord, we talked about what will happen to me if you go
away.  Because the empress said to me last night, 'Stephanie, you
are in love.'  I blushed and shamefully lowered my eyes.  That
was a sign of assent, since I was silent, because at first I
didn't know what love was, except for that night at Malvei.  And
if you leave there will be little good fortune and a miserable
gift of love for me except for all the pain I'll have for
company.  Oh, poor me!  That's the way I will be
punished--because of your wrongdoing."

"My lady," said Tirant, "didn't I tell you that the day we left I
would beg the emperor, in the presence of the empress and the
princess, to give his consent to this marriage?  The constable
will be here, and then we will hold your wedding."

"And how will I get along," said Stephanie, "when you aren't
here?  There won't be any celebration or dancing or festivities
at all without your lordship here."

"Who wants festivities at a wedding if there weren't any at the
engagement?" said Tirant, "Leave the partying and merrymaking for
the bed."

While they were talking, the emperor came down with Carmesina.
Tirant thought that this was a good time to tell the emperor.  So
he went over to the emperor, and in Carmesina's presence he sank
to one knee, and humbly began the following plea:

"With deep humility I beg Your Majesty, and the empress, and the
princess, to hold the marriage of the maiden Stephanie of
Macedonia to my singular brother, the Count of Sant Angel and the
High Constable of Your Highness, because marriages like these are
a union of the deepest kind of love."

The emperor replied:

"I am going to delegate my power to my daughter here so that she
can ask her mother's consent."

And he left without another word, while the princess stayed
behind with them.  When Stephanie saw that the emperor had gone
so quickly, she assumed that he did not approve of the marriage,
and she left the princess, Tirant, the constable and
Plaerdemavida, and went into a chamber alone and began to cry.

Tirant took the princess's arm, and went with the constable and
Plaerdemavida to the empress's chambers.  There Tirant and the
princess asked the empress to give her consent to this marriage,
since the emperor had agreed, and she answered that she would be
very happy to.  They immediately called all the court to
Stephanie's betrothal.  They all gathered in the great hall,
along with a cardinal who had been summoned to marry them.  Then
they sent word for the bride to come, and they found her still
crying because she had heard no news until they came looking for
her and told her that the emperor and all the others were waiting
for her.

The betrothal was celebrated with dances and a sumptuous feast.
The emperor wanted the wedding to take place the following day so
that Tirant's departure would not be delayed, and so it was done.
Great celebrations were held with jousts and dances and gaiety.
And everyone was happy except poor, miserable Tirant.

The night of the wedding, Plaerdemavida caught five little
kittens and put them by the window where the bride was sleeping,
and they meowed all night long.  After Plaerdemavida had put the
cats there she went to the emperor's chambers and said to him:

"My lord, come to the bride's chamber quickly: the constable must
have hurt her terribly because I heard some loud cries.  I am
really afraid that he may have killed your dear niece, or at
least hurt her badly; and since Your Majesty is such a close
relative of hers it's you who should go to her side."

Plaerdemavida's words were so amusing that the emperor dressed
again and the two of them went to the door of the bridal chamber
and listened.  When Plaerdemavida saw that they were not talking,
she quickly called out:

"My lady, my bride, how is it that you aren't crying out or
talking now?  It must be because in that battle your pain (That
pain that reaches down to your heels, and won't let you shout
that delightful 'Oh!') and your even greater haste are over.
It's a great pleasure, if you listen to what the maidens say.
Since you're so quiet, that's a sign that you've finished the
meal, bone and all.  It will be bad for you if you don't do it
again.  The emperor is right here, listening for you to cry out
because he's afraid you might be hurt."

The emperor told her to be quiet, and not to say he was there.

"I certainly will not," said Plaerdemavida.  "I want them to know
that you're here."

Then the bride began to cry out and to say that he was hurting
her and for him to be still, and Plaerdemavida said:

"My lord, everything the bride is saying is a lie.  Her words
don't come from the heart.  They sound false to me, and they're
not to my liking."

The emperor could not contain his laughter at Plaerdemavida's
delicious remarks.  Then, when the bride heard them laughing so
hard she said:

"Who put those wretched cats out there?  Put them somewhere else,
I beg you: they won't let me sleep."

Plaerdemavida replied:

"That I certainly won't do.  Didn't you know that I can get live
kittens out of a dead cat?"

"Oh, what a lively young lady!" said the emperor.  "How my heart
is warmed by the things you say.  I swear to you by the Almighty
that if I didn't already have a wife I would have no other girl
but you."

The empress had gone to the emperor's chamber and found the door
closed, and no one was there but a page who told her that the
emperor was at the door of the bridal chamber.  Then she went
there and found him with four maidens.  Plaerdemavida saw the
empress coming, and before anyone could talk she said:

"Hope to die quickly, my lady: listen to what my lord the emperor
said to me--that if he didn't already have a wife he would have
no one but me.  And since you're in my way, fall down dead right
now--as quickly as you can."

"Oh, you wicked child!" said the empress.  "Is that the sort of
thing you say to me?"  And turning to the emperor: "And you, you
blessed saint, what do you want another wife for? To give her
taps instead of thrusts? Don't you know that no lady or maiden
ever died from being tapped?"

And, joking, they went back to their chambers happily, and the
empress and the maidens returned to theirs.

The next day, in the morning, everyone was happy, and they highly
honored the constable and the bride.  They took them to the main
church where they heard mass with great honor.  When they had
read the scripture the preacher mounted the pulpit and gave a
solemn sermon.

When the sermon and the mass were finished, they had the
constable put on the clothing of the duchy of Macedonia, and they
displayed the flags of that duchy.  On his head they put a crown
made entirely of fine silver, and they crowned Stephanie in the
same way.

When these things were finished they left the church, riding
through the city with flags flying in the wind.  The emperor,
with all the ladies and all the grandees, dukes, counts and
marquis, and many others on horseback, rode around the entire
city.  Afterward they all went outside the city to a beautiful
meadow where there was a shining spring called Holy Spring.
After the flags were blessed, they baptized the duke and duchess
of the kingdom of Macedonia by pouring perfumed water on their
heads.

The duke went to the Holy Spring, and the emperor took water from
the spring and baptized him again, giving him the title of Duke
of Macedonia.  Then the trumpets sounded, and the heralds
shouted:

"This is the illustrious Duke of Macedonia, of the great lineage
of Rocasalada."

At that moment three hundred knights with golden spurs came, and
they all made a deep bow to the emperor, and paid great honor to
the Duke of Macedonia.  And from this moment on he was no longer
called Constable.  These three hundred knights separated into two
groups, and each knight took the most beautiful lady or the one
that was most to his liking.  They held them with the reins of
the horses they were riding on.  And each of them, in order, rode
forward: first those of highest station and lineage, and then
those who wished to joust.  And when they met, one would tell the
other to give up the lady they had, or he would have to joust
with him, and the one who broke the other's lance first would
take his lady.

While the knights were engaged in these games, the emperor went
to the city of Pera where the celebration was prepared.  It was
already past noon, and the knights had not yet returned, so the
emperor went to the top of a high tower.  He had a great horn
blown that could be heard more than a league away, and when the
knights heard the horn, they all set out on the road to Pera.
Then three hundred other knights came out, dressed in the same
color of garments, and they blocked the road.  A very singular
display of arms took place there which greatly pleased the
emperor.

All the ladies and maidens who had been taken prisoner fled to
the city and left the knights.

The combat between the knights lasted more than two hours as the
emperor did not want to stop it, and when they had broken all
their lances they fought with swords.  The emperor called for the
trumpets to sound, and they all separated, each group to a
different side.  When the knights were separated, each sought out
his lady, and they could not find them.  Then they began to say
that the other knights had taken them prisoner, and each of them
complained to the empress and the princess about the ladies they
had lost.  They answered that they knew nothing, and that they
believed the other knights had them hidden.  Then these knights,
very furious, raised their swords and spurred toward the others,
and they began to fight again.

When it had gone on for a good spell, they saw the ladies on the
palace walls.  A trumpet sounded, and they all gathered together
and attacked the palace mightily, and the women defended it.  But
the men outside broke in by force of their arms.  When they were
inside the great patio they divided into two groups, and taking a
king-of-arms, they sent him to the knights who had come most
recently, demanding that they leave, for they were each there to
get back their lady, along with the ones they had won.  They
answered that they would not leave for anything in the world.
They wanted their share of what was due to them, as they had
placed themselves in such grave danger of death.  After this,
they held combat on foot inside the palace, and it was a
delicious sight to see, for some were falling here and others
there.  Others delivered marvelous blows with their axes, and
whoever lost his axe could not fight again, nor could anyone
whose body or hand touched the floor.  They fought in such a way
that it became a fight of ten against ten, and then it was
beautiful to see.  Finally the emperor had them separated, and
then they were all disarmed in the great hall, and there they
dined.  When it was a half hour before sunset they began to
dance, and they held a long and pretty dance.  They took the
princess and all the ladies, and dancing, they went to the city
of Constantinople.

After the meal Tirant gathered all those of his lineage,
thirty-five knights and gentlemen who had come with him or the
Viscount of Branches.  They went to kiss the foot and hand of the
emperor, thanking him for the great kindness he had done them in
giving his beautiful niece to Diafebus for his bride.  And after
they had all thanked him, the emperor smiled and said:

"Because of the great virtue I see in you, Tirant, I love you
deeply.  And I would not want anyone to marry a relative of mine
if he were not of the lineage of Rocasalada.  I would have begged
you to take Stephanie, my niece, as your wife, along with the
duchy of Macedonia, so that you would be more united with the
crown of the Empire of Greece, and I would have given you many
other things.  At the time that I offered it, you did not want to
be a count; instead you gave it to your relative.  And now I
would have given you the duchy, along with a lady who is a
relative of mine, and you did not want that either.  I don't know
what you're waiting for!  If you want me to give you my empire,
don't count on it: I need it."

Tirant replied:

"The greatest glory I could have is to leave an inheritance to my
relatives and friends.  As an inheritance of my own I want
nothing more than a horse and arms, so Your Highness will have to
work a great deal to make me rich."

The old emperor was pleased by Tirant's words.  Turning to his
daughter, the emperor said:

"I have never known a knight with as much virtue as Tirant.  If
God gives me life I will see him crowned a king."

 CHAPTER VII IN THE PRINCESS'S BED

After the celebrations were over, Diafebus, the Duke of
Macedonia, lived in the emperor's palace.  The following day the
duke invited all those of his lineage, Rocasalada, to dine.
While the guests were eating, the emperor told his daughter to go
to the duchess' chamber since all the foreigners from Brittany
were there.

"The duke is attempting to pay them honor, and celebrations like
this are useless if there are no maidens present."

The princess replied:

"My lord, I will obey Your Majesty's command."

Accompanied by many ladies and maidens she started toward the
duchess' chamber.  With great malice Widow Repose went up to her,
and said:

"Oh, my lady!  Why does Your Highness want to go where these
foreigners are?  Do you want to disturb their dinner?  When they
see Your Excellency no one will dare eat in your presence.  You
and your father want to honor them and give them pleasure, and
yet you do them great harm.  For all of them would prefer to see
the wing of a partridge than all the maidens in the world.  Your
Highness should not act so freely, going to such a place, since
you are the emperor's daughter.  Think highly of yourself if you
want to be well thought of by other people.  It's a bad sign when
I see Your Excellency always with that fool, Tirant."

"Don't I have to obey what my father, the emperor, orders me to
do?" said the princess.  "I don't think anyone would blame me for
obeying my father's command."

But she went back to her own chamber without visiting the
duchess.  When everyone had eaten, Plaerdemavida decided to see
Tirant and talk to the duchess.  Seeing Tirant sitting there,
deep in thought, she went over to him, and to console him she
said:

"Captain, my lord, my soul suffers deeply when it sees you so sad
and lost in thought.  Tell me, your grace, how I can help, for I
will not fail you even if my life were in the balance."

Tirant was very grateful to her.  The duchess approached them,
and asked Plaerdemavida why the princess had not come.
Plaerdemavida answered that Widow Repose was the cause, for she
had scolded her at length.

And she would not tell what the Widow had said about Tirant so
that he would not explode in anger.

"I wish," said Tirant, "that she were a man.  Then I could repay
her for all the wicked things she says."

"Would you like to do it properly?" asked Plaerdemavida.  "Let's
leave the wickedness aside and get right down to business; the
remedies will come later.  I'm well aware that we won't
accomplish anything if we don't mix in a little force, so I'll
tell you what I think.  Her Highness told me to prepare a bath
for her the day after tomorrow.  So when everyone is eating I'll
take you into the chamber where she takes her bath in such a way
that no one will see you.  When she comes out of the bath and
goes to sleep I'll be able to place you by her side in the bed.
And just as you are serious and skillful on the battlefield you
must be the same way in bed.  This is the quickest road for
getting what you want.  If you know a better one, speak up, don't
hold your tongue."

The duchess said:

"Let me talk to her first, and I'll see what sort of answer she
gives.  Your idea will have to be the last thing we do to get
what we want."

Tirant spoke:

"I wouldn't want to do anything that would offend my lady.  What
good would it do me to have my desire with Her Highness if it's
against her will?  I would rather undergo a cruel death than make
Her Majesty angry in any way, or do anything against her wishes."

"In God's faith, I don't like what I'm hearing from you," said
Plaerdemavida.  "If the desire to love exists in you, you won't
run away from the narrow path I'm offering you.  My experience
speaks for itself, and it desires to serve you and bring you all
the good I can--even more than I can.  But I see that you're
going off in a strange direction.  You want to go down a dead-end
street.  From now on you go find someone else to take care of
your problem.  I don't want to have anything more to do with it."

"Maiden," said Tirant, "I beg you, please, don't be angry.  Let's
put our minds together and do what's best.  If you fail me in
this, there's nothing left for me to do but go off, hopeless,
like a madman."

"Not even the angels," said Plaerdemavida, "could give you better
advice than I have."

They decided that the duchess should go to the princess's chamber
to see if it was possible for him to talk to her.  When they got
there they found her in her room, combing her hair.  Then the
duchess thought up some youthful mischief: she went into a room
that the princess would have to pass through when she came out of
her chamber.  She lay down at the foot of the bed and leaned on
her elbow, very dejected.  When the princess heard that she was
there, she sent word for her to come into the chamber, but the
duchess did not want to go.  And Plaerdemavida, who had contrived
it all this way, told her:

"Leave her alone.  She can't come.  She's very sick and I don't
know what's wrong with her.  She's very sad."

When the princess had combed her hair, she came out of the
chamber and saw the duchess with a very sad face.  She went over
to her and said:

"Oh, my dear sister!  What's wrong?  Please, I beg you, tell me
quickly, for I feel very bad about your illness, and if I can
help you in any way, I will."

"I'll tell Your Highness what hurts me, for I am prepared to lose
my life in this matter.  It's impossible for me to go back on the
promise I made, by your command, to Tirant in the castle of
Malvei.  So, my lady, I beg Your Excellency not to allow me to
remain a perjurer or for you to be the cause of my downfall, for
I will have to be on bad terms with the duke and with Tirant."

As the duchess said this, tears flowed from her eyes.  The
painful tears of the duchess moved the princess to pity, and she
forgot much of the anger she felt for Tirant.  With a humble
voice she answered tenderly:

"Duchess, you have to realize that I am just as sad as you are.
But, my lady and sister, don't grieve any longer, for you know
that I love you more than anyone in the world, and I will behave
from now on as God wills.  Since you want me to talk to Tirant, I
will, out of love for you, even though I have little desire to do
anything for him.  If you knew how he treats me and all the
things he's said about me, you would be astonished.  I'll put up
with him because of the great danger we're in, and because we all
need him.  But I swear to you by this blessed day that if it
weren't for that I would never allow him in my presence again.
Who would think that such ingratitude could exist in such a
virtuous knight."

The duchess replied with the following words:

"My lady, I am astonished that Your Highness could believe that a
knight as noble and virtuous as Tirant could have said even one
word to offend Your Majesty.  If his ears had heard anything
spoken against you, he would have killed everyone including
himself.  So don't even think, Your Highness, that Tirant is the
way he's been described to you.  Some miserable person has led
you to believe a false story, and is trying to destroy the
reputation of the best knight in all the world."

Plaerdemavida stepped in and said:

"My lady, take that vice of having bad thoughts about Tirant out
of your head, for if anyone in the world deserves merit, it's
Tirant.  Who is the half-wit who could make Your Majesty believe
that a knight exists who can even compare to him in glory, honor
and virtue?  There is no one (unless they wanted to lie) who
could say (unless it's with great wickedness) that Tirant would
say anything but good things about Your Excellency.  Forget what
wicked people say, and love the one you should love, for it will
be to your great glory to possess such a virtuous knight.  Love
one who loves you, my lady, and leave the wicked talk to that
devil, Widow Repose.  She's the one who's causing all this
trouble, and I trust God that it will all fall back on her.  I
have only one hope in this world: to see her whipped through the
streets of the city, naked, with cow entrails hanging down her
shoulders, her eyes and her face."

"Be quiet," said the princess.  "You just think Widow Repose is
telling me all this, but she's not.  I'm the one who can see all
the terrible things that could happen.  But in spite of it all,
I'll do whatever you tell me."

"If you listen to my advice," said Plaerdemavida, "I'll tell you
to do only things that will bring you honor."

And so they left.  The duchess went back to her chambers and
found Tirant there, and she told him everything that had
happened.  Tirant, very happy, went to the great hall where the
emperor, the princess and the empress were, with all the ladies,
and they danced there for a good while.  And the princess
continually entertained Tirant.

After the dancing was over, when the princess withdrew to dine,
Widow Repose approached her.  With no one around to hear, she
said:

"It hurts me to see how much love permits, and I curse the day
you were born.  For many people constantly turn their eyes to
Your Majesty, and then to me, and they say to me three times:
'Oh, Widow!  Oh, Widow Repose!  How can you allow a man who is a
foreigner to carry off Carmesina's virginity?'  Just imagine if
someone who hears words like those doesn't have the right to
grieve and to despair of their life?  How could you think, my
lady, that such a thing could be done without bishops and
archbishops knowing of it?  I'm only telling you all this, my
lady, to bring it to mind again, for I've already told you about
it several times."

She decided to say no more, and waited to see what the princess
would say.  The princess was brimming with emotion at this
moment, but she had no time to reply to the poisonous words of
the wicked Widow because the emperor was at his table, waiting
for the princess, and he had sent word for her to come twice
already.

The princess said:

"Madam Widow, to be able to give an answer to everything you have
told me would be a delicious meal for me."

She left the chamber, and when the duchess, who was waiting to
find out if Tirant could go to her that night, saw her come out
so agitated and flushed, she did not dare say a word to her.  But
when Plaerdemavida saw her in that state too, and also saw the
Widow following behind, she said to her:

"Oh, my lady, I've always noticed that when the sky turns red
it's the sign of a storm."

"Shut up, you madwoman," said the princess.  "You're always
spouting nonsense."

You can imagine how the princess must have appeared, for when the
emperor saw her he asked her why she looked that way, and if
anyone had made her angry.  The princess answered:

"No, my lord.  Since I left Your Majesty's side I've been lying
down in my bed, because my heart has been in pain.  But thanks to
Our Heavenly Father I have found a cure for my ache."

The emperor commanded the doctors to oversee her diet, and they
ordered pheasant for dinner, which is gentle meat for the heart.
The duchess sat at her side, not to eat, but to be able to talk
to her and to tell her that Tirant was waiting for her in his
chamber with good news.  When the meal was over, the duchess
leaned toward her and whispered:

"What is open has the seal of truth, and what is done secretly,
as the Widow does, shows evil.  A vassal cannot deceive his
master, and since the Widow is my vassal, I want her death, for
her actions deserve great punishment."

"My duchess," said the princess, "I love you very much, and I
will do as much for you as one can reasonably do for her
sister--even more.  Leave Widow Repose alone, because even though
she's your vassal, she's not to blame for anything."

The duchess said:

"Give me an answer to that matter of Tirant: Do you want him to
come tonight?  I'm sure that's what he's hoping for so anxiously.
Don't tell me no, upon your life."

"I'll be very happy for him to come this evening," said the
princess.  "I'll wait for him here and we shall dance, and if he
wishes to tell me anything, I'll listen to him."

"Oh, my dear girl," said the duchess.  "Now you want to change
the game on me.  I'm only telling you that if you want that
virtuous man, Tirant (without whom you can gain neither blessings
or honor) to come see you, the same way he did that pleasant
night in the castle of Malvei-- let's see if you can catch my
meaning now!"

"I can't think at all when you mention Tirant's name to me," said
the princess.  "You may certainly tell Tirant that I beg him, as
a knight full of faith and virtue, to stop tempting my soul which
has been crying tears of blood for many days.  But after he comes
here it will be I who will consent, and in a greater way than he
imagines."

"Oh, my lady!" said the duchess.  "If Your Excellency wishes to
do battle with Tirant, place yourself in his arms again with the
same fear you felt that night at Malvei, with the promises and
oaths you swore to him."

"Shall I tell you something, my sister and my lady?" said the
princess.  "I want to keep my reputation and my honor as I value
my life.  And this I intend to do with God's help."

The duchess left very angrily, and when she saw Tirant she told
him about her lady's bad disposition.  Tirant's anguish increased
to an even greater degree than usual.

When the emperor had dined, knowing that Tirant was in the duke's
chamber, he sent for him and said to the princess:

"Send for the minstrels so that the knights can enjoy themselves.
The time for their departure has been set."

"No," said the princess.  "I feel more like going to bed than
dancing."

She immediately took leave of her father and withdrew to her
chamber so that she would not have to talk to Tirant.  Widow
Repose, who had heard her say these words, was very satisfied
with what she had done.  Plaerdemavida went to the duchess'
chamber and said to Tirant:

"Captain, put no hope in this lady as long as Widow Repose is
around her.  They've already withdrawn to her chamber, and are
speaking together about your affairs.  You'll never get your way
with her unless you do what I'm going to tell you: Tomorrow
she'll take her bath, and I will be so clever that at night I'll
put you in her bed.  You'll find her completely naked.  Do what
I'm telling you, for I know she'll never say a word.  Where the
duchess used to sleep, I've taken her place now that she's no
longer there.  Since this is the case, let me take care of it."

"Maiden," said Tirant, "I am extremely grateful to you for all
your gentility, and for what you are telling me, but there is one
thing you should know about me: I wouldn't use force against a
lady or maiden for anything in the world, even if it should cost
me the crown of the Empire of Greece, or of Rome, or of the
entire Kingdom of Earth.  I prefer to go through the pain and
trial of pleading with her, for I am completely convinced that
she was created in Paradise.  Her gracefulness shows that she is
more angelic than human."

He said no more.  Plaerdemavida, showing her anger to Tirant,
said:

"Tirant, Tirant, you will never be brave or feared in battle if
you don't mix a little bit of force in when you love a lady or a
maiden.  Since you have a good and genteel hope, and you love a
maiden valiantly, go into her room and throw yourself down on her
bed when she's naked or in her nightshirt, and wound her boldly,
because among friends no towel is necessary.  And if you don't do
it, I won't be your ally any longer, for I know many knights who
have deserved honor, glory and fame from their ladies because
they had their hands ready and valiant.  Oh Lord, how wonderful
to have a tender maiden, about fourteen years old and completely
naked, in your arms!  Oh Lord, how wonderful to be in her bed,
kissing her all the while!  Oh Lord, how wonderful if she's of
royal blood!  Oh Lord, how wonderful to have an emperor as her
father!  Oh Lord, how wonderful to have her rich and generous,
and free of all infamy!...  Now what I want most of all is for
you to do what I tell you."

By this time most of the night was gone and they wanted to lock
up the palace, so Tirant had to leave.  When he had said
goodnight to the duchess and was already going out, Plaerdemavida
said:

"Captain, my lord, I wouldn't be able to find anyone who would do
as much for me: Go to sleep, and don't come back from the other
side."

Tirant burst out laughing and said to her:

"You have such an angelic nature, you're always giving good
advice."

And so they went their separate ways.

That night Tirant thought about everything the maiden had said to
him.  The next morning the emperor sent for the captain, and he
immediately went and found him dressing, and the princess had
come to wait on him.  She was wearing a brocade skirt, with no
cloth covering her breasts, and her hair, loosened somewhat,
almost reached to the ground.  When Tirant approached the emperor
he was astonished to see as much perfection in a human body as he
saw in her then.  The emperor said to him:

"Captain, in God's name, I beg you to do everything possible so
that you can leave with your men soon."

Tirant was so impressed by the vision of this striking lady that
he was stupefied and could not speak.  After some time had passed
he recovered and said:

"I was thinking about the Turks when I saw Your Majesty, so I
didn't hear you.  Your Highness, tell me what you want me to do,
I beg you."

The emperor was surprised to see him so distracted, but since he
had understood so little he thought that that must be the case,
for he had seemed entranced for half an hour.  The emperor
repeated what he had said, and Tirant answered:

"My lord, Your Majesty should know that the crier is running
throughout the city, telling everyone that the departure is set
for Monday, and today is Friday.  So we will be leaving very
soon, my lord, and nearly everyone is already prepared."

Tirant stood behind the emperor so that he would not see him, and
covering his face with his hands, he looked at the princess.  She
and the other maidens laughed out loud while Plaerdemavida stood
in front of the emperor, and taking the emperor's arm, she turned
him toward her and said:

"If you have done anything noteworthy it's because of Tirant, who
conquered the Grand Turk and made him lose the false and terrible
madness he had about ruling the entire Greek empire.  He also
intended to conquer the old emperor here with pretty words, and
instead the Turkish kings and the sultan desperately ran for
safety to the great fortress in the city of Bellpuig.  And not at
their leisure, but swept along by the fear that took control of
their feet.  He has won renown by his own virtue, and if I had
the royal scepter and were lord of the Greek empire, and if
Carmesina had come from my body, I know very well whose wife I
would make her.  But all of us girls are foolish like this: we
want nothing but honor, position, and dignity, and as a result
many of us come to a bad end.  What good would it do for me to
belong to the line of David if I lost what I had for lack of a
good man?  And you, my lord, try to save your soul, since you've
spared your body in battles in the past, and don't even think
about giving any other husband to your daughter but...  Do I have
to say it?  I won't...  I must: the virtuous Tirant.  Take this
consolation while you're alive, and don't expect it to be done
after your blessed days are over, because the things that nature
wills and that are ordered by God must be consented to.  That way
you'll have glory in this world and paradise in the next."

Then she turned to the princess, and said:

"You who are of such lofty blood, take a husband soon--very soon.
If your father won't give you one, I will, and I'll give you none
other than Tirant.  For it's a wonderful thing to have both a
husband and a knight, whoever can have one.  This man is greater
than all the others in prowess.  If you don't think so, Your
Majesty, look at the disorder of your empire and the point it had
reached before Tirant came to this land."

"Please be quiet, girl," said Tirant, "and don't say such
outlandish things about me."

"Go on out to your battles," said Plaerdemavida, "and let me be."

The emperor answered:

"By the bones of my father, the emperor Albert, you are the most
extraordinary maiden in the world, but the further you go, the
more I like you.  And now, as a present, I'm going to give you
fifty thousand ducats."

She knelt to the ground and kissed his hand.  The princess was
very disturbed by what she had said, and Tirant was somewhat
embarrassed.  When the emperor had finished dressing he went to
mass.  As they came out from mass Tirant had an opportunity to
talk to the princess, and he said to her:

"Anyone who makes a promise puts himself in debt."

"The promise," said the princess, "was not made in the presence
of a notary."

Plaerdemavida, who was standing nearby, heard the princess's
reply, and quickly said to her:

"Let's have none of that: a promise to fulfill love doesn't
require any witnesses, and even less a notary.  What a miserable
state we'd be in if we had to have it in writing every time!
There wouldn't be enough paper in the world!  Do you know how
it's done?  In the dark and without witnesses, because the
lodging is never missed."

"Oh, this madwoman!" said the princess.  "Do you always have to
talk to me about the same thing?"

No matter how much Tirant spoke to her, no matter how he pleaded,
she would do nothing for him.

When they were in the chambers, the emperor called Carmesina and
said to her:

"Tell me, my daughter, those things Plaerdemavida said--where do
they come from?"

"I'm sure I don't know, my lord," said the princess.  "I never
spoke of such a thing to her.  But this madwoman is impertinent
and she says anything that comes into her head."

"She's no madwoman," said the emperor.  "In fact, she's the most
sensible maiden in my court.  She's a good girl, and she always
gives good advice.  Haven't you noticed when you've come to the
council chambers that when you make her talk she is always very
discreet?  Would you like to have our captain for your husband?"

The princess blushed shamefully, and could not utter a word.
After a moment, when she had recovered, she said:

"My lord, when your captain has finished conquering the Moors,
then I will do whatever Your Majesty commands me."

Tirant went to the duchess' chamber, and sent for Plaerdemavida.
When she was there, he said:

"Oh, genteel lady!  I don't know what help you can give me: My
soul is in discord with my body, and unless you can cure my
illness I don't care whether I live or die."

"I'll do it tonight," said Plaerdemavida, "if you do as I say."

"Command me, maiden," said Tirant, "and may God increase your
honor.  The things you said when the emperor was here, about the
princess and me: who told you to say them?"

"You, and my lady, and the emperor too: You're all thinking the
same thing," said Plaerdemavida.  "When he asked me, I gave him
even better reasons why you're worthy of having the princess as a
wife.  To what better man could she be given than to you?  And he
agrees with everything that I say.  I'll tell you why, in strict
confidence: He's in love with me, and he would pull up my chemise
if I'd let him.  He's sworn to me on the Bible that if the
empress was dying, he would take me as a wife in a minute.  And
he told me: 'As a sign of our pact, let's kiss; this kiss will be
very little, but it's better to have something than nothing.'
And I answered him: 'Now that you are old, you're a lecher.  When
you were young, were you virtuous?'  Only a few hours ago he gave
me this string of fat pearls, and now he's with his daughter,
asking her if she wants you for a husband.  Do you know why I
said that to him?  Because if you go to her chamber at night and
it's your bad fortune to cause a commotion, and they try to
charge me with something, I'll have an alibi.  I'll say: 'My
lord, I already told Your Majesty.  The princess ordered me to
let him in.'  And that way no one will be able to say anything.
So that you can see my good will and how much I want to help and
honor your grace, when the emperor is dining, come to me.  I
promise to put you in my lady's bed, and in the refreshing night
you'll see how solace comes to those who are in love."

While they were talking, the emperor, knowing that Tirant was in
the duchess' chamber, sent for him, and interrupted their
conversation.

When Tirant held counsel with the emperor, they spoke at length
about war and what things would be needed, and at that time they
were all dressed in readiness for battle.  When the dark shadows
of night had fallen, Tirant came to the duchess' chamber, and
while the emperor was with the ladies, Plaerdemavida went into
the chamber very happily, took Tirant by the hand and led him
away.  He was dressed in a jacket of red satin, with a cloak over
his shoulders and a sword in his hand.  Plaerdemavida put him in
the chamber.  A large box was there with a hole she had made so
he could breathe.  The bath had been prepared, and it stood in
front of the box.  After the ladies had eaten, they danced with
the gallant knights.  When they saw that Tirant was not there
they stopped dancing, and the emperor retired to his chamber
while the ladies departed, and left the princess alone with her
ladies-in-waiting in her chamber where Tirant was.  Plaerdemavida
opened the box under the pretext of taking out a sheet of
delicate linen for the bath, and she left it slightly open,
putting clothing on top so that none of the other women would see
him.  The princess began to take off her clothes, and
Plaerdemavida prepared her seat which had been placed directly in
front so that Tirant could see her clearly.

When she was completely naked Plaerdemavida brought a lighted
candle to give pleasure to Tirant, and looking at all of her body
and everything that was in view, she said:

"In faith, my lady, if Tirant were here and could touch you with
his hands the way I am, I believe he would prefer that to being
made ruler of the kingdom of France."

"Don't believe it," said the princess.  "He would rather be king
than touch me the way you are."

"Oh, my lord Tirant!  Where are you now?  Why aren't you standing
here, nearby, so that you can see and touch the thing you love
most in this world and in the world beyond?  Look, my lord
Tirant, here are the locks of my princess; I kiss them in your
name, for you are the best of all knights in the world.  Here are
her eyes and her mouth: I kiss them for you.  Here are her
crystalline breasts: I hold one in each hand, and I kiss them for
you.  See how small, how firm, how white and smooth they are.
Look Tirant, here is her belly, her thighs and her secret place.
Oh, wretched me, if I were a man I would want to spend my last
days here.  Oh, Tirant!  Where are you now?  Why don't you come
to me when I call you so tenderly?  Only the hands of Tirant are
worthy to touch where I am touching, and no one else, because
this is a morsel that there is no one who would not like to choke
on."

Tirant was watching all this, and could not have been more
pleased by the fine wit of Plaerdemavida's comments, and he felt
sorely tempted to come out of the box.

When they had been there some time, joking, the princess stepped
into the bath and told Plaerdemavida to remove her clothes and
join her.

"I will, under one condition."

"What's that?" asked the princess.

Plaerdemavida answered:

"That you consent to have Tirant in your bed for one hour while
you're in it."

"Hush!  You're mad!" said the princess.

"If you please, my lady, tell me what you would say if Tirant
came here one night without any of us knowing it?"

"What else could I tell him," said the princess, "but beg him to
leave, and if he wouldn't go, I would keep quiet rather than be
defamed."

"In faith, my lady," said Plaerdemavida, "that's what I would do
too."

While they were saying these things, Widow Repose came in, and
the princess begged her to join her in the bath.  The Widow
removed all her clothing except her red stockings and a linen hat
on her head; and although she was very pretty and well endowed,
the red stockings and the hat on her head made her so ugly that
she looked like a devil, and it is true that any lady or maiden
you see in that sort of attire will look very ugly to you no
matter how genteel she may be.

When the bath was finished they brought the repast to the
princess, which was a pair of partridges, and then a dozen eggs
with sugar and cinnamon.  Afterward she lay down in her bed to
sleep.

The Widow went to her chamber with the other ladies except for
two who slept in the chamber.  When they were all asleep,
Plaerdemavida got up from the bed and she led Tirant from the box
in her nightshirt, and made him take off all his clothing,
quietly, so that no one would hear him.  And Tirant's heart,
hands and feet were trembling.

"What's this?" said Plaerdemavida.  "There's not a man in the
world who is valiant with weapons, but who isn't afraid when he's
with women.  In battle there's not a man alive you're afraid of,
and here you tremble at the sight of one lone maiden.  Don't
worry, I'll be with you the whole time.  I won't leave your
side."

"By the faith I owe our Heavenly Father, I would be happier to
joust ten knights to the death than commit an act like this."

The maiden took him by the hand, and he followed her, trembling,
and said:

"Maiden, all my fear is really shame, because of the extreme good
will that I desire for my lady.  I would much rather go back than
continue on when I think that Her Majesty knows nothing about any
of this.  When she sees what's happening she will be completely
frightened, and I would rather die than offend Her Majesty."

Plaerdemavida was very angry with Tirant's words, and she said:

"Oh, you faint-hearted knight.  Does a maiden frighten you so
much that you're afraid to go near her?  Oh, unlucky captain.  Do
you have so little courage that you dare say such words to me?
Pluck up your courage.

When the emperor comes, what story will you invent to tell him?
I'll have you discovered, and God and the whole world will know
that you have spoken ill, and let me remind you that this time
you'll lose your honor and your fame.  Do what I tell you and
I'll give you a secure life and have you wearing the crown of the
Greek Empire, because the time has come when I can tell you only
one thing: to go quickly and take those steps that will lead you
to the princess."

Seeing the frankness in Plaerdemavida's words, Tirant said:

"Let's go on without delay, I beg you, and let me see that
glorified body.  And since there's no light I'll see her only
with the eyes of the imagination."

"I've used great ingenuity to bring you here," said
Plaerdemavida, "so conduct yourself in a proper way."

And she let go his hand.  Tirant discovered that Plaerdemavida
had left him, and he did not know where she was because there was
no light in the room.  She made him wait half an hour, barefoot,
and in his shirt-sleeves.  He called to her as softly as he
could, and she heard him perfectly well but did not answer.  When
Plaerdemavida saw that she had made him grow quite cold, she had
pity on him, and going up to him she said:

"That's the way people who aren't in love are punished.  How
could you imagine that any lady or maiden of high or low station,
wouldn't want to be loved?  Anyone who can go in by honest or
secret roads, by night or by day, through a window, a door or a
roof, is thought of highly.  I wouldn't be unhappy if Hippolytus
would do it to me.  And I wouldn't be upset if he would take me
by the hair, and drag me through the room, with my consent or
without it, and make me be quiet, and I would let him do anything
he wanted.  I would rather know that he's a man.  In other things
you should honor, love and serve her; but when you're alone in a
room with her, that's no time to be polite."

"In faith, maiden," said Tirant, "you've pointed out my defects
to me better than any confessor could, no matter how great a
teacher of theology he might be.  Take me to my lady's bed
quickly, I beg you."

Plaerdemavida took him there, and made him lie down beside the
princess.  The head of the bed did not touch the wall, and when
Tirant was lying down, the maiden told him to be still and not to
move until she said so.  Then she stood at the end of the bed,
and she put her head between Tirant and the princess, facing the
princess.  Because the sleeves of her blouse bothered her, she
rolled them up, and taking Tirant's hand, she placed it on the
princess' breasts, and he touched her nipples, and her belly, and
below.  The princess awoke, and said:

"My heaven, what a bother you are!  Can't you let me sleep?"

Plaerdemavida, with her head on the pillow, said:

"Oh!  You're a very difficult lady to take.  You've just come out
of the bath, and your skin is so smooth and nice that it makes me
feel good just to touch it."

"Touch all you like," said the princess, "but don't put your hand
so far down."

"Go back to sleep," said Plaerdemavida, "and let me touch this
body that's mine, because I'm here in Tirant's place.  Oh,
Tirant, you traitor!

Where are you?  If you had your hand where I have mine, wouldn't
you be unhappy!"

Tirant had his hand on the princess' belly, and Plaerdemavida had
her hand on Tirant's head, and when she saw that the princess was
asleep, she loosened her grip, and then Tirant touched at will,
and when she was about to wake up, the girl squeezed Tirant's
head, and he stopped.  They spent more than an hour at this play,
and he did not cease touching her.  When Plaerdemavida saw that
she was deep in sleep she removed her hand completely from
Tirant, and he carefully tried to accomplish his desire.  But the
princess began to wake up, and half asleep, she said:

"But what are you doing, you wretched girl?  Can't you let me
sleep?  Have you gone mad, trying to do what's against your
nature?"

It was not long until she knew that it was more than a woman, and
she refused to surrender to him and began to cry out.
Plaerdemavida covered her mouth and whispered in her ear so that
none of the other girls would hear her:

"Hush, my lady, you don't want to be dishonored.  I'm terribly
afraid that the empress will hear you.  Be quiet: this is your
knight who is ready to die for you."

"Oh, you wicked girl!" said the princess.  "You've had no fear of
me or shame of the world.  Without my consent you've put me in a
very bad situation and defamed me."

"What's done is done, my lady," said Plaerdemavida.  "It seems to
me that being quiet is the only solution for you and me: it's the
safest thing, and what's best in this case."

Tirant softly pleaded with her as well as he could.  She found
herself in a difficult situation, because love was conquering her
on the one hand, and fear on the other, but since fear was
stronger than love, she decided to be still and she said nothing.

When the princess first screamed, Widow Repose heard her, and she
was fully aware that the cause of that scream had been
Plaerdemavida, and that Tirant must be with her.  And she thought
that if Tirant was seducing the princess, she couldn't accomplish
her own desire with him.  Now everyone was silent and the
princess was not saying a thing, but instead was defending
herself with graceful words so that the pleasant battle would not
come to an end.  The Widow sat bolt upright in her bed and cried
out:

"My daughter, what's wrong?"

She woke up all the girls, shrieking loudly and making so much
noise that the empress heard it.  They all got up, some entirely
naked and others in their nightshirts, and quickly ran to the
door of the bedchamber which they found closed fast, and they
cried out for a light.  At the very moment that they were
pounding on the door and calling for light, Plaerdemavida seized
Tirant by the hair, and pulled him from the place where he would
have liked to end his life.  She led him to a small chamber and
made him jump to a rooftop there.  Then she gave him a hemp rope
so that he could drop down to the garden and from there could
open the gate.  She had it very well prepared so that when he
came he could leave by another door before daybreak.  But the
disturbance and the cries of the Widow and the girls were so loud
that she could not let him out the way she had planned, and she
was forced to let him out by the roof.  So, giving him the long
rope, she quickly turned and closed the window and then went back
to her lady.

Tirant turned around and tied the rope securely, and in his haste
to leave without being seen or heard, he did not watch carefully
to see whether or not the rope reached the ground.  He let
himself slide down the rope which hung more than thirty-five feet
from the ground.  He had to let go because his arms could not
hold the weight of his body, and he hit the ground so hard that
he broke his leg.

Let us leave Tirant stretched out on the ground, unable to move.

When Plaerdemavida returned, they brought the light, and all the
women came in with the empress who immediately asked what the
disturbance was and why she had cried out.

"Madam," said the princess, "a huge rat jumped up on my bed and
ran over my face, and I was so frightened that I screamed.  He
scratched my face with his claws, and if he had gotten my eye,
you can imagine what damage he would have done!"

Now that scratch had been made by Plaerdemavida when she covered
her mouth so she would not scream.  The emperor had gotten up,
and he entered the princess's chamber with his sword in his hand,
and hearing about the rat, he looked through all the rooms.  But
the maiden had been discreet: When the empress came in and was
talking to her daughter, she jumped out onto the roof and quickly
removed the rope.  She heard Tirant moaning, and immediately
realized that he had fallen, and she went back to the chamber
without saying a word.  There was so much noise throughout the
palace, between the guards and the palace officials, that it was
a wonder to hear and to behold; and if the Turks had entered the
city the disturbance would not have been any greater.  The
emperor, who was a very discreet man, suspected that this had to
be more than a rat, and he even looked into the coffers.  Then he
had all the windows opened, so that if the maiden had not been
quick about removing the rope he would have found it.

When the duke and duchess, who knew what was going on, heard all
the noise, they thought Tirant had been discovered.  Imagine how
the duke must have felt, thinking that Tirant was in such a
difficult situation, and that he must have been killed or
imprisoned.  He quickly armed himself to help Tirant since he had
his weapons there, and he said:

"Today I'll lose my entire kingdom because Tirant is in such a
bad situation."

"And look at me," said the duchess.  "I don't have enough
strength in my hands to put on my blouse."

When the duke was armed he left his room to see what was
happening, and to find out where Tirant was.  And as he was going
out he saw the emperor returning to his chamber.  The duke asked
him:

"What is it, Sire?  What's the cause of this disturbance?"

The emperor answered:

"Those foolish maidens who aren't afraid of anything.  According
to what they say, a rat climbed over my daughter's face, and she
says it left a scratch on her cheek.  Go back to sleep, you're
not needed here."

The duke went back to his room and told the duchess, and they
were both very relieved that nothing had happened to Tirant.
Then the duke said:

"For the love of Our Lady, I went out of here in such a state
that if the emperor had imprisoned Tirant I would have killed him
and everyone who came to his aid, and then Tirant or I would have
been emperor."

"But it's best that it turned out as it did," said the duchess.

She quickly got up and went to the princess's chamber.  When
Plaerdemavida saw her, she said:

"My lady, please, I beg you, stay here, and don't let anyone
speak badly of Tirant.  I'll go and see how he is."

When she was out on the roof she did not dare speak for fear that
someone would hear her, and she heard him moaning loudly, and
saying:

"I can feel myself descending toward the dark and gloomy palaces.
And since I cannot restore my miserable life with all my sighs,
I'm content to die, because life without you, dear princess, is
completely unbearable.  Oh Lord and eternal God!  You who are all
merciful, grant me the grace of dying in the arms of that most
virtuous princess, so that my soul may be more content in the
next world."

At this moment Hippolytus knew nothing about Tirant's actions,
but he was aware of the great uproar in the palace that was
spreading throughout the city.  Seeing that Tirant was inside the
palace and that he had told everyone he was sleeping in the
duke's chamber that night, and with the viscount and Hippolytus
knowing about his love for the princess, they had all the men
take up arms.  Lord Agramunt said:

"I can only think that Tirant must have done some mischief in the
princess's chamber, and news of it has reached the emperor, and
all of us will take part in the wedding along with him.  So we
must prepare ourselves quickly to help him if we have to.
Because in all the nights he's slept here nothing unusual has
happened, and as soon as he's outside you see what a great outcry
there is in the palace."

Hippolytus said:

"While you're arming yourself I'll go to the palace gate to see
what's happening."

"Hurry," said the others.

When they were all outside, the viscount followed Hippolytus.

"My lord," said Hippolytus, "you go to the main gate and I'll go
to the one in the garden.  Whoever discovers what is really
happening--what all this noise is about--will go and tell the
other one."

The viscount said he thought that was a good idea.  When
Hippolytus was at the gate to the garden, thinking he would find
it locked, he stood, listening, and he heard a mournful voice
crying.  It sounded like a woman's voice, and he said to himself:

"I would much rather hear Tirant than this woman's voice, whoever
she is."

He stood, looking to see if he could scale the wall.  When he saw
that it was impossible, he went back to the gate with an easy
heart, thinking it must be a woman.

"Let her wail, whoever she is--lady or maiden," said Hippolytus,
"for this has nothing to do with my lord Tirant."

He left and went to the plaza where he found the viscount and
others who wanted to know what had caused the disturbance.  But
by now the cries had subsided a great deal, and the disturbance
had been quelled.  Then Hippolytus explained to the viscount how
he had been at the garden gate and had not been able to go in,
and that he had heard what seemed to be a woman's voice moaning,
and he did not know who it was, but that he thought the woman was
the cause of all the outcry.

"If it please you, let's go there," said the viscount, "and if
she's a lady or a maiden who needs help, let's give it to her if
we can, because it's our obligation under the 'laws of
chivalry.'"

They went to the garden gate, and heard the loud laments coming
from inside the garden, but they could not understand what was
being said or recognize the voice: with all the pain she was in,
her voice was altered.  The viscount said:

"Let's break down the gate.  It's night, and no one will know we
did it."

But the gate was unlocked, because during the night, not
imagining that so much harm would be done, Plaerdemavida had left
it that way so that Tirant could open it easily whenever he
liked.

And they both pushed against the gate with all their might, and
it flew open easily.  The viscount went in first and walked
toward the voice which sounded so strange.

The viscount said:

"Whoever you are, I beg you in God's name, tell me if you're an
errant spirit or a mortal body who needs help."

Tirant thought it must be the emperor and his men, and so that he
would not be recognized, and they would leave, he disguised his
voice, even though the pain he was in had already disguised it,
and he said:

"In my time I was a baptized Christian, and I am condemned to
wander because of my sins.  I am an invisible spirit, and if you
see me, the reason will be that I am taking on form.  The evil
spirits here are stripping off my flesh and my bones and throwing
them in the air piece by piece.  Oh, what a cruel torture I am
suffering.  If you come any closer to me, you will share in my
pain."

They were very frightened when they heard these words, and they
made the sign of the cross and recited the Gospel of Saint John.
The viscount spoke so loudly that Tirant heard him:

"Hippolytus, do you think we should go to our chambers and get
all our armed men and some holy water, and then come back here to
see what this is?"

"No," said Hippolytus, "we don't need to go back to our chambers
for anything.  We both have the sign of the cross on our swords:
let me go there."

When Tirant heard the viscount call Hippolytus' name, he said:

"If you are Hippolytus, a native of France, come to me and have
no fear."

Then Hippolytus took out his sword, and holding the handle in
front of him, he made the sign of the cross and said:

"As a true Christian, I fully believe in the articles of the
Catholic faith, and everything that the holy Roman church
teaches: in this holy faith I want to live and die."

He went closer in great fear, but the viscount was even more
afraid, and did not dare to approach.  And in a soft voice Tirant
called to him and said:

"Come closer.  I am Tirant."

At that he became even more frightened, and was ready to go back.
Tirant saw this, and raising his voice he said:

"Oh, what a cowardly knight you are!"

Hippolytus recognized him when he spoke, and ran up to him and
said:

"Oh, my lord, is it you?  What misfortune brought you here?"

"Don't be worried, and don't say anything," said Tirant.  "But
who is that with you?  If he's of the lineage of Brittany, have
him come here."

"Yes, my lord," said Hippolytus.  "It's the viscount."

He called him, and when the viscount saw Tirant he was amazed at
the adventure and at everything he had said to them during the
time they had not recognized him.

"Let's not waste words," said Tirant.  "Hurry and take me away
from here."

Together they lifted him in their arms and took him out of the
garden and closed the gate.  Then they carried him to his lodging
and lay him under the portico.

"I'm in more pain than I've ever felt before," said Tirant.  "Of
all the times I've been wounded and near death, my body has never
felt so much pain.  I'll need to have doctors without the emperor
knowing about it."

"My lord," said Hippolytus, "may I give you some advice?  You are
so badly hurt that it can't be kept hidden, especially with the
disturbance in the palace.  Mount your horse if you can, my lord,
and let's go to the palaces of Bellestar where your horses are.
We'll make everyone think that your horse fell on you and broke
your leg "

The viscount answered:

"It's true, my cousin and lord, Hippolytus is right.  Otherwise
the emperor will certainly hear about it. I would be happy if,
after you're cured and we've accomplished our aims, we returned
to our lands."

"My lord viscount," said Tirant, "this is no time to talk about
these things, but you, Hippolytus, have them bring the animals
here secretly, and bring the horse with the smoothest gait."

Let us return to the princess.  Plaerdemavida stayed out on the
roof until she saw them carry Tirant away.  Then she went into
the room where the princess was with the duchess and all the
ladies.  The empress was astonished that there should be such a
great uproar in the palace over a rat, and sitting on her bed she
said:

"Do you know the best thing for us to do, ladies?  Since the
palace is calmed down again, let's go back to sleep."

The princess called Plaerdemavida and whispered to her, asking
where Tirant was.

"My lady, he's gone," said Plaerdemavida, "and he's in great
pain."

But she did not dare tell her that he had a broken leg, or what
he had said.  She was very pleased that they had not seen or
found him.  The empress got up, and Widow Repose said:

"It would be a good idea, my lady, to tell your daughter to sleep
with you, so that if the rat came back it wouldn't frighten her
even more."

The empress answered:

"What the Widow says is true.  Come, my child: you will sleep
better with me than by yourself."

"No, my lady. Let Your Excellency go on: the duchess and I will
sleep together.  Don't spend a bad night on my account."

The empress said:

"Come with me. I'm getting cold standing here."

"My lady, since you insist," said the princess, "you go on, and
I'll come soon."

The empress left, telling her to come right away.  The princess
turned to the Widow and said angrily:

"Now I know how much you're to blame.  Who gave you the right to
tell my mother that I should go and sleep with her, and to
deprive me of my pleasure?  From what I can see, you don't live
by virtue, but by envy and malice."

The Widow replied

"I'll tell you what I've done wrong.  I honored and loved you
more than you liked: that's how I'm to blame.  Do you imagine, my
lady, that I have no feelings for Tirant, and that I didn't see
him letting himself down by the rope, and it breaking, and him
falling so hard I think he broke his legs and his ribs?..."

She began to cry miserably, and threw herself to the ground, and
pulled her hair, saying:

"The best of all knights is dead!"

When the princess heard these words, she said three times:

"Jesus, Jesus, Jesus!"

And she fell to the floor in a faint.  She had cried out the name
of Jesus so loudly that the empress, who was in her chamber,
asleep in her bed, heard it.  She quickly got up and hurried to
her daughter's chamber.  She found her there, unconscious, and
nothing helped to revive her.  The emperor had to get up, and all
the doctors came.  But still the princess did not regain
consciousness, and three hours passed before she did.  The
emperor asked how his daughter had come to such a state.  They
told him:

"My lord, she saw another tiny rat, and because her imagination
was dwelling on the one she had seen on her bed, when she saw
this one she suffered a terrible shock."

"Oh, old emperor, sad and embittered!  In my last days must I
suffer so much pain?  Oh, cruel death!  Why don't you come to me
when I want you so?"

When he had said this he lost consciousness and fell in a faint
beside his daughter.  The cries and shouts were so great
throughout the whole palace that it was astonishing to see and
hear the laments the people were making: and this disturbance was
greater than the first.

Tirant, standing before the portico waiting for the animals to be
brought, heard such loud cries that he thought the sky was
falling in.  He quickly mounted, full of pain and anguish, and
the pain grew as he became fearful that the princess might have
come to some harm.  Hippolytus took a cloth and wrapped his leg
so that the cold would not get into it.  So, as best they could,
they rode to the gates of the city.  The guards recognized Tirant
and asked him where he was going at this hour.  He answered that
he was going to Bellestar to look after his horses because he
would soon be leaving for the camp.  The gates were quickly
opened for him and Tirant went on his way.  When they had ridden
half a league, Tirant said:

"I am deeply afraid that the emperor has done the princess some
harm because of me.  I want to go back and help her in case she
needs me."

The viscount said

"In faith, you're in fine condition to help her!"

"My dear viscount," said Tirant, "I feel no pain now!  You know
that a greater injury makes a lesser one diminish.  I beg you,
please, let's go back to the city so that we can help her in case
she needs us."

"You've lost your mind," said the viscount.  "You want to go back
to the city so that the emperor will find out what you've done.
We'll be doing well enough if we can keep this from the people so
that they won't blame you for it.  You can be certain that if you
go back you won't escape injury or death if things are the way
you say they are."

"Since I'm the cause of all the trouble," said Tirant, "is it
unreasonable for me to have the punishment?  I'll consider my
death worthwhile if I die for such a virtuous lady."

"God help me," said the viscount, "I won't let you go back even
if I have to use force.  Isn't the duke there, and if he hears
something that puts the princess in danger or dishonors her,
won't he go and help her?  Now you see what sad love-affairs lead
to.  Let's not stay here any longer.

The more time we lose, the worse it is for you."

"Since you don't want to let me go back," said Tirant, "do me a
favor.  You go, and if anyone harms her, kill them all and show
mercy to no one."

Tirant begged the viscount so much that he had to return to the
city, and as he turned back he said softly so that Tirant didn't
hear, but so Hippolytus could understand:

"By Heaven, I wish I didn't have to concern myself with any lady
or maiden, but only arrange for the doctors to come."

Tirant went on ahead with Hippolytus.

