CHAPTER XI

PLAERDEMAVIDA

 By the great mercy of God, Plaerdemavida was saved from the
shipwreck and taken to the city of Tunis, to the house of a
fisherman's daughter, as was related previously.  Then, after two
years had passed the fisherman's daughter took a husband near
that city.  And while they held Plaerdemavida captive there, she
always lived very honestly, working gold and silk as the maidens
of Greece are accustomed to doing.  It happened one day that her
mistress went to the city of Montagata, and left Plaerdemavida to
watch the house.  She had gone to the city to make some
purchases, and while she was there she went to talk to the king's
daughter, and she told her:

"My lady, I've been told that you are planning to marry, and that
you are supplying yourself with blouses embroidered with gold and
silk and other things proper for maidens.  I have a young slave
who is able to do what I have taught her from the time she was an
infant: to embroider all manner of things as befits young women.
Here are some samples of what she can do.  If you want her, I
will give her to you for one hundred doubloons, even though I
will be losing all the training I have given her."

The princess, seeing the samples, wanted her very much, and she
said that she would be happy to give her the one hundred
doubloons.  The Moor said:

"I'll be glad to give her to you for that price, on one
condition: you must tell her that I have loaned her to you for
two months, because if she guessed that I had sold her, she would
be so sad that she would fall into despair."

Plaerdemavida was placed in her hands and she came to love the
princess very much.  It happened a short time later that the city
was attacked, and the Moors took many Christians prisoner.  Among
the men they captured was a soldier who had been an oarsman on
Tirant's galley when it was lost.  Plaerdemavida recognized him,
and she said:

"Aren't you one of the Christians who were on Tirant's galley
when it went down at sea?"

"My lady," said the man "it's true: I was there, and I nearly
drowned.  I reached the shore half dead, and afterward I was
beaten, and bought and sold.  I went through great trials in
those days."

"What can you tell me about Tirant?" said Plaerdemavida.  "Where
did he die?"

"By the Virgin Mary!" said the prisoner.  "He is very much alive.
He's right here.  He's the commander, and he's using all his
might to conquer this land."

He also told her that Lord Agramunt was wounded, and then she
asked him:

"What became of Plaerdemavida?"

"That maiden you're asking about," said the prisoner, "it's
believed that she died in the sea, and our captain has grieved
deeply over her."

When she heard the news she ordered all the prisoners to flee.
Hearing that Tirant was alive and so near, she also wanted very
much to escape, but considering how Tirant had conquered so much
of the Barbary Coast, and thinking of the victories that were
told about the Christian captain, she was very happy.  For she
had known nothing about him and believed that he had drowned in
the sea.  She fell to her knees, raised her clasped hands to
heaven and gave thanks and praise to God Our Lord for the great
success He had given to Tirant and to the new Christianity, for
he was making war on the enemies of Jesus Christ so bravely.  She
became very hopeful that soon she would be out of captivity, and
all the suffering she had gone through up to then seemed to be
nothing to her: the thought that she would see Tirant consoled
her that much.

On the day her mistress had to go and talk to the captains, she
disguised herself so well that no one would recognize her.  When
the lady was before the captain, she was accompanied by fifty
maidens, but Tirant would not listen to her and he sent her to
his cousin, Lord Agramunt.  And if he had replied badly to the
ambassadors, he gave an even worse reply to the lady.  Hopeless,
they went back, crying and lamenting loudly.  All that night, men
as well as women did not cease their wailing and sighing.

In the morning Plaerdemavida told her mistress and the honorable
men of the city that if they would give her liberty to go out,
she would talk to the captain, and would tell him such things
that he would do anything she wished.  They agreed that she
should go, because they had lost all hope and had only that one
day left.  That day Plaerdemavida dressed as a Moor, and painted
her eyes so that she would not be recognized.  She took thirty
well dressed maidens with her.  At noon they left the city and
went to the camp, and there they saw Tirant at the door of his
tent.  When he saw them coming he sent word that they should go
to Lord Agramunt, and that he could do nothing since he had
turned all his power over to him.   Plaerdemavida answered:

"Tell the captain that he should not refuse to see us, and even
less to speak to us, because if that captain did such a thing he
would be cruel and unjust.  Since he is a knight and we are
maidens, in accordance with the order of chivalry he must aid us,
and give us his advice and his support."

The chamberlain immediately took the reply back to the captain:

"Upon my word, my lord, there is a maiden with those Moors who is
very gracious.  She speaks the Christian tongue most beautifully.
And if your grace would like to do me a very great favor for the
services I have performed for you, when we take the city I beg
you to make her a Christian and to give her to me for a wife."

"Have them all come here," said the captain.

When they stood before him, they made a deep bow to him.
Plaerdemavida, smiling, said:

"My captain, your generous heart cannot fail to act according to
its custom.  Your nobility is full of mercy, and you must forget
the great crime of the ignorant inhabitants of this city, who
will fold their hands and kneel down and kiss your feet, begging
you for mercy.  Look, virtuous captain, I speak with the spirit
of prophecy.  Do you remember that fortunate day when you were
given the honor of chivalry in that prosperous court of the King
of England?  And the singular battles you fought at that time and
won with great honor, with no trickery?  What should I say of
Philippe, son of the King of France?  In your great wisdom you
made him King of Sicily, and now he possesses the daughter, the
kingdom, and the crown.  And when that blessed lord, who is of
greater excellence than anyone in the world, the Emperor of
Constantinople, heard of your fame, he had you come to the city
of Constantinople.  His high Majesty made you his captain, and
you showed the Turkish enemies your strength and power,
conquering them time and time again.  I am a Moor who speaks by
prophecy, and my heart cries tears of blood for those worthy
knights, because now they are as good as dead.  Cry, miserable
people and lament the fact that Tirant lo Blanc has forgotten
you!  And it does not surprise me that he does not remember you,
for he has forgotten a lady (I won't say who she is, but I can
call her the greatest and best in all Christendom) in order to
conquer this cursed land."

Tirant was quite astonished when he heard these words, and he
begged her to tell how she knew so much.

"Oh Tirant, how little mercy you are showing.  Go on pursuing
those fleeing kings so that you can have all of Barbary in your
lap, and let us live in blessed peace.  Aren't you that prince of
the line of Roca Salada who went into battle that pleasant night
in the castle of Malvei with that most serene princess, the
beautiful Carmesina?  And if my heart hasn't gone mad or I
haven't lost all my senses, it seems to me that I heard tell that
Her Highness let you into her chambers at a very late hour.  She
put her father's crown--that of the Greek Empire--on your head,
and accepted you as her universal lord, with the help of a sad
maiden named Plaerdemavida.  You have given so little thought to
either of them, it's as if you'd never known them.  Her Highness,
with you forgetting about her, is more dead than alive in the
Monastery of Santa Clara, always calling out the name of Tirant
in whom she has placed all her hope.  Oh, Tirant!  How you have
shed all kindness.  You know full well that the Turks have
overrun all of Greece, that all they have left to do is take the
city of Constantinople and seize the emperor, his wife and the
grieving princess."

When Tirant heard the maiden say these things, he heaved a sigh
from the depths of his heart as he remembered the lady he loved
more than anyone in the world.  He was so stricken that he fell
to the ground, senseless.  When everyone saw their captain lying
there, his eyes filled with tears, they thought he had delivered
up his spirit to God and his body to the ground.

The doctors came and said:

"Our captain must be very ill.  He looks as though he is near
death."

King Escariano quickly had the maiden seized and her hands
tightly bound.  When Plaerdemavida saw herself treated so badly,
she angrily said:

"Let me go to the captain.  I nourished him from my breast before
you ever heard of him.  Let me use the remedies I know, because I
can see that these ignorant doctors don't know how to help him."

The maiden quickly sat on the ground, unfastened her robes and
the blouse she was wearing down past her bosom, uncovering her
breasts.

She took Tirant's body, placed it in her lap, and lay his head on
her breasts.  When the maiden saw Tirant open his eyes and sigh
deeply, she was very happy, and she said:

"Captain, my lord, for a long time you have been fighting us
night and day.  I don't want your grace to suffer such terrible
hardships when I can free you from them.  Begin with me.  I am
right here, a defenseless maiden, and your sword is very sharp.
Now you can use your strong hand and bathe your sword with the
blood of someone who, after God, wants to serve only you."

Tirant answered as well as he could:

"Maiden, it seems to me that you are like the bee that carries
honey in its mouth and a stinger in its tail.  I have heard
things from you that have left me astonished.  I want very much
to know how news about that most serene princess has reached you.
Tell me, I beg you, and you can count on this: In consideration
of Her Majesty, I will do such things for you that you will all
leave here highly satisfied."

Plaerdemavida was very happy at the captain's reply.  While they
were talking, Lord Agramunt came into the tent in a rage, with a
bare sword in his hand.  He had been misinformed by King
Escariano about how Tirant had fallen into a faint in the
maiden's arms.  When he saw Tirant in her lap and without
noticing his captain's condition, with a fierce face and a
terrible voice, he cried:

"What is this poisonous woman doing here, this devil-worshipper?
How can you all stand by, seeing how she's killed him, and not
behead her?  Since the rest of you won't do it, I will."

He grabbed her by the hair and jerked back her head.  And he put
his sword by her neck to take away her life.  When Tirant saw the
sword so close to the maiden, and heard her cry, he seized the
sword with his hands.  Lord Agramunt, feeling the sword against
something hard, thought it was the maiden's neck.  So he slashed
as hard as he could, and put a large gash in Tirant's hands.  And
according to the doctors Tirant was very fortunate that he was
not badly injured.

When Tirant saw that his cousin had shown him so little honor, he
became very angry.  King Escariano made Lord Agramunt leave, and
Lord Agramunt lowered his eyes and became very ashamed.  Then he
bowed deeply to the king and to Tirant, and left the tent.  And
his humility and shame went a long way toward cooling Tirant's
anger and making him feel pity instead.

Then Tirant turned toward the maiden and asked her very kindly if
she had been a captive in Constantinople, and he asked who had
told her so many things about the princess.  She quickly got up,
and falling to her knees, she said:

"What is this, captain!  Have you lost your memory entirely?
There is a great deal of truth in the fact that where there is no
love there can be no remembrance.  What!  Aren't I poor,
miserable Plaerdemavida who, for your lordship, endured so much
pain and misery, and finally captivity?"

Tirant's eyes flew open with recognition at once, and he would
not allow her to say another word, realizing full well at this
moment that she was Plaerdemavida.  He knelt to the ground before
her, and embraced her and kissed her many times over.

After they had embraced for a good while, Tirant ordered a
beautiful platform placed at the door of the tent, covered
entirely with brocade cloth above, and with satin on the sides
and floor.  Plaerdemavida was seated at the top step of the
platform, and covered with a mantle of crimson brocade lined with
ermine--one belonging to Tirant that he had ordered put on her
since she had completely torn her robes.  The lady of the city
was made to sit on the top step, and her maidens below, on the
satin cloths.  In this situation it seemed that Plaerdemavida was
indeed a queen.

Tirant had taken the head-dress off her head, and now her hair
hung loose over her shoulders.  He paid her such great honor that
everyone thought Tirant was going to take her as his wife.  He
had a proclamation read throughout the entire camp that everyone
should come and kiss Plaerdemavida's hand, under penalty of
death.  Then he had another proclamation made that everyone in
the city, men and women, were pardoned, and that each of them
could live under any law they wished, and that no one in the camp
should dare harm anyone from the city.  Afterward he had many
dishes prepared, and held a general banquet so that everyone
could come who wished.  And the most singular celebration ever
held in a camp took place there, lasting eight days.

Plaerdemavida begged the lady of the city to be baptized, and she
answered that she would do it.  Then Tirant asked her if she
would marry Melquisedic.  Plaerdemavida also pleaded with her,
and the others insisted so much that she consented.  And the
wedding was held with great celebrations.

Tirant often spent his time talking to Plaerdemavida.  One day,
while they were talking about the princess and the emperor,
Plaerdemavida scolded him, and asked him why he did not forget
about conquering Barbary and help the emperor and his daughter.
Tirant answered that he wanted to know for certain what the
situation was in the empire before he moved.  He begged
Plaerdemavida to tell him what had happened to her after she was
swept over the side of the galley.  With tears in her eyes,
Plaerdemavida said:

"I beg you, lord Tirant, don't make me talk about it.  Whenever I
think about it I would rather die a hundred deaths than go on
living."

When Tirant heard her speaking so painfully, he said:

"Rejoice, valiant maiden.  I promise you, by the lady who has
been the cause of your misfortune, that I will repay you.  I will
mix your blood with that of Roca Salada, and you will be reckoned
among the women of Brittany, among whom you are certain to have
the title of queen."

There was a long argument between Tirant and this maiden about
the marriage he had decided upon, which was between her and Lord
Agramunt.  He gave her many different reasons, citing very holy
authorities, so that Plaerdemavida finally submitted to Tirant's
will, and replied in a few words:

"Your servant is here, Lord Tirant.  Do with me according to your
will."

Tirant took a beautiful chain from his neck and placed it around
Plaerdemavida's neck as a sign of her future marriage.  He had
brocade brought, and dressed her like a queen.  Then Tirant sent
for Lord Agramunt, and he begged him at length not to refuse what
he would tell him, since he had already made a promise.  Lord
Agramunt answered him:

"Lord Tirant, I am astonished that you would plead with me about
anything.  Just by commanding me you are doing me a great favor."

Tirant said:

"Cousin, I have decided to make you King of Fez and Bogia, and to
give Plaerdemavida to you as your wife.  You know how indebted
all of us are to her for the work she has done for us.  She is a
maiden of great discretion who has lead a virtuous life, and it
will be very good for both of you."

Lord Agramunt answered:

"Cousin and lord, I had no thought of taking a wife, but it is
too much grace and honor for your lordship to entreat me to do a
thing that I should beg you for.  I kiss your hand and your
feet."

Tirant would not allow it.  Instead he took him by the arm,
lifted him up, and kissed him on the mouth.  Afterward he thanked
him, both for the kingdoms and for the new wife.

Tirant felt more satisfied at having arranged this marriage than
by all of his conquests in Barbary.  He quickly had Lady
Montagata's palace decorated with beautiful gold and silk cloth,
and he had all the musicians from that area come, with every kind
of instrument that could be found.  Then he had many dainties and
special wines brought to insure the success of the celebration.
Plaerdemavida was very richly dressed, and her presence and
appearance showed that she was a queen.  She was taken to the
great hall where King Escariano and Tirant were, with many other
barons and knights, along with the wife of King Escariano and
many other ladies of rank.  After the wedding vows were exchanged
there was a great celebration with dances of different types and
very singular foods.

While the celebrations lasted, Tirant had the table prepared for
everyone who wished to eat, and for a week there was a great
abundance of everything.

 CHAPTER XII

CONQUEST

 When the celebrations were over Tirant had a large ship armed,
and he had it loaded with wheat to send to Constantinople to help
the emperor.

He had Melquisedic, Lord of Montagata, brought to him, and he
told him to go on that ship as a messenger to the emperor.  He
told him to become well informed about the emperor's condition,
and how the empire was, and about the princess.  He gave him
instructions and letters of credence, and he had him embark, well
outfitted and better escorted.

Then Tirant ordered his men to break camp, and to get all the
cavalry and foot soldiers ready.  They filled the carts with food
and all the supplies and weaponry necessary to fight the cities,
villas, and castles.

They went toward the city of Caramen, at the edge of Barbary and
bordering on the black Kingdom of Borno.  Because three kings who
fled from the battle scene had taken refuge in that city, while
the others had gone back to their own lands.  So the great
numbers of cavalry and foot soldiers went through the land,
conquering castles, villas and cities.  Some were taken by force,
and others surrendered willingly.  Many became Christian, while
others remained in their sect, and they were not harmed or
wronged in any way.  Finally they reached the city where the
kings had taken shelter.  There, Tirant's forces set up their
tents and encircled the city at a distance of about two crossbow
shots.

Tirant held council with King Escariano, Lord Agramunt, the
Marquis of Luzana, the Viscount of Branches, and many other
barons and knights in the camp.  They chose a Spaniard from the
town of Oriola to be their envoy.  His name was Lord Rocafort,
and he had been a captive on a Moorish galley until Tirant had
freed him.  They told him to observe how many men might be in the
city, and what condition they were in, and they give him detailed
instructions about everything he should do and say.

After receiving assurances of safe-conduct, the envoy went to the
castle where the kings were.  These were the King of Fez, King
Menador of Persia, and the King of Tremicen.  This last king was
nephew to the other King of Tremicen, and had been chosen king
when his uncle had been killed by King Escariano.  The other
kings had died in the battles they had been waging.

The envoy stood before the kings who had gathered to listen to
his embassy, and without greeting them or showing them any
reverence, he said:

"I have come to you who were powerful kings on behalf of the most
Christian King Escariano and the magnanimous captain, Tirant lo
Blanc, to notify you of the will of their lordships.  They say
that you and your forces must leave the city of Caramen and all
of Barbary within three days."

King Menador of Persia gave the reply for the other kings:

"You can tell that traitor and renegade, King Escariano,
Mohammed's enemy and ours, and his friend Tirant lo Blanc, that
we won't leave the city, much less Barbary, for them.  And so
that they'll know how great our power is, let them be ready for
battle tomorrow because we'll come out of the city and give them
terrible destruction."

As soon as King Menador had finished, Tirant's ambassador turned
his back and left without another word, and he went back to his
camp.  When he was with King Escariano and Tirant, he told them
all about King Menador of Persia's reply.  Tirant immediately
called together all the barons, knights and captains of both
cavalry and foot soldiers.  When they were together, he told them
to get ready because the Moors were going to do battle with them.

The following morning the Moors put their forces together in a
beautiful plain outside the city, and they began to move toward
Tirant's camp.  The Christians' spy saw the Moors coming, and ran
to warn Tirant.  Tirant had all his cavalry ready and his foot
soldiers in order, and they went toward the Moors.

When the battalions drew near each other, the trumpets and pipes
began to sound, and the screams and shouts of both armies were so
great that it seemed like heaven and earth would come together.
Tirant ordered his first battalion to attack, and the good
captain Lord Rocafort went into battle so fiercely that it was a
wonder to behold.

The King of Tremicen, who was captain of the first battalion of
Moors also attacked so powerfully that the best knight in the
world could have done no better, and they fought so fiercely
against the Christians that the Christians were beaten back.
Then the second squadron of Moors attacked very savagely, and one
could see lances breaking, and knights and horses falling, and
many men lying dead on the ground, both Christians and Moors.

Tirant saw that the battle was going badly, and that his men were
being beaten.  So he had four squadrons attack together, his
being the only one that held back.  They attacked so powerfully
that in a few hours, before the enemy realized what had happened,
they had killed a great number of Moors.

King Escariano came face to face with the King of Fez, and their
horses clashed so mightily that they broke their lances.  They
both fell to the ground, and got up, fighting with their swords,
like lions.  When the two sides saw their king on the ground,
they rushed in to help them, and in the harsh battle that
followed, many men died.

Then Tirant attacked too, with his men, and you would have had to
see the great tumult and the terrible cries of the Moors who were
not able to resist the Christians.  King Menador of Persia, who
had gone into battle like a raging dog, came against Tirant, and
hit his head with his sword so hard that he nearly knocked Tirant
from his horse.

Tirant then raised his sword and brought it down so hard that he
cut the king's arm completely off at the shoulder, and the king
soon fell to the ground, dead.

During the battle it happened that Tirant came upon the King of
Tremicen, and gave him such a blow to the head with his sword,
that he knocked the king to the ground. And if it had not been
for the king's good helmet, he would have been dead.  Tirant went
on ahead, and the Moors picked up their king and lay him over a
horse, taking him quickly back to the city.

When the battle had gone on for a long while, the Moors could not
stand up against the Christians, and they had to turn and flee.
When Tirant saw the Moors running away, he cried:

"The time has come, good knights, the day is ours!  Kill them
all!"

They rushed after the Moors who were trying to take refuge inside
the city.  But with all their efforts, the Moors could not avoid
the deaths of more than forty thousand of their men that day.

With the battle won, Tirant immediately had a galley armed in the
port of One, and he entrusted a knight named Espercius as its
captain.  This man was a native of Tremicen, and a good
Christian.  Tirant charged him to go to Genoa, Venice, Pisa and
Majorca (which at this time was a great trading center), and to
enlist as many ships, galleys, caravels, and all kinds of
vessels, as could carry many men.  He was to promise them a
year's wages, and take them to the port of Constantine in the
kingdom of Tunis.  When Espercius was informed about everything
he was to do, he embarked on his journey.

 When Ambassador Melquisedic left Barbary he had such favorable
weather that he reached Constantinople in a few days.  When the
emperor was informed that a ship was in port, he immediately
sent a knight to find out what ship it was, and what its purpose
was in coming.  The knight went to the port, boarded the ship and
spoke with the ambassador.  Then he returned to the palace and
told the emperor that the ship had come from Barbary, that Tirant
had sent it, stocked with wheat, to His Majesty, and that a
knight was on it whom Tirant had sent as his ambassador.

When the emperor heard this news he felt very relieved because of
the straits they were in, and he gave thanks and praise to God,
Our Lord, that he had not been forgotten.  The emperor
immediately commanded all the knights of the city to go and
escort the ambassador that Tirant had sent, and they all went to
the port, and had them disembark.

The ambassador, accompanied by the people with him, came out,
very finely dressed.  When they were on land, they were received
by the emperor's knights, who paid the ambassador high honors
because of their great desire for Tirant to come.  They took him
to the emperor and the empress who were in the emperor's chamber.
The ambassador bowed to the emperor, and kissed his foot and
hand, and also the empress's hand.

They received them, smiling, and showing great pleasure at their
arrival.

The ambassador explained his mission to the emperor and his
council, and they were all astonished and comforted by Tirant's
great prosperity in conquering Barbary.  Then the ambassador
asked permission to go see the princess.  Hippolytus escorted him
to the convent where she was staying, and he presented her with a
letter from Tirant.  She felt very comforted by his words,
convinced that he would be coming to her soon.  Then she asked
the ambassador what news he had of Plaerdemavida: if she was dead
or alive.  He told about her adventure in detail, and how she had
married Lord Agramunt, and how Tirant had promised to make her a
queen.  Then he took his leave of the princess and went to the
lodging.

A few days later the emperor had a letter composed to Tirant,
explaining in detail the situation his empire was in: that the
empire had been overrun by the Turks, and now all that remained
was the city of Constantinople, the city of Pera, and a few
castles.  He had the ambassador come before him, and gave him the
letter.  Then he begged him earnestly to press Tirant to remember
him and to have compassion on his old age, and on all the people
who were in danger of renouncing the faith of Jesus Christ, and
on the women and maidens who lived in fear of being dishonored
unless they had divine aid and his aid as well.  The ambassador
took his leave, kissing his feet and hand, and likewise the
empress's.

Afterward the ambassador went to the convent where the princess
was, and he told her that he had come to see Her Highness in case
she wished to command anything of him.  The princess told him she
was very pleased that he would be returning so soon, for she
trusted his goodness and gentility that he would do everything
possible to make Tirant come quickly to free them from the great
danger they were in.  And she earnestly begged him to do this.
Then she gave him a letter she was sending to Tirant.

When their talk was over, the ambassador kissed the princess's
hand, and took his leave of her.  As the ambassador had carried
out all the things Tirant had entrusted to him, he boarded the
ship, and had the sails raised so they could be on their way.  In
a few days he reached the city where Tirant was, who received him
very happily.  Bowing, he gave him the emperor's letter.

When Tirant had read the emperor's letter, he felt great
compassion for him.  His eyes filled with tears when he thought
of his anguish, and he remembered the Duke of Macedonia and his
other relatives and friends who were being held captive in the
hands of the infidels because of him, and that they had no hope
of escaping without him.  He also thought about all he had
conquered in the Empire of Greece while he had been there, and
that it and much more had been lost in such a brief span of time.

He asked the ambassador about all that he had seen, and he told
him everything.  He also asked him about the princess and how she
was.  He answered that he had found her in the convent of Santa
Clara (for with his absence she had given herself over to the
service of God) and about how she also wore a veil over her face
and led a very holy life, and how she had received him very
happily.

"She asked me how you were and what had happened to you, and she
begged me at length to plead with you not to forget her,
especially now that they were in danger of becoming prisoners of
the Moors.  And that if she had ever angered your lordship, she
begged you not to make her grieve for it.  That, as you were
merciful toward your enemies, you would treat her, who was your
own, as well.  That you should think of her as your own flesh,
and not forget her."

And he told him many other things that the book does not relate.

The ambassador gave him the princess's letter, and it said the
following:

"After I read your letter, I was filled with infinite joy, and
great happiness softened my sad heart.  The greatest peace, calm
and joy I have felt after I lost your presence is this outpouring
of my words, as I feel myself coming back to you.  For I have
been, I am and will be your secret captive.  I thank you with all
my heart, for I know all that you have suffered because of me.
And I forgive you for the false opinions you held about me, on
the sole condition that the African soil find itself abandoned by
you so that you will return to me and my deserted people.  Let me
bring to your memory the crown of the Empire of Greece that
awaits you; and my virginity which you so desired, and that is
now in danger of being stolen by some infidel; and I, your wife,
who am in danger of being taken captive.  I don't know what to
say, I don't know what to show you!  Until now my thoughts have
been able to hold these deceptions: gazing at, kissing, adoring
some jewels and things that were yours, and finding my
consolation in them.  Then, going to the doors of my room,
saying: 'Here is where my Tirant sat, here he caught me, here he
kissed me, here in this bed he held me naked.'  And so, rambling
most of the night and day, I ease my troubled mind.  Let these
thoughts cease, then, for they avail me very little, and let
Tirant come, for he will be my true consolation, my end, the
remedy and peace for my ills, and the redemption of the Christian
people."

When Tirant had finished reading the princess's letter, he felt
great agony from the pain and compassion he had for the emperor
and for the princess, and in thinking of the Duke of Macedonia,
his cousin, being held prisoner, and of all his other relatives
and friends.

Tirant then told King Escariano that they would leave and go to
Tunis.  Before they left, he gave the kingdoms of Fez and Bogia
to Lord Agramunt.  Then all the men set out for Tunis.

When the kingdom of Tunis learned that King Escariano and Captain
Tirant were coming with such a mighty force, they sent word to
them, begging them not to harm them.  Since their lord had died,
they would be happy to obey them and to do whatever they
commanded.  They willingly accepted, and entered the city of
Tunis very peacefully.  Tirant had them swear to accept King
Escariano as their lord, and all the cities, villas and castles
surrendered to him.

While Tirant was feeling very content, the news reached him that
six large ships had docked at the port of Constantine.  He
immediately sent Melquisedic, giving him many doubloons, and
ordered him to load the six ships with wheat, and send them to
Constantinople.

Melquisedic departed and quickly carried out Tirant's orders, and
in a few days they were stocked, and they set sail.  Then Tirant
had King Escariano take possession of the kingdom of Tunis, and
they swore their allegiance to him as their king and lord.

When all these things had been done, he felt like the happiest
man in the world.  He begged King Escariano to go with him to
Constantinople, with all his forces, to recover the Empire of
Greece that the Moorish sultan and the Grand Turk had seized.
And King Escariano told him that he would be very happy to carry
out everything that he commanded.

He also told Lord Agramunt, King of Fez and Bogia, to go to his
kingdoms and to enlist as many men as could go with him.  Lord
Agramunt was very happy, and he left immediately.  Then King
Escariano wrote letters to the entire kingdom of Tunis, to all
the captains and knights, telling them to be in the city of
Constantine on a certain day with all their arms and everything
they needed for battle.  And in three months they were in the
city of Constantine.  There were forty-four thousand men on
horseback and one hundred thousand on foot from the kingdom of
Tremicen and from Tunis.  Then came the King of Fez and Bogia,
Lord Agramunt, with twenty thousand men on horseback and fifty
thousand foot soldiers.

While these men were coming, the galley of Knight Espercius
arrived with many ships, galleys and other vessels, from Genoa,
Spain, Venice and Pisa, and there were even more.  When Espercius
disembarked from the galley, he told Tirant that he had carried
out everything he had been charged with.  Tirant was very
satisfied at all this.  He quickly had the galley loaded, and he
told Espercius that he wanted him to go as his ambassador to the
King of Sicily, and he replied that he would do it gladly.
Tirant gave him instructions about what to say to the King of
Sicily, and Knight Espercius went aboard his galley and set out
for Sicily.

A few days after the ambassador had left, all the ships were
together in the port of Constantine, and when Tirant saw that he
had enough vessels, and that he would need no more, he paid for
the fleet for one year.  Then he immediately had thirty ships
stocked with wheat and supplies from the Barbary Coast.  When the
ships were loaded, a day was set for all the armed men to meet.
Those on horseback and those on foot, and all the people in the
city and many others came to a beautiful spot in front of the
city of Constantine.  Tirant had a very tall cenotaph made there
so that all the people could be around it.  Then Tirant, King
Escariano, the King of Fez and many other barons and knights went
onto the cenotaph until it was completely filled.  The others
stayed down below, and when the people were silent, Tirant spoke
briefly, and a friar gave a sermon.

When the sermon was over, all the Moors who were not baptized
cried out, asking for baptism.  Tirant immediately had large
basins filled with water, as well as conches, casks and tubs, and
all the friars and clerics came, for Tirant had had many
monasteries and even more churches built in the cities he had
taken, and many clerics and friars had come from the Christian
realms.  Everyone was baptized--those who were leaving as well as
those who were staying behind--and in three days three hundred
thirty-four thousand Moors--men, women and children--were
baptized.

Afterward, Tirant went to talk to King Escariano, and he said to
him:

"I have been thinking, my lord and brother, that if it is to your
liking, instead of going with us by sea you could return to your
kingdom of Ethiopia, and enlist as many men as possible, foot
soldiers and cavalry, and I will go by sea with these men.  And
with you on one side and me on the other, we will catch the
sultan and the Turk in the middle, and we will destroy them."

King Escariano said he would prefer to go with him, but that he
understood how much aid he could give him with all his men, and
he was content to do so.  The book explains that this King
Escariano was a very strong and valiant knight, and that he was
totally black.  For he was lord of the Negritos of Ethiopia, and
was called King Jamjam.  He was very powerful, owning many horses
as well as great treasures, and he was well loved by his vassals.
His kingdom was so large that it extended to Barbary, and the
kingdom of Tremicen, and on the other side to the Indies and
Abyssinia through which the River Tigris passes.

Then King Escariano prepared to depart with five hundred knights,
and he and the queen took their leave of Tirant, and the King and
Queen of Fez, and all the other barons.  Tirant accompanied him
more than a league, and then he returned to the city of
Constantine to give the order for the men to ready themselves
with their horses and their entire army.  Here the history ceases
to speak of Tirant, and it returns to Ambassador Espercius who
was going to the island of Sicily.

After Ambassador Espercius left the port of Constantine, he had
such favorable weather that in a few days he reached the island
of Sicily.  He learned that the king was in the city of Messina,
and he went there.  When he was near the port he dressed very
well and had all his men put on their finery.  Then he
disembarked and went to the king's palace.

When he was before the king, he bowed, and the king honored him
and asked the reason for his coming.  The ambassador answered:

"Most excellent sir, Tirant lo Blanc sends me to Your Majesty as
his ambassador."

He immediately gave the ambassador a very fine room, and he had
everything he needed brought to him.  He also sent beef of an ox
and pork and fresh bread to the galley for the men.

On the morning of the following day, after the king had heard
mass, he summoned his council, and when they were seated in a
great hall he told the ambassador to explain his mission.  The
ambassador said:

"Most excellent sir, Your Excellency is aware that Tirant lo
Blanc was carrying on a war for the Emperor of Constantinople
against the Moorish sultan and the Grand Turk.  It happened that
they took from the emperor all the lands Tirant had conquered,
and so he has decided to take the mightiest force he can to
Constantinople.  He begs Your Highness to go with him personally
with all your forces, to help carry out the conquest of the
Empire of Greece.  And since he has so much confidence in your
lordship he will be here very soon."

The ambassador said no more.  The king quickly replied:

"Knight, it makes me very happy to know of the good fortune of my
brother Tirant, and I am very pleased to be able to help him."

The ambassador stood and thanked the king.  When they left the
parley, the king had letters drawn up to all the barons and
knights of Sicily, and to all the cities and royal villas, that
on a certain day they should send all their magistrates to the
city of Palermo, because he had decided to hold a general
parliament there.

On the appointed day the king and all those who were invited were
in Palermo, and when the parliament opened the king asked the
entire kingdom for aid.  They were all happy to give their
assistance, and those who could decided to go with him.  When the
parliament was over, all who had decided to go quickly made
ready, and in a short time the king gathered four thousand
horses, and he had at his disposal a large fleet of ships and
many provisions.

Here the book ceases to speak of the King of Sicily, who is
putting all his ships in order, and gathering all the provisions
and the horses and arms, and it returns to the six ships Tirant
had sent to Constantinople, loaded with wheat.

After the six ships had left the port of Constantine they had
such a favorable wind that in a few days they reached the Port of
Valona, which is in Greece.  There they received news that the
sultan and the Turk had passed the Bosphorus with many ships and
galleys that they had sent for from Alexandria and Turkey, and
that they had laid siege to the city of Constantinople.  The
emperor was extremely concerned, and all those in the city prayed
continually to Jesus Christ to send Tirant so that they could be
freed from their captivity.  At the same time they felt very
confident because they were sure that Tirant was coming with all
his forces.  The princess returned to the emperor's palace to
console her father, and she told him to gather courage, for Our
Lord would help them.  The emperor had made Hippolytus his
captain-major, and every day he performed great acts of chivalry.
If it had not been for him, the sultan would have taken the city
before Tirant arrived.

When the captains of the six ships learned that the sultan's
forces were about to fall on Constantinople they sent a courier
by land to the emperor, informing him that they were there, in
the port of Valona, but that they did not dare go on to aid His
Majesty out of fear of the Moorish army that was facing the city.
However, they notified His Majesty that Tirant had already left
the city of Constantine and that he was coming with great haste
to assist him.  In addition, they armed a brigantine and sent it
to Tirant to warn him that the Turk and the sultan had laid siege
to the city of Constantinople.  The brigantine left very secretly
and steered for Sicily, and it had such favorable weather that in
a few days it reached the port of Palermo.

As soon as King Escariano had left Constantine, Tirant ordered
all the horses, the food supplies and the people brought
together.  The thirty ships stocked with wheat arrived, and he
had them filled with men.  When they were all on board, Tirant,
the King of Fez and Plaerdemavida went on the ship, along with
all the knights who had been on land with Tirant.  When
everything was ready, they sailed toward Sicily.

When the brigantine that had come from the port of Valona saw
Tirant's fleet, it sailed out of the port and steered toward
them, asking for the captain's ship, and it was pointed out to
them.  When the brigantine was next to Tirant's ship they told
him that the six ships were in the port of Valona and that they
had not been able to pass by the sultan's fleet, and of the siege
that had been laid against the city.  This made Tirant very
angry, and he sailed to the port of Palermo where he saw the
ships of the King of Sicily that began to celebrate with trumpets
and bombards.  Those of Tirant answered them, and they raised
such a din that it seemed as though the world was going to cave
in.

As soon as Tirant's armada was in port and had laid anchor, the
King of Sicily came on board Tirant's ship and there they
embraced and kissed.  The King of Sicily honored all the barons
and knights who were on Tirant's ship, and he kissed and embraced
the King of Fez, and they all went on land together.  Tirant
ordered that no one on the ships was to go on land, since he
wanted to leave the following day.  The King of Sicily had his
queen come to the sea, and she honored Tirant and the King of Fez
and the queen, especially when she heard that she had been the
servant of so virtuous a lady as the princess.  They all went to
the palace together, with a great multitude of ladies and
maidens, and other people who followed them.  When they were in
the palace a splendid meal was prepared for them, and they ate
their fill with great pleasure from all sorts of victuals.

When they left their tables, Tirant and the King of Sicily went
into a chamber.  The Queen of Sicily and the King of Fez, along
with his wife, remained in the hall with many ladies and
gentlemen, and they began to dance and entertain themselves.
Tirant told the King of Sicily about all the misfortunes he had
suffered, and how afterward Our Lord had protected him and had
given him a great victory, and how he had conquered all of
Barbary.  Then he told him of the condition the emperor was in,
and that he needed their aid immediately.  The King of Sicily
answered him:

"My brother and my lord, the horses and arms have been prepared,
along with most of the men."

Tirant answered:

"My brother and lord, I beg you to have a proclamation sent out
through the city that everyone shall gather, as you wish to
depart this evening."

The King of Sicily immediately sent one of his chamberlains, and
the trumpeters went through the city commanding all those who
were to leave to gather together, and it was quickly done.
Tirant and the king went back to the hall with the queen, and
there they found a little diversion.  The Queen of Sicily drew
apart with the Queen of Fez, and embraced her, asking her many
questions about the princess, about her beauty and about the love
between Tirant and the princess.  The Queen of Fez praised the
princess, saying she would never be able to tell of all her
wonderful qualities.  She passed lightly over the love affair
with great discretion.  Then she began to flatter the queen--an
art at which she was a master--telling her that after Her
Highness, the princess, she was without equal in the world; that
she had never seen or heard of a lady with such a genteel mind or
so much beauty as Her Majesty, and that she was very much in love
with her and her singular qualities; and she told her many other
things, all of which gave the Queen of Sicily great pleasure.

After the party and celebrations had ended it was time to dine,
and they ate with great satisfaction.  When they had left the
table, Tirant begged the King of Sicily to make ready quickly,
and the king told him he would.  They took their leave of the
Queen of Sicily and of all those who were staying with her.  The
King of Sicily entrusted the regency of the kingdom to a
cousin-german of the queen, who was Duke of Messina, a good and
virtuous knight.  He made him viceroy, and put the queen and his
entire household in his charge.

When everything was done that was necessary, the king and Tirant
and all their company gathered together, and the entire fleet,
Tirant's as well as that of the King of Sicily, set sail.  At the
port of Valona the six ships loaded with wheat were waiting, and
they were very pleased when they saw Tirant's fleet.

Here the book ceases talking about Tirant and continues with the
story of King Escariano.  As soon as King Escariano left Tirant,
he and his wife, the queen, rode until they came to his land--the
Kingdom of Ethiopia.  After he had rested a few days, he called
all the barons and knights of his kingdom to the city of
Trogodita, and he told them:

"It must have come to your knowledge that I was the prisoner of
the captain of the Christians: Tirant lo Blanc.  He is the best
knight in the world, for he gave us our liberty and made us his
companion in arms.  Furthermore, he has given me as my wife the
daughter of the King of Tremicen, along with that kingdom, and he
has also given to me the Kingdom of Tunis.  Now he must carry out
the conquest of the Greek Empire for the Emperor of
Constantinople--because the sultan and the Grand Turk have taken
away his entire empire.  So he has called on me, as his brother
and servant, to help him with all my power.  Thus, I beg all of
you who are willing, to come with me to Constantinople."

One by one, they each responded that they loved him with a great
love, and that they would follow him and die for him, not only in
Constantinople but to the ends of the world.

King Escariano thanked them all.  Then he sent messages to all
the cities and towns of his kingdom that all who wished to put
themselves at his service--both cavalry and foot soldiers,
citizens and foreigners--should come to the city of Trogodita.
When they had all gathered there, King Escariano found that as
part of his army he had at his command twenty thousand horsemen,
strong and able with weapons.  The queen also made ready, and
they left the city of Trogodita with their entire army.

Here the book returns to Tirant lo Blanc's armada as they are
going to Constantinople.

When Tirant was at the port of Valona he sent a galley into the
port and commanded the captains of the six ships to come out of
the port and follow the armada.  So they set sail and came out of
the port and followed the fleet.  When the armada was in the
canal of Romania it set its course for the port of Gigeo, which
is the port of Troy, and there they waited for the rest of the
armada to join them.

Tirant held counsel with the King of Sicily and the King of Fez
and all the other barons and knights, for he knew that the
sultan's entire armada was in the port of Constantinople, and
that they had more than three hundred vessels.  It was decided to
send a man overland who knew the Moorish language, and who would
go into Constantinople at night to inform the emperor that Tirant
and his entire armada were in the port of Troy, a little more
than one hundred miles from Constantinople.  They did not want to
give him any sort of letter, so that if he were taken prisoner
by the Moors they would not have any warning.  So they would tell
him everything he should say to the emperor.

When the council was over Tirant called a knight from Tunis who
had been a Moor of the royal house.  His name was Sinegerus, and
he was a very ingenious and eloquent man, and a valiant knight.
He had been a captive in Constantinople, and knew the area well.
Tirant told him everything he was to say to the emperor and the
princess, and he gave him his seal so the emperor would have
faith in him.

This knight dressed himself in Moorish fashion as a lackey.  A
brigantine picked him up, and at night they put him ashore a
league from the Moorish camp that was laying siege to the city of
Constantinople.  The knight carefully turned away from the
encampment and set out for the city, but before he could escape
he fell into the hands of spies from the Moorish camp.  He spoke
to them very discreetly in their language, and told them he was
one of them, and they let him pass.  When he reached the city,
the men who were guarding the gate seized him, thinking he was
from the Moorish encampment.  He told them not to harm him
because he was Tirant's ambassador, and that he was coming to
talk to the emperor.  The guards immediately took him to the
emperor who, at that moment, was getting up from the dinner
table.

When Sinegerus was before the emperor, he knelt and kissed his
hand and foot, and gave him Tirant's seal.  The emperor looked at
it and recognized Tirant's coat of arms.  Then the emperor
embraced him, telling him he was very welcome.  Sinegerus said:

"Most excellent Sire, I was sent here by that great captain
Tirant lo Blanc who commends himself in grace and mercy to Your
Majesty, for soon, with the help of God our Lord, he will free
you from all your enemies.  In addition, he begs you to put all
your cavalry in order, and have the city well guarded, for
tomorrow morning he will attack the Moorish armada, and he fears
that when the Moors see their squadron lost they will mount a
powerful attack against the city.  Tirant is coming with enough
might to take them and kill them all, and of this Your Majesty
should not have the slightest doubt."

"Friend," said the emperor, "we feel very relieved by what you
have told us.  May our Lord grant us the grace that it will be as
you have said, for we have so much trust in the great virtue and
chivalry of Tirant, that with the help of God he will fulfill our
good desire and his own."

The emperor immediately summoned Hippolytus, his high captain,
and when he was before him he said:

"Our captain, you know that Tirant is in the port of Troy with a
great squadron.  He has decided to attack the Moorish army
tomorrow morning, and so it is very important that you quickly
call all the cavalry in the city and all the constables and
captains of the foot soldiers, and that you have your men ready
in case the Moors decide to attack the city."

After the ambassador, Sinegerus, had explained his mission, he
asked the emperor's permission to go pay reverence to the empress
and the princess, and the emperor gave his consent.  When he had
received permission he went to the empress' chambers where he
found her daughter with all the ladies.  The knight bowed to the
empress and kissed her hand, and then the princess's hand.  Then,
kneeling, he said:

"Ladies, my captain and lord Tirant lo Blanc sends me to kiss
your hands.  And he offers to come here very soon to pay his
respects to you."

When the princess heard that Tirant was coming and that he was so
close, she became so happy that she nearly fainted.  For some
time she seemed delirious with happiness.  When she had
recovered, the empress and the princess rejoiced with the
ambassador.  They asked him about many things, especially what
men were coming in Tirant's company.

The ambassador answered that the King of Sicily was coming with
him with all his forces, and the King of Fez with all his forces
and with his wife, the queen, whose name was Plaerdemavida.  And
all the barons of the kingdoms of Tunis and Tremicen were coming.
Many other knights who had accepted payment for their services
were coming from Spain, France and Italy because of the great
fame and renown of Tirant.  And also that magnanimous King
Escariano, the lord of Ethiopia, was coming overland.

"He is coming with a mighty army of men on foot and on horseback,
and he is bringing his wife, the queen, with him.  She is very
desirous of seeing Your Excellency, Princess, because of the
great beauty she has heard attributed to you.  For this queen is
one of the most beautiful women in the world, and possesses all
virtues."

He also told them how Plaerdemavida had married Lord Agramunt,
and that she was coming so His Majesty the emperor and the ladies
would honor her for the wedding.  He explained to them at length
how Tirant had carried out the conquest of Barbary, and how he
had given away all that he had conquered and won, and had kept
nothing.  And that everyone who saw him or heard of him adored
him.  He told them many other virtuous and praiseworthy things
about Tirant, which neither ink nor words would suffice to
describe.

When the empress and the princess heard about all Tirant's
virtues and singular acts, they were astonished at the great
grace that God, our Lord, had given him so that he was loved by
everyone.  And they wept with happiness when they thought that he
would be the restorer and defender of the crown of the Empire of
Greece.  For they were already beyond hope, and each of the women
thought they would be made captives and dishonored by the enemies
of the faith.  And they were very pleased when he told them about
the coming of the Queen of Ethiopia, especially the princess,
because they had told her she was very beautiful and virtuous,
and she wanted very much to have her friendship.  And they talked
late into the night.

The empress remained in her chamber and the princess went to her
own.  The ambassador took her by the arm and accompanied her, and
she asked him why he had kissed her hand three times.  He
answered that it was by his lord Tirant's command, who begged her
to please pardon him, for he would never dare come to her because
of the great error he had committed.

The princess answered:

"Knight, tell my lord Tirant that where there is no error, there
is no need for forgiveness.  But if he feels he has wronged me, I
beg him to correct it by coming here quickly, for it is the thing
I desire most in this world."

The ambassador took his leave of the princess and went to the
lodging that the emperor had prepared for him.  That night
Captain Hippolytus had a careful watch set up throughout the
city, and no one slept at all with their great fear of the Moors,
and because they were looking forward to the battle Tirant would
give the Moorish army.

Here the book stops talking of the emperor who is having the city
well guarded, and goes back to tell about Widow Repose, alias the
Devil.

When Widow Repose heard that Tirant was coming and that he was
already so nearby, she was stricken with such fear that she
thought she was going to die, and she said that her heart felt
terribly ill.  She went into her chamber, and there she lamented
loudly, crying and striking her head and face, for at that moment
she felt she was dead, and she truly believed that Tirant would
deal a cruel sentence against her.  Since she knew that he had
been informed by Plaerdemavida, she thought that if the princess
knew of the heinous crime she had accused her of, how could she
possibly face her?  On the other hand, she was still terribly in
love with Tirant, and thus she was driven mad.

She spent the entire night this way, fantasizing and struggling
within herself, for she did not know what to do.  And it was not
something she dared tell to anyone, nor could she ask for advice,
because if she did they would all be her enemies.

Finally she decided to poison herself in such a way that her
wickedness would not be known, so that her body would not be
burned or given to the dogs to eat.

She immediately took some arsenic that she had for making a
depilatory, and she put it in a glass of water and drank it.  She
left the door to her chamber open, undressed and lay down on the
bed.  Then she began to cry loudly, saying that she was dying.
The maidens who were sleeping nearby heard the loud cries and
quickly got up and went to the Widow's chamber, and there they
found her screaming continuously.

The empress and the princess got out of bed, and there was a
great uproar in the palace.  The emperor got up quickly, thinking
the Moors had broken into the city with their weapons, or that
his daughter might have unexpectedly become ill.  He fainted, and
the doctors were summoned.  When the empress and the princess
heard that the emperor had fainted, they left Widow Repose and
went running to the emperor's chamber where they found him more
dead than alive.  Then the princess began to wail loudly, and it
was terrible to see her anguish.  The doctors came quickly and
immediately tended to him.  As soon as he regained consciousness
he asked what had caused all the disturbance, and if the Moors
had entered the city.  They told him no, but that Widow Repose
was having great dizzy spells, and that she was crying terribly
and was very close to death.  The emperor ordered the doctors to
go, and to do whatever they could to save her.  The doctors went
immediately, and at the very minute they reached her chambers,
she surrendered her soul to Pluto's realm.

When the princess learned that Widow Repose had died, she wailed
loudly, because of her great love for her, for she had been
nursed by her.  She had them place her in a beautiful coffin,
because she wanted her to be given a very honorable burial.  In
the morning the emperor and all his court, the empress and the
princess and all the magistrates and honorable men of the city,
escorted the body of the Widow to the great church of Santa
Sofia, and there they held a very solemn funeral.  Then the
emperor and all the people went back to the palace.

Here the book leaves off speaking of Widow Repose and returns to
Tirant.  After Tirant had put the knight Sinegerus ashore so that
he could warn the emperor, he had his entire fleet make ready.
He commanded his vessels to attack the ships, and the galleys to
attack the galleys.  At the same time he ordered all the
captains, when they attacked the Moors, to create a tremendous
noise with trumpets, pipes and horns, and the others with
bombards and terrible cries to frighten them to death.

When everything was ready he gave the order to set sail.  All the
ships very quietly left the port of Troy at daybreak and sailed
all day and the following night.  Our Lord favored them so much
that the entire day was foggy and misty and neither the Moors nor
the people in the city could see them.  They came upon the
Moorish fleet two hours before daybreak while the Moorish armada
was completely unsuspecting.  Then they attacked the Moorish
fleet mightily, with a great explosion of trumpets, pipes and
horns and loud cries, and many bombards that they shot
simultaneously.  And the noise they made was so loud that it
seemed as though the earth and the sky would cave in.  They built
great bonfires on each ship that lit up the heavens.  When the
Moors heard such a loud noise and saw the light and the ships
bearing down on them, they were so frightened that they did not
know what they were doing, for they had been caught sleeping and
unarmed.  All the ships were taken with little difficulty since
they were so alarmed that they gave no resistance.  And there was
such a slaughter that it was a sight to see, for they beheaded
every man they found on the ships and spared no one.

Those who threw themselves into the sea and swam ashore carried
the bad news to the sultan and the Turk.  When the Moors in the
camp learned that all the ships had been seized and all the men
were dead, and they had heard the noise and seen the fires, they
did not know who had done it and they were frightened.  They all
armed and mounted their horses and prepared for battle, because
they were afraid they would be tricked as the ships were.  They
went down to the water's edge so that no one would come ashore.

When Tirant saw that all the Moorish ships had been taken, he was
the happiest man in the world, and he knelt down, and with great
devotion he said:

"Great Lord, full of infinite mercy and grace, I give thanks to
Your immense goodness for all the help You have given me.
Without losing one of my soldiers You have let me take three
hundred ships."

This victory was won so quickly that when they had finished
taking the ships it had barely turned daylight.  When those on
the city wall heard the loud noise of the bombards and the
trumpets and shouting near the port, and saw so many lights, they
were astonished, for it seemed that all the might in the world
was there.  They realized that it was Tirant's armada that had
attacked the Moorish fleet, and they were surprised that at that
moment the Moorish camp had not attacked the city.  And everyone
in the city became excited when they realized that Tirant was
attacking the Moorish ships.

The emperor heard the noise, got up quickly and mounted his
horse, along with the few who were in the palace at that time.
He went through the streets asking all the people to be ready to
defend the city if necessary.  The Moors were so upset by the
lost ships and afraid of a landing that they paid little
attention to the city.  They were trapped and could not turn
back, and they thought they would all be dead or taken captive.
They carefully watched the shoreline so that no one from
Tirant's armada could come ashore.

When the day was bright and clear, Tirant had his men board all
the ships that he had taken from the Moors, then they raised
their sails and the entire armada left the port of Constantinople
and made for the Black Sea along the Bosphorus.  Tirant thought
that if he cut off their way by land he could do whatever he
wanted with them.  So he pretended to be leaving with the booty,
taking all the Moorish ships.

That day Tirant sailed toward the Black Sea until, in the
evening, the Moors lost sight of the ships.  Tirant did this so
that the Moors would think he was leaving and would not try to
stop them when they went ashore.  When the night was dark, Tirant
had his entire squadron turn back toward land.  He touched land
four leagues from the Moorish camp, and the men disembarked with
all the horses and artillery they needed, and enough food for
their encampment.  The Moors were completely unaware that they
were there and they left their ships well supplied.

When all the men were ready and on horseback, they took several
mules and went at least half a league from their ships along the
basin of a river, until they reached a large stone bridge.  Here
Tirant had all the men set up camp at the head of the bridge next
to the river.  They had the river between them and the enemy so
that the Moors would not fall upon them during the night.  Tirant
had his tent set up on the bridge so that no one could go past,
and he had many bombards installed on the bridge so that if the
enemy came they would be well met.  He also sent his spies toward
the Moors' camp so that he would be forewarned if anyone came.

As soon as they were settled, Tirant took a foot soldier and
dressed him like a Moor to deliver a letter to the emperor in
Constantinople.  The letter told about his victories over the
ships of the Moorish sultan and the Grand Turk.  It said they had
captured three hundred ships filled with food, and that he wanted
to send the food to the emperor.  And finally it asked the
emperor how much food the city had.

When Tirant had finished the letter he gave it to the man he had
chosen to go to Constantinople.  His name was Carillo, and he was
Greek, a native of Constantinople, so he knew very well how to
get there.  By night he took back roads to the city so that the
Moors in the camp did not see him.  When he was at the gate the
guards seized him and took him to the emperor.  He bowed, and
kissed his hand and foot, and gave him Tirant's letter.  The
emperor was very happy to get it, and he read it immediately, and
then praised God for His mercy.  He called the empress and his
daughter, the princess, and showed them Tirant's letter, and they
were very pleased that Tirant had captured the Moors' ships.

The emperor summoned his captain, Hippolytus, and showed him
Tirant's letter.  Hippolytus immediately left the emperor and
with other men a search was made, and they found that they still
had provisions for three months.  Hippolytus returned to the
emperor and told him:

"Sire, we have enough supplies in the city to last three months,
or even four, if necessary.  So, my lord, before we use up these
supplies, Tirant will have lifted the siege of the city."

The emperor called his secretary, and had him write a letter to
Tirant, explaining in detail what he had decided.  Then he called
Sinegerus, and said:

"Knight, I want you to take this letter to Tirant, and also to
tell him everything you have seen."

He replied that he would.  When the ambassador Sinegerus had
taken the emperor's letter, he kissed his hand and foot and took
his leave.  Then he went to say goodbye to the empress and the
princess, and he found her in her chamber.  She begged him to
tell Tirant about her, and she hoped he would think of her.  She
wanted him to think of how many hardships they had suffered since
she had seen him.  In any case, she wanted to see him as soon as
possible, and if she couldn't, she was sure she would die.  The
knight answered that he would do everything she commanded, and he
kissed her hand.  The princess embraced him, and he bowed and
left the palace.  He dressed as a Moor and took Carillo, who had
brought the letter to the emperor, as his companion.  They left
the city at twelve o'clock midnight, and took the same roads by
which Carillo had come secretly, and no one in the Moorish camp
saw them.  At dawn they reached the bridge where Tirant had his
camp.  When the guards recognized them they let them pass, and
they went directly to Tirant's tent and found him already up.

Tirant was very happy to see them, and he asked Sinegerus for
news about the emperor and the empress, and his heart, the
princess.  He told him about everything he had seen, and what the
emperor told him.  He also told him what the princess had said.

When the sultan and the Turk discovered that Tirant had
disembarked and that he had set up camp on the stone bridge, they
were sure they were lost, for they saw that they could not escape
by sea or by land without falling into Tirant's hands.  At the
same time, if they stayed there long they would die of hunger,
because they did not even have enough food to last two months
since their ships had not been able to unload their cargo.  When
they saw the fate that was to befall them, like bold knights and
without showing the least faintness of heart they held council to
see what could be done.

In this council there were terrible arguments.  Some advised them
to attack the city: if they could take it they could hold fast
there until they received aid, for they could not imagine that
the city would not be well supplied.  Others said they should set
up battle stations in front of Tirant's camp, because he was such
a valiant knight that he would be certain to do battle.  And they
had so many excellent cavalry that they could not help but defeat
them.  And even if they did not, it was better to die as knights
than to let themselves be trapped like sheep.  And if fortune
smiled on them and allowed them to be the victors in battle they
could go past safely and stay there until they had taken the
city.

Others were of the opinion that it would be better to send an
embassy to Tirant so he would grant them a truce and let them go
past.  They would all go to their land and leave the Empire of
Greece behind, and they would also give back all the fortresses
they had taken, and all the prisoners and captives.  At the end
of the council they decided to send an embassy to Tirant, and if
he would not let them go by, then they could take other measures:
First they could attack the city, and if they could not take it
then their last recourse would be to die like knights with their
swords in their hands.

So the council ended, and they chose as their ambassadors the son
of the Grand Caramany and the Prince of Scythia, who were very
knowledgeable about war.  They told them to estimate how many men
Tirant had and how many were ready and armed, and they gave them
instructions about everything they were to say and do.

With the ambassadors went two hundred unarmed men on horses.
Before they left they sent a messenger to Tirant's camp to ask
for safe passage, and it was granted to them.  The ambassadors
then set out on the road to the camp.

Meanwhile, Tirant called the Marquis of Lizana, his admiral, and
told him to pay what was due to the hired ships.  And he was to
divide their provisions into three parts, taking some to the
castle of Sinopoli, and others to the castle of Pera, and the
last to the city of Pera, along with five hundred soldiers.  Then
the ships could return to their home ports.  He also commanded
him to arm the ships that had been taken from the Moors and his
remaining ships, and to supply them well, and that were to go to
the city of Constantinople.

"And after they have unloaded their cargo, let them appear
constantly in view of the Moors' encampment and bombarded them
and cause them as much harm as they can."

The admiral did this, and also ordered two well armed galleys to
remain in the river, near Tirant's camp, in case he needed to
send them somewhere.  Then Tirant went to the tent of the Queen
of Fez, and told her:

"My sister, I beg you to go with these ships to Constantinople,
so that you can console the lady who holds my soul captive.  I am
afraid that during this time, while I'm not able to go to her,
some harm may befall her, and that would be worse than death for
me."

The gracious queen would not allow Tirant to speak.  Instead,
with a kindly face and soft voice, she said:

"My brother, to me your requests are commands.  I am deeply in
your debt because of the great benefits and honors I've received
from you."

Then Tirant embraced her and kissed her on the cheek, and said to
her:

"My sister, I cannot thank you enough for the great love I see in
you."

The queen tried to kiss his hands, and Tirant would not allow it.

Later, the morning of the following day, the queen went to depart
with all her maidens; and the King of Sicily, along with Tirant
and five hundred armed men, accompanied her to the sea.  When the
queen had boarded a ship they took their leave of her and
returned to camp.  The admiral had all the ships set sail, and
they started on their way to Constantinople.

Then the Moorish ambassadors reached Tirant's camp, and were
astonished at all the horses and men there.  In Tirant's tent the
son of the Grand Caramany explained his mission:

"You know, great captain, how many people are lost in battles of
this sort.  And many more would be lost in this one where graves
are prepared for so many soldiers.  So, to avoid all that
inhumanity we, ambassadors of our lord the sultan, and the Grand
Turk, have come to learn what your lordship's intention is in
this matter.  If it please you, we would ask for a truce of three
or more months, and if your generous person should wish it, a
lasting peace for one hundred and one years.  They will be very
happy to be friends of your friends and enemies of your enemies,
in brotherhood.  If this is done they will leave the empire of
Greece, restoring to your dominion all cities, castles, towns and
lands within the boundaries of Greece.  In addition, they will
free all Christian prisoners held in our power, and they will
comply with any other reasonable demand.  But if you do not wish
to come to an agreement with them, you may be certain that they
will very quickly give you a terrible lesson with cruel weapons."

And that was the end of his speech.

Tirant saw immediately that he had finally achieved the glory he
desired so much.  But with great discretion he did not agree at
once; he told them to rest, and that he would soon give them a
reply.  So they took their leave, and Tirant's knights took them
back to their tents with honor.

Like a virtuous captain, Tirant sent word for his illustrious
kings and dukes and noble chivalry to come to his tent the next
day, for after mass he wanted to hold counsel concerning the
embassy.  And as they all loved Tirant deeply, they quickly went
to his tent.  After they had heard mass they each sat down
according to their rank, and when there was silence in the
council, Tirant said:

"Most illustrious and magnificent lords, your lordships are aware
of the embassy sent by the Moorish sultan and the Grand Turk,
asking us for a truce.  In the first place we must consider that
they are in bad straits.  We know that we have them in a position
where they need food and other things necessary to survive.  My
opinion is that we could not give greater service to His Majesty
the emperor than if we did not grant them a truce or any
agreement at all.  Instead we should have them place themselves
in our power with no assurances concerning their property or
their lives.  And if they do not agree to this, let them do all
the harm they can, for we are certain we can make them perish
from hunger.  Furthermore, if we want to do battle with them it
is in our power, because we are much more powerful than they.
However, I believe it would be great madness for us to battle
them, for they are desperate, and we could lose many of our own
men and put the entire country in danger.  My lords and brothers,
my opinion is this: we should give them no reply at all without
consulting His Majesty, the emperor, so that if anything of the
sort should happen, we would not be blamed.  So I beg all your
lordships, my brothers, to advise me about the reply that should
be given."

And he finished his speech.

***



In the meantime the fleet left Tirant's camp to go to the
illustrious city of Constantinople, and the wind and weather were
so favorable that on that same day, two hours before Phoebus
ended his journey, they reached the city.  The noble citizens and
the townspeople, hearing the cries of happiness, ran to the wall
to see the help they wanted so much.  The fleet came in, flying
the flags of His imperial Majesty and the valiant captain,
Tirant.  There was no less happiness inside the city, as they
rang the bells and praised divine Providence.

When the princess saw Plaerdemavida, her servant, coming so
triumphantly as a queen, she dismounted in order to pay her
honor.  The queen threw herself at her feet to honor her, but the
lady would not allow that, and instead kissed her many times on
the mouth as a sign of her great love.  The night the virtuous
Queen of Fez arrived at Constantinople the princess wanted her to
sleep with her so they could talk at their leisure.  When they
were in bed the princess said:

"My virtuous sister and lady, my heart has been very anxious all
the time you were gone.  I couldn't write down all the reasons
for this, for I loved you more than all the ladies and maidens in
the world.  I found it impossible to live without you, especially
when I thought that because of me you had died a frightening
death at the terrible hands of the sea.  I beg you, my sister and
lady, please tell me how I offended virtuous Tirant who so
cruelly left the one who loved him more than her own life.  And
don't think that I am the way I was when you left me, because
love has won over me so that I am beside myself.  And I'm afraid
that if I don't see my Tirant soon my life will not last long."

The lady ended her pitiful words, weeping uncontrollably.  The
virtuous queen comforted her with tender words, and when the
princess had recovered, the queen said:

"My lady, Your Highness should rejoice at one thing: you are not
at all to blame.  I told Tirant everything.  When he knew the
truth he was very confused and ashamed, and through me he asks
Your Majesty to pardon him.  My lady, Your Highness should
forgive him because he was deceived by someone who was deeply
trusted, and Your Majesty is unaware of her cruelty.  Trust me,
my lady, I have never failed you when you needed me.  I will soon
have him come here to pay you homage, for I know that he truly
has no other desire than to honor you and offer his services to
Your Majesty."

"My sister," said the princess, "I can see now that in the past
when you were in my service, you gave me good advice and I didn't
realize it.  From now on I will do what you advise me."

When the princess had finished, the queen said:

"My lady, if Your Highness will do this I promise to fulfill your
desire very quickly--even more than you wish."

And with these words and others like them, they spent most of the
night.  The princess took great pleasure in the queen's words,
for it had been a long time since they had seen each other and
they had a great deal to talk about.  The queen said:

"My lady, let us give ourselves up to the night so that Your
Highness will not grow tired."

And they did.

              ***



When virtuous Tirant held council with the great kings, dukes,
counts and barons about the reply they would give to the
ambassadors of the sultan and the Turk, the council decided
unanimously that His Majesty the emperor should be consulted.
Tirant thought he had reached the end he so much desired to have
a justifiable reason for going and paying homage to the lady who
held his heart captive.

Thinking that this business was of great importance, and that it
affected his honor more than it did the others', he decided to go
alone, secretly, to the noble, beloved city to talk with His
Majesty, the emperor, and to know his decision.  In that way
peace could be brought to the Empire of Greece, and he could
enjoy restful tranquility in the arms of his lady.

When darkness of night fell, he spoke to the King of Sicily and
the King of Fez, and left the camp in their hands.  Then he went
on board a galley and sailed to Constantinople, which was some
twenty miles from Tirant's camp.  When Tirant reached the port
and the galley was anchored, it was ten o'clock at night.  He
ordered the ship's commander not to leave.  Then he disguised
himself, and disembarked, and when he was at the city gates, he
told the guards to open them, that he was a servant of Tirant who
had come to speak to His Majesty, the emperor.  The guards let
him pass, and he went to the emperor's palace.  When he was
inside they told him that the emperor had gone to bed.  Tirant
went to the Queen of Fez's chamber and found her praying.  When
the queen saw him she quickly recognized him and ran to embrace
him and kiss him, and she said:

"Lord Tirant, I can't tell you how happy I am that you are here,
and now I have even more reason to thank God for hearing my
prayers.  Come, my lord, so worthy of glory.  It is time now for
you to receive the payment for your honorable deeds in the arms
of the lady who is your real happiness.  And if you don't do what
I tell you to this time, I swear that you'll never have my help
again.  Instead I'll go back to my land as quickly as I can."

Tirant did not let the queen go on.  He said:

"My lady and sister, if I have disobeyed you in the past, I beg
you to forgive me.  I promise and swear to you, on the order of
chivalry that I hold, that there will be nothing in the world
that you will command of me that I will not obey, even if I am
certain it will bring me death.  For I am very sure that you
always gave me good advice, if only I had taken advantage of it."

"Now then," said the queen, "we shall see what you are able to
do.  You will have to go into a list in a closed field of battle,
because I won't consider you a knight if I don't see you as the
victor in a delicious battle.  Wait here, and I will go talk to
the princess.  I'll ask her to come here tonight to sleep with
me."

The queen quickly left Tirant and went to the princess's chamber,
and found her ready to go to bed.  When the princess saw the
queen, she said:

"What has happened, sister, to bring you here in such a hurry?"

The queen pretended to be very happy, and she put her head close
to the princess's and said:

"My lady, please come sleep with me in my bed tonight.  I have
many things to tell Your Majesty.  A galley has come from
Tirant's camp, and a man came ashore and talked to me."

The princess very happily told her she would do it, because she
had slept with her other times, and the queen had also slept in
her bed.  They did this when they wanted to talk freely without
awakening the suspicion of the empress and the maidens.  The
princess took the queen's hand, and they went to her chamber.
They found it in good order and well perfumed, as the queen had
prepared it.  The princess quickly got into bed because of her
great desire to have news about Tirant, and her maidens helped
her undress.  When the princess was in bed, they bade her a good
night--which they did not know was already prepared for her.

When the maidens had left the bedroom the queen bolted the door
herself and told her maidens to go to sleep because she was going
to pray a little while, and she would go to bed later and did not
want anyone there.

All the maidens went into another chamber where they slept.  When
the queen had dismissed them all she went into the sitting room
and said to Tirant:

"Glorious knight, strip yourself to your nightshirt, and go lie
beside the lady who loves you more than her own life.  Apply the
spurs strongly and without mercy, as befits a knight.  And don't
come to me with any squeamishness, because I swear to you on my
word as a queen that if you don't do it now you'll never get
another chance to have this much glory for the rest of your
life."

When Tirant heard such beautiful words from the queen he knelt
down on the floor and kissed her hands and feet.  Then he said:

"My lady and my sister, you've bound my liberty with strong
chains.

What you are doing for me is so great that, even if I were your
captive for the rest of my life, I don't believe I could repay
what I owe you."

"My lord, Tirant," said the queen, "don't waste time.  Take your
clothes off right now."

The virtuous Tirant flung his clothes into the air, and in a
trice he was naked and barefoot.  The queen took him by the hand
and led him to the bed where the princess was.  The queen said to
the princess:

"My lady, here is your adventurous knight whom Your Majesty loves
so much.  Be a good companion to him, your grace, as one would
expect from Your Excellency.  You're not unaware of how many
trials and hardships he has gone through to win your love.  Make
wise use of him, for you are the discretion of the world, and he
is your husband.  And Your Majesty should think of nothing but
the present, because one never knows what the future will bring."

The princess answered:

"False sister, I never thought you would betray me like this.
But I have confidence in the virtue of my lord, Tirant, who will
make up for your great lack."

And don't imagine that during this conversation Tirant was idle;
instead he applied himself to his labor.  The queen left them and
went to a bed in the chamber, to sleep.  When the queen had gone,
the princess turned to Tirant who was pushing forward in his
battle, and she said:

"Calm yourself, my lord, and don't try to use your bellicose
strength, because the strength of a delicate maiden is not so
great that she can resist such a knight.  Upon your mercy, don't
treat me like this.  The struggle of love doesn't require great
force; it is not won by strength, but by ingenious flattery and
sweet deception.  Stop your insistence, my lord; don't be cruel:
don't think that this is a camp or list of infidels; don't try to
conquer someone who is already conquered by your goodness.  Let
me have part of your manliness so that I may resist you.  Oh, my
lord!

How can something which is forced give you pleasure?  Oh!  Can
love allow you to harm the thing that is loved?  Restrain
yourself, my lord, upon your virtue and nobility.  Wait, poor
thing!  The arms of love should not cut, nor should the enamored
lance break or wound!  Have pity, have compassion on this
solitary maiden.  Oh, false and cruel knight!  I will cry out!
Wait, for I want to scream.  Lord Tirant, will you have no
compassion on me?  You are not Tirant.  Wretched me!  Is this
what I desired so?  Oh, hope of my life, here is your dead
princess!"

And do not think that Tirant refrained from doing his work
because of the pitiful words of the princess, for in a short time
Tirant was the conqueror in the delicious battle, and the
princess gave up her arms and swooned.  Tirant jumped out of bed,
thinking he had killed her, and he went to call the queen so that
she would come and help him.  The queen got up quickly and took a
jar of water and sprinkled it on the princess's face, and rubbed
her temples.  She recovered her senses, and giving a deep sigh,
she said:

"Even if these are the signs of love, they should not be used
with so much force and cruelty.  Now, lord Tirant, I must believe
that you did not love me with a virtuous love.  If only you had
waited for the day of solemnity and the ceremonial festivities to
lawfully enter the doors of my chastity."

The queen did not wait for the princess to say any more, and with
a smiling face she said:

"Oh, my blessed lady!  How well you know how to act like you're
hurt!  A knight's arms do no harm to a maiden.  May God give me a
death like the one you pretend he's giving you!  May I be
attacked by the illness you're talking about if by morning you
don't feel completely cured."

The princess was not entirely consoled at the loss of her
virginity, and since she did not want to answer the queen's
insane words, she kept quiet.  The two lovers spent the entire
night playing that happy sport that lovers play.

 CHAPTER XIII

THE WEDDING

 During the night Tirant told the princess about all the
misfortunes he had suffered because of her love.  Then he took
great pleasure in telling her about his prosperity and victory,
but finally he told her that he felt less glory in any of it than
he did in conquering her illustrious person.  When she had
gathered her strength and her sweet anger was over, she told
Tirant about the life she had led while he was gone, and how
during this time she had never seen anyone laugh or take joy in
anything.  Withdrawn from all delights, alone in continual
prayer, deep in religion because of her love, she had been able
to survive until they brought her the happy news of his arrival.
And they exchanged many other delicious words, full of loving
sighs.

The queen, who was responsible for this affair, saw that daylight
was near, and she realized that when people in love have some
pleasure, they do not think of anything that would disturb them.
She got up from her bed, anxiously, and went to where the lovers
were.  She told them that since their night had been good she
hoped God would give them a good morning.  They returned her good
wishes very graciously, and she found them very happy, taking joy
in one another.  The queen said to Tirant:

"Lord of the Empire of Greece: Get up, it's already day.  You
must leave as secretly as you can so that no one will see you."

Tirant would have liked that night to last a year.  Many times,
while kissing the princess, he begged her to forgive him.  The
princess answered:

"My lord Tirant, love obliges me to forgive you, on the condition
that you come back soon, for I cannot live without you.  Now I
know what love is, and before I did not know."

The lady had barely uttered the last syllable of her loving words
when Tirant said:

"Your Highness will see how short the war will become so that I,
your captive, can wait on you with loving service."

And with a kiss of deepest love they parted.  The queen took him
by the hand and led him through a back door into the orchard.
Saying very courteous words, they each went their way.  Tirant
went to Hippolytus' quarters, and the queen went back to the
princess, and took Tirant's place in the bed.  And there they
slept peacefully until well into the day.

Hippolytus' happiness was by no means slight when he saw his
master and lord Tirant.  With the great love he had for him, he
threw himself at his feet, attempting to kiss them.  Tirant would
not allow it, and lifted him from the floor, and embraced and
kissed him.  They greeted each other at length, for they had not
seen each other since fate had carried off Tirant.  Tirant told
Hippolytus to go to the palace and tell the emperor that he had
come and wished to speak with him secretly.

Hippolytus quickly went to the emperor and told him of Tirant's
arrival.  The emperor thought Tirant must have come because of
very important matters, and he told Hippolytus to have him come
immediately.  Hippolytus went to his quarters and told Tirant
what the emperor had said.  The two relatives left Hippolytus'
lodging in disguise and went to the palace.  They found the
emperor in his chamber as he was finishing dressing.

When Tirant was before His Majesty he threw himself at his feet,
to kiss them.  The great lord would not permit it, and instead
took Tirant by the hand, lifted him from the floor and kissed him
on the mouth.  Tirant kissed his hand, and the emperor took his
hand and led him to another chamber where he made him sit at his
side.  Tears ran down the emperor's cheeks because of his great
happiness, and because of all the losses he had suffered--which
he knew well would not have happened if Tirant had been there.
Tirant said:

"Most excellent Sire, the Moorish sultan and the Grand Turk have
sent me on this mission which has many conditions that affect
Your Majesty.

Since it would be very presumptuous of me to give a reply without
the express license of Your Majesty, I entreat your grace that it
be examined carefully in the council and a decision be reached
about what is to be done, so that if it should be brought up in
the future, I would not be held to blame.  The Moorish sultan and
the Grand Turk are asking Your Majesty for a truce of three
months, or for longer if Your Majesty wishes.  And if you want a
lasting peace for one hundred one years, they will be happy to
form an alliance with Your Majesty to be friends of your friends
and enemies of your enemies."

The emperor answered:

"Our virtuous captain and son: We hold you in such high esteem
and trust that we would have accepted whatever you decided.  But
to please you, I will hold counsel on the matter."

The great emperor ordered the council to meet quickly so that
Tirant could return to camp.  Taking his leave of the emperor,
Tirant went to pay his respects to the empress and the princess.
He found them together in the princess's chamber because she was
pretending to be sick, and the empress had come to be with her.
The empress was very glad to see Tirant.  The princess pretended
to greet him coldly so as not to arouse suspicions about what had
happened the night before.  They spoke of many things, and the
princess especially asked Tirant if he had any news about the
arrival of the Queen of Ethiopia.  Tirant answered:

"My lady, three days ago I received a letter, by messenger, from
King Escariano.  He asked me not to do battle with the Moors
until he arrived.  And he assured me that he would be here in two
weeks."

The princess answered:

"Captain, there is nothing I desire more than to see this queen.
I hear that her beauty is greater than that of anyone in the
world."

Tirant answered:

"My lady, they told you the truth.  After Your Majesty I don't
think a more beautiful or more virtuous woman can be found
anywhere.  She has the same desire you do: her only reason for
coming here is because of all the perfection she has heard about
Your Majesty."

While Tirant, the empress and the princess were speaking,
Stephanie, Duchess of Macedonia, came into the chamber.  With the
absence of her husband, she had entered religion and did not want
to leave it until that fortunate day when she hoped all her
troubles would end.  She threw herself at Tirant's feet and cried
aloud, tears flowing down her cheeks.  Tirant would not allow the
duchess to kneel.  He took her arm and raised her from the floor.
Then he embraced her and kissed her, and said:

"I promise you, on my order of chivalry, that before a month has
gone by the Duke of Macedonia and all the others will be out of
prison and they will be here.  That is the sole reason I came."

When the Duchess of Macedonia heard Tirant's words, she threw
herself at his feet, wanting to kiss them.  Tirant would not
allow it, and lifting her from the floor he kissed her again.
Then, taking her hands, they sat down and told each other about
their past difficulties.

While the captain was entertaining the ladies and consoling the
Duchess of Macedonia, the emperor called for a council meeting
and explained the mission that the sultan and the Turk had sent
Tirant on, just as Tirant had told it to him.  When all the
council members learned the good news there were arguments and
disagreements among them.  Finally, after much deliberation, they
sent for the emperor and said to him:

"Your Majesty, we advise you to make a lasting peace with the
sultan and with the Turk and with all the other great lords in
their company, with the stipulation that they put themselves in
Your Excellency's power as your prisoners.  And they must not be
released until they have carried out all their promises, and the
other Moors have left, unarmed and on foot."

The emperor was very happy with this decision since it was such
good advice.  He went to the princess's chamber where he found
Tirant, and taking him by the hand, he had him sit by his side in
great friendship, and told him what he wanted.

"Tirant, my captain and son, our council has come to the decision
we mentioned.  So, I beg you to depart as quickly as you can to
give reply to the embassy."

Tirant said he would do as he was ordered, and he took his leave
of the emperor.  He went to the empress and the princess and bade
them farewell, and they begged him to do everything he could to
liberate the Empire of Greece.  Tirant replied:

"My ladies, may Our Lord grant that it be done as quickly as Your
Excellencies wish."

He took his leave of the princess, and the queen accompanied him
to the door of his chamber to tell him that as soon as it was
dark he should go through the orchard door and come to her room
where he could talk to the princess.  Tirant said he would do as
she commanded.

After Tirant had left the ladies he went to Hippolytus' room to
wait for the dark of night so he could have his heart's desire.
Alone and in disguise, when the time was right he crept softly
through the familiar orchard toward the queen's chamber, and
there he found the princess, with the queen, waiting for him.
The princess greeted him with great happiness, and the three of
them went into the chamber.

Tirant gamboled with the princess and they passed the time in
amorous solace and delicious chatter until it was time for bed.
The princess got into bed first, and the queen dismissed all the
ladies and put valiant Tirant at the side of his lady, who
treated him with more love than she had the night before.  After
the queen had placed them in the list and they were in delicious
battle, she left to go to sleep, trusting that they would be in
such agreement that the battle would never come to an end.

Tirant did not sleep the entire night, like a brave knight who
understands that one who is valiant in battle must be valiant in
bed.  As day drew near Tirant said to the princess:

"My lady and my life, I must go.  I promised His Majesty the
emperor that tomorrow, at break of day, I would be in my camp."

The princess answered:

"My lord and my love, your departure grieves me deeply.  If it
were possible I would never let you out of my sight.  If I felt
pain before, now it will be a thousand times worse.  Do me the
grace, my lord, not to delay your return unless you want to cut
short my life, for I cannot live without you."

When Tirant had her permission he got up from the bed and
dressed, and with kisses of deep-felt love along with tears he
left the princess.  Going out the back gate of the orchard, he
went to Hippolytus' lodging.  Hippolytus got up, and quickly
escorted Tirant to the city gates so they would be opened for
him.  Tirant went to the ocean and boarded the galley that left
the port secretly and rowed to the encampment.

The sun had been up scarcely an hour when the galley was in sight
of the camp.  The entire camp knew the captain had returned, and
the King of Sicily and the King of Fez rode with their men to
escort Tirant, and they took him to his triumphal tent with great
honor.  Tirant explained to them everything His Majesty the
emperor had decided, and they were all very content.

The morning of the following day the captain asked the kings and
grandees to come to mass.  They all quickly went to his tent with
many knights.  After mass he sent word to the ambassadors of the
sultan and the Turk to come, as he wanted to give them an answer.
The ambassadors were very glad to receive the news.  Dressed in
Moorish fashion, and accompanied by many noble knights from
Tirant's camp, the great lords went with great pomp and gravity
to the tent of the valiant captain.  Before they left their tent
the ambassadors put their mounts and servants in readiness so
that when they had the reply from Tirant they could return to
their camp.

When the ambassadors were in the presence of the valiant captain
they bowed deeply to him and Tirant paid them as much honor as he
thought they deserved.  When they were seated before him, Tirant
gave the following reply:

"Do not be astonished that the answer has been so long in coming,
for I wanted to consult His Majesty, the emperor, about your
embassy.  He, with great benignity and clemency, has had
compassion on you.  As you well know, your life or death is in
our hands.  So that you may know how great is the humanity and
clemency of the emperor, he is content to spare your lives and
grant you mercy in this fashion: The sultan and Turk, with all
the kings and lords in your camp, will place themselves in the
emperor's power as prisoners.  There you will stay until such a
time as you have restored all the lands you have taken from the
empire.  At the same time you will bring to him all the prisoners
and captives in the lands of the sultan as well as the Turk.  And
His Majesty the emperor is willing to let all the Moors leave who
are in your camp, but on foot and unarmed.  And if you are not
satisfied with the emperor's mercy, you can all prepare to die,
for I promise you that not one of you will be spared."

On the morning of the following day the Moors held council
regarding the reply they should give to Tirant, and the council
decided to acquiesce to everything Tirant asked for.  The
ambassadors delivered the reply to Tirant, saying that the sultan
and the Turk, with the counsel and will of all the rest, were
content to do everything his lordship had asked.

Soon all those who were to be hostages rode in, and there were
twenty-two in all, all titled and of high nobility.  I will not
give their names here so that I will not take up too much space,
but I can tell you that because of their great hunger they were
hardly slow in coming down the road.  They all presented
themselves to Tirant, and bowed deeply.  Tirant welcomed them,
paying them great honor, and gave them a magnificent banquet.

After the banquet, Tirant put all the prisoners on two galleys,
and then he went on board himself to go with them.

The two galleys sailed away from the camp, and quickly reached
Constantinople.  When the captain was near the port of
Constantinople, and the people in the town heard that Tirant was
coming in triumph, bringing the highest lords of the Moorish
people as prisoners, they were the happiest people in the world.
Everyone ran to the ocean to see the prisoners.  An immense crowd
gathered, both men and women, shouting:

"Long live our blessed captain!  May God protect and prolong his
life, for he has freed us from so much misery!"

Tirant refused to leave the galleys until the emperor sent
Hippolytus along with other knights.  When Hippolytus was on the
galley with Tirant, he told him:

"My lord, His Majesty, the emperor, has sent me to your lordship,
and he begs you to come on land."

Tirant said he would be happy to do what he commanded.  The
captain quickly had the galleys draw near to land and they
lowered the ladders.  Then Tirant had all the prisoners disembark
with him.  When they were on land they met all the officials and
magistrates of the city who received them with great honor, and
Tirant with great reverence.  They all left the shore together
and went to the emperor's palace, and the populace followed them.

When they were in the palace square they saw the emperor up above
on the cenotaph, seated in the imperial chair, with the empress
to his left, and the princess to the right of the emperor, but a
little lower, as a sign that she would be the successor to the
empire.  When Tirant and the prisoners were in view of the
emperor, they all knelt to the ground; then they went up to the
cenotaph where the emperor was.  They made another deep bow, and
Tirant moved to the front.

When he stood before the emperor he threw himself at his feet to
kiss them, but the emperor would not allow it.  Instead he took
him by the arm, lifted him from the ground and kissed him on the
mouth, and Tirant kissed his hand.  The Turk and the other great
lords did the same.  The emperor received them with great
humanity, and ordered them taken to the other cenotaph.

The tables were prepared immediately, and each was seated
according to his station.  The emperor wanted Tirant to eat at
his table, and the five of them ate there: the emperor, the
empress, the princess and Tirant, and the Queen of Fez.  The
emperor ordered the prisoners to be served with great honor and
reverence, for even though they were infidels they were still men
of great dignity and station.  And it was all done well, with a
great abundance of precious foods and wines of different kinds.
They were astonished, and they said that the Christians were more
experienced than the Moors in eating.

When they had eaten, Tirant asked the emperor's permission to go
to the Moorish camp and have the Moors sent to Turkey.  The
emperor agreed.  Tirant took his leave of the empress and the
princess, and he withdrew to the galleys, and sailed to the fleet
in front of the Moorish camp.  When the admiral saw Tirant
approaching he commanded the trumpets, pipes and horns to be
blown, and they greeted the captain with loud cries.  The admiral
went on board the captain's ship and said to him:

"Sir, what does your lordship require?"

Tirant answered:

"Have all the ships come near shore, and all the Moors will go to
Turkey."

The admiral said he would carry out the order.  He returned to
his ship and gave the signal for all the ships to draw in to
shore.  And it was done very quickly.  Tirant had a man that he
had brought from the sultan put ashore, and he told the Moors to
go aboard the ships without fear, and that they would go to
Turkey.  The Moors, who wanted nothing else in the world because
of their great hunger, quickly gathered and left behind their
horses and arms, with their tents still standing, containing all
their booty.  When the ships were loaded with Moors, they carried
them over to their land: It was very near as they only had to
cross the Bosphorus; then they returned for more.  You can
imagine how many men there were, for four hundred vessels,
including ships and galleys and other vessels made ten crossings.

When the men of Tirant's camp learned that all the Moors were
gone, they all ran as fast as they could to take a share of the
booty.  After the men on the vessels had taken the Moors across,
they went ashore and they still had time to take part of the
booty.  It could truly be said that that camp was the richest one
there had ever been, for they had captured and robbed the entire
Empire of Greece, and they had it all right there, and a lot of
good it did them!  And the men who found themselves with that
booty were rich for the rest of their lives.

When the entire Moorish camp had been sacked, Tirant ordered all
the men back to their camp.  He kept only the King of Sicily and
the King of Fez with him, along with some other barons who wanted
to pay homage to the emperor.  They left the Moors' camp and went
overland to the illustrious city of Constantinople, while the
ships sailed into the port of the city.

After the emperor had left the table and the prisoners had eaten
their fill, he ordered Hippolytus to take all the prisoners to
the top of the palace towers which were prepared for them.
Hippolytus went to the cenotaph where the prisoners were and told
them to go with him.  They came down from the cenotaph and
followed Hippolytus as he led them up to the towers.  Hippolytus
put the Moorish sultan and the Grand Turk in a beautiful chamber.
Then he told them:

"Sirs, His Majesty the emperor commands your lordships to rest
here, and to be a little patient if you are not being treated as
befits your worthiness."

The sultan replied:

"Virtuous knight, we are grateful to His Majesty the emperor for
the great honor he is doing us, because he is not treating or
regarding us as prisoners, but as brothers.  We are deeply
obligated to him for this, and when we are given our liberty and
our power again, we shall serve him in everything he commands."

Afterward Hippolytus ordered the four pages never to leave the
chamber, and to serve them with all respect in everything they
commanded.  Then he ordered guards to keep watch over the tower.
Hippolytus took the rest of the prisoners and placed them in the
other towers where they were given very nice chambers and
servants to serve them, and they were very content.  And he gave
them good guards so that they would be well served and well
guarded.

The emperor went to the palace with all the ladies and gave
orders that nothing on the square should be touched, because he
had been advised by Tirant that the King of Sicily and the King
of Fez would be coming to pay him their respects.  He ordered
Hippolytus to arrange for good lodgings in the city, and
Hippolytus, who was virtuous and discreet, carried out everything
the emperor commanded him.

A few days later the emperor was told that Tirant was coming with
the King of Sicily and other lords, and that they were a league
away from the city.  The emperor had Hippolytus and all the
officials from the city, along with the nobles and knights who
were there, go out to receive them.  When they were at the
palace, Tirant, the King of Sicily and the others dismounted.
The new guests were astonished at the great beauty of the ladies,
especially of the princess.

After they had entertained the ladies, the emperor was told that
the dinner was ready.  Later they cleared the tables, and the
dances began.  The square was full of people from the city who
were looking at such a beautiful celebration.  Others were
dancing, and it was lovely to see such a victory celebration.  In
the city there were also other kinds of dances and games, for the
emperor had ordered celebrations held for a week.

Tirant would not leave the side of the King of Sicily during all
these festivities.  Instead they slept and ate together
continuously-- the better to cover up what had taken place
between him and the princess.  The others spent the eight days
celebrating.  Every day Tirant told the princess of his love, and
begged Her Highness to arrange the marriage so that they could
enjoy its delights without fear.

The princess answered:

"Oh, most virtuous of all men!  Don't beg me for the one thing I
want most in the whole world, and don't think me so ungrateful
that I've forgotten what your great nobility has brought us.
Please, my lord, do not become angry because you have to wait for
the culmination of our happiness, for you have already won a
glorious victory over me.  Just think how it has been to your
glory and that of your men that you have recovered the entire
empire, and conquered and killed so many Moorish kings and lords.
Now the only thing your lordship lacks is to have dominion over
all the empire as part of your matrimony.  Since you have
returned to me, and you are the mainstay of my life, I promise to
renounce the crown in your favor, and to complete our wedding
vows with you as emperor since my father, being advanced in
years, wants me to rule in his stead."

Tirant would not allow the lady to continue, and with a loving
heart he said:

"Even if I could, I find it difficult to accept your gracious and
generous offer.  May the Divine Power not permit me to commit
such great folly as to take the crown of the empire during the
emperor's lifetime.  I only ask His Majesty to keep me as a son
and servant, and the captive of his daughter.  I want nothing
else in this world."

When Tirant finished these words of love, tears sprang from his
lady's eyes.  Throwing herself into his arms, and clinging from
his neck, she kissed him many times.  After a moment she said:

"My lord and my life, no tongue could express the perfection and
virtues of your noble person, and now I truly understand that you
are unique in all the world.  May you long possess the crown of
the Greek Empire, and may I be able to serve you all your life."

And they departed with many words of mutual love.

Tirant spent the night in amorous thoughts, waiting for Phoebus
to arrive in the east, spreading its luminous rays over our
horizon.  At the proper time the captain went before the emperor,
and said:

"Your Majesty remembers the promise given by the sultan and the
Turk to Your Excellency, of restoring to your power all the lands
they occupy in the Greek Empire.  So, great lord, if Your
Majesty will grant me permission, I will leave to take possession
of them for Your Majesty.  If fortune favors us, Sire, Your
Excellency will command all the land that your predecessor, the
emperor Justine, commanded."

The emperor answered:

"We are well aware of the many services and honors you have done
for us and for the entire empire, and we are greatly indebted to
you.  We would therefore like to give you and your people the
entire empire while we are still alive, and furthermore we wish
to give you our daughter Carmesina as your wife, if you will
accept her.  For we are at such an age that we are no longer able
to rule, much less to defend the empire."

When Tirant heard the emperor's kind words he threw himself at
his feet and kissed them with great humility and love, and he
said:

"My lord, may heaven never permit Tirant lo Blanc, Your Majesty's
humble servant, to commit such an error as to allow Your Highness
to lose the command of your empire during your lifetime; before
that should happen I would rather die.  But Sire, if you would do
me the grace of giving me something that is worth much more, as
Your Majesty has offered, I would value it more than if you gave
me ten empires."

Seeing his great gentility, the emperor took him by the arm,
lifted him from the floor and kissed him on the mouth, and Tirant
kissed his hand.  The emperor took Tirant's hand and led him to
the chambers of the princess, who was with all her ladies,
entertaining the King of Sicily.  When the great emperor came
into the room everyone stood up and bowed to him.  As the emperor
sat down he made the princess sit at his right, Tirant at his
left, and the King of Sicily in front of them.  The emperor then
turned to his daughter, and said:

"My daughter, you're aware of the great service and high honors
Tirant here has bestowed on us.  And that he has liberated the
entire empire from all the hardships that the Moors have
inflicted on us.  As we realize that we do not have enough to
offer him for all he has done for us, we have decided that we
have nothing dearer or of greater value or that we love more than
you yourself.  So we have offered you to him, and I beg and
command you, my dear daughter, to take him as your husband and
lord: that will be the way you can best serve me."

The lady answered with a gracious and modest continence:

"Most merciful and kind lord, it is to my glory that Your Majesty
has placed me in such high esteem that I am a worthy reward for
all the services and honors which valiant Tirant has done for
Your Majesty and for everyone in the empire.  Even though I am
not worthy to remove his shoe, when one thinks of all the unique
qualities and virtues he possesses, I hope he will accept me as
his servant and his captive, for I am ready to do whatever Your
Majesty or he commands me."

The emperor sent for the archbishop of the city to betroth them
immediately.  And this gracious union was a matter of no slight
happiness, for during a long while Tirant and the princess could
not speak, so inflamed with true love were they.  As soon as the
archbishop arrived, the emperor ordered him to betroth his
daughter and Tirant, and he did so.

When the betrothal was completed, there was much celebrating and
great happiness throughout the city.  A marvelous feast was
prepared as suited such a betrothal, and music was performed by
many groups from the towers and through windows of the great
halls.  The foreigners and everyone in general took great
pleasure in this betrothal, for they had faith that the bold
spirit of Tirant would allow them to live in peace.  And the
celebrations, both in the palace and in the city, lasted a week.

The emperor sent a proclamation throughout the city, with many
trumpets and drums, that they should all consider Tirant his
successor and the Caesar of the empire.  And he made them swear
that after his death they would hold him as their emperor and
lord.  And from that time forward the new Prince Tirant was named
Caesar of the Greek Empire.

 CHAPTER XIV

DEATH

 Tirant decided to leave as soon as he could in order to recover
all of the Greek Empire, and put it in the emperor's power.  At
the same time it hurt him to think of being away from the
princess, for life without her was impossible.  He was tired of
war now, and he wanted peace and tranquility.  When he received
news that the magnanimous King Escariano was coming with many
men, and that he was in Pinxenais which borders on Greece, and is
ten days journey from Constantinople, he decided to go out to
meet him.

After he had taken his leave of the emperor, the empress, and of
his princess and wife, he left the city of Constantinople, and
went to his camp with grandees and other nobles.  When the Caesar
reached his camp he had the trumpets blow for the camp to be
raised.  Everyone got ready, and the following morning they left
the bridge and went toward the place where King Escariano was.

As the powerful army was going along, many castles and villas
delivered themselves over to the Caesar (We omit their names to
avoid being prolix.).  Finally they reached the city of Strenes
where King Escariano's army was resting.

When King Escariano knew that his dear friend and brother at arms
was coming, he rode out with his grandees and met him on the
road.  They dismounted quickly, embraced and kissed very warmly.
Tirant told King Escariano that the King of Sicily and the King
of Fez were with him.  King Escariano went to the other kings,
and embraced and kissed them very courteously.  Then they mounted
their horses again and went toward the city.  When they reached
King Escariano's tents, Prince Tirant and the kings dismounted in
front of the tent of the illustrious Queen of Ethiopia who
welcomed them, and embraced and kissed them all.

They decided to send the beautiful queen to the city of
Constantinople, and five hundred soldiers made ready to go,
accompanied by many nobles and knights.  The illustrious queen
took leave of her lord, King Escariano, Tirant, and the other
kings and lords who escorted her for a league.  Then Tirant and
the others bade the queen farewell, and she continued on to
Constantinople while Tirant and the others returned to the city.

Tirant and King Escariano immediately commanded their camps to be
raised and each of them put their men in order.  They left the
city and went toward the province of Thrace.  They reached a city
called Stagira, which is surrounded by walls adorned with
beautiful towers.  The city immediately opened all the gates to
them.  After all the renegade Greeks had been made good
Christians again, they swore fidelity to the emperor.  And all
the Moors who did not want to be baptized were thrown out of the
city.  It was in this same city that the great philosopher
Aristotle had been born, and he was considered a saint.

While Prince Tirant had his tents set up in this city and was
resting, he sent two Moorish ambassadors through the outlying
territories, and to all the cities, castles and villas of the
neighboring provinces.  They delivered up their keys and rendered
homage to Prince Tirant, and he replaced the captain of every
city, villa and castle.

They then left the city of Stagira and headed for Macedonia,
stopping at a city called Olympus.  This city takes its name from
a nearby mountain, one of the highest in the world.  Here they
were better received than in any of the places they had been,
because they knew that the Caesar was the cousin of Diafebus,
their duke and lord.

The prince left the duchy of Macedonia, and they went to the city
of Trebizond which delivered itself over immediately.  They
brought all the knights who were held prisoner here, and with
them was Captain Diafebus, Duke of Macedonia.  Prince Tirant
asked for the Duke of Macedonia, and he was brought to him.  But
he was so changed that Tirant would never have recognized him:
His beard had grown down to his waist, and the hair on his head
reached past his shoulders; he was thin and discolored, and his
appearance was very different; he wore a yellow cloak, with a
blue turban around his head.  All the other knights were dressed
the same way.  When the Duke of Macedonia was before the Caesar,
he threw himself at his feet, wanting to kiss them.  The Caesar
lifted him up, and with tears running from his eyes, he kissed
him on the mouth.

Soon the Marquis of Saint George presented himself before Tirant,
and kneeling, he thanked him for freeing them.  Prince Tirant,
with great affection, lifted him from the ground and kissed him
on the mouth.  After the marquis, came the Duke of Pera, his
brother, and the prior of Saint John, and all the other knights.
The Caesar received them with great love, and honored them as
they deserved.

After the illustrious Queen of Ethiopia left the city of Strenes,
she journeyed quickly to the renowned city of Constantinople.
When the queen stood before the princess, she began to kneel, but
the princess caught her by the arm, raised her up, and kissed her
warmly three times.  Then she took her hand and made her sit at
her side.

The princess was astonished at the queen's great beauty.  At the
same time the Queen of Ethiopia was startled by the beauty of the
princess.  Everyone in the court was impressed by the queen's
beauty, and they whispered about Tirant's great virtue in turning
down such a beautiful lady, for they were sure that she had asked
him to be her husband and lord of the kingdom of Tunis and of all
Barbary, and he had left it all for love of the princess.

After the Caesar had held celebrations for the Duke of Macedonia
and his companions, he gave them their leave.  They left the city
of Trebizond and went to the illustrious city of Constantinople.
There they were welcomed with honor by His Majesty the emperor,
by the empress and all the ladies.  And the Duke of Macedonia was
especially welcomed by the duchess, his wife, who loved him more
than her life.  With the arrival of the prisoners, great
celebrations were held in the court.

After the Duke of Macedonia had left the city of Trebizond with
all his companions, Tirant quickly had all the others break camp,
and he had King Escariano and all his men, and each captain with
his squadron, depart.  So one squadron left after another, in an
orderly fashion, and they went to the land of Bendin, six days
journey away, and when the Caesar arrived there with his entire
army, they surrendered to him by order of the sultan and the
Turk.

When the captains had been placed in the city and in the
fortress, they advanced and recovered the entire province of
Blagay and all the land of Brina and all the land of Foxa and all
the land of Bocina, for each of these is a large province with
many cities, castles and villas, and they all surrendered
willingly to the Caesar.  They were accustomed to being subject
to the Greek Empire, and they wanted to be so again because of
the bad treatment they had received from the Moors.

The Caesar left these provinces and recovered many other cities.
From here he went to the Kingdom of Persia, and he took it by
force of arms, for it did not belong to the sultan or the Turk
and it had its own king.  The virtuous Prince Tirant conquered
many other provinces and lands, and joined them under the
dominion and power of the empire with such great triumph and
victory that it would be tiring to tell it all.  He recovered all
of Greece, Asia Minor, all of Persia, all Selonich (which is
Galipoli), Morea, Arca, the Cape of Arca, Valona.  And by sea he
sent the fleet he had in Constantinople to take the islands, with
his admiral, the Marquis of Lizana, as its captain.  And he took
all the islands which had belonged to the empire: Calistres,
Colcos, Oritige, Tesbrie, Nimocha, Flaxen, Meclotapace, and many
other islands the book does not mention to avoid prolixity.

After the admiral had conquered all the islands that once formed
part of the empire, he had his entire fleet return to
Constantinople, and they entered the city firing their bombards
and shouting their greetings to the illustrious city.  The
townspeople ran to the sea wall to greet the fleet with joy.  The
admiral disembarked, accompanied by many well dressed knights and
noblemen, and they went to bow to His Majesty the emperor who
received them very cordially, and they all kissed his foot and
his hand.

Wanting to reward many nobles and knights who had been released
from their imprisonment, he gave them over in matrimony to
maidens of high station, all of them servants of the empress and
the princess, and he also gave them large estates so they could
live out their lives honorably.  When the engagements had been
made, their weddings were postponed until the day Prince Tirant
would be wed to the princess.

But Fortune would not permit a mortal body to have so much
delight and glory in this world.  For God did not create human
nature to reach bliss and glory in this world, but instead to
enjoy the glory of paradise.  No one ponders this: everyday
virtuous men perform illustrious acts worthy of immortal memory,
as did this magnanimous and virtuous prince and valiant knight,
Tirant lo Blanc.  For with his great skill at arms and high
degree of intelligence, he conquered so many kingdoms and brought
uncountable numbers of people in Barbary and in Greece into the
Holy Catholic faith.  And yet, he was unable to see the finality
of all that he had so desired and labored for.

Among so many other sorrows, I find it impossible to free my
weary hands from setting down on white paper how fortune lets man
go unrewarded.  This, despite the fact the glorious actions of
Tirant bring me renewed anguish, for they did not bring him the
prize he so richly deserved.

So then, after the Caesar had defeated and recovered the entire
empire, and subjugated many other nearby provinces, he started
back in great triumph to the city of Constantinople.  In his
company went the magnanimous King of Fez and many other kings,
dukes, counts, and marquis, and innumerable knights (who came
with him to share in the enormous celebration that would take
place upon his return, and out of love for King Escariano, and to
celebrate Tirant's wedding), and no one would leave his side.
When the emperor received word that he was coming, he prepared an
enormous celebration.

When Tirant was one day's journey from Constantinople, in a city
called Andrinopol, he stopped because the emperor had sent word
to him not to come to the city until he should tell him.  While
the virtuous Caesar was enjoying himself in that city, finding
sport and pleasure, and strolling with King Escariano and the
King of Sicily at a river's edge which ran alongside the walls of
the city, he felt such a great and powerful pain in his side that
they had to take him in their arms and carry him back into the
city.

When Tirant was in his bed the six doctors who accompanied him
came to him--the best in the world--and four of King Escariano's.
They gave him many kinds of medicine, but these brought no
relief to his pain.  Then Tirant realized he was dying, and he
asked for confession.  They had the confessor who accompanied him
come quickly.  He was a good priest of the Order of Saint
Francis, a teacher of holy theology, and a man of great
knowledge.  While the Caesar was making confession the King of
Fez sent an urgent message to the emperor, giving His Majesty to
know that the Caesar was very ill, and that his doctors could not
help him.  He begged his grace to send his own doctors very
quickly, as he had great doubts that they would arrive in time.

After the Caesar had confessed, he had the precious body of Jesus
Christ brought to him.  He looked at it with great devotion, and
with tears in his eyes he prayed:

"Almighty Lord, humble, sweet and benign!  How can I thank You
for all the love You have shown to me, a weak creature?  I give
You infinite thanks, Lord, for all Your gifts.  And I humbly
beseech You, Lord, since You have saved me so many times from
danger (and You are now giving me death, which I accept most
obediently, since it is Your holy will, in remission and penance
for my weaknesses), that You will grant me, Lord, forgiveness of
my sins in order to have Your absolution and mercy."

After he had said these words, he received the holy body of Jesus
Christ.  And the people in the room with him whispered that he
did not seem to be a knight, but rather a holy man.  When he had
given restitution to his soul, he had his secretary come, and he
gave his last will and testament in the presence of all those who
were with him.

"I, Tirant lo Blanc, of the lineage of Rocasalada and the House
of Brittany, knight of the Garter, and Prince and Caesar of the
Greek Empire, with an illness from which I fear I will die, but
with full knowledge, and firm and manifest word: with my lords
and brothers at arms present, King Escariano, the King of Sicily,
and my cousin-german, the King of Fez, and many other kings,
dukes, counts and marquis, in the name of my Lord Jesus Christ, I
do make and leave the following final will and testament.

"I name as executors of this testament the virtuous and most
excellent Carmesina, Princess of the Greek Empire and my wife,
and my dear cousin-german Diafebus, the Duke of Macedonia.

"I wish that one hundred thousand ducats be taken from my estate,
and be distributed according to the wishes of my executors.
Moreover, I encharge the said executors to take my body to
Brittany, to the Church of Our Lady, where lie all those of my
lineage of Rocasalada.

"I also desire and command that from my estate one hundred
thousand ducats be given to each of the men of my lineage who are
here.  And of all my other property and rights which I have
gained with Divine help, and which have been given to me by His
Majesty, the emperor, I make as my beneficiary my servant and
nephew Hippolytus of Rocasalada.  It is my wish that he take my
place, and be my successor."

After Tirant had made his testament, he told the secretary to
write a note to the princess with these words:

"Since death is so near to me, I want to write to you, dear lady,
my last, sad farewell.

"Fortune has not allowed me to have you--the prize for my deeds.
And death would not be so painful to me if I could have ended my
life in your arms.

"But I beg Your Highness to go on living, so that you will keep
the great love that I have had for you.

"And since fortune has not allowed me to speak to you or to see
you--for I believe you would have cured me and saved my life--I
have decided to write you this letter, because death will not
grant me more time, so that at least you will be certain of my
great love.  I cannot tell you more, for the great pain I am
suffering will not allow it.  I only beg of you to take in your
charge my relatives and servants.

"Your Tirant, who kisses your feet and hands, commends to you his
soul."

After Prince Tirant had made his testament, he begged King
Escariano, the King of Sicily and the King of Fez to carry him to
Constantinople before his life ended.  For the greatest pain he
felt was that he might die without seeing the princess.  And he
was of the belief that if he saw her she would give him health
and life.

The doctors gave their approval because, since they considered
him as good as dead, they thought that with the great consolation
he would feel if he saw the princess, whom he loved deeply,
nature could have a more beneficial effect than all the medicines
in the world.  They quickly put him on a litter, and he was
carried on men's shoulders very comfortably.  He was accompanied
by all the kings and grandees, with only five hundred soldiers.
All the others remained in the city.

When the emperor received the King of Fez's letter, he fell into
deep anguish and concern.  As secretly as he could he sent for
his doctors and the Duke of Macedonia and Hippolytus.  He showed
them the King of Fez's letter, and begged them to ride there
quickly.  The Duke of Macedonia and Hippolytus left the imperial
palace without a word to anyone, and went off with the doctors,
for the emperor feared that if the princess heard of it she would
faint and it could be very dangerous for her.

When the Duke of Macedonia and Hippolytus, along with the
doctors, were half a day's journey from Constantinople, they met
Tirant on the road.  They dismounted, and the litter was laid on
the ground.  The Duke of Macedonia went up to Tirant and said:

"Cousin, my lord, how is your lordship?"

Tirant answered:

"Cousin, I am most pleased that I have seen you before I died,
for my life is ending.  I beg you to kiss me, you and Hippolytus,
for this will be the last farewell I shall have from you."

The duke and Hippolytus kissed him, crying openly.  Then Tirant
told them that he commended his soul to them, and that he wished
them to hold more love for the princess, his wife, than they did
for himself.  The duke answered:

"My lord and cousin, is a knight as valiant as your lordship
growing weak hearted?  Have faith in Our Lord, that He, in His
mercy, will help you and bring you back to health."

As he was saying these words, Tirant cried out, loudly:

"Jesus, Son of David, have pity on me!  Virgin Mary, guardian
angel, angel Michael, defend me!  Jesus, into Your hands, Lord, I
commend my spirit."

And with these words, he delivered up his noble soul, while his
beautiful body lay in the arms of the Duke of Macedonia.  The
tears and wailing were so great from all who were there, that it
was a pity to hear them.  For Prince Tirant was loved by all.

After they had cried for some time, King Escariano called the
King of Sicily, the King of Fez, the Duke of Macedonia,
Hippolytus, and some of the others, and they held counsel about
what they had to do.  They all agreed that King Escariano, along
with the others in his company, should accompany Tirant's body to
the city, but that they should not go in, for as King Escariano
had not yet seen the emperor, it was not the time or place for
them to meet.  In addition, they decided to embalm Tirant's body,
for they had to take it to Brittany.

They departed with Tirant's body from the place where he had
died, and made their way toward the city of Constantinople.  By
the time they arrived it was well into the night.  They gathered
at the city gate, and King Escariano took his leave of the King
of Sicily, the King of Fez, the Duke of Macedonia and Hippolytus,
and he returned with his men to the city he had come from,
lamenting loudly, for King Escariano loved Tirant deeply.  The
others placed Tirant's body in a house within the city, where it
was embalmed by the doctors.

After they had embalmed it, they dressed it and took it to the
main church of the city: Saint Sofia.  There a very large and
tall cenotaph was prepared for him, covered entirely with
brocade, and on the cenotaph was a large bed.  There they placed
Tirant's body, stretched out on the bed, with his sword at his
side.

When the emperor learned that Tirant was dead, he rent his royal
garments.  Coming down from his imperial seat and lamenting over
Tirant's death, he said:

"Today is the day when our scepter is lost, and I see the crown
taken from my head and dashed to the ground.  Let everyone dress
in deep black mourning, let all the bells ring at once, and let
everyone wail over this loss, which is so terrible that my voice
is scarcely able to speak of it."

The emperor spent the greater part of the night lamenting, and
when day came he went to the church to pay him honor, and to make
a large tomb for him with the funeral rites that are normally
given to great lords.  When the princess saw everyone crying she
was very surprised.  She wondered what the people in the palace
and her maidens were crying about.  She thought her father, the
emperor, might have died, and she got up quickly, dressed in her
chemise, and looked out the window.  She saw the Duke of
Macedonia, crying and tearing at his hair, and Hippolytus and
many others clawing at their faces, and hitting their heads
against the walls.

"By the one God," said the princess, "I beg you to tell me the
truth.  What is the cause of all this uproar and sadness?"

The Widow of Montsant said:

"My lady, it is inevitable that you will hear of it at any
moment.  Tirant has passed from this life to the other.  At
midnight they took him to the church to give him a holy funeral
as he deserves.  The emperor is there, crying and bemoaning his
death, and is inconsolable."

The princess was left numb: She did not cry, she could not speak.
She could only moan softly and sigh, and after a moment she said:

"Give me the clothes my father had made for my wedding."

They were quickly brought.  When she had them on, the Widow of
Montsant said:

"But my lady!  At the death of such an admirable knight who died
in the service of His Majesty, the emperor, and of yours, are you
going to dress that way, as if you were going to your wedding?
Everyone else is dressed in mourning and sadness, because they
cannot stop crying, and Your Highness, who should be the saddest
and for whom it should mean the most, has dressed yourself in an
unheard-of way."

"Don't worry yourself, Widow," said the princess.  "You will know
the meaning of this when it is time."

When she had dressed, the sad lady of the imperial palace came
down with all the ladies and maidens, and with steps hastened by
the anguish she felt, she went to the church where Tirant's body
lay.  She stepped to the top of the great cenotaph, and when she
saw Tirant's body she felt her heart would break, and yet passion
lifted her spirit and she went over to his bed with warm tears
flowing from her eyes, and threw herself upon Tirant's body.  The
suffering woman kissed his cold body.  Everyone who heard her
weep shed great tears of grief.  Then she said:

"I want to go looking for the soul of the one who was my Tirant
in the blessed places where it rests.  And I do so want to keep
you company in death since in life, where I loved you so much, I
have not been able to serve you.  Oh, you ladies and maidens, do
not cry!  Save your tears for a more opportune time.  It's enough
for me to cry and lament, since these are my sorrows."

When she had said these words, she fell upon the body in a faint.
She was quickly lifted away from the body, and the doctors helped
her regain consciousness.  When she had recovered her senses, the
lady again threw herself upon the body, kissing Tirant's cold
mouth.  She tore at her hair and clothing, along with the skin of
her breasts and her face, this sad lady, more grievous than any
other.  Stretched out on his body, she kissed his cold mouth,
mixing her warm tears with Tirant's cold ones.  She wanted to
talk, but could not, and she knew no words sad enough to express
her grief.  With trembling hands she opened Tirant's eyes which
she kissed first with her mouth, and then filled with all the
tears flowing from her own eyes.  And it seemed as though Tirant,
while dead, was crying for the grief of the living Carmesina.
And she was crying blood, for she had exhausted all her tears.
So she cried over his body-- she who had lost everything to him
who lost his life for her-- and with words that would be enough
to break precious stones, diamonds and steel itself, she cried
grievously:

"Don't think, my soul, that I will keep you from Tirant for long.
I will give burial to your body and to mine.  The dead bodies
will be embraced in one grave, and together we will share the
same glory in heaven."

The emperor, distressed by his daughter's words, said:

"My daughter's sorrow and tears will never end.  My good knights,
pick her up, and take her to my palace, and leave her in her
chambers, either with her consent or by force."

And so it was done.  Her father, desperate, went with her,
saying:

"My daughter, you are the lady of all I possess.  Do not go to
such an extreme, for your grief is death to me.  Stop your crying
and put on a happy face for the people to see."

The princess answered:

"Oh emperor, my lord, life-giver of this miserable daughter!
Your Majesty truly wants to console my grief!  Oh, poor me, I
cannot hold back my tears!"

When the poor father saw his daughter and the other women crying,
he could not bear to remain in her chambers, and with his
terrible anguish he left.  Then the princess sat on the bed and
said:

"Come, my faithful maidens, and help me undress, for there will
be time enough to cry."

And she prepared her body in the most comely way she could, and
said:

"I am the infanta who hoped to rule over the entire empire of
Greece.  It is my duty to move everyone here to grief and
compassion for the death of the virtuous and blessed knight,
Tirant lo Blanc.  Oh, my Tirant, out of grief for your death let
our right hands wound our breasts and tear at our faces so that
our misery will be so much greater, for you were our shield and
the shield of the whole empire.  Oh sword of virtue, great was
the sorrow that was prepared for us!  And don't think, Tirant,
that I have wiped you from my memory: As long as I am alive I
will weep for your death.  Now, my dear maidens, help me to cry
this short time that is left of my life, for I cannot remain
with you long."

The crying and wailing was so great that it made the entire city
resound.  When they saw the princess nearly more dead than alive,
they cursed fortune which had brought them such anguish.  The
doctors came and said she had all the signs of a dying woman: She
felt such grief for Tirant's death that blood was coming from her
mouth.

The grieving empress came into the chamber, knowing that her
daughter was not well.  When she saw her in that state she
suffered such a shock that she could not speak.  When she had
recovered, she said:

"Oh, my daughter!  Is this the joy and happiness I hoped to have
from you?  Is this the wedding your father and I and all the
people hoped to be consoled by?  Everywhere I turn I see nothing
but grief and sorrow!

I see the poor emperor, lying on the floor; I see the ladies and
maidens, their hair unkempt, their skin covered with blood, their
breasts uncovered and scratched, crying throughout the palace,
revealing their grief to everyone.  I see the knights and
grandees, all in mourning, all lamenting, twisting their hands,
tearing the hair from their head.  What a bitter day, so filled
with sadness!  I see all the orders of friars coming with pain in
their voices, and not one of them can sing.  Tell me, what kind
of celebration is this for everyone to run from it?  Scarcely
anyone can talk without a grieving face.  Oh, sad is the mother
who bears such a daughter!  I beg you, my daughter, be happy and
put an end to all this sadness.  This way you will give
consolation to your old and grieving father, and your sad,
unfortunate mother who has raised you so delicately."

And she could say no more, such was the grief that held her.

"How can Your Excellency tell me, my lady, to find consolation
and rejoice if I have lost such a knight who was my husband and
lord, and had no equal in the world?  Have my protector, my
father and lord, come so that he can see my death and my end, and
so that part of his daughter will be left for him."

When the sad father was there, she begged him kindly to sit at
one side and the empress at the other.  With her between them,
she said these words:

"I beg you all to have my father confessor come quickly."

When he was there the princess told him:

"Father, I wish to make a general confession in the presence of
all who are here."

  Then the confessor had her make a general confession, and
afterward he absolved her of all punishment and guilt.  When
absolution had been granted the princess asked that the precious
body of Jesus Christ be brought to her, and with great devotion
and contrition she received it.  And all those in the chamber
were astonished at the great constancy and firmness of spirit the
princess had, and at the many prayers she said before the Corpus.
There was no heart of steel in the world who, hearing her words,
would not burst into tears.

When the princess had given restitution to her soul she had the
emperor's secretary come, and turning to her father, she said:

"Father and lord, if it please Your Majesty, I would like to
dispose of my possessions and my soul."

The emperor answered:

"My daughter, I give you my leave to do whatever pleases you.
For if I lose you I lose my life and all good things on this
earth."

The princess thanked him, and turning to the secretary, she
dictated her will:

"I make, as executors of my will, Diafebus, Duke of Macedonia and
Stephanie, his wife.  And I beg and command them to place my body
together with Tirant's in the place he will be buried.  For, as
we were not able to remain together in life, at least in death
our bodies will be united until the end of the world.

"In addition, all my clothing and jewelry shall be sold, and the
proceeds will be given to my maidens for their weddings.  As for
all the other rights I have in the Greek Empire, I make the
empress, my mother, the successor in my place."

When the princess had put her possessions and her soul in order,
she said farewell to her father, the emperor, kissing his hands
and his mouth again and again, and she did the same to her
mother, the empress, asking their forgiveness and their blessing
with great humility.

"Oh unfortunate and miserable me!" said the princess.  "I see the
emperor more dead than alive because of me.  On the one hand the
death of Tirant pulls me, and on the other my father's death
pulls me: Each of them is winning me over."

Her miserable father, his face wet with tears, saw that his
daughter was ready to die and could barely speak.  He heard her
say such painful words, and saw all the wailing that was going on
in the chamber and throughout the palace.  He felt greatly
disturbed and was beside himself.  He tried to get up from the
bed to go out, but he fell to the ground, senseless.  They picked
him up, unconscious, and put him on a bed in another chamber, and
there he ended his days before his daughter, the princess.

Because of the emperor's death there was loud wailing, and the
news reached the empress and the princess.  The empress ran as
quickly as she could, but the emperor had already passed from
this life.  Imagine how the poor lady must have felt: to see her
husband, her daughter, and her son-in-law all dead!  And don't
ask me what grief there was in the palace.  So much
tribulation--all in one day!

The princess said:

"Help me sit down on my bed, and you will hear my words.  You all
know that with the death of the emperor, my father, I am the
successor to the Greek Empire.  And so my knights, I command you,
by the allegiance you owe to His Majesty, the emperor, and now to
me, to bring my father's and Tirant's body here to me."

And they had to do it.  The emperor was put on the right, and
Tirant on the left, while she was in between them.  She kissed
her father many times, and Tirant many times more, and she cried
in a miserable voice:

"Look, knights, you who suffer from love.  Take note of me and
see if I am not fortunate!  On one side I have an emperor, and on
the other the best knight in the world.  Look and see if I should
not go into the next world happy, for I will have such good
company.  Come to me, my loyal sisters and companions, and kiss
me, one by one.  Then you will feel a part of my misery."

And they did.  First came the Queen of Ethiopia, then the Queen
of Fez, then the Duchess of Macedonia, and then all her other
maidens and her mother's maidens.  They kissed her hand and her
mouth, and they sadly bade the princess farewell, shedding many
tears.  She had them bring her the cross, and looking at it
steadfastly, she said these words with great devotion:

"Receive the soul of Your servant, oh Lord, and free me from
infernal bonds and pains.  May I feel, oh Lord, the blessed rest
of heaven and of eternal light, and may I deserve to have, among
Your chosen saints, everlasting life and glory.  Oh God, full of
pure love and goodness.  You Who know only how to forgive.  Grant
me, oh Lord, that my soul, drawn apart and stripped of earthly
vices, may be placed in the company of those redeemed by You.  I
give myself to God Who created me."

Saying these words, the princess gave up her spirit to her
creator.

 CHAPTER XV

AFTERMATH

 The destruction of the very last of the lineage of the royal
house of Greece was complete.  After going through so much past
misery with all its trials and hardships, they would have
obtained a happy peace--if fortune had allowed it.  And so, no
one should depend on worldly prosperity, for it fails when it is
most unexpected.

When the princess had passed on from this life, the wailing and
crying in the palace was so loud that it echoed throughout the
entire city.  And the heartache felt for Tirant and the emperor
was renewed and redoubled.  The poor empress fell into such a
deep faint that the doctors could not revive her, and Hippolytus
beat his head and face, believing that she was dead.  Finally,
with all the remedies they tried, after more than an hour, she
seemed to awaken slightly.  Hippolytus remained steadfast at her
side in great anguish, rubbing her wrists and wetting her face
with rose water.  When she regained consciousness, they picked
her up in their arms and carried her to her chamber, putting her
on a bed.

Hippolytus was always at her side, comforting her, and kissing
her often to bring to mind the love they had continually had for
each other.  The empress loved him more than her daughter and
herself because of the great kindness and genteelness she had
found in Hippolytus who had always obeyed her every wish.  And
don't think that at that moment Hippolytus was feeling great
pain, for as soon as Tirant was dead he realized that he would be
emperor, especially after the death of the emperor and his
daughter, for he had great confidence in the love the empress had
for him.  Putting aside all shame, she would take him as her
husband.

After the empress had spoken a short while with Hippolytus, and
their pain had been somewhat alleviated with kisses, she said to
him:

"My son and my lord, I beg you, as lord here, to order funerals
held for the emperor, my daughter, and Tirant, so that afterward
your desire and mine can be carried out."

When Hippolytus heard such loving words he kissed her hand and
her mouth, and said he would do everything Her Majesty commanded.
Hippolytus went to the princess's chamber where the three bodies
were lying, and on behalf of the empress he ordered them to take
Tirant to his cenotaph in the church immediately.  And it was
quickly done.

Then he ordered the surgeons to embalm the bodies of the emperor
and the princess.  Hippolytus had another cenotaph put up in the
Church of Saint Sofia, much more beautiful and higher than
Tirant's, and he had the emperor's body brought to the cenotaph.
He had the princess put in Tirant's bed, on his right hand side.

He ordered a proclamation read throughout the city that all those
who wished to dress in mourning should go to a certain house in
the city, and there mourning cloth would be given to men as well
as to women.  In the space of one day everyone in the palace and
the city, and all the foreigners were dressed in mourning.  In
addition, Hippolytus decreed that all the clergy--friars,
chaplains and nuns--within two days journey from Constantinople
should come to participate in the funerals of the dead, and one
thousand two hundred were counted.

They decided that the burial should take place two weeks after
the emperor's death, and all the barons of Greece were summoned,
so that they could be present for the emperor's funeral rites.
Then he sent a message to King Escariano on behalf of himself and
the empress, inviting him to come and honor the burial of the
emperor and his daughter, and his dear friend and brother Tirant.
For, since he had not been able to honor their wedding he would
be able to honor his burial.  King Escariano sent word to him
that he would do so, but that he had hoped to enter
Constantinople with happier news.  And he left for Constantinople
with one hundred knights.

While the people were arriving, Hippolytus had the King of
Sicily, the King of Fez, the Duke of Macedonia, the Marquis of
Lizana, and the Viscount of Branches and some others gather in a
chamber.  Then he said to them:

"My lords and brothers, your lordships are not unaware of the
great danger that has befallen us with the death of our father
and lord, Tirant.  He expected to be emperor, and he would have
ennobled and enriched all those of our lineage.  Now that there
is no hope of that, we must take counsel about what should be
done.  Your lordships realize that the entire empire is in the
empress's power.  Although she is advanced in years, some great
lord will be very pleased to marry her, and he will find it very
agreeable to be emperor.  After her death, he will be the ruler,
and he may treat foreigners (which is what we are) badly.  I am
of the opinion that we should make one of us emperor, and all of
us should help him; and the one who is elected will enrich the
others very well.  Now, I beg you, let each of you give your
opinion."

Then the King of Sicily said he felt it was a good idea that one
of them should be made emperor, and that they should select
whoever was willing.  The King of Fez spoke, because he was the
eldest of their line, and he said:

"My lords and brothers, it seems to me good advice that one of us
should be chosen emperor.  But it is my opinion that we should
follow the dictates of Tirant's will, then the princess's, and
with these two wills we shall see who among us is indicated."

Everyone agreed with what the King of Fez had said.  They sent
for the secretaries of Tirant and the emperor, and had the wills
read.  When they had read them, they made the secretaries leave
the room, and the Duke of Macedonia spoke:

"My lords and brothers, as I see it, our selection is very clear
and cannot be disputed.  I see that our good relative and lord
leaves as recipient of all the rights he has earned in the Greek
Empire, Hippolytus here.  Further, I see that the princess has
bestowed the entire empire on her mother.

So from what I see there is no other action we can take,
considering the friendship we all know Hippolytus has with the
empress, than for him to take her as his wife.  In that way he
will become emperor, and he will keep each of us in our station,
for he is our relative."

Then the Marquis of Lizana spoke:

"Lords, I find the Duke of Macedonia's advice to be good, and
praise it, for we all have wives, and furthermore it is Tirant's
command."

All the rest praised him and agreed that Hippolytus should be
chosen emperor and husband of the empress.  When Hippolytus saw
the gentility of his relatives, he praised them, and gave them
many thanks for their great love.  And he made a vow before God
and Our Lady that if God granted that he become emperor, he would
repay them in such a way that they would all be very happy.  And
they decided that after the funeral rites were held for the dead,
they would raise him to the status of emperor, and would hold the
wedding for him and the empress.

Tirant's relatives agreed, and the following night King Escariano
entered Constantinople, dressed in mourning, with all his men.
He was received with great honor by Hippolytus, and by his wife,
the queen, who was very happy to see him.  Hippolytus placed him
in the emperor's palace, in a beautiful apartment.  The King of
Sicily, the King of Fez, the Duke of Macedonia, and many other
knights came to see him, and a great celebration was held.

After this, King Escariano took his leave of them, and taking the
queen, his wife, by the hand, he went with Hippolytus to pay
honor to the empress.  When they were in her chamber, King
Escariano bowed before the empress, and she warmly embraced him.
She took him by the hand, and had him sit at her side.  Then King
Escariano said:

"I left my land in order to help Tirant lo Blanc recover the
empire, and the queen, my wife, came only to attend the wedding
of my brother Tirant and the virtuous princess.  Their deaths
have made me both sad and angry.  Now that they are gone, I am
ready to serve you for the rest of my life."

The empress hesitated, and then said softly:

"It is great glory for me that so magnanimous a king should say
such words to me.  I thank you very much for coming, and even
more for helping us put an end to this conquest.  But with it I
have lost three of the best people in the world, and because of
this the rest of my life will be filled with sadness."

The empress could speak no more, and tears sprang from her eyes.
King Escariano also began to cry.

That night Hippolytus went to sleep with the empress, and he told
her about his conversation with his relatives, and what they had
all decided:

"That I should take you as my wife.  My lady, I know that I am
not worthy of being your husband, or even your servant.  But I
trust in Your Highness' love and virtue, and I hope that you will
accept me as Your Majesty's captive.  And trust me, my lady, to
do well.  I will be so obedient to you that you can command me
more than ever before, for I never wanted anything but to serve
you."

The empress answered:

"Hippolytus, my son, you know how much I love you, and I will be
very pleased if you will take me as your wife.  But remember, my
son and lord, even though I'm old you will never find anyone who
loves you as much as I do."

Then Hippolytus knelt to kiss her hands and feet, but she lifted
him up and embraced him and kissed him.  And they spent that
delicious night with little thought about those who were lying on
the cenotaphs for burial.

In the morning, before Phoebus had spread its shiny rays over the
earth, the knight got up, full of new joy, for that night
Hippolytus had entertained his lady very well.  He arranged
everything that was necessary for the burial.

On the appointed day all the barons and knights who were invited
went to the city of Constantinople.  On the first day they buried
the emperor with the most beautiful sacramental lights ever given
to a prince.  To exalt the occasion there were many kings, dukes,
counts and marquis, and many noble knights.  All the people from
the city were there, lamenting over their good lord, and the
clergy performed the ceremony, singing so that all were weeping.
And on that day the emperor's body was solely buried.  The second
day was reserved for the princess's burial, and the third for
Tirant's.

There was so much wailing and lamenting during those three days
that no one felt like crying for the rest of the year.  When the
funeral rites for the emperor were over, the emperor's body was
placed in a beautiful tomb which the emperor had ordered made
some time before.  The bodies of Tirant and the princess were
placed in a wooden coffin, for they had to be taken to Brittany.

When this was done, the King of Sicily, the King of Fez, and the
Duke of Macedonia went to King Escariano and told him all about
the council they had held with Tirant's relatives, and how they
had decided to raise Hippolytus to the status of emperor.  King
Escariano said:

"I am very pleased by your decision.  I think Hippolytus is a
good and virtuous knight, and he deserves to be emperor."

Then they asked him to go with them and carry the news to the
empress, and he was glad to do so.  The three kings left with the
Duke of Macedonia, and it was the noblest embassy that had ever
been made to a man or a woman.  They entered the empress's
chamber, and she welcomed them with great honor.  She took the
hand of King Escariano and the King of Sicily, and they sat down
in the imperial throne room, with the empress between the two
kings.  They had agreed that King Escariano should explain their
mission, and he began:

"As we deeply appreciate the honor of your illustrious person, we
hope it will be agreeable to you to take a husband.  And we beg
Your Majesty not to be angry at what I am going to tell you.
Your Majesty knows what good condition the Greek Empire is in
because of that singular knight, Tirant.  You know the rights
that His Majesty, the emperor, granted to him, and you know that
he left those rights to his nephew, Hippolytus.  And so we beg
and advise Your Majesty to take Hippolytus as your husband and
lord.  He is such a virtuous knight that Your Majesty will be
greatly loved and revered by him, and he is such a knight that he
will be able to rule and defend the empire, which has been
reconquered through so much effort."

The empress then said very graciously:

"Great lords, I realize that you are my brothers, and I trust
that you would never advise me to do anything that would be
harmful to me or my honor.  So I freely place myself in your
lordships' hands to deal with me and my empire as though it were
your own."

They all bowed deeply to the empress and gave her many thanks.
And they left, very satisfied with the empress' reply.  The three
kings went with the Duke of Macedonia to Hippolytus' chamber, and
he received them very warmly.  They told him about the entire
conversation they had had with the empress, and how she had
agreed to do everything they wanted.

Hippolytus knelt, and thanked them, and he was very happy.  They
quickly took him to the empress's chamber, and then had the
bishop come from the city and marry them.  In attendance were the
Queen of Ethiopia, the Queen of Fez, the Duchess of Macedonia,
and all the ladies of the court.  They were all very pleased
because of all the hard times they had had, and which they were
afraid would continue.

The news that the empress had married Hippolytus ran through the
city, and everyone was glad.  They all gave thanks to God for
giving them such a good lord.  Everyone in the city liked
Hippolytus because in times of need he had been their captain,
and he had treated them very well.

Soon afterward the King of Sicily departed, and the emperor
entreated the King of Fez and the Viscount of Branches to carry
the bodies of Tirant and the princess to Brittany.  They said
they would do it very willingly out of love for His Majesty and
Tirant.  The emperor commanded the admiral to put forty galleys
in order so they would go in his honor.  And they were quickly
armed and put in order.

The emperor had ordered a very beautiful wooden coffin made, all
covered with gold, and decorated so that it looked like the
sepulcher of a great lord.  And he had the bodies of Tirant and
the princess placed inside, all dressed in brocade, with their
faces uncovered so that they seemed to be sleeping.

He had the coffin put on board a galley with all of Tirant's
weapons and flags on it so that they could be placed upon the
sepulcher where Tirant would lie, to serve as a perpetual
memorial.  And the emperor gave the King of Fez two hundred
thousand ducats so that the sepulcher of Tirant and the princess
could be made in Brittany in accord with their great merit.  When
everything was in order the King of Fez and the Queen set sail,
and they had such good weather that in a few short days they
reached Brittany very safely.

The King of Fez, the queen, and the Viscount of Branches, along
with many noblemen and knights, made port in a city called
Nantes, and here they were well received and entertained by the
Duke of Brittany, and the Duchess.  They took the coffin with
Tirant and the princess, and with a great procession of many
clerics, friars and monks they carried it to the high church of
the city, and it was placed in a tomb held up by four lions.
This tomb was worked in a very clear alabaster, and molded in
fine gold were these words:

 The knight who in arms was phoenix

 And the lady most beautiful of all,

 Lie dead in this tomb,

 While their living fame resounds throughout the world:

 Tirant lo Blanc and noble Carmesina.

And above the tomb these three verses were sculpted in gold:

 Cruel love that united them in life

 And has taken their life in great pain,

 After their death, encloses them in the sepulcher.

Words could not express the mourning that took place in Brittany.
There was great mourning over his death by the Duke of Brittany
and the Duchess and all Tirant's relatives when they learned of
the actions of everlasting renown he had performed and the great
prosperity he had achieved.  The King of Fez had large amounts of
money given in charity for the souls of Tirant and the princess.
He spent the two thousand ducats the emperor had given him very
well.  And he decided to return to his homeland, for he had
stayed in Brittany six months to carry out everything the emperor
had encharged to him.

The King and Queen of Fez took their leave of the duke and
duchess and all the relatives who were very sad to see them
leave.  And the Viscount of Branches also took his leave of
everyone.  They embarked on the galleys and set their course
toward the lands of the King of Fez.  Our Heavenly Father gave
them such good weather that in a few days they reached the port
of Tangier.  And the King of Fez and the Queen disembarked with
all their people.  The Viscount of Branches returned to
Constantinople with the forty galleys, and was well received by
the emperor who was greatly desirous of knowing what had happened
in Brittany.

The Viscount of Branches very discreetly told the emperor about
everything that had been done, just as it had been directed by
his majesty.  The emperor was highly pleased, and immediately
bought the county of Benaixi, which belonged to the princess, for
three hundred thousand ducats, and gave it to the Viscount of
Branches as a reward for his works, Then he gave a large
inheritance to all those who had married servants of the empress
and the princess so that they could live well and honorably,
each according to his station, and all were very happy.  Then he
arranged marriages for all his other knights.

Fortune favored Emperor Hippolytus so much, and he was such a
virtuous knight that he greatly increased the Empire of Greece,
and he added to it many provinces that he conquered, and due to
his great diligence he amassed a very large treasure.  He was
deeply loved and feared by his subjects and also by the
neighboring lords who lived near the empire.

A few days after he was made emperor he had the Moorish sultan
and the Grand Turk released from prison, along with all the other
kings and lords who had been imprisoned with them.  They made
peace and a truce for one hundred one years, and they were so
content that they said they would come to his aid against the
entire world.  Afterward the emperor had them go to Turkey aboard
two galleys.

This Emperor Hippolytus had a long life.  But after the death of
her daughter, the empress lived only three years.  After a short
time the emperor took another wife, who was the daughter of the
King of England.  This empress was extremely beautiful, humble,
and a very virtuous and devout Christian.  The genteel lady bore
Emperor Hippolytus three sons and two daughters, and the sons
were exceptional and valiant knights.  The eldest son was named
Hippolytus, like his father, and he lived his entire life a
magnanimous man and performed singular acts of chivalry which
this book does not relate, but defers to the books that were
written about him.  But the emperor, his father, left all his
relatives and servants well provided for before he died.

And when the emperor and the empress passed from this life they
were very old.  They both died on the same day, and were placed
in a very luxurious tomb which the emperor had ordered made.  And
you may be sure that because of their excellent rule and their
good and virtuous life they are in the glory of paradise.













 DEO GRATIAS



Here ends the book of the valiant and singular knight, Tirant lo
Blanc, Prince and Caesar of the Greek Empire of Constantinople,
which was translated from English into the Portuguese language,
and afterward into the Valencian tongue by the magnificent and
virtuous knight, Johanot Martorell who, because of his death, was
able to finish the translation of only the first three parts.
The fourth part, which is the end of the book, was translated at
the behest of the noble Isabel de Loris by the magnificent knight
Marti Johan d' Galba.  If any defect should be found he wishes it
to be attributed to his ignorance, and may Our Lord Jesus Christ,
in His great goodness, grant him the glory of paradise as a
reward for his works.  And he protests that if he has put some
things in this book that are not Catholic, he retracts them and
submits them to the correction of the Holy Catholic Church.

This work was printed in the city of Valencia, the 20th day of
the month of November in the year of the Birth of Our Lord Jesus
Christ 1490.












