CHAPTER VIII

THE BETROTHAL

 When the viscount was at the gates of the city, the guards would
not let him in until he said that the captain had fallen from his
horse and he was in a hurry to summon the doctors.  He couldn't
find them as quickly as he wanted because they were all with the
emperor and his daughter.  When they had taken care of the
emperor they took everything they needed for Tirant, and they did
not dare tell the emperor that his captain was injured.  But the
viscount did everything he could to see the princess, so that he
could tell Tirant how she was.

When she had regained consciousness, she opened her eyes and
said:

"Is the one who holds my soul captive dead?  Tell me quickly, I
beg you. Because if he's dead, I want to die with him "

The empress, who was upset by all the anguish she felt for her
daughter, could not understand her, and she asked what she had
said.  The duchess was holding her on her knees, and she answered
the empress:

"My lady, the princess is asking if the rat is dead."

The princess, her eyes closed, again said:

"I didn't say that.  I asked if the one who is my hope is dead."

The duchess answered in a loud voice:

"He's not dead: they never caught him."  And turning to the
empress, she said: "She's delirious.  This illness has the effect
of turning the wisest people into madmen who don't know what
they're saying."

Her delirium subsided, and two doctors went with the viscount and
the duke.  When the princess found out, she cried:

"Oh, my lord Tirant!  Father of chivalry!  Now the lineage of
Rocasalada has fallen, and the house of Brittany has lost so
much.  You are dead!  Dead!  For anyone who has fallen from as
great a height as you cannot hope to live long.  Why couldn't I
have suffered the harm, since I was the cause, and you would find
yourself free from these dangers?"

The duchess was very agitated, both because of the princess's
illness and Tirant's injury.  She did not want to say anything
more for fear of the maidens who were nearby.  The doctors left
quickly without saying anything to the emperor so that he would
not have a relapse, because his constitution was very delicate.

When the doctors reached Tirant they found him lying on a bed in
great pain.  They looked at his leg and found it completely
broken, the bones protruding from the flesh.  With their
ministrations Tirant fainted three times, and each time they had
to revive him.  The doctors treated him as best they could the
first time and said that under no circumstances should he be
moved from his bed, because his life was in danger.  Then they
went back to the palace.  The emperor asked them where they had
been, since he had not seen them at mealtime.  One of them
answered:

"My lord, your captain has been injured, and we went to Bellestar
to minister to him."

The emperor said;

"And how was he hurt?"

"My lord," said the doctor, "they say that early this morning he
left the city to go to where his horses are so that Monday
morning everyone would be ready to leave.  He was riding a
Sicilian horse and, galloping along the road, he fell in a trench
and hurt his leg."

"Holy Virgin Mary," said the emperor.  "Tirant has no lack of
troubles.  I want to go see him immediately."

When the doctors heard the emperor's decision--that he wanted to
leave--they detained him for a day so that he would have time to
recover.  The emperor saw that the doctors advised against it, so
he decided to stay.  He went to the princess's chambers to ask
about her illness and to explain what had happened to Tirant.
What grief the princess felt in her heart!  But she did not dare
show it for fear of her father, and her own pain seemed as
nothing when she thought of Tirant's suffering.

The emperor stayed with his daughter until dinnertime.  The
following day, seeing the doctors pass by from a window and
knowing that they were going to see Tirant, he called to them to
wait.  Then he mounted and went with them and saw their second
treatment.  From what he saw he understood at once that Tirant
would not be able to go to the encampment for a long time.  When
they had finished their treatment, the emperor said:

"I can't begin to tell you how much grief I feel.  As soon as I
heard about your injury I knew how great my misfortune was,
because I had placed all my hope in your leadership.  I had
envisioned the blood of those cruel enemies of mine and of the
holy Catholic faith being shed by the strength of your arm, and
the blow of your sword.  But now, when they hear that you are not
there, they will be afraid of no one and will overrun my entire
empire."

Tirant weakly said:

"My lord, you don't need my sword and my leadership.  In your
empire you have courageous knights who can take on the enemy
right now.  But it only seems right to me, since you are pressing
me so much, that I should go to the camp.  My lord, I will be
ready to go on the day we had set."

When the emperor heard him say that, he was very happy, and he
took his leave and returned to the city.  When the empress saw
him she said:

"My lord, tell us the truth about our captain.  How is he?  Is he
near death, or is there hope for him?"

In the presence of the princess and the maidens the emperor said
to the empress:

"My lady, I don't think he's in danger of dying, but there is no
doubt that he's in a bad way.  The bones in his leg are sticking
out through the skin, and it's a terrible sight to see.  But he
says he will be ready to leave Monday."

"Holy Mother of Jesus!" said the princess.  "What is Your Majesty
trying to do?  You want a man who is so badly hurt that he's at
death's door to go to the encampment and end his days while he's
on the road?  How could he help the soldiers?  Do you want to put
his life and the entire empire in danger too?  No, my lord;
that's no way to fight these battles.  It's better to have him
alive than dead, because with him living all your enemies will be
afraid, and once he's dead they won't be afraid of anything."

The emperor went into the council chamber where they were waiting
for him, and they all agreed from what he had seen of Tirant that
he should not be moved.

After the emperor had left Bellestar, where Tirant was, Tirant
immediately ordered a box made so that he could be carried in it.
When it was Sunday evening and the duke and all the others had
gone back to the city, and without anyone knowing of it except
Hippolytus, Tirant ordered the viscount and Lord Agramunt not to
disturb him until they were ready to depart.  They had not an
inkling that Tirant would commit such an act of folly as to
leave.

Tirant gave one doctor a large amount of money to go with him,
but the other doctor ordered him not to move and would not go
along.  Tirant had them put him in the box, and using shafts to
carry it on their shoulders, they left for the encampment.
Before he left he ordered them to tell everyone who came from the
city that since he had not been able to sleep at night he was
resting.  Some who came to see him went back, and others stayed,
waiting for him to awaken.  When it was noon the Duke of
Macedonia who was a close relative, as was the viscount, wanted
to go inside.

Saying that anyone who was wounded should not sleep so much, they
forced their way in and discovered that he was gone.  They
quickly mounted their horses and rode after him, and they sent
word to the emperor, telling how his captain had obeyed his
command, and cursing the emperor and all of his kind.  When the
emperor heard the news, he said:

"By the living God, he carries out his promises!"

When the duke and the viscount overtook him and learned that he
had passed out on the road five times, they reprimanded the
doctor and Hippolytus, and said they cared nothing for him.

"And you, Hippolytus," said the duke, "of our lineage of
Rocasalada and of the kindred of Brittany, to allow our master
and lord to leave!  The day his life ends we will all be lost and
no one will ever hear of us again.  You deserve the worst sort of
reprimand.  If I had no fear of God or felt no sense of worldly
shame, I'd do worse to you with this sword than Cain did to Abel:
You miserable knight!  Get away from me, or upon my word of honor
you'll get the punishment you deserve."

And turning to the doctor he gave vent to his anger.

"I lose all patience when I think of the outrageous act of this
doctor who put the light of Rocasalada in mortal danger."

And the duke rode furiously at the doctor, his sword raised,
while the doctor attempted to flee to save his miserable skin,
but it gained him nothing because when he reached him he brought
the sword down on his head so hard that it split in half, down to
his shoulders, and his brains flew out.

When the emperor received news of the death of such a singular
doctor he quickly rode to Tirant, and found him in a hermitage
where the duke had put him: there he was being given everything
he needed.  When the emperor saw Tirant's condition he took great
pity and had all his doctors come there to see how his leg was.
The doctors found it much worse and they told him that if he had
gone one league further, either he would have died or had to have
his leg cut off.

All the barons in the empire came to see him.  The emperor held
council there and they decided that since Tirant could not go,
all the men should leave the next day.  Tirant said:

"My lord, I think Your Majesty should give two months' wages to
all the men, and since they will only serve one and a half
months, everyone will be happy, and they'll put up a better
fight."

The emperor answered that he would do it immediately, and he
said:

"This evening I've received letters from the Marquis of Saint
George in our camp, telling me that great numbers of Moors have
come.  It says here that the King of Jerusalem, who is a cousin
of the Grand Caramany has come, and with him are his wife and
children and some sixty thousand soldiers from the land of
Enedast, a very fertile and abundant province.  As soon as a male
child is born there, he is raised with great care.  When he is
ten years old they teach him to ride and to fence.  Then they
teach him to fight, and throw a lance.  And last, they teach him
how to butcher, so that he will get used to cutting up meat and
will not be afraid of spilling blood.  This makes them cruel, and
when they are in battle and capture Christians, they quarter them
and haven't the slightest feeling of pity about flesh or blood.
The King of Lower India has come here, and they say he is the
brother of the prisoner from Upper India; he is a very rich man
and he's bringing forty-five thousand soldiers with him.  Another
king, called Menador, has come with thirty-seven thousand
soldiers.  The King of Damascus has come with fifty-five
thousand.  King Veruntament has come with forty-two thousand.
And many others have come with them."

Tirant replied:

"Let them come, my lord.  I have so much faith in the divine
mercy of Our Lord and in His most Holy Mother, Our lady, that,
even if there were twice as many as there are, with the help of
the singular knights Your Majesty has, we would be victorious
over them."

When they had finished their conversation, the emperor commended
Tirant to God, and ordered the doctors to leave him alone and to
allow him to depart.

The princess was very upset by Tirant's injury.  When it was
Monday, all the soldiers were ready to leave.  The Duke of Pera
and the Duke of Macedonia were in charge of leading all the men.
When they reached the camp of the Marquis of Saint George, the
others were very happy to see them.  Tirant stayed in the
hermitage, waiting for the doctors to give him permission to go
into the city.  Lord Agramunt who never wanted to leave him
alone, remained with him, for he said that he had left his
country only for love of him, and that he would not leave him
while he was injured.  Hippolytus stayed in his company, and went
to the city every day for whatever he needed, but especially to
bring news about the princess to Tirant.  And when they wanted to
make him eat or do other things the doctors prescribed, they
would say it was for the princess, and he would do it
immediately.

After this had happened to Tirant, the princess often reprimanded
Plaerdemavida for what she had done, and wanted to shut her up in
a dark room to have her do penance there; but she defended
herself with choice words, or with jokes, saying:

"What will your father say if he finds out?  Do you know what
I'll tell him?  That it was you who told me what to do, and that
Tirant has stolen your virginity.  Your father wants me to be
your stepmother, and I can assure you that when I am I'll punish
you.  When that valiant knight, Tirant, comes again, you won't
cry out the way you did the last time.  Instead you'll be quiet,
and you won't move."

The princess became very angry, and told her to shut her mouth.

"Since you're speaking to me so harshly, my lady, I want to leave
Your Highness' service, and I'm going to go back to my father,
the count."

She immediately left the chambers and gathered up all her
clothing and jewels.  Leaving the Widow of Montsant, who was in
the court, in charge, and without saying a word to anyone, she
mounted a horse and with five squires she rode to where Tirant
was.

When the princess discovered that Plaerdemavida had gone, she was
very upset and wanted her to return.  She sent men in all
directions to make her come back.

Plaerdemavida rode by back roads to the hermitage where Tirant
was, and when he saw her he forgot his pain.  When Plaerdemavida
went up to him and saw how much his appearance had changed, she
would not hold back her tears.  And with a weak voice she said:

"Oh, I am the most miserable person in the world!  I am so sorry
when I think of your injury, because I am to blame for all the
harm that has come to the best knight in the world.  I can only
ask you for mercy."

With a sigh Tirant said:

"Virtuous maiden, there is no reason at all for you to ask my
forgiveness: you're not to blame for anything, and even if you
were, I would pardon you not just once but a thousand times,
because I know how much affection you've always had for me.  I
won't say another word about this because I want to know what the
princess has been doing while I've been gone.

I'm sure Her Highness's love has grown weak, and she probably
doesn't want to see me again."

Plaerdemavida, with a smile, told him she was very happy to do
him such a service, and in a soft voice she said:

"After you left there was so much shouting and such a tumult in
the palace that the emperor got out of bed.  He went looking
through all the rooms furiously, with a sword in his hand, saying
whether it was a mouse or a man he would kill it without mercy.
The empress went back to her chambers to sleep.  The love-sick
Widow went to the princess with her own wickedness, because she
is related to the old witch who brings only harm to those who
love her.  With a false expression of compassion on her face she
told her: 'My lady, I saw Tirant lower himself by a rope, and
half-way down it broke; and he fell from such a height that he
was smashed to pieces.'  And she began to wail very loudly.
When the princess heard the news she could say only, 'Jesus,
Jesus, Jesus,' three times, and immediately her spirit left her.
I don't know where it went or on what business, because she was
senseless for three hours.  All the doctors came, but they
couldn't revive her, and at that moment the emperor thought he
was losing everything that nature and fortune had given him.  And
the tumult and cries in the palace were even greater than they
had been the first time."

Then she told him everything she and the princess had said to
each other.

"All her anger is feigned.  She can't make up her mind about how
to behave the first time she sees you: Whether or not to show
that she is bothered by your injury.  Because she says that if
she smiles at you, you'll want to come back every day, and if she
doesn't, you will be angry with her."

Tirant replied:

"What crime does Her Highness say that I've committed besides
loving her?  Her Majesty would do me a great favor if she would
just grant me a visit.  I believe that then most of her anger
would disappear."

Plaerdemavida answered:

"My lord, do me a favor.  Write her a letter, and I'll work with
her so that she'll give you an answer.  That way you'll be able
to know what she is thinking."

As they were talking, the men that the princess had sent in
search of Plaerdemavida entered the chamber.  When they saw her
they told her what the princess had ordered them to do.
Plaerdemavida answered:

"Tell my lady that she can't force me to serve her.  I want to go
to my parents' home."

"If I had found you someplace else," said the knight, "I would
have forced you to go back.  But I don't imagine the captain will
be happy if the princess's will isn't carried out, and as a
virtuous knight he will take care of the situation."

"Don't doubt for a minute," said Tirant, "that my lady will be
served in every way.  This maiden will quickly go with you."

Tirant had ink and paper brought, and with the great pain he felt
in his leg he could not write as well as he wanted to, but in
spite of his injury he wrote the following words of love:

"Who knows the great perfection that I see in Your Majesty, and
in no one else?  The fear I have of not having Your Highness'
love makes me feel twice as much pain, because if I lost Your
Majesty I would lose everything.  You must know that in you all
perfection is contained.  My petition is based on that moment
when you heard about my injury and said, 'Jesus, Jesus,
Jesus!'--which has moved me deeply."

When Plaerdemavida had left Tirant, and the princess knew that
she was coming, she ran to the landing of the stairs and said to
her:

"Oh, my beloved sister!  What made you so angry that you wanted
to leave me?"

"Why, my lady!" said Plaerdemavida: "Your Excellency swept me
from your mind and didn't want to see me again."

The princess took her by the hand, and led her to her
bedchambers.  She turned to the men who had brought her, and
thanked them.  When they were inside the chambers the princess
said:

"Don't you know, Plaerdemavida, that disagreements between
parents and their children often reach heights of anger, and that
the same thing happens between brothers or sisters?  Even if you
and I had words, that's no reason for you to be angry with me.
You know very well that I love you more than all the maidens in
the world, and you know all my secrets as you do my heart."

"Your Majesty spins very fine words," said Plaerdemavida, "but
your actions are bad.  You want to believe Widow Repose and all
her wickedness, and you won't listen to me or anyone else.  She
was the cause of all this trouble.  I remember that night when my
lord Tirant broke his leg and Your Highness fainted: there was
nothing but tears and anguish.  But the Widow was the only one
who was glad.  Your Excellency has many virtues, but you lack
patience."

"Let's stop talking about these things now," said the princess.
"Tell me about Tirant: How is he?  When can I see him?  The
happiness he brings me makes me think about him more than I would
like to."

"Since the time he left you, all the memories of Your Excellency
make him sigh and grieve.  You can be sure that no one deserves
you as much as Tirant does.  And he sends you this letter."

The princess took it very happily, and when she had read it she
decided to write an answer:

"I tried to beg you several times not to steal my chastity; and
if my words did not move you to pity, my tears should have.  But
you brought so much pain to your princess.  The sound of my last
words was carried to the ears of Widow Repose, and the empress
came.  I don't know how it was that I said, 'Jesus, Jesus,
Jesus,' and I threw myself in the duchess' lap because I hated
life..."

When she had finished her answer she gave it to Hippolytus.  When
Hippolytus returned to Tirant, he gave him the letter.  Tirant
was very pleased to get it.  He had paper and ink brought to him,
and despite his injury he wrote the following letter:

"Now is the time when all things are at rest, except I who am
awake, thinking of Your Highness and how you have forgotten about
all the years I have been in love with you.  But I give thanks to
God for allowing me to know a maiden who is so full of
perfection.  And I see full well that no one but myself deserves
Your Majesty's beauty.  If you feel that I am worthy of reply, I
am prepared to obey everything Your Excellency commands me."

When Tirant had finished writing the letter he gave it to
Hippolytus and begged him to give it to the princess in
Plaerdemavida's presence, and to get a reply if possible.
Hippolytus gave the letter to the princess as he had been
commanded, and the princess took it, very pleased.  As the
empress came to see her daughter at that moment, she could not
read it immediately.  But when she saw that the empress was
engaged in conversation with Hippolytus, asking him about
Tirant's injury, and him answering her, the princess got up from
where she had been sitting and went into her chamber with
Plaerdemavida to read the letter.

After they had spoken at length about Tirant's illness, the
empress said to Hippolytus:

"Your face looks quite altered, Hippolytus, thin and discolored.
The illness of such a valiant knight as Tirant must bring grief
to all his relatives.  I have been suffering greatly too.  At
night I wake up, filled with anxiety.  Then, after I remember his
injury, I go back to sleep."

Hippolytus quickly answered:

"If I were near a lady, and found myself in her bed, I wouldn't
let her have as much rest as Your Majesty gets, no matter how
deeply she slept.  But it doesn't surprise me in Your Majesty:
you sleep alone, and no one says a word to you.  That's what is
making my face so thin, not Tirant's illness.  Everyday I ask Our
Lord with all my heart to take away these painful thoughts that I
keep having.  Only those who know what love is have a real
knowledge of what suffering means."

The empress presumed that Hippolytus must be in love and that all
the sadness in his face was nothing but the passion of love.  She
thought also that since Plaerdemavida had said many times that
she loved Hippolytus, she must be the one he was troubled about.
And the empress unhesitatingly asked Hippolytus who the lady was
that was causing him so much grief.

"Tell me, who is bringing you so much sadness?"

"My bitter misfortune," said Hippolytus.  "And here, where I am,
don't let Your Majesty think that my life is in less danger than
Tirant's."

"In case you should tell me," said the empress, "I would keep it
to myself always."

"Who would dare reveal his grief," said Hippolytus, "to a lady of
such excellence?"

"There is no one," said the empress, "who should not listen to
what another wants to say.  And the loftier one's position, the
more humbly he should listen."

"My lady," said Hippolytus, "since you want to know: love, it's
love that I have, and it's not clothing that I can remove." "I'm
not lacking in knowledge," said the empress, "about what you're
saying.  You say you're in love, and I ask you: With whom?"

"I don't have my five senses," said Hippolytus, "to tell you."

"Oh, man of little understanding" said the empress.  "Why don't
you say what it is that's making you suffer?"

"There are four things," said Hippolytus, "that surpass all
others in excellence, and the fifth is the knowledge of truth.
It is Your Majesty whom the heavens have foretold that I should
love all the days of my life..."

Having said this he did not dare raise his face again, and he
said nothing more.  As he was leaving, the empress called him,
but because of his shame he did not dare turn around.  Hippolytus
thought to himself that if she asked him why he didn't stop he
would say he did not hear her.  He went to his room thinking that
he had spoken wrongly and acted even worse, and he was deeply
repentant of what he had said.

The empress stood there, thinking about what Hippolytus had told
her.

When Hippolytus knew that the empress had gone back to her
chambers, he felt both ashamed and frightened at how daring he
had been.  He wished he were already gone so that he would not
have to face the empress again.  But he had to return to the
palace for the princess's reply.  He went into her chambers and
found her on Plaerdemavida's knees, with other maidens who felt
affection for Tirant.  Hippolytus begged her for a reply to the
letter he had brought.  The princess said to Hippolytus:

"Since the messenger is faithful, I beg you to excuse me from
writing my reply.  You may tell him that I will make arrangements
with the emperor for us to go and see him one day this week, and
if it pleases the Divine Being he will soon he well again, and we
will be excused from this task."

Hippolytus answered:

"My lady, your heart shows that you have no compassion.  From all
the harm you have caused him you could tell him just this little
bit of good news that he hopes to hear from you."

The princess replied:

"Since I don't want to show my lack of knowledge, I will keep
quiet, but your over-loose tongue ought to be answered.
Plaerdemavida, pull out three hairs from my head, and give them
to Hippolytus so that he will give them to my master, Tirant.
And tell him, since I cannot write to him, to take the hairs as
his answer."

"God help me if I'll take them," said Hippolytus, "unless you
tell me what they mean and why there are three of them and not
four, or ten instead of twenty.  For God's sake, my lady!  Does
Your Highness think we are following the old customs when these
niceties were the rule?  Back then a maiden who had a love-sick
swain, and who was in love with him, would give him a bouquet of
perfumed flowers or a hair or two from her head, and the poor
fellow considered himself very fortunate.  I know very well that
my lord Tirant would like to take hold of you in bed, naked or in
your nightgown, and he wouldn't care a jot if your bed wasn't
perfumed.  But if Your Majesty is going to give me three hairs to
take to Tirant, well, I'm not used to carrying things like that:
send them with someone else, and let Your Excellency tell me with
what hope they've come out of your head.''

"I'll be glad to tell you," said the princess.  "One hair stands
for the great love I've always had for him above all people in
the world, and it was so much that I forgot my father and my
mother, and if you press me, I nearly forgot God; and I wanted to
offer him my body along with everything I own.  The second one
stands for all the grief he is causing me.  The third one means
that I know well how little he loves me.  Now you know completely
what the hairs mean, and with your wickedness you won't take them
with you."

She took them out of his hands, and very angrily tore them apart
and threw them on the ground, and tears burst from her eyes and
ran down her breasts.  When Hippolytus saw that the princess had
become angry over such a slight matter, he said with a humble
expression:

"It's true that you were held in your mother's chamber, but you
were not violated.  Tell me, my lady, how can you blame Tirant
for having attempted such a singular act?  Who could condemn him
to any punishment?  If he is lost, more than ten thousand
soldiers will be lost, and they will be sorely needed to bring
the war to a successful conclusion.  Look how many men the King
of Sicily has at the service of Your Highness; and the
Grand-Master of Rhodes, the Viscount of Branches--how many men
he's brought.  Well, if Tirant weren't here, none of those men
would stay.  Then you'll see if Widow Repose will fight the
battles for you and your father."

To help Hippolytus in Tirant's favor, Plaerdemavida said:

"It would have been better for me if I had never known of Your
Majesty's existence.  You don't love the person who deserves it
as you should.  How can I serve you with a willing spirit if I
see such ingratitude in you?  If Your Excellency could feel that
glory that many maidens have experienced, if God would grant that
I might show you the glory that lovers feel in this life, and the
pleasure it brings with it, then you would be worthy of being
among the privileged ones who have loved well, and you would be
deserving of eternal praises in this life.  But Your Excellency
is like a person who smells the odor of meat but does not taste
it.  If Your Highness would taste its sweetness and the pleasure
it brings in this instance, when you died you would rise again in
glorious renown.  But my lady, since I see that you don't love my
lord Tirant, there's no reason for you to love any of his men.
There will come a time when you will cry over him and his
friends, and you'll tear your eyes from your face, and curse the
day and night for the rest of your life.  I know that the day
Tirant can ride again, seeing Your Highness' great unhappiness he
will go back to his country, and all the others will follow him
because of the affection they have for him.  You will be left all
alone as you deserve, and the entire empire will be lost.  And
when you're dead and you appear before the judgment seat of your
Lord, He will ask for an account of your life with words like
these:

"'It was by My command that man was made in My image, and from
man's rib a female companion was made.  And, moreover, I said:
Increase and multiply and fill the earth.  Carmesina, I have
taken your brother from you so that you would be at the head of
the empire.  Now tell me, what account do you give to me
concerning that which I encharged to you?  Have you left behind
sons to defend the Catholic faith and increase the numbers of
Christians?'  What are you going to answer?" said Plaerdemavida.
"Oh, my lady, you will not be able to give a good reply!  I'll
tell you what your reply will be: 'Oh Lord, full of mercy and
pity!  You Who are so merciful, forgive me!'  And the guardian
angel will make you say these words: 'It is true, Lord, that I
loved a knight who was very virtuous in arms, whom Your Holy
Majesty sent to us to rescue Your Christian people from the hands
of the infidel.  I loved him and I held him in great devotion,
and I wanted him for a husband, as my beloved.  And I had a
maiden in my service whose name was Plaerdemavida, who always
gave me good advice and I did not want to accept it.  She put him
in my bed one night and, like a fool, I cried out.  And when I
realized what was happening I stopped shouting, and was quiet.  A
widow who heard me scream began to cry out and woke up the entire
palace, so a great deal of anguish and pain followed because of
my fear.  Later they begged me to give in to the knight, but I
never would.'  And they'll have to leave you in hell along with
Widow Repose.  And when I leave this life there will be a great
celebration in paradise, and they will give me a seat in the
eternal glory of the Highest, and as an obedient daughter I will
be crowned with the other saints."

The emperor entered the room without anyone seeing him.  He
stayed near his daughter for a little while, and then he took
Hippolytus by the hand, and they spoke of the war and of the
captain's illness.  As they were talking they passed through a
room where the empress was, and at that moment Hippolytus would
have liked to have been a day's journey away.  When she saw him
she smiled and looked at him fondly.  Then she got up from where
she was sitting and approached the emperor, and the three of them
stood, talking of many things.  They dwelt especially on the
cruel misfortune in which their son departed from this miserable
world in the flower of his youth, and the empress began to cry.

Many old knights who formed part of the council entered the
chamber, and they consoled the empress.  Then they told
Hippolytus of the great valor the emperor had shown when they
brought him the news that his son had died.  The good man, on
hearing of the death of his son, had answered the cardinal and
the others who brought him the news:

"Be assured that what you are telling me is nothing new, because
I bore him to die.  It is the law of nature to receive life, and
to relinquish it when it is asked of us."

The emperor withdrew to one side of the chamber to speak with
some of his council, and Hippolytus remained with the empress.
When she saw that he was silent she thought it must be because he
felt embarrassed.  And she said:

"Although I can't speak to you in as fine a manner as I would
like, you will understand it much better than my lips could
express it.  I beg you to tell me who made you say what you did.
Tell me if it came from your master Tirant, so that if I decided
to love you he could make better use of the power that he wants.
I'm dying to know."

Hippolytus quickly replied, lowering his voice:

"I'll tell you everything.  I was with the emperor, and we came
into these chambers, and when I saw Your Majesty I nearly fell to
the ground.  I was afraid the emperor would notice, because at
that moment fear and shame were battling within me.  Afterward I
sighed, and I saw that Your Highness was laughing pleasantly at
my sigh.  My lady, I beg you not to make me say anything further,
but command me to do anything dangerous, and Your Majesty will
see how steadfast Hippolytus is.  As for what Your Majesty said
about Tirant, I swear to you that neither Tirant nor my confessor
(which is even worse) knew any such thing about me."

"Hippolytus, you must tell me your thoughts openly.  Love doesn't
recognize nobility, lineage or equality; it doesn't differentiate
between people in high and low positions.  You can be sure that
no matter how criminal your words were, I wouldn't tell them to
the emperor or to anyone else on earth."

Hippolytus plucked up his courage, and in a whisper, he said:

"Because of my great attraction for you, my lady, I often wanted
to reveal my deep love for Your Majesty.  But fear stopped me
from telling you my feelings until now, since you are the most
excellent of all things excellent.  But if love makes me speak
indiscreetly, you must suffer it patiently, and must punish me
with tender words.  Tell me, I beg you, how I must behave in your
honor."

The empress replied:

"You've given my heart many worries and cares.  I'm wondering
what has given you hope of having me since the distance between
our ages is so great.  If it became known, what would they say
about me?  That I've fallen in love with my grandson.  Any maiden
would be overjoyed to be loved by you.  But I would rather
someone else had your love, without any crime or infamy, than for
me to perish because of love."

The empress could say no more since the emperor had gotten up
from where he was sitting.  He went over to the empress and took
her by the hand, and they went in to dine.

That night Hippolytus could not talk to the princess, but he
spoke with Plaerdemavida, and she said to him:

"What were you talking to the empress about for so long?  You two
are always together."

"It's nothing," said Hippolytus.  "She was just asking about our
captain."

Early the next day, Hippolytus left without a reply from the
princess.  When Tirant saw him, he said:

"It's been five days since I've seen you."

"My lord," said Hippolytus, "the emperor made me stay there, and
so did the princess, and while we were out walking we talked
about you.  Everyone intends to come see you.  That's why the
princess decided not to give you any answer, because her visit
will be so soon."

Tirant said:

"That is very good news."

He had the doctors come, and begged them to take him to the city
since he was feeling so well.

"I can tell you, truly, that I'll get better in one day in the
city than I could here in ten.  Do you know why?  I was born and
raised near the sea, and sea air is very healthy for me."

All the doctors agreed, and two of them went to tell the emperor.
The emperor then rode to where the captain was, and Tirant was
taken to the city in four days in a bier carried on the shoulders
of four men.

When he was in his chambers, the empress and all her ladies went
to see him.  They were very happy that he was feeling better, and
all the ladies from the palace as well as the city often visited
him.  But the empress, who was warned by one of her maidens she
trusted much more than the others, seldom left her daughter alone
when she was in Tirant's room, and so they had little time to
talk about their love.  In the meantime Plaerdemavida came every
day, trying to find a way for the battle to come to a conclusion.

Let us stop talking about Tirant now, and return to the
encampment.

When the truce ended, the war began, cruel and savage, for the
Turks knew about Tirant's injury.  Every day they came near the
city of Saint  George where the camp was, and every day there
were fierce battles, and many men from both sides were killed.
Each day the emperor wrote to them to tell them how Tirant was,
and to encourage them.  He told them that Tirant was getting out
of bed now to strengthen his leg and to help him recover.  They
all felt comforted, especially the Duke of Macedonia, who loved
him dearly.

Tirant was getting better daily, and he could walk through his
chambers with the aid of a staff.  Almost every day the ladies
came to see him and keep him company, and the princess
entertained him.  And do not think that Tirant wanted to be
healed very soon; this was because of the lovely sight that he
had daily of the princess.  He had few thoughts about going to
war; instead it was his wish to fulfill his desire with his lady,
and as for the war--let someone go there who wanted to.

As the emperor and the empress were in Tirant's room, he could
not talk to the princess without being overheard by the empress.
So he called Hippolytus and quietly said to him:

"Go outside and then come back in shortly and go to the empress's
side.  Start talking to her about whatever you think will please
her most, and I will see if I can talk to the princess about my
love for her."

Hippolytus returned as he had agreed, and went to the empress,
and quietly said to her:

"I always want to be near Your Excellency.  This is because I
love you so much, and I beg you to grant me a boon that will
increase my honor and my fame.  If I am loved by Your Majesty,
then there will be no one more fortunate than I."

And he said no more.

The empress replied:

"Your great virtue is making me go beyond the bounds of chastity.
If you swear to me by all that is holy that you will say nothing
of this to the emperor or to anyone, you will have everything you
like.  In the still of night wait for me quietly on the roof near
my chamber.  And if you come, have no doubts, for I love you
dearly, and I will not be late unless death itself stands in my
way."

Hippolytus tried to tell her about one thing he was afraid of,
and the empress told him that to think of every possible danger
was a sign of weakness in spirit.

"Do what I tell you, and don't worry about another thing now."

Hippolytus answered:

"My lady, I will be happy to do everything Your Majesty commands
me."

When they had finished their conversation the empress left
Tirant's lodgings with all the other ladies.  And when they were
in the palace, the empress said:

"Let us go visit the emperor."

When they were together with him they conversed pleasantly.
Afterward the empress stood up, feeling the anguish of her new
love, and she said to Carmesina:

"Stay here with these maidens and keep your father company."

The empress then went to her chambers and told her maidens to
have the stewards come, as she wanted to change the satin
curtains and put up others fringed in silk, saying:

"The emperor told me that he would like to come here, and I want
to entertain him a little since he has not come for a long time."

She quickly had the entire chamber furnished with linens of silk
brocade.  Then she had the chamber and the bed sprinkled with
perfume.

After they had eaten, the empress retired, saying she had a
headache, and in everyone's presence a maiden named Eliseu said
to her:

"My lady, does Your Highness want me to call the doctors to help
minister to you?"

"Do as you like," said the empress, "but summon them in such a
way that the emperor does not find out, so that he will have no
excuse for not coming tonight,"

The doctors came quickly and took her pulse, and they found it
very rapid, because she hoped to do battle with a young knight,
and she was fearful.  The doctors said:

"My lady, Your Majesty should take a few sweetened
hemp-seeds with a glass of malmsey: that will help your headache
and make you sleep."

"As far as sleeping is concerned, I don't think I'll do much of
that with my illness.  The way I'm feeling I'll probably be
tossing and turning all over the bed."

"My lady," said the doctors, "if that happens to Your Majesty,
send for us right away.  Or if you wish we'll stand watch at the
door to your chamber or there inside so that we can look at your
face from time to time.

And we'll do this all night long."

"I won't accept that offer right now," said the empress.  "I want
the whole bed to myself, and I don't want any of you looking at
my face.  The illness I have won't stand for anybody to be
watching."

The doctors left.  When they were at the door they told her not
to forget the comfits and to moisten them well with malmsey.  The
empress was so obedient that she ate a large box of them.  Then
she had her bed sprinkled with perfume, and she had civet put on
the sheets and pillows.  When this was done and she was perfumed,
she told her maidens to go to sleep and to close the door to
their chamber.

In the empress's chamber there was a sitting room where she
always went to dress, and in the sitting room was a door that
opened out to the roof where Hippolytus was.  When she got out of
bed Eliseu heard her and quickly got up, thinking something was
wrong, and when she was in the chamber she said:

"Why did Your Highness get out of bed?  Are you feeling worse?"

"No," said the empress.  "I'm fine, but I forgot to say the
devout prayer that I always pray every night."

Eliseu said:

"My lady, would you be so kind as to tell it to me?"

"I'll be happy to," said the empress.  "This is it: At night, at
the first star you see, you must kneel down on the ground and say
three 'Our Fathers' and three 'Hail Marys' in reverence to the
three Kings of the Orient, that just as they were guided and
guarded while they were watching and sleeping, and when they were
in the hands of King Herod, that they will give you grace to be
free from infancy and so that all your affairs will be prosperous
and increase in all that is good.  Now don't disturb me in my
devotions."

The maiden went to her bed and the empress went into the sitting
room.  When she saw that the maiden was in bed she put a dress of
green velvet lined with sable on over her chemise.  Then she
opened the door to the roof and saw Hippolytus crouched down so
that no one would see him.  That made her very pleased as she
thought that her honor would be safe.  When Hippolytus saw her,
he got up quickly and went to her.  He knelt on the ground and
kissed her hands and tried to kiss her feet.  But the worthy lady
would not permit it, and instead kissed him again and again on
the mouth.  She then took his hand and showed him great love and
told him to come to her chamber.  Hippolytus said:

"My lady, Your Majesty must excuse me, but I will not go to your
chamber until my desire has a taste of its future glory."

And he took her in his arms, and laid her on the floor, and there
they enjoyed the climax of their love.

Afterward they went into the sitting room very happily.
Hippolytus, with great joy, gave her true peace, and with a happy
spirit and loving expression, he said:

"If I dared to say what glory I feel at this moment with the
great perfection I've found in Your Majesty, I don't believe my
tongue would have enough power to express it."

The empress, smiling, replied:

"Although my mind finds itself tormented, I will not complain
about you, or even less about God or myself, because I have been
able to win you."

"My lady," said Hippolytus, "now is not the time for words.  Let
us go to bed, and there we will speak of other matters that will
increase your delight, and will be of great consolation to me."

After he had said this, Hippolytus quickly stood naked.  Then he
went to the genteel lady and removed the clothing she had on so
that she was left in her chemise.  And whoever saw her in this
way would recognize that she was like a maiden, and that she
possessed as much beauty as can be found in this world.  Her
daughter, Carmesina, resembled her in many ways, but not in all,
for this lady's beauty, in her time, surpassed that of her
daughter.  The young gallant took her by the arm and placed her
on the bed, and there they remained, talking and sporting as
lovers do.  When half the night had passed, the lady heaved a
deep sigh.

"Why is Your Majesty sighing" said Hippolytus.  "Is it because I
did not satisfy you?"

"It is quite the opposite," said the empress.  "The feelings I
have toward you have increased even more.  At first I thought of
you as a good man, and now I find you much better and more
valiant.  The reason for my sighing has been only that I am
grieved because they will hold you as a heretic."

"What, my lady!" said Hippolytus.  "Why should I be considered a
heretic?"

"Because," said the empress, "you have fallen in love with your
mother."

"'My lady,"' said Hippolytus, "no one knows how worthy you are
but me."

The two lovers spoke of these things and of many others, with all
the delights and sweet words that two people in love enjoy.  They
did not sleep the whole night through, and morning was nearly
upon them.  The empress had spoken the truth when she told the
doctors that she would sleep very little that night.  Now, tired
from staying awake, they slept, for the new day had arrived.
When the day was fully upon them the maiden Eliseu, who was
completely dressed by now, entered the empress's chambers to ask
her how she was, and if she wanted anything.  When she approached
the bed she saw a man lying at the side of the empress, her arm
under the gallant's head, and his mouth to her breast.

"Oh, Holy Mary help me!" said Eliseo.  "Who is this traitor who
has deceived my lady?"  She was tempted to cry out, loudly: "Kill
the traitor who, by cunning and deception, has entered this
chamber to possess the delights of this bed!"  Then she thought
that no one would be so bold as to enter there against the
empress's will.  She tried as hard as she could to see who it
was, but it was impossible because he had his head hidden.  She
was afraid that the other maidens might enter the chamber to wait
on the empress as they usually did, so Eliseu went in to where
they were sleeping, and said to them:

"My lady bids you not to leave the room so that you will not make
any noise, because sleep has not yet satisfied her eyes."

After half an hour had passed the doctors came to see how the
empress was.  The maiden went to the door and said the lady was
resting because during the night she had been a little ill.

"We will stay here," said the doctors, "until Her Majesty
awakens.  That is the emperor's command."

The maiden did not know how to remedy the situation, nor whether
she should awaken her or not.  She was filled with indecision
until the emperor knocked on the chamber door.  The maiden,
upset, and without sufficient patience or discretion, went
anxiously to the bed and cried out, softly:

"Wake up, my lady, wake up!  Death is approaching!  Your poor
husband is knocking at the door and he knows that you have
offended him.  Who is this cruel man who lies at your side and
brings so much grief?  Is he an unknown king?  I pray to God
Almighty that I will see him with a crown of fire on his head.
If he is a duke I hope to see him end his days in prison.  If he
is a marquis, I hope to see his hands and feet eaten.  If he is a
count, he should die by evil weapons.  If he is a viscount, may a
Turk's sword slice him through from his head down to his navel.
And if he is a knight, sailing at the sea's will, may he end his
days in the deep."

When the empress found herself awakened by such an evil noise,
which was worse than a trumpet, she lay motionless, unable to
utter a word.  Hippolytus did not understand the maiden's words,
but he did understand her tone of voice.  And so that no one
would recognize him, he put his head under the blanket.  When he
saw what great anguish his lady was in he put his arm around her
and made her duck under the blanket, asking her why she was so
frightened.

"Oh, my son!" said the empress.  "Get up: the emperor is at the
door, and your life and mine are in God's hands at this very
moment.  And if I cannot speak to you, or you to me, forgive me
with all your heart, as I do you, because now I see that this day
has been the beginning and the end of all happiness and delight,
and the final hour of your life and mine."

When Hippolytus heard the empress saying these words, he began to
feel very sorry for himself, because he had never been in a
situation like this before.  Young as he was, he joined the
empress, serving her up tears instead of advice and aid.  But he
begged the maiden to bring him the sword that was in the sitting
room, and plucking up his courage, he said:

"Here I shall become a martyr before Your Majesty, and deliver up
my spirit."

At that instant the empress heard no noise whatsoever, and she
said to Hippolytus:

"Go hide in that sitting room, my son.  I will delay them, and
you can escape with your life."

"I wouldn't abandon Your Majesty even if they gave me the whole
Greek Empire four times over.  I will give my life and everything
I have before I leave Your Highness, and I beg you to kiss me as
a token of faith," said Hippolytus.

When the empress heard these words her pain increased, and with
the increase of pain she felt her love increasing.  As she heard
no noise at all she went to the chamber door to see if she could
hear soldiers or some other bad sign.  Through a small crack in
the door she saw the emperor and the doctors discussing her
illness, and she realized that there was no danger.  She ran back
to Hippolytus and pulling his ears, she kissed him hard.  Then
she said:

"My son, by the great love I have for you I beg you to go into
that sitting room until I can make up an excuse for the emperor
and the doctors."

"My lady," said Hippolytus, "in all things I will be more
obedient to you than if you had bought me as a captive, but don't
ask me to leave here, because I don't know if they will harm
you."

"Don't worry," said the empress.  "It's not what Eliseu told me,
at all.  There would be a great uproar in the palace if it were."

Hippolytus quickly went into the sitting room, and the empress
got back into her bed and had the doors to the chamber opened.
The emperor and the doctors went to her bed and asked about her
illness and how she had spent the night.  The empress answered
that her headache and the pain in her stomach had not let her
sleep all night long, and she had not been able to rest until the
stars in the sky had disappeared.

"Then, since I could no longer stay awake, I slept, and now I
feel much happier than before.  And I believe that if that
pleasant dream had lasted longer, I would feel even better.  But
in this world a person cannot be completely happy: with the
painful awakening this maiden has given me, my spirit is in more
anguish than I can say.  If I could go back to the way I was, it
would be a great consolation to me.  I could touch and hold in my
arms the things I love and have loved most in this world."

The emperor said:

"Tell me, my lady, what was it that you held in your arms?"

The empress answered:

"My lord, the greatest blessing that I have ever had in the
world.  I fell asleep, and soon it seemed to me that I was up on
the roof in my chemise, saying the prayer that I always pray to
the three Kings of the Orient.  And when I had finished the
blessed prayer, I heard a voice telling me: 'Do not go, for in
this place you will possess the grace you are asking for.'  And
soon I saw my beloved son coming toward me, accompanied by many
gentlemen, all dressed in white, and they held Hippolytus by the
hand.  Surrounding me, the two of them caught up my hands and
kissed them, and they wanted to kiss my feet, but I would not let
them.  And as we sat on the roof we exchanged many words which
gave me great delight, and they were so many and so delicious
that they will always remain in my heart.  Afterward we entered
the chamber, and I held him by the hand.  My son and I got into
bed, and I put my right arm around his shoulders, and his mouth
kissed my breasts.  I have never had such a pleasant sleep.  And
my son said to me, 'My lady, since you cannot have me in this
miserable world, take my brother Hippolytus as your son, for I
love him as much as I love Carmesina.'  And when he said these
words he was lying beside me, and Hippolytus was obediently
kneeling in the middle of the chamber.  I asked him where his
room was, and he told me that he was among the martyred knights
in paradise, because he had died in battle against the infidel.
And I could not ask him more because Eliseu woke me up with a
sound more strident than a trumpet."

"Didn't I say," said the emperor, "that all her talk was only
about her son?"

"Oh, my lord," said the empress, "it has hurt no one more than
me.  I held him in this arm; his pleasant mouth was touching my
breasts; and the dreams you have in the morning often come true.
I think he still may not have left.  I would like to try to go
back to sleep to see if he will talk to me again."

"I beg you," said the emperor, "put this madness out of your
head, and get up out of bed."

"I beg you, my lord," said the empress, "for my health and
pleasure, let me rest a little.  My eyes are clouded from lack of
sleep."

"My lord," said the doctors, "it would be better if Your Majesty
would leave and we let her sleep, because if we take this
pleasure from her it would not be surprising if her illness got
much worse."

The emperor left, and so did all the maidens in the chamber
except Eliseu.  When the doors were closed the empress had
Hippolytus come back in, and she said to the maiden:

"Since fortune has permitted you to know about this matter, I
command you to serve Hippolytus, even more than myself, with all
your heart.  Stay in that sitting room until we have slept a
little.  I shall favor you more highly than all the others, and I
will marry you to a man of higher station than the others.
Afterward Hippolytus will give you so many of his possessions
that you will be very satisfied."

"Heaven help me," said Eliseu, "but I have no desire to serve
Hippolytus, and even less to love and honor him, but since Your
Majesty commands me, I'll do it.  Otherwise I wouldn't stoop to
the floor to pick up a needle for him.  I tell you, since the
time I saw him lying next to Your Majesty, I have never felt more
ill will for any man in the world than I feel for him.  I would
like to see a lion eat up his eyes, his face, and all the rest of
him!"

Hippolytus answered:

"Maiden, I never meant to make you angry.  I want to love you and
do more for you than for all the other maidens in the world."

"Do it for the others," said Eliseu, "but don't bother with me.
I don't want anything that belongs to you."

And she quickly went into the sitting room, and began to cry.
The two lovers stayed in bed so long that it was nearly time for
Vespers when they got up, and they found the maiden still crying.
When she saw them coming into the sitting room she stopped her
wailing, and the empress consoled her and begged her not to say
anything about what Hippolytus had done.

"My lady," said the maiden, "Your Majesty needn't worry about me.
I would die before I'd tell anybody anything without your
command.  As for the second thing, have no fear: I will serve
Hippolytus in every way I can, out of consideration for Your
Majesty."

The empress was satisfied, and she left Hippolytus in the sitting
room and went back to her bed.  Then she commanded the chamber
doors to be opened.  Soon her daughter was there, along with all
the maidens, the emperor and the doctors.  And again she told
them about her pleasant dream.

The meal was served, and the empress ate like someone who was
tired from walking a long distance.  The maiden was diligent in
serving Hippolytus, and she gave him some pheasants to eat.  And
when he did not want to eat, she begged him on behalf of her
lady.  Hippolytus spoke to her and joked, but she would not
answer him unless it was something to do with her service.

Here was the empress, not moving from her bed until the following
day when the emperor had already eaten lunch.  After she had
dressed she went to chapel to hear mass, and there was a great
dispute among the priests as to whether they should read the
scriptures, because it was already past noon.

Hippolytus remained in the sitting room with this pleasure for a
week.  When the lady saw that he was quite exhausted, she asked
him to leave, telling him to return to her chamber another day
after he had rested, and he could take her as he pleased.  And
from a box where she kept her jewelry the empress took out a gold
chain, and put it around his neck, saying:

"Pray God that I may live, Hippolytus, because I will be
surprised if I don't put a crown on your head before many years
have passed.  Now, for love of me, wear this.  Since it will be
in view you will remember someone who loves you as much as she
does her own life."

Hippolytus knelt to the ground, thanked her, and kissed her hand
and her mouth and said:

"My lady, how could Your Majesty deprive yourself of such an
exquisite jewel to give it to me?  If it were mine I would give
it to Your Highness where it would be put to better use.  I beg
you to keep it."

The empress answered:

"Hippolytus, never refuse what your lover gives you."

"Then, my lady, how will you command my life?  What do you want
me to do?"

"I beg you to leave.  I am terribly afraid that tomorrow the
emperor may enter this sitting room and find you here.  Go now,
and let this fear of mine pass.  There will be other days when
you can return."

Let us leave these endearments of hers for Hippolytus now, and
return to Tirant to see how his love is doing.  When his leg was
mended he often went to the palace without anyone's help.  His
only obstacle was that the doctors would not let him go as often
as he would have liked.  The emperor often asked them how many
days it would be before he would be entirely well so that he
could leave for battle.  They told him that he would soon be well
enough to ride.  When Tirant knew how much the emperor wanted him
to go, he felt great anguish because he could not have his desire
or at least some contact with the princess.

The passion that the Widow carried inside had not been revealed
until that time.  But when she learned from the emperor that
Tirant would be leaving soon, she thought that she might be able
to persuade him to take her along to the camp with the excuse
that she would serve him there.  And if this was impossible, her
diabolical plans were to spread a seed throughout the court
called discord.  She went to the princess and said:

"Did you know, my lady, that Tirant told me as we were leaving
mass that he wanted to talk to me.  I told him that I would be
glad to talk to him if I could have Your Majesty's permission.  I
think he realizes that he will be leaving soon, and he wants to
see if he can commit some treachery against Your Highness.  He is
thinking to himself: If he can do it, well and good, and if he
can't, then when he's gone he'll forget all about you.  He told
me the other day that that's the way he is, and he laughed as
though he had said something wonderful."

"Then let's do this," said the princess.  "You go talk to him,
and we'll see if there is some treachery in his heart.  Your
advice is good: I should be careful with him."

"But, my lady," said the Widow, "if I'm to find out what's really
in his heart, you must not leave this room until I come back."

The Widow went out, called a page and told him:

"Tell Tirant that the princess is here, in this chamber, and is
very anxious to talk to him."

The page quickly went to tell him.  When Tirant heard that his
lady had asked him to come, he did not wait for anyone to go with
him.  The Widow was watching carefully to see when he would come,
and as soon as she saw him she pretended to be coming out of the
princess's chamber at that very moment, and she went up to him
and said:

"Unfortunately, the empress just took the princess to her
chambers, and they are talking right now.  I asked her to send
for you because just as Jesus Christ enlightened his disciples,
so you spread light to everyone whenever you are in the palace,
and as soon as you leave we feel sad.  The princess told me to
come and keep you company until the empress is gone.  So let's
sit down until Her Highness comes: I don't want you to hurt your
leg on my account."

They sat in the drawing room, and Tirant said:

"Calling to mind, my lady, what you just said to me, the
consolation you feel when you see me, I thank you very much for
saying that.  Take this chain as proof of my affection, I beg
you, so that when you look at it you'll think of me, because I
want to do a great deal for you."

The Widow answered:

"There's no one who doesn't know how you hurt your leg, but
because of their situation they don't want to offend you or make
you angry, and because of the war they hide their feelings and
pretend not to know anything.  If they were certain there would
be peace, Carmesina would be the first to throw you into
everlasting and bitter grief.  Are you so blind that you can't
see the dishonest things that are plotted and carried out in this
palace?  It all seems so vile and abominable to me that I won't
agree to any of it.  That's why they don't like me.  I know for a
fact that you're not highly regarded the way you should be.  Tell
me, wouldn't it be better for you to love a woman who was expert
in the art of loving, and very honest, even if she weren't a
virgin?  She would follow you across the sea and over land, in
war and in peace.  She would serve you in your tents both night
and day, and would never think of anything but how to please
you."

"Tell me, my lady," said Tirant, "who is the woman who would
perform such remarkable services for me?"

"Oh, wretched me!" said the Widow.  "Why are you trying to make
me suffer more than I already do?  Haven't I said enough?  Don't
pretend that you don't understand what's so clear.  I've tried to
find a time when we wouldn't be interrupted by anyone to reveal
my pain to you.  It seems to me that I've made my intention known
to you very clearly, and the knight who is so graciously offered
such a gift can feel very fortunate."

Tirant did not hesitate to reply:

"To satisfy you, I'll answer your kind words.  It makes me angry
that I can't do what you are asking because your words are filled
with so much love.  But my free will is captive, and even if I
wanted to, my five senses would not allow it."

"Everything I've told you was only to test your patience, and to
show you, Lord Tirant, how much I want to serve you.  I think you
should be aware of all the things you don't know.  I don't want
you to be deceived by the princess's actions: she no longer has
any honor, and she has none of her father's or her mother's honor
either.  She could have satisfied her appetites honestly with a
valiant and virtuous knight like you, or with many others who are
in love with her, but the sky, the earth, the sea and the sands
abominate the sin she has committed (and still commits daily).
Only Our Lord would permit such an abominable crime of adultery
without punishing her!  If you knew what I know you would spit in
her face.

But why should I try to exaggerate such an ugly crime with
unnecessary words?  She has become involved with Lauseta--that's
his name.  He's a black slave, a Moorish gardener who takes care
of the orchard.  And don't think, your grace, that all these
things I've told you are simply fables, because I'll let you see
it with your own eyes.  She has made me live with this enormous
pain for a long time.  How many kinds of herbs have I gone to
pick, and then placed them inside her to destroy the fetus in her
infamous stomach!  Oh wretch, the poor thing was punished because
of my sin!  And its body wasn't buried, but instead made its trip
down the river.  What else could I do so that the grandchild
would not be seen by the emperor, its grandfather?  She has the
pleasure, if it can be called that, and I have the blame."

Tirant, with all the melancholy he felt, said:

"Widow, your words have gone straight to my miserable heart.
They hurt me more deeply than I have ever been hurt before.  I
beg you, virtuous lady, show me the cause of my pain, because
otherwise I couldn't believe words that sound so unreasonable.
It seems impossible that such a celestial person would freely
place her beauty in the hands of a black savage."

Then he was silent.  Widow Repose was very worried because Tirant
did not fully believe her false words.  During this conversation
the emperor came into the chamber, and when he saw Tirant, he
took him by the hand, and they both went into a room to talk
about the war.  The Widow was left alone, and she began to say to
herself:

"Since Tirant did not believe me, this deception I have planned
won't succeed.  But I'll make him give in to me, even if I have
to sell my soul to the devil to do it."

Furious, she swept into the princess's chamber.  Then, feigning
laughter, she showed her the gold chain Tirant had given her, and
she said:

"You'd be astonished, my lady, if you knew his latest whim.  He
wants to bring a galley here, and carry you off to his land by
force."

And she continued to invent stories almost in mockery.  When the
princess saw that she was mocking Tirant, she became inwardly
very angry, and she left and went to her sitting room.  She began
to think a great deal about Tirant and how deeply she loved him,
and of the gifts that he gave to her ladies because of her.  The
thought of how much she loved him made her reflect deeply, and
brought her bitter pain.  After thinking for a long time, she
dressed and went out to the hall to talk to Tirant, because she
knew that he would soon have to leave for the field of battle.

Widow Repose waited for Tirant, and said to him:

"My captain, I would like to have your word that you will not
tell the princess, even in jest, what I said to you.  Before
twenty-four hours have gone by I will let you see it with your
own eyes."

"Widow," said Tirant, "I will be very happy if you show me.  And
so that you will have complete confidence in me, I promise by the
blessed Saint George, in whose name I hold the honor of
chivalry, not to tell a soul."

As the emperor turned he saw the Widow, and said to her:

"Go quickly and tell the empress and my daughter to go to the
orchard right away.  I'll be waiting for them there."

Soon all the ladies were with the emperor, and they talked about
many things, including how the emperor had sent the order to the
camp for two thousand lancers to come and accompany the captain.
When the princess heard the news she became very agitated, and
pretending that she had a headache, she said:

"I will not deprive myself just because the captain is here; I'll
let my hair down even though he's present."

Then she let down all her hair, allowing it to hang loose--and it
was the most beautiful hair any maiden ever had.  When Tirant saw
it in all its splendor he was astonished, and his love doubled in
strength.  The princess was dressed that day in a skirt of white
damask.  At that moment her hands were struggling with the cord
of her skirt, and she seemed to be in great anguish as she walked
alone through the orchard.  The emperor tried to question her
about her illness, and asked if she wanted the doctors to come.
She answered no, that:

"My illness requires neither doctors nor medicine."

At this moment Widow Repose got up from where she was sitting,
and taking a companion and two squires along as her escorts, she
went to a painter's house and told him:

"Since the festival of Corpus Christi is near, I would like to
put on a play.  You're the best painter in the world: Could you
make a mask of flesh color according to my instructions?  It
should be over a fine, black skin that would look like Lauseta,
the gardener of our orchard.  It should have hair on its face,
some white and some black, and I'll put gloves on my hands so
that I will appear entirely black."

"Madam," answered the painter, "that can be done, but I have a
great deal of work right now.  However, if you pay me well, I'll
put aside all my other work so that I can serve you."

The Widow reached into her purse and gave him thirty ducats in
gold so that he would do a good job.  And he made it with the
exact shape and features of Lauseta.

When the princess had strolled through the garden at length, she
saw Lauseta pruning an orange tree, because it was his job to
work in the garden, and she went up to him to talk to him.  The
Widow, who had returned by now, was watching Tirant, and she made
a sign to him so that he would notice that his lady was talking
to the Negro, Lauseta.  Tirant turned around (for he was at the
emperor's side), and saw the princess speaking animatedly with
the black gardener, and he said to himself:

"Oh, that wicked Widow!  She's still trying to make me believe
that what she told me is the truth!  No matter what she says or
does, no one can tell me that the princess would do such a
terrible thing, and nothing in the world will make me believe it
unless I see it with my own eyes."

At that moment the emperor called a maiden and said to her:

"Come here, Praxidis,"--for that was her name.  "Go over to my
daughter and ask her to call the captain and tell him that she
wants him to leave for the camp soon.  Often young knights will
do more for ladies than they will for themselves."

The princess replied that she would, since His Majesty had asked
her to.  After she had spent a while talking with Lauseta about
the orange trees and the myrtles, she went back to strolling
through the garden.  When she was near the emperor she called to
Tirant and told him that she was tired, and she asked him to take
her arm so they could walk through the garden together.  God
knows how happy Tirant felt when the princess said this to him.
And when they were some distance from the others, Tirant said:

"I have only you in my thoughts now, and I spend day and night
thinking of you.  If fortune would like to have a little pity on
me, let it allow me to have only a part of my desire, because
then I will become the most glorious knight who ever lived.  All
I need is a little hope from Your Excellency."

The virtuous lady kept her pain secret, and replied:

"Tirant, my lord, harbor no doubt whatsoever about what I tell
you, because even if I have occasionally been cruel with you, I
don't want you to think I have not always been with you in
spirit.  I have always loved you and looked on you as a god, and
I can tell you that as my age increases so does my love.  And now
the time has come when you can know fully whether I love you,
for I want to give you the prize of your love.  And I beg you,
please, to guard my honor as you do your own life."

Tirant's heart was filled with happiness when he saw that this
lofty lady had shown her great love for him, and that he was on
the path of possessing the crown of the Empire of Greece.  He
felt that he could conquer the entire world, and he wanted to
tell his cousin Diafebus, the Duke of Macedonia, about it,
because he thought everyone would feel just as delighted as he
did.  And as a greater pledge, he took out a reliquary he
carried, and he made the princess place her hands there, asking
her to declare that she would marry him, and she very happily
swore it.  Then Tirant said:

"My lady, I make the same oath to be faithful and true to you and
never to forget you for anyone else in the world."

When all this had been done, Tirant knelt down on the ground to
kiss her hands because he was more afraid of offending her than
of a saint.  The princess said:

"To keep my honor and my reputation I am holding back what you
most desire.  After your great victory, we will take that sweet,
delicious fruit of love which is plucked in matrimony, and you
will wear the crown of the Empire of Greece."

In a trembling voice, Tirant said:

"I am so anxious to have what I desire most in the world that
every hour I wait seems like a thousand years.  I would like to
change that future time to the present."

The princess, with a kind face, quickly answered:

"I cannot completely resist your entreaties without offending
you.  But shame and fear hold me back, telling me to keep myself
from losing what I will never be able to recover.  I beg you, let
us leave this conversation so the emperor will not begin to
wonder about me.  You talk to Plaerdemavida, and whatever you
decide I will agree to."

They kissed many times without anyone seeing them, because the
orange trees were between them and the emperor, and protected
them from everyone's view.  When they returned to the emperor,
the princess saw him deep in thought and said to him:

"My lord, what are you thinking about?"

The emperor answered:

"My daughter, I want to hold a celebration tomorrow in Tirant's
honor.  For every battle he has won on land and on sea, I want
that many flags placed in our Church of Santa Sofia, and for
every castle, villa and city he has conquered, I want that many
standards placed around the high altar with Tirant's coat of
arms.  For he has brought this empire so many benefits, showing
himself to be truly a lover of the public good and a conqueror of
the world."

The emperor sent for all those in his council and told them what
he wanted, and they all praised him, saying it would be a very
good thing to do.  When they had made their calculations they
found that in four and one half years he had conquered three
hundred seventy-two villas, cities and castles.

When the emperor held his council and Tirant found out that he
was discussing these things, he did not want to be present, and
he went to his chambers.  On leaving the orchard, Tirant said to
Hippolytus:

"Tell Plaerdemavida to go out to the great hall.  I have to talk
to her."

Hippolytus took the message, and she quickly went there.  Tirant
embraced her, and smiling, he took her hand.  When they had sat
down by a window he said:

"I have been with Her Highness and we have exchanged many words
of love, and she promised to do whatever you and I decided.  I
was to tell you all my concerns, and tonight I would speak with
Her Majesty.  We held hands and solemnly swore that as long as
she and I should live I would be her servant, husband and lord,
and I would have a resting place of perpetual glory and delight
in her chambers, in her bed."

Plaerdemavida listened to Tirant.  She thought for a moment, and
then said:

"I was not born among the lower classes in Rome.  My mother was
born in that city, and my ancestors were noble citizens of Rome.
Tirant, lord of the world, why did you speak to me so timidly?
Is your grace unaware of what you have in me?  My heart, my body,
my will and all my thoughts have no other purpose in this world
than to serve your grace.  I won't say anything more to you
because a knight who is waiting to go into battle shouldn't be
worn out by words.  But when the emperor is dining I'll go to
your rooms and give you news that will please you very much."

Then Tirant kissed her eyes and her face with great joy.  He left
her, and Plaerdemavida went back to the garden where she found
the princess with the emperor.  The emperor went into the upper
chambers, and Plaerdemavida and the princess entertained
themselves and decided what time Tirant should come.  The
princess told her everything that she had said and done with
Tirant, and Plaerdemavida was very glad to see how happy her lady
was.

The hour arrived when the emperor was to dine, and Tirant did not
forget to go to the palace quickly.  He met Plaerdemavida coming
down the stairs to his quarters.  She told him how it was to be
done, and what time he should come.  Then they went back the way
they had come.

After everyone in the palace had retired and was asleep, the
princess got up from her bed, and the only ones with her were
Plaerdemavida and another named Lady Montblanc who knew all about
the affair.  The princess put on a dress that the emperor had
ordered made for her wedding.  Neither he nor anyone else had
ever seen it, and it was the most beautiful dress anyone had ever
seen at that time.  Her gown was of crimson satin embroidered
with pearls.  Her mantle was lined with ermine, and on her head
she wore a stunning imperial crown.  Plaerdemavida and Lady
Montblanc took lighted torches in their hands, and waited for
Tirant to come.  When the clock struck eleven (which was the
hour that he was awaiting so anxiously), he quickly went to the
garden gate.  Climbing the stairs to the sitting room, he found
Lady Montblanc with the lighted torch, and as soon as she saw him
she knelt before him and said:

"Of knights, the best, and the most beloved in the world by a
beautiful lady."

And Tirant replied:

"Maiden, may your wishes be fulfilled."

They both went up to the sitting room and waited there until
Plaerdemavida came in, happier and more content than Paris was
when he carried off Helen.  They went into one chamber while the
princess was coming in from another door, and they met very
happily, and Tirant knelt on the ground, and she did likewise.
They remained like this for some time.  Then they kissed, and
their kiss was so delicious that one could have walked a mile
while they had their lips pressed together.  Plaerdemavida saw
the danger in their dilatoriness, and went up to them and said:

"I declare you good and loyal lovers, but I will not leave this
battlefield until you are lying in bed together.  And I won't
deem you a knight if you make peace before spilling blood."

They stood up, and the princess took the crown from her head and
placed it on Tirant's head.  Then she fell to her knees and said:

"Oh Lord God, Jesus Christ, all powerful and merciful, Who,
having pity on mankind, came down from heaven to earth and took
on human form in the virgin womb of the most Holy Virgin Mary,
Your Mother and Our Lady, and Who died on the tree of the true
cross to redeem the sins of mankind, and came back to life on the
third day by Your own power, in a glorified body, true God and
true man!  May it please Your most Holy Majesty to allow my lord
Tirant to possess this crown, with the title and reign over all
the Empire of Greece, after the death of my father, inasmuch as
Your divine goodness has granted him the grace to have retaken it
and freed it from the infidel.  And may this be done in honor,
praise and glory of Your most Holy Majesty and of Your most Holy
Mother, and for the benefit of the holy Catholic faith."

When she had finished her prayer, the princess got up and took
some scales that the emperor used for weighing gold coins, and
she said:

"My lord Tirant, good fortune has decided that on this day I will
submit to your power of my own free will, and without my mother's
and father's consent, or that of the people of Greece.  Here I
hold some scales of perfection: on the right side is love, honor
and chastity; on the other side is shame, infamy and grief.
Choose which of these pleases you most, Tirant."

As one who always wished to serve honor, Tirant took the scale on
the right hand side, and said:

"Before I was given news of Your Majesty I had heard of your
virtues, which as I now know would be too many to mention.  For
Your Highness practices virtue continually and has such great
beauty that it is far greater than that of all other ladies in
the world."

Then, holding up the scale on the right, he said:

"I place love and honor above the crown and the scale with all
the firmness that it has.  And I beg you dearly to speak no more
of this.  Rather, with true will, let our marriage take place."

The princess answered:

"You have embraced the scale of love and honor.  Now I beg you to
preserve my chastity, and for the present do not violate it.
Otherwise, what will the emperor say, and my mother, and the
entire country who think of me as a saint?  What will they say of
me?  There will be no one who can trust Carmesina.  And when you
are gone away, if I am offended by anyone, who will I go to for
help?  A brother or a husband?  And if I become with child, what
counsel could I take?"

Tirant could no longer withstand the tears of the princess, and,
smiling, he replied:

"My lady, I have been waiting so long to see you in your
nightgown or completely naked on a bed.  I don't want your crown
or your kingdom.  But give me all my rights which belong to me,
as our Holy Mother Church commands with the following words: 'If
a maiden gives herself in true matrimony, he who is able but does
not have copulation after marriage is in mortal sin.'  As for me,
my lady, if you love my body you should love my soul too, and
Your Majesty should not willfully cause me to sin.  You know very
well that if a man goes into battle while he's in mortal sin, God
will not come to his aid."

And as he was saying these words Tirant was not slow about
removing her clothing: he unfastened her skirt while he kissed
her again and again, saying:

"Every hour that we're not in bed is like a year to me.  Since
God has given me such a treasure, I don't want to lose it."

Plaerdemavida exclaimed:

"Oh, my lord!  Why wait until you are in bed?  Do it on top of
her clothes so that they can be a more certain witness.  We'll
close our eyes and say that we saw nothing.  If you wait for Her
Highness to take off her clothes you'll have to wait until
morning.  Afterward Our Heavenly Father could punish you as a
knight unworthy of love.  Heaven help you if you should fail at a
time like this.  Seeing that you were such a polite lover, Our
Heavenly Father wouldn't want to give you a morsel like this
again, nor would He have anything to give you.  There's no man in
the world who wouldn't swallow it, even if he knew for a
certainty that he would choke to death."

The princess answered:

"Be quiet, you enemy of all goodness!  I would never have
thought, Plaerdemavida, that you could be so cruel.  Up to today
I've always thought of you as a mother or a sister, but now you
are like a stepmother because of the reprehensible advice you're
giving about me."

At this point Tirant had finished removing her clothing, and he
took her in his arms and placed her on the bed.  When the
princess saw herself in such a situation, and that Tirant, who
had taken off his clothes, was at her side working with the
artillery to penetrate the castle, she saw that she could not
defend it by the strength of her arms.  She thought that perhaps
with feminine arms she could resist him, and with her eyes
pouring forth tears she began to lament:

"You are trying to keep me from loving you.  You want to use your
absolute power over me and make me very angry.  Tirant, open the
eyes of your understanding, and look at the misfortune that
awaits you, and when you recognize it, give way to reason, and
restrain your lustful appetite."

The princess made all these and other laments with her eyes
pouring forth tears.  Tirant saw all the tears and the discreet
words of his lady, and he decided to make her content that night
and to follow her will.  Although all night long the two lovers
slept very little, but rather played and found amusement now near
the head of the bed and now near its foot, caressing each other
continually, both of them very content.  When it was nearly
daybreak and the people in the palace were beginning to stir, the
princess said:

"For my own satisfaction I would that the day had not come so
quickly, and it would be my pleasure if this delight could last a
year, or never end.  Arise, Tirant, lord of the Empire of Greece,
for tomorrow, or whenever it pleases you, you may return to the
same place."

Tirant got up very reluctantly, and said:

"I shall do what you command, but I fear that my desire will
never be satisfied, and my thoughts are very restless."

So that no one should see or hear him, he left full of passion
and anguish, kissing her wildly at the moment of their parting.
When he was gone Plaerdemavida was so distraught that she could
bear no more.  The princess sent for her and had Lady Montblanc
summoned, and both knew what had taken place between her and
Tirant.

"God help me!" said Plaerdemavida.  "Your Highness had the
pleasure and Tirant the delight, and I the sin.  But it grieves
me so much that there was no consummation that I feel I shall die
from anger.  Bring that skinny, spineless knight to me, and
you'll see what I say to him!  I shall never again do anything
for him; instead I will try to stand in his way whenever I can."

"In faith," said Lady Montblanc, "he has shown great virtue as
the most valiant and courteous knight he is, for he has wished to
forego his pleasure rather than anger my mistress."

They spoke of this at length until it was bright daylight and the
emperor sent word to the empress and to his daughter that all the
ladies should dress in their finery, and then they should all
come to the festivities being held for Tirant.  He also sent word
to all the knights and ladies of the city so that they would go
to the palace.  God knows well that in that instance the princess
would have liked more to sleep than to leave her chambers.  But
for love of Tirant and so that the celebration could take place,
she left her bed and dressed very beautifully, and they went out
from the great hall where they found the emperor with all his
retinue of nobles and knights and ladies of the city.

When the procession was ready, they went through the city with
the two hundred seventy-two flags in front, until they came to
the church.  Tirant went up to the princess, and she received him
warmly, but she could only say:

"Tirant, my lord, all that I have is yours."

Tirant did not dare answer her because the empress and the others
were near.  The mass was begun with great solemnity.  On
administering the holy water they set up one flag; after
confession another was put in place; then, at psalm or scripture
reading they put up another one.  Finally, when the mass was
over, all the flags were in place.  Tirant did not want to sit in
his usual place, or even next to the emperor.  Instead he went
into a chapel with his Hours in his hand, and from there he could
see the princess very well.  In truth, Tirant said very few Hours
at that mass.  I could not tell you about the princess, but as
long as the holy service lasted she did not take her eyes from
Tirant.

 CHAPTER IX  WIDOW REPOSE

 After the service was over and everyone had eaten, there was
dancing in the square.  While they were dancing the princess went
to the palace, to her chamber, to change clothes, and she had
them close the door.  When she was in her tunic she went up to
the treasure tower with two maidens.  There the three of them
weighed out a load of ducats.  The princess gave them to
Plaerdemavida to carry to Tirant's rooms.  When she had dressed
again she went back to where the emperor was.  She went up to him
and to Tirant who was nearby.  She whispered in Tirant's ear so
that the emperor would not hear:

"Your hands have caressed me so much that there is no part of my
body that does not remember your touch."

Tirant answered:

"It is very fortunate for me that my hands have learned something
new."

The emperor said:

"What are you two talking about so secretly."

"My lord," said the princess, "I was asking Tirant if there would
be jousts at this celebration.  He told me there would not, and
that they were waiting to hold them against the Turks."

"That is the best news I could possibly hear," said the emperor.
"Do you feel well enough to be able to leave?"

"Yes, by the Holy Virgin!" said Tirant.  "When the celebration is
over, I will take the doctors with me, and I'll be able to go."

They spoke of other things until Plaerdemavida came and signaled
from a distance.  When the emperor began to talk to other people
Tirant quietly went to Plaerdemavida to ask her what she wanted.
She answered:

"It is only logical that you've lost the prize of all your
efforts so many times, my lord, with your neglect and lack of
persistence.  You don't deserve to be rewarded any further since
you're satisfied with what you have, and you've lost it through
your own fault.  As far as I'm concerned, I don't want to be
involved in your love affairs any longer.  You don't need me--you
need Widow Repose: she'll give you what you deserve.  I'm not
bound to do anything more for you: you are the most disloyal,
unworthy knight who was ever born.  And that you can't deny.  If
I were a knight, I would fight you.  You were in bed with a
maiden in your arms--the most beautiful, most pleasing, the
worthiest lady who ever lived--and you shouldn't have left her
just because she begged you to or because she shed tears.  And if
she went there a virgin, I saw her leave a virgin--to your shame
and confusion.  The great error you committed will hurt me all my
life.  There is no lady or maiden in the world who wouldn't
consider you the lowest of men if she knew what you have done.  I
don't want to talk about this anymore: I've already said enough.
I only want to tell you that when the emperor sits down to
dinner, you'll have to be there.  I've just now come from your
chambers, and here's the key to your room.  I beg you to go there
quickly.  I brought the keys so that no one could read what
you'll find written there."

Tirant took the keys, and wanted to reply to what Plaerdemavida
had told him, but it was impossible because the emperor was
telling him to come right away.  When he was there the emperor
told him that he was to sit alone at the table.  The emperor, the
empress, the princess, and all the maidens waited on him.  And
there was no knight or lady who dared approach to serve him,
because they were all in their seats waiting to hear what an old
knight who was very experienced in arms would say.  He was a very
eloquent and great reader who began to recite all the
chivalresque deeds that Tirant had performed.  The men and women
forgot to eat as they listened to the great honors that Tirant
had achieved up to that day.  When Tirant had finished eating,
the knight stopped reading-- and his recitation had lasted more
than three hours.

When evening arrived, the dinner was as abundant as the afternoon
meal had been.  After the dancing there were farces and short
plays, as were required at such festivities.  These festivities
lasted almost the whole night through, and the emperor did not
want to leave until dawn.  The princess was never bored at the
celebration because she could see and talk to Tirant.  And Tirant
barely dared to talk to the princess for fear of the emperor who
was very near, but he told her quietly:

"My lady, last night was certainly more enjoyable to me than
tonight is."

Plaerdemavida quickly interjected:

"My lord, your words are fine, but not your actions."

Then, when the emperor saw that dawn was breaking he got up and
wanted everyone to go with him to escort Tirant to his chambers.
Tirant thanked him for the great honor he was paying him, and he
wanted to escort the emperor to his chambers, but the worthy lord
would not permit it.

When Tirant was in his chambers he thought that because
Plaerdemavida was so unhappy with him she had probably written
him some letter, but when he went into his room he saw a heap of
gold on the floor.  He was astonished at the princess's great
virtue, and he thought more highly of her good will than he did
of the gift.  He had Hippolytus come, and ordered him to
safeguard it.

When it was time for mass all the lords went, and Tirant found no
way to talk to the princess, to thank her for what she had sent
him, until after dinner.  After eating they told the emperor that
since he had slept so little the night before he should go and
rest, and that when it was time for the festivities they would
all return.  As the ladies went back to the palace Tirant drew
near to the princess and told her:

"I haven't the spirit to talk, nor can my tongue express all the
words of love that befit the works of honor that Your Majesty
bestows on me every day."

She quickly replied, although she did not dare to speak much
because the emperor was passing by.  She only said to him:

"You are my lord; I am in your power.  Decide what you will do
with me: make war or peace.  If I don't help you, who are my
lord, whom would I help?  What I do now is little, if you
consider what I plan to do.  But if you want more, the doors to
the treasure are open for you, and closed for anyone else."

With Tirant again thanking her, they reached the emperor's
chambers, and the emperor went inside with the ladies.  Only
Widow Repose remained outside.  She stood at the head of the
stairs, waiting for Tirant.  With her feminine malice she was
prepared to commit an unspeakable crime.  When she saw Tirant she
put on a sympathetic face, and with graceful gestures designed to
make him love her, she said:

"I'm not surprised that you want to conquer the world: you've
already captivated me.  With the pity I have for your grace, I
want to help you.  So, my lord Tirant, if you'd like to be in a
certain secret place after two o'clock, you'll be able to see
everything I've told you about."

Tirant said that was agreeable to him, and that he would be
ready.  The Widow left Tirant at once.  Behind the garden she and
a very old woman had a house already prepared, and she had her
furnish it nicely with a bed, as would befit Tirant.  When the
raging Widow saw that the time had come, she went looking for
Tirant secretly, and she made him swear at length, and then
disguise himself.  Then they went to the old lady's chambers.  In
the chamber was a small window overlooking the garden, and
through it a person could see everything that went on in the
garden; but the window was very high, and only by climbing a
ladder could you see out.  The Widow brought two large mirrors,
and put one at the window and the other one lower, in front of
Tirant, facing the first mirror.  And everything that appeared in
the top one was reflected in the lower one.

When the Widow had done this and had left Tirant in the room, she
went quickly to the palace, and found the princess sleeping in
her bed.  The Widow said to her:

"Get up, my lady.  My lord, the emperor, sent me to tell you that
the doctors want you to get out of your bed and not to sleep so
long.  After you stayed up so late last night, and having eaten
lunch, if you sleep now with this warm weather it could endanger
your health."

She opened the windows of the chamber so that she would not
sleep, and the princess permitted her to because of her father's
tender words.

When she was up she put on a brocade tunic with the top
completely unbuttoned, no kerchief over her breast, and her hair
hanging loose over her shoulders.  Then the Widow said to her:

"The doctors think it would be good for you to go down to the
garden and see all the greenery, and we'll entertain ourselves
there with some games so that your drowsiness will pass.  I have
a costume for the festival of Corpus Christi that looks like your
gardener.  Plaerdemavida likes these things very much and she
will put it on, and will tell you her usual witty things."

The princess went down to the garden with the Widow and two
maidens while Tirant was watching the mirror carefully.  He saw
the princess coming with the maidens, and watched as they sat
down near a small stream.  The Widow had foreseen everything, and
she had sent the black gardener to the city of Pera so that he
would not be in the garden.

The Widow helped dress Plaerdemavida, and put the mask on her
that had been made to look exactly like the black gardener; and
she went into the garden wearing his clothing.  When Tirant saw
her coming he thought that it was in fact the Moorish gardener,
carrying a spade over his shoulder.  He began to dig, and soon
approached the princess.  He sat at her side, and took her hands
and kissed them.  Then he put his hands on her breasts and
touched her nipples, and made overtures of love.  The princess
broke into great peals of laughter, and all her weariness left
her.  Then he drew her even closer and put his hands under her
skirts, while all the maidens laughed, as they listened to
Plaerdemavida's amusing words.  The Widow turned toward Tirant
and twisted her hands as she spat on the ground, indicating the
loathing and pain she felt for what the princess was doing.

Imagine poor, miserable Tirant, who the day before had been so
pleased at having won a lady of such high rank as his betrothed,
the thing he desired most in the world, and then to see his
misery, his affliction and his pain with his own eyes.  And when
he began to think, he wondered if the mirrors were reflecting a
false image, and he broke them and looked inside to see if they
contained something evil made by the art of necromancy, but he
found nothing of the sort.  He wanted to get up to the window to
find out if he could see more, and to discover how those games
would end, and he saw that there was no ladder, because the Widow
had been afraid that he might do this and she had hidden it.
Tirant, finding no other recourse, took the bench from in front
of the bed and stood it up.  Then, taking a cord that he cut from
the curtains, he passed it over a beam and pulled himself up by
it.  He saw how the black gardener had taken the princess by the
hand, and was leading her to a hut in the garden where he kept
his gardening tools and a bed to sleep on.  Plaerdemavida led her
into that room, where they looked through everything, including
the clothing which the black man kept in a chest.  After a time
the princess came out, as the Widow and a maiden were walking
near the hut.  When they saw her, the Widow went over to the
maiden and gave her a scarf.  To go ahead with the game and make
everyone laugh, she said to her:

"Put it under the princess's skirts."

When she was in front of Her Highness, the maiden knelt on the
ground as the Widow had instructed her, and put the rag under her
skirts.  And the princess' naivete played into the hands of the
Widow's malice.  When Tirant saw such a heinous thing, he was
completely aghast, and with a voice full of anguish, he began to
lament:

"Oh, fortune, enemy of all who want to live upright in this
world: Now, when I had achieved such a marriage, you have let me
be dishonored by a man of the most vile condition and nature that
could be found.  Oh, princess, my lady!  I would never have
believed that in a maiden of such tender years there could be so
little shame and boldness that you would commit such an
abominable sin."

At this moment Widow Repose came in.  She had waited a short time
at the door, and when she heard Tirant's lament, she said:

"Now all the things I have begun are coming to pass."

When she entered the room she saw that Tirant was in great
anguish, his pillow full of tears, continuing his lamentations.
She sat down near him to see if Tirant wanted to say anything to
her, and ready to do whatever he said.  When the Widow saw that
Tirant was not changing his tone, she said to him:

"That lover of all dishonesty won't leave her abominable life, no
matter how much you beg or threaten her.  Her only desire is to
satisfy her lust.  What can I do, poor me?  With these breasts,"
and she pulled them out so that Tirant would see them, "I nursed
that lady."

She let them hang out like this for a good while, pretending that
with her lamentations she had forgotten to cover them.  Then she
added:

"Lord Tirant, take comfort from me.  Oh, Almighty God, Holy
Trinity!  With great anguish in my soul, with great anger and
many tears, I revealed those thoughts that ran through my mind
almost every day.  But at night, alone in my room, I would find
myself drying my tearful eyes--with sackcloth so that I would
feel the pain even more."

Tirant quickly replied:

"Your love, Widow Repose, can't be compared to mine, because
yours is diminishing: It grows smaller and smaller, while mine is
increasing.  But I have more reason to grieve than any lover
because in one day's time I have reached the highest peak of love
that fortune could grant me, and the next day I have been the
most confused and downtrodden lover in the entire world.  My eyes
have seen a black Moor easily possess what I have not been able
to have by supplications or by all the dangers and hardships I
have endured.  A man as unlucky as I should not go on living, so
that he will not have to trust any maid or maiden."

He got up from the bed as though to leave, and the Widow said to
him:

"My lord, rest a while.  There are many people outside, and I
value my life so much that I would not want anyone to see you
leaving.  I'll go to the window and tell your grace when it is
safe to go."

Tirant went slowly back to the bed, never ceasing to ponder his
grief.  The Widow went into the room of the old mistress of the
house and quickly took off her clothing and dressed in a perfumed
blouse, and a skirt of black velvet.  With her blouse completely
unfastened she went into the bedchamber and lay down beside
Tirant very boldly and shamelessly, and said:

"If you knew the hardships my soul endures for love, you could
not help but have pity on me.  Where will you find greater
affection than mine in any woman?  It would be more to your glory
to have me always in your chambers or in your tents, serving you
in every way that I can, than to love a false maiden who is given
over to a black captive Moor.  Take me as a servant and as one
who loves you more than her own life."

"My lady," said Tirant, "please don't torment my sad soul.  I
can't give an answer to anything you've said.  I can only tell
you that I could not forget Her Majesty any more than I could
renounce my faith."

The Widow said:

"Since you don't want to love me, at least let me lie next to you
a while, completely naked."

She quickly removed her tunic, which was already unfastened.
When Tirant saw her in her chemise, he leapt out of bed, flung
open the door, and went back to his quarters with great pain.
And the Widow was left with no less.

When Tirant was in his room his emotion was so great that he did
not know what to do, and as he walked back and forth tears flowed
from his eyes.  And so he did nothing for three hours but pace,
lie down and get up again.  Then he left the room full of anger.
As secretly as he could he went in disguise to the garden gate,
and in the orchard he found the black gardener who had arrived
only shortly before.  He saw him in the doorway of his room,
putting on a pair of red pants.  When Tirant saw him, he looked
around, and no one else was in sight.  Then he seized him by the
hair, pushed him into the room and cut off his head.  He returned
to his room without anyone seeing him, because everyone was in
the square where the celebration was taking place.  Tirant then
said:

"Oh, just and true God!  You who correct our faults, I ask of you
vengeance and not justice for this lady.  Tell me, pitiless
maiden, was my disposition less agreeable to your desires than
this black gardener?  If you had loved as I thought you did, you
would still be mine.  But you never did love me."

Let us leave Tirant in his lament now, and return to the emperor
who, with all the ladies, was getting ready for the celebration.
At this moment a message arrived, telling him about an
unfortunate event that had happened in the camp three days
previously.

The Duke of Macedonia and the Duke of Pera were captains of the
camp, and they often went out to do battle against the Turks.
But the Turks were afraid of all the water that the Christians
released.  They often fought, and many men from both sides died.
But for every ten Christians who died, three hundred Turks died.
The reason for this was that when the Turks came into the city of
Saint  George, the Christians released all the river waters, and
from the canals the ground was like clay so that the horses could
not get out of it, and the men on foot could not escape.

But one day the Turks decided to come four thousand strong, armed
with spades and baskets, and picks, vinegar and fire to cut
through the mountain so that the water would spread down the dry
river bed, and would leave them free.  Further on, a league from
where the Turks were, was a large section of a toppled wall where
there was no one.  All the Moorish soldiers went there at night.
The foot soldiers stayed in that deserted place while those on
horseback went into a forest half a league away so they would not
be seen.  In the morning the spies came and told the captains
that the Turks had arrived.  They held council, and they all
agreed to mount and ride against the Turks.

First they sent out scouts, who came back with the news that the
enemy was going to try to cut through the mountain to control the
water.  The Christians went there.  As soon as they arrived the
foot soldiers began skirmishes that lasted a long time, so that
many men from both sides died.  Finally, when it was nearly noon,
the Turks found themselves too tightly pressed, and they
abandoned their tools and took flight.  The Christians quickly
went to the pass half a league away, and there was so much water
there that they could not cross it except at great effort and
danger.  Then, when they did make their way across, the others
were at a great advantage.  At a gallop the Moors left all the
foot soldiers behind, with about five thousand men following them
until they took refuge in the unpopulated village.  But it was
too heavily populated for the Christians!  When the Turks
regrouped at the broken wall, the Duke of Macedonia said:

"Gentlemen, I don't think we should go any further.  We don't
know what kind of an ambush may be in store for us: the enemy is
always thinking of how they can do us the most harm."

The Duke of Pera, who was the other captain, was very envious,
and he said maliciously:

"Duke of Macedonia, you have very little experience in arms, and
here you are telling us about the danger we could run into.  Turn
back and flee: you would be better off with women in the city
than here!"

The Duke of Macedonia did not want to create discord among the
men, and have them start fighting among themselves.  So he tried
to hold his tongue, but he could not restrain himself, and he
answered:

"Duke of Pera, you would be better off if you kept quiet.  Who
has been honored in battle?  I, the Duke of Macedonia, am known
as a conqueror, while the Duke of Pera is held in low esteem
because of the battles he has engaged in."

The other knights and grandees interrupted the argument, and made
them stop.  Some wanted to advance and others to retreat.  But in
the end they had to go on, because the Duke of Pera said:

"Whoever wants to come with me or go back is free to do so."

And he started out, so all the others felt they had to follow
him.  When they reached the deserted village, the Turks on top of
the wall defended it bravely.  There was a ditch there, and they
had to dismount and fight with lances, because they had no other
arms.  While they were doing this, the forces of the sultan and
the Turk came out, some through one gate and some through
another, and they caught them in the middle.  There was a great
slaughter, and they captured many of them.  I can say about this
sad adventure that everyone who dismounted was killed or taken
prisoner, and only one knight was able to escape.  With this
victory the Turks returned to the city of Bellpuig and put their
captives in strong prisons.

This news reached the emperor while he was in the hall waiting
for the ladies to come so they could go to the square for the
celebrations.

The emperor, in the presence of all who were there, cried:

"Oh, disconsolate widows, lament, tear out your hair, scratch
your faces, dress in mourning!  For the flower of chivalry has
died, and it will never be recovered."

The crying, the wailing, was so great in the palace that it soon
spread throughout the city.  And the festivities turned into
mourning and lamentations.

 Then the emperor sent for Tirant to give him the sad news and
show him the letters he had received.  When the chamberlain came
to Tirant's door, he heard him crying out:

"Oh, poor me!  Oh, cruel fortune!  Why have you done these things
to me?  To think that that excellent lady would give herself to a
black Moor, the enemy of our faith.  Would that I had never seen
such a thing--the woman I loved most in the world and hoped to
serve.  Oh, you wicked Widow!  I wish I had never known you, for
you will be the cause of my death and destruction!"

The emperor's chamberlain heard him talking and crying, but he
could not make out the words because the door was closed.  But to
do the emperor's bidding, he called out:

"Oh, captain!  The emperor is calling you and wishes to see you."

When the chamberlain returned to the emperor, he said:

"Sire, your captain already knows about the terrible things that
have happened.  I heard him grieving piteously!"

The captain came to the chamber and saw the princess lying on the
ground with the doctors gathered around her.  When he saw her
like this, he could not help but exclaim, "Why are you allowing
this lady to die without helping her?  Even though her guilt
cannot be excused, I still pray God that she will live longer
than I."

The doctors didn't understand him, and thought he was bewailing
the bad news.  And Tirant thought everyone was crying because of
the princess.  Then he turned and saw the empress who had torn
all the veils from her head.  At another side he saw the emperor
sitting on the floor, still as a statue.  He had the letters in
his hand, and motioned Tirant over and gave them to him.  When
Tirant read them, he said:

"It's worse than I thought."

Then he began to console the emperor.  At this moment the
princess regained consciousness.  She opened her eyes, and begged
Tirant to come to her.  The princess made him sit next to her and
said:

"Oh, my last hope!  If you truly love me, don't let your life and
mine be taken from this world until the day that all the dukes,
counts and marquis are recovered who have been killed or placed
in cruel prisons."

While she was speaking, two men who had fled the camp came in,
and she could say no more, nor could Tirant answer.  They told
them in detail about the destruction, and about the terrible
argument between the Duke of Macedonia and the Duke of Pera, and
how five thousand knights had been killed or taken prisoner.  The
emperor, his eyes brimming with tears and barely able to speak,
began to lament:

"Oh, unlucky captains!  You, more willful than wise, have ignored
my counsel.  Find comfort in a cruel prison, thinking that you
will never again see your emperor, for your actions have not been
well thought out."

The emperor got up from his seat, and went into a chamber, tears
springing from his eyes, his head in his hands.  When the
princess saw how he was grieving, she lost consciousness.  The
wisest doctor of them all said:

"I have little hope for this lady's life.  She has fainted three
times and now I cannot feel her pulse."

When Tirant heard the doctor say these words, he quickly said:

"Oh, cruel death!  Wouldn't it be better and more just for you to
come to me first, instead of letting me see her die?  Even though
she has deeply hurt me, I want to keep her company."

And with extreme grief he fell to the ground and all the weight
of his body fell on the leg which had been broken, and it broke
again, and was even worse than before.  Blood came out of his
nose and his ears, and especially from his leg, and it was a
wonder that he did not lose his life.  They quickly went to tell
the emperor, and he said:

"It is not at all surprising, for of all his relatives there is
not one left who is not dead or being held prisoner.  But this is
my consolation, because to get his relatives and friends out of
prison he will perform admirable feats."

The emperor began to go to Tirant when he saw his daughter lying
half dead.  And he said:

"God help me, I don't know which of them to help first."

But he had his daughter lifted up and placed in her bed, and then
Tirant was put in a beautiful room.  They quickly removed his
clothing and treated his leg, straightening it a little.  And he
was completely unaware of everything they did for him, because he
was unconscious for thirty-six hours.  When he regained
consciousness, he asked who had brought him there, and Hippolytus
told him:

"What, my lord!  Don't you know what a great fright you brought
us?

You've been unconscious for two days, and haven't had anything to
eat.  Your body can't hold up that way, so please take what the
doctors order you to have."

"I don't want anything that will bring my health back," said
Tirant.  "I want only death."

They quickly went to tell the emperor, and the princess
overheard, for she had now regained consciousness.  Then Tirant
said:

"Tell me how the princess is."

Hippolytus answered:

"Very well, my lord.  She's recovered now."

"I'm sure she is," said Tirant.  "Her illness could not be great.
A few days ago she had things she wanted a great deal, but now I
don't think she will brag much about them.  She's not the first
to do this, nor will she be the last.  I know very well that
she's not made of iron. Oh, how painful it is for a man not to be
able to share his grief."

At this moment the emperor came in, followed by all the ladies
with the empress, and they all asked him how he was.  But he did
not want to answer anyone.  They were all astonished that he had
not answered the greetings of the emperor or the ladies, and
continuing to show his grief he began to lament:

"Oh, Son of God, all powerful Jesus.  I am dying of love, and You
wished to die for love, to free mankind.  You suffered so much
pain, lashings, wounds and torments, and my pain was the sight of
a black Moor.  Outside of You, Lord, who can compare with my
love?  Lord, Your Holy Mother, and Our Lady, suffered great pain
at the foot of the cross, and I stood with a cord in my hand,
with two mirrors that represented, Lord, the greatest pain that
any Christian has ever endured."

The emperor and all the ladies were in the room, along with the
cardinal and many other clergymen, and they were all astonished
at the pious words they heard Tirant saying.

Then Tirant lowered his head, and began to lament again, because
death was calling him.  The doctors ordered many things for him,
but they did not help.  Hearing of his illness, an old Jewess
came to the emperor, and very boldly said:

"Your Majesty sees that Tirant's life is near its end, all the
doctors have given up hope, and I am the only one who can help
him.  Call the soldiers together, and have them start shouting
and go into his chambers and beat their swords against their
shields.  When he wakes up and sees so many armed men and hears
them shouting, and he asks what is happening, you can tell him
the Turks are at the gates of the city.  Then all those thoughts
of his will disappear, and with that virtue he has and out of
fear of being shamed, he will get up."

The emperor sent for his doctors and his wise men and explained
what the Jewess had advised.  They all agreed that it would be
worth trying.

The shouting and the uproar were so loud in the city that Tirant
heard it even before they came into his chamber.  The Jewess, who
stood at the head of the bed, told him:

"Get up, my captain.  Don't be afraid of death.  Here are your
enemies, the Turks, at the gates to the city, and they're coming
to take revenge on you."

When Tirant heard the old lady saying this, he said:

"Is it true that the Turks are so close?"

"They're even closer than you think," said the Jewess.  "Get up.
Go to the window, and you'll see what they plan to do to you."

Tirant immediately called for his clothes, and he had his leg
bound with towels.  Then he put his armor on as best he could and
mounted his horse, along with many other men.  He was so ready
and willing to fight that his illness went almost entirely away.
The emperor and the doctor who were there told him to take some
restoratives, and that would make him better able to do battle.
He did everything they advised him, and then he realized that it
had all been contrived to help him get over his illness.  Tirant
said:

"Praise be to God: a woman has delivered me from the arms of
death, for another woman had killed me."

With all the noise the soldiers raised, the princess ran to her
mother's chamber.  They saw the emperor coming back with Tirant,
and all the ladies looked out the windows to see what had
happened.  When Tirant was in front of the princess's window he
lifted his head and put both hands over his face.  The empress
asked her daughter why Tirant had covered his face, because the
only reason that was ever done was when a love affair had gone
wrong.  The princess answered that she didn't have any idea.

After they had gone by and were at the palace door, the emperor
dismounted, and Tirant begged his leave to go to his lodging.
The emperor did everything he could to make Tirant dismount,
telling him he would be given everything he needed in the palace,
but Tirant insisted on leaving.  The princess wondered why Tirant
did not want to stay in the palace despite all the emperor's
pleas, for he had wanted to many times before.  She also wondered
why he had covered his face.

When Tirant reached his lodging, he immediately went to his room
and called Lord Agramunt and Hippolytus.  He begged them to arm
and provision ten galley ships.  They said they would, and
leaving Tirant, they stocked the galleys.

After Tirant had eaten, he arranged everything for his departure.
He ordered all his men to go by land to the castle of Malvei, and
said he would go by sea and they would meet there.  When it was
evening and the doctors had left, they told the emperor that
Tirant was all right.  When it was nearly the hour for prayer,
the princess, upset that she did not see Tirant, asked
Plaerdemavida and Lady Montblanc to go to Tirant's lodging to
find out what was wrong.  As the maidens were coming, one of
Tirant's pages saw them and quickly went into Tirant's chambers
and said:

"Cheer up, my lord, two gallant ladies are coming with a message
from the princess."

"Go right away," said Tirant, "and tell them I am all right but
that I'm sleeping."

The page did what he was told, for Tirant did not want to see
them.

When the maidens returned to the palace with the reply, the
princess insisted so much that her mother and the emperor went to
Tirant's lodging, and when Tirant heard that the emperor was
coming he gave two pages instructions about what to do.  When the
emperor was at the door to his chamber, the more clever of the
pages said:

"Your Majesty should not come into the chamber because of the
captain's sickness.  He has not rested for so many days that he
is catching up on all the rest he needs now.  He is nearly
drenched with sweat, and it would be good for a doctor to come in
without awakening him."

Tirant quickly got into bed, and he moistened his face with a wet
cloth and pretended to be asleep.  The doctor came in, and when
he left again he told the emperor:

"My lord, it would be very harmful for us to awaken him now.  Why
doesn't Your Highness go now.  Tomorrow morning you can come back
and visit him."

The princess could not take it calmly when she was not able to
see Tirant, but she had to return with the emperor.  When Tirant
knew that they had all gone, he quickly got up and had all his
clothing gathered and taken to the galley.  At midnight he
secretly went on board, and he would have liked to cast anchor
then, but the ship was not ready.

In the morning, when the sun came up, the emperor heard the
galley trumpets giving the signal for the men to go on board.
Tirant sent Lord Agramunt to the emperor as his courier, and when
he was before him he gave him the following message:

"Your captain has gone on board one of the galleys, and has
ordered the ships to go to the port of Transimeno.  He will go by
ship to the castle of Malvei while the soldiers go there by land.
I have been sent here to tell Your Highness about his decision to
leave."

The emperor answered:

"Knight, I am very happy to have this good news, and I give many
thanks to Divine Goodness for bringing health to our captain so
that he can leave.  This is what I wanted most in the world after
the salvation of my soul."

Lord Agramunt kissed his hand and begged his leave.  Then he went
to the empress's chamber and bade her farewell, and did the same
to the princess.  When the empress saw that Hippolytus would have
to go, and the princess saw that Tirant was leaving, they shed
bitter tears, especially the princess because Tirant was going
without a word to her.  They quickly went to the emperor's
chamber to see if it was true that they were leaving, and the
emperor told them everything.  The princess urged the emperor to
go to the water's edge so that she could go along, and the
empress did not dally.  The emperor reached the sea before they
did, and he went on board the ship, begging Tirant to do
everything he could for the empire.  Tirant spoke to him very
kindly, and said he would do everything he could, and the emperor
felt very relieved.

All the soldiers advised the emperor to go back on land quickly
because a black cloud with thunder and lightning was coming their
way.  So the emperor went on land.  The princess was sorry that
she had not been there when her father went on the galley so that
she could have gone too and talked with Tirant.  By now the sea
was so choppy that the women were not allowed on board, nor would
her father have given his permission.  The princess, sighing
deeply, and with tears streaming from her eyes, had no recourse
other than to beg Plaerdemavida to go on board the galley and
find out why Tirant had left so secretly, without saying anything
to her, and why he had placed his hands over his face as he
passed by, and also why he had not wanted to stay in the
palace--which he had wanted to do so many times before.

Plaerdemavida understood exactly what her lady wanted, and she
got on a boat with Hippolytus and some others who were with him.
The pain that the empress felt as she saw Hippolytus going on
board the galley cannot be described.  When Plaerdemavida was on
board, Tirant paid no attention to her.  But she insisted, and
said to him:

"Oh, cruel knight!  Who has turned your thoughts?  To leave such
a virtuous lady, who has more dignity and virtue than anyone in
the world, without so much as telling her goodbye!  If you want
her life to be sad and to hasten her death, don't go back on
land, and don't look at her.  But if you want to restore her
bitter life, let her see your lordship for a short time."

When she had said this she could no longer hold back her tears,
and she wrapped her cloak around herself, and moaned softly but
would say no more.  Tirant wanted to reply to what Plaerdemavida
had told him, and very softly so that no one could hear him he
said:

"Her beauty and discretion so far surpasses all the others that
only a madman could compare anyone else with her.  But I saw this
lady with the black gardener, Lauseta, and she was not thinking
of me at all.  First I saw them kissing, and I was offended by
the sight.  Then I was even more shocked when I saw them
embracing like lovers and going into a chamber.  When they came
back out Widow Repose knelt down at her feet and put a silk scarf
high under her skirt.  Painful thoughts attacked my mind when I
saw how he treated her.  I don't know why I didn't kill someone
right then, but the wall was in my way.  But I could not take the
terrible jealousy of the black gardener out of my mind, and I cut
through his neck with my sword.  Still the pain kept increasing
so much that I was beside myself, and I went into my chamber,
pretending to be terribly tired so I would be left alone.  And
now I want to be in the sea; I want my body to float, unburied,
on the waves until it reaches the princess, so that she can dress
me in my shroud with her delicate hands."

Then he would say no more.  When Plaerdemavida heard what was
bothering Tirant and that the black gardener had been killed, and
no one would know who did it unless she told them, she was very
agitated.  Still she forced herself to smile, and with Hippolytus
there, she said:

"Even if you did see it, it was all a game to cheer up the
princess.  Widow Repose got some costumes from the plays for the
Corpus Christi festivals, and I dressed up like our gardener."

And she told him everything that had happened.

Tirant was astonished by it all, and said he could not believe
it.  The maiden laughed, and said:

"My lord, the best thing would be for me to stay here while
Hippolytus goes to my room.  Under my bed he will find all the
clothing of the black gardener.  And if I'm not telling the
truth, you can throw me into the ocean."

Tirant told Hippolytus to take the keys and go, and to come back
quickly because the sea was very choppy.  Hippolytus did what
Tirant commanded.  When he came back with the clothing, the ocean
swells were so high that Hippolytus could not board the galley,
and Plaerdemavida could not go back on land.  They threw a rope
to the ship and tied the clothing of the black gardener to it so
that it could be pulled up to the galley.  When Tirant saw the
mask and the clothing, he saw all the wickedness of Widow Repose.
He then swore in everyone's presence that if he could go on land
just then, he would have her burned before the emperor, or he
would do to her what he had done with the black man.  Then Tirant
begged Plaerdemavida to forgive the bad thoughts he had had about
the princess, and about her, and when she was with Her Highness
to beg her forgiveness.  Plaerdemavida agreed, very graciously.

Suddenly the sea became so stormy that the people who saw the
boat Hippolytus was on, began to pray that it would not sink.  It
headed back to land, and the men on it were drenched while the
boat was half-filled with water.  The wind and rain were so
strong and the waves were so high that the galley's ropes broke,
and they were swept out to sea.  Two of the galleys remained
there; the people on them were saved, but the ships were lost.
The three galleys that found themselves in the middle of the
tempestuous sea had their masts broken and their sails torn
apart.  A gust of wind threw one of the galleys into a small
island, and its men took refuge there.  Tirant's galley and the
other one were leeward.  They could not make it to the island,
and Tirant's galley found itself with its rudder smashed.  The
other galley was nearby, and it split apart.  The men on board
fell into the bitter sea, and all of them drown.

Tirant's galley continued toward Barbary, and the sailors lost
their bearings and did not know what seas they were in, and they
lamented loudly.  Tirant heard the great cries the sailors were
making, and he saw the galley's boatswain, who was the best of
all the sailors, commending his soul to God because a
tackle-block had fallen on his head.  A galley slave got up and
went to Tirant, and with a great effort he said:

"My lord, order the men to bale out the water in the galley.
Here is your staff of authority.  Hold it in your hand and run
through the galley: the boatswain is dead, and all the men see
that they are very near death, and are fainting.  Do everything
you can to make them bale, because if we can get beyond the cape,
we can save our lives.  It is better for us to be captives of the
Moors than to die."

Tirant lifted his head, and said:

"What seas are we in?"

"My lord," said the galley-slave, as he pointed, "those are the
seas of Sicily, and these are the seas of Tunis.  And because you
are a virtuous man I'm sorrier for you than I am for myself.  It
is Fortune's will that we shall perish on this Barbary Coast, and
in a case like this every man should beg forgiveness of the
others."

Tirant quickly got up, although the dreadful sea was crashing
about him so that he was barely able to stand.  Then he brought
out the best clothing he had, and he dressed in it.  He took a
sack containing a thousand ducats, and put a note inside that
said: "I beg whomsoever should find my body to give it an
honorable burial.  I am Tirant lo Blanc from Brittany, and of
that singular lineage of Roca Salada, High Captain of the Greek
Empire."

By now it was already past noon, and the further the galley went
the more water it took on.  The cries increased and death drew
near.  As they were near land the Moors saw the galley
approaching, and they realized that it would run aground just
where they wanted it, while the Christians knew that they could
not escape death or being captured.

The galley came close to land, and all the men threw themselves
into the sea to save their lives.  By this time it was nearly
dark of night.  When Tirant saw the sailors jumping overboard he
decided not to leave the ship, no matter what might happen.  And
by then there was no boat, rope or oar that had not been lost.
Tirant begged two sailors, faithful friends of his who had come
on the ship with him when it was stocked in Brittany, to take
care of the maiden.  They took off all her clothes, and by this
time nearly all the galley was underwater.  Taking up a corkwood
plank, the sailor tied it across her breasts while the other man
helped her stand up.  The sea sent a wave crashing into
Plaerdemavida and the sailors, and hurled them about.  The man
carrying the plank drowned in order to save her.  The other
sailor helped the maiden as long as he could, and finally was
forced to abandon her.  It was her good fortune to find herself
near land at night, and she could hear the loud noise the Moors
were making as they captured the Christians.  The maiden's feet
touched bottom, and since she was all alone she stopped and
decided not to go ashore.  Instead she went closer to land so
that she would not be in such deep water, but waves sometimes
came crashing over her head.  As she walked through the water
close to shore, she moved away from the shouts, afraid that she
would be killed.  For she saw that the Moors were killing each
other as each one tried to capture the most prisoners.  And when
lightning flashed, she could see the reflection of swords near
the sea.  She continued to walk in the water, completely naked,
following the shoreline, and whenever she heard anyone she would
duck underwater, and stay there until they were gone.

