CHAPTER IV

CONSTANTINOPLE

 After a week, while the king was in council, he remembered a
letter the emperor of Constantinople had sent him, telling about
certain troubles.  He summoned Tirant, and had it read in his
presence, and it said the following:

"We, Frederick, Emperor of the Empire of Greece by the immense
and divine majesty of the sovereign and eternal God, extend
health and honor to you, King of the great and abundant island of
Sicily.  By the pact made by our ancestors, sealed, signed and
sworn by you and by me through our ambassadors: We do notify your
royal personage that the sultan, the Moorish renegade, is inside
our empire with a great army, and in his company is the Grand
Turk.  They have overpowered a large part of our realm, and we
have been unable to lend assistance, for because of my old age I
cannot bear arms.  After the great loss we have suffered of
cities, towns and castles, the dearest possession I had in this
world was killed -- my first born son who was my consolation, and
a guardian of the holy Catholic faith -- doing battle against the
infidel, to his great honor and glory and to mine, And as a
greater misfortune, he was killed by his own men.  That sad,
painful day was the perdition of the imperial house and of my
honor.  It is known to me and is common knowledge that in your
court you have a valiant knight, whose name is Tirant lo Blanc;
he belongs to the brotherhood of that singular order of chivalry
said to be founded on that glorious saint, the father of
chivalry, Saint George, on the island of England.  Many singular
acts worthy of great honor are told about this knight and are
celebrated throughout the world, and they are the reason we ask
you to beg him on your behalf and mine to come to my service, for
I shall give him all my possessions he may desire.  And if he
will not come I pray Divine Justice to make him suffer my pain.
Oh, blessed King of Sicily!  As you are a crowned king, have pity
on my pain so that the immense goodness of God will keep you from
a similar situation, for we are all subject to the wheel of
fortune, and there is no one who can detain it."

When the emperor's letter was finished, and Tirant had heard it,
the king said:

"You should thank Almighty God, Tirant, my brother, for He has
given you such perfection that your name reigns throughout the
world.  I place my trust in your generosity, and so I dare to beg
you on behalf of the Emperor of Constantinople and myself.  And
if my pleas have no effect on you, at least have pity on that
unfortunate emperor so that he will not lose his imperial
throne."

When the king had said this, Tirant replied:

"If Your Majesty commands me to go serve that prosperous emperor
who reigns in Greece, I will do it because of the great love I
hold for Your Highness.  But, Sire, I can only do as much as a
man can do; that is plain to God and to the whole world.  And I
am even more astonished at that great emperor--who has passed
over all the excellent kings, dukes, counts, and marquis in the
world who are more knowledgeable and more valiant than I am in
the art of chivalry--that he should pass over them for me."

"Tirant," said the king, "I know very well that there are good
knights in the world, and you should not be forgotten among them.
If, by chance, their honor should be examined, among the
emperors, kings, and expert knights, the prize, honor and glory
would be given to you as the best of them all.  So I beg you as a
knight to go and serve the imperial state, and I advise you to do
so as if you were my son."

"Since Your Majesty commands and advises me to do this," said
Tirant, "I will go."

The king ordered all the galleys to be stocked with everything
they would need.  And when the king told the emperor's
ambassadors that Tirant was willing to go, they were the happiest
men in the world, and they heartily thanked the king.

As soon as the ambassadors had reached Sicily they were ready to
offer a salary to the men.  They gave half a ducat each day to
the crossbowmen, and a ducat to the soldiers.  And since there
were not enough men in Sicily, they went on to Rome and Naples,
and there they found many men who accepted wages very willingly,
and they also bought many horses.

Tirant took his leave of the king and queen, and of Philippe and
the infanta.  And with all the men on board, they let a favorable
wind fill the sails, and they sailed quickly over a calm sea
until one morning they found themselves before the city of
Constantinople.

When the emperor heard that Tirant had arrived, he was happier
than he had ever been, and he said that he felt as if his son had
come back to life.  As the eleven galleys neared shore, all the
cries of happiness made the entire city resound.  The emperor
went up on a great cenotaph to watch the galleys come in.  When
Tirant learned where the emperor was, he had two large flags of
the King of Sicily brought out, and one of his own.  He had three
knights come out in armor, each of them with a flag in his hand,
and every time they passed in front of the emperor they lowered
the flags until they nearly touched the water, while Tirant's
touched it each time.

This was a sign of greeting, and because of the emperor's dignity
they humbled themselves so lowly before him.  When the emperor
saw this, which was something that he had never seen before, he
was very pleased.

When Tirant was on land he found the Count of Africa waiting for
him on shore with many men, and he welcomed him with great honor.
They then made their way to the platform where the emperor was.
As soon as Tirant saw him he knelt to the ground, along with all
his men, and when they reached the middle of the platform they
bowed again.  When he was six feet away he knelt and tried to
kiss his foot, and the worthy lord would not permit it.  He
kissed his hand, and the emperor kissed him on the mouth.

When they had all bowed to him, Tirant gave him the letter from
the King of Sicily.  After the emperor had read it in everyone's
presence, he spoke to Tirant:

"This is no small happiness I feel at your arrival, virtuous
knight.  So that everyone will know how grateful I am to you, I
am bestowing on you the imperial and general captaincy over the
soldiers and over justice."

He offered him a rod made of solid gold, and on its enamel head
was painted the coat of arms of the empire.  When Tirant saw that
it was the emperor's will he accepted the rod and the captaincy,
and kissed his hand.  The trumpets and minstrels began to play by
order of the emperor, and they announced throughout the city by
imperial proclamation how Tirant lo Blanc had been chosen captain
by command of their lord, the emperor.

After all this the emperor came down from the cenotaph to go back
to the palace, and they passed by a very beautiful lodging that
had been prepared for Tirant and his men.  The emperor said:

"Captain, since we are here, go into your chambers so that you
can rest a few days from the hardships you have endured at sea."

"What, my lord!  Do you imagine that I would be so ill mannered
as to leave you?  My consolation is to accompany Your Majesty--to
Hell itself, and even better, to the palace."

The emperor had to laugh at what Tirant had said.  And Tirant
continued:

"My lord, if it please Your Majesty, when we are in the palace,
allow me to go and pay my respects to the empress and to your
beloved daughter, the infanta."

The emperor gave his consent.  When they were in the palace the
emperor took him by the hand and led him to the empress's
chamber.  They found her in the following condition: the chamber
was very dark, for there was no light at all, and the emperor
said:

"My lady, here is our captain who has come to pay you his
respects."

She replied in a very weak voice:

"Very well.  He is welcome."

Tirant said:

"My lady, it is by faith that I must believe that the one
speaking to me is the empress."

"Captain," said the emperor, "whoever holds the captaincy of the
Greek Empire has the power to open windows, and to look everyone
in the face, to remove the mourning they bear for a husband,
father, son or brother."

Tirant asked for a lighted torch to be brought, and it was done
immediately.  When the light was cast on the room the captain
discovered a pavilion entirely in black.  He went up to it,
opened it, and saw a woman dressed in coarse cloth with a large
black veil over her head that covered her entirely, down to her
feet.  Tirant removed the veil from her head so that her face was
uncovered, and when he saw her face he knelt to the ground and
kissed her foot and then her hand.  She held a rosary in her
hand, made of gold and enamel; she kissed it and then had the
captain kiss it.  Then he saw a bed with black curtains.  The
infanta was reclining on the bed, dressed in a black satin skirt
and covered with a velvet garment of the same color.  A woman and
a maiden were sitting at her feet on the bed.  The maiden was the
daughter of the Duke of Macedonia, and the woman was called
Widow Repose, and she had nursed the infanta with her own milk.
In the back of the room he saw one hundred seventy women and
maidens, all with the empress and the infanta Carmesina.

Tirant approached the bed, made a deep bow to the infanta, and
kissed her hand.  Then he opened the windows.  And it seemed as
though all the women were coming out of a long period of
captivity: they had been plunged into darkness a long while
because of the death of the emperor's son.  Tirant said:

"My lord, speaking by your leave I will tell Your Highness and
the empress my idea.  I see that the people in this notable city
are very sad and troubled for two reasons.  The first is because
of the loss of the prince, your son.  Your Majesty should not be
troubled, for he died in the service of God, upholding the holy
Catholic faith.  Instead you should praise and give thanks to the
immense goodness of God, our Lord, because He gave him to you and
it was His wish to take him from you for His own good, and He has
placed him in the glory of paradise.  The second reason they are
sad is because all the Moors are so nearby that they are afraid
of losing their possessions and their lives, and as a lesser evil
that they will become captives of the infidel.  That is why Your
Highness and the empress must show smiling faces to everyone who
sees you: to console them in their grief so that they will gather
courage to fight against the enemy."

"The captain's advice is good," said the emperor.  "It is my wish
and my command that men as well as women shed their mourning
immediately."

While the emperor was talking, Tirant's ears were attentive to
what he was saying, but his eyes were contemplating the great
beauty of Carmesina.  As the windows had been closed it was very
warm, so her blouse was partly open, exposing her breasts like
two apples from the garden of Eden.

They were like crystal and allowed Tirant's eyes to gain
entrance, and they remained prisoners of this free person
forever, until death separated them.  The emperor took his
daughter Carmesina by the hand and led her from the room.  The
captain took the empress's arm, and they went into the other room
which was very nicely decorated and completely covered with works
of art depicting the following love-stories: Floris and
Blanchfleur, Thisbe and Pyramus, Aeneas and Dido, Tristram and
Isolde, Queen Guinevere and Lancelot, and many more whose loves
were displayed in very subtle and artistic paintings.  And Tirant
said to Ricart:

"I never thought there could be as many wondrous things on this
earth as I am seeing."

By this he meant, more than anything, the great beauty of the
princess.  But Ricart did not understand him.

Tirant took his leave of the others and went to his chambers.  He
entered a bedroom and put his head on a pillow at one end of the
bed.  It was not long before someone came to ask him if he wished
to dine.  Tirant said he did not, and that he had a headache.  He
was wounded by that passion that traps many.  Diafebus, seeing
that he was not coming out, went into the room and said:

"Captain, please, tell me what's the matter.  I'll be glad to
help you if I can."

"My cousin," said Tirant, "the only thing wrong is that the sea
air has left me with ardor."

"Oh, captain!  Are you going to keep things hidden from me?  I
have been the archive of all your good and bad fortune, and now
are you keeping secrets from me?  Tell me, I beg you.  Don't hide
anything from me."

"Don't torment me even more," said Tirant.  "I have never felt a
worse illness than I do now."

He turned over from shame, not daring to look Diafebus in the
face, and no other words could come out of his mouth except:

"I am in love."

As he said this, tears flowed from his eyes.  When Diafebus saw
how ashamed Tirant was he understood why, because Tirant had
always reprimanded all of his kinsmen and all his friends on the
subject of love.  And as Diafebus thought of the remedies for
this illness, he said:

"Although you may think that it is difficult and strange to be
subjugated by the yoke of love, you may be sure that no one can
resist it.  And so, my captain, the more intelligent a man is,
the more he should hide his thoughts, and not reveal the pain and
anguish that are attacking his mind."

When Tirant saw the good advice that Diafebus was giving him, he
got up, feeling ashamed, and they went in to dinner, which was
excellent, because the emperor had planned it.  But Tirant could
not eat.  The others thought he was still feeling the ill effects
of the sea.  And because of his great passion, Tirant left the
table and went into his room, sighing and ashamed of the
confusion that was overcoming him.

Diafebus took another knight, and they went to the palace, not to
see the emperor but to see the ladies.  The emperor, who was
sitting near a window, saw them passing by, and sent word for
them to come up.  Diafebus and the other knight went up to the
emperor's rooms, and found him with all the ladies.  The emperor
asked what had become of their captain, and Diafebus told him
that he felt a little ill.  When he heard it he was very
concerned, and told his doctors to go at once to see him.

When they returned, the doctors told the emperor that his illness
had only been caused by the change of air.  The magnanimous
emperor begged Diafebus to tell him about all the celebrations
that had taken place in England with the marriage of the king to
the daughter of the King of France, and about all the knights who
had jousted, and which ones had been victorious in the field.

"My lord," said Diafebus, "I would be very grateful if Your
Majesty would excuse me from telling about these things.  I
wouldn't want Your Highness to think that because I'm a relative
of Tirant I would favor him.  I will tell you what truly
happened.  And as proof, I have all the acts signed by the king,
and the judges of the camp, and by many dukes, counts and
marquis, kings-of-arms, and heralds."

The emperor begged him to have them brought immediately.
Diafebus sent for them and told the emperor extensively about all
the celebrations, and he did the same about the jousts.
Afterward they read the acts and they saw that Tirant had been
the best of all the knights.  The emperor was very pleased, and
his daughter Carmesina even more so, as were all the ladies who
were listening very attentively to all the magnificent
chivalresque acts of Tirant.  Afterward they wanted to know
about the wedding of the princess of Sicily and the liberating of
the Grand Master of Rhodes.

When everything had been explained the emperor held counsel, as
he usually did for a half hour in the morning and one hour in the
evening.  Diafebus wanted to go with him, but the valiant lord
would not permit it and told him:

"It is a well known fact that young knights have a greater desire
to be with the ladies."

He left, and Diafebus stayed behind, and they spoke of many
things.

Princess Carmesina begged her mother, the empress, to let them go
to another room where they could enjoy themselves, since they had
been inside a long while in mourning for her brother.  The
empress said:

"My child, you may go wherever you please."

They all went to a marvelous hall built completely with
brick-work, done artfully and with delicate craftsmanship.  When
the princess was in the hall, she drew apart from the others with
Diafebus, and they began to talk about Tirant.  When Diafebus saw
that she was speaking of Tirant with such interest, he quickly
said:

"Take everything that I say as a loyal servant, and keep it in
the most secret part of your heart: It was only the fame of Your
Highness that brought Tirant here to see you and serve you.
Don't imagine, Your Highness, that we have come at the request of
the valiant King of Sicily, or because of the letters your
father, the emperor, sent to the King of Sicily.  And Your
Highness should not imagine that we have come to test ourselves
in the exercise of arms, or because of the beauty of the land, or
to see the imperial palaces.  Your Highness, the reason for our
coming was none other than the desire to see you and to serve
Your Majesty.  And if wars and battles take place, it will all be
to win your love and admiration."

"Oh, wretched me," said the princess.  "What are you saying to
me?  Shall I grow vain, thinking that all of you have come
because of love of me, and not for the love of my father?"

"In faith," said Diafebus, "on that I could swear that Tirant,
our brother and lord, begged us to come with him to this land to
see the daughter of the emperor, whom he desired to see more than
anything in the world.  And the first time his eyes rested on
Your Highness he was so overcome by the vision of Your Excellency
that he took to his bed."

When Diafebus said these things to the princess she became
withdrawn and remained deep in thought, and could not speak.  She
was half beside herself, her angelic face blushing, for feminine
fragility had so overtaken her that she could not utter a word.

At that instant the emperor arrived and called Diafebus, and they
spoke of many things until the emperor wished to dine.  Diafebus
excused himself, approached the princess, and asked Her Majesty
if she would like to command him to do anything.

"Yes," she said, "take these embraces of mine and keep them for
yourself, and give part of them to Tirant."

Diafebus drew near to her and did what she commanded.

When Tirant heard that Diafebus had gone to the palace and was
talking to the princess, he wanted very much for him to come back
so that he could have news of his lady.  When he came into the
room, Tirant got up from the bed and said:

"My good brother, what news do you bring me of the lady who has
captured my heart?"

When Diafebus saw Tirant's great love, he embraced him on behalf
of his lady, and told him their entire conversation.  Then Tirant
was happier than if he had been given a kingdom, and he
recuperated so well that he ate well and was happy, and longed
for morning to come so he could go and see her.

After Diafebus had left the princess, she remained lost in
thought, and she had to leave her father's side and go into her
chambers.  The daughter of the Duke of Macedonia was named
Stephanie.  She was a young lady whom the princess loved deeply,
because they had been raised together from the time they were
very small, and they were both the same age.  When she saw that
the princess had gone into her chambers, she left the table and
followed her.  When they were together the princess told her
everything Diafebus had said to her, and about the great passion
she felt from Tirant's love.

"I tell you that I have been more pleased by the vision of this
man than all the men I have ever seen in the whole world.  He is
tall, of excellent disposition, and he shows his great spirit by
his manners, and the words that come out of his mouth are
delightful.  I think he is more courteous and agreeable than
anyone I have ever known.  Who wouldn't love a man like that?
And to think that he came here more out of love for me than for
my father's sake!  Truly, my heart is inclined to obey all his
commands, and the signs indicate that he will be my life and my
salvation."

Stephanie said:

"My lady, from among those who are good, choose the best.
Knowing his extraordinary feats of chivalry, there is no lady or
maiden in the world who would not love him and obey his every
wish."

While they were engaged in this delightful conversation, the
other maidens came in, along with Widow Repose, who was very
concerned with Carmesina since she had suckled her.  She asked
them what they were discussing, and the princess said:

"We were talking about what that knight was saying--about the
great celebrations and honors that were given in England to all
the foreigners who were there."

And they spent the night speaking of these and other things so
that the princess slept neither a little nor a great deal.

The following day Tirant put on a cloak of gold braid, and in his
hand he carried the gold captain's stick.  All the rest of his
countrymen dressed in brocades and silks, and they all went to
the palace.

When the emperor heard that his captain had come, he told them to
let him enter.  As he came in the emperor was dressing and the
princess was combing his hair.  Then she brought him water to
wash his hands, as she did every day.  The princess was dressed
in a skirt of gold thread.

When the emperor had finished dressing he said to Tirant:

"Tell me, captain, what was the illness you were suffering from
yesterday?"

"Your Majesty, my affliction was brought about entirely by the
ardor of the sea, for the winds of these lands are finer than are
those of the west."

The princess replied before the emperor could speak:

"Sire, that ardor does no harm to foreigners if they behave as
they should; instead it brings them health and a long life."

As she spoke these words she looked steadfastly at Tirant,
smiling at him so that he could see she had understood him.

The emperor and the captain left the chamber together, talking as
they went, and the princess took Diafebus' hand, and holding him
back, she said:

"After what you told me yesterday I have not slept all night
long."

"My lady, what can I tell you?  We've had our share as well.  But
I am very happy that you understood Tirant."

"How could you think," said the princess, "that Greek women are
of less worth than the French?  In this land all women understand
your Latin, no matter how obscurely you speak."

"That is why," said Diafebus, "we are more content having
conversations with intelligent people."

"As far as conversations go," said the princess, "you will soon
see the truth, and you'll see if we understand your wiles."

The princess ordered Stephanie to bring other maidens to keep
Diafebus company, and many young ladies quickly appeared.  When
the princess saw him well engaged, she went back into her chamber
to finish dressing.  Meanwhile Tirant accompanied the emperor to
the great church of Saint Sophia, and then left him there saying
prayers, and returned to the palace to be with the empress and
Carmesina.  When he was in the great hall he found his cousin
Diafebus there, surrounded by many maidens, and telling them
about the love between Philippe and the daughter of the King of
Sicily.  Diafebus was so accustomed to being in the company of
maidens, that it seemed as though he had been raised with them
from birth.

When they saw Tirant come in they all stood up and welcomed him;
then they made him sit with them, and they talked of many things.
Then the empress came out, and she took Tirant aside and asked
him about his illness.  Tirant told her that he was much better
now.  It was not long before the princess came out.

Tirant took the empress's arm because, as captain, he held
precedence over the others.  There were many counts and marquis
there, men of high position, and they went to the princess to
take her arm, and she said:

"I want no one at my side except my brother Diafebus."

They all left her, and he took her arm.  But God knows that
Tirant would much rather have been near the princess than near
the empress.  As they went to the church, Diafebus told the
princess:

"Look, Your Highness, how spirits attract."

The infanta said:

"Why do you say that?"

"My lady," said Diafebus, "because Your Excellency has on a
sequined dress, embroidered with large pearls, and the
sentimental heart of Tirant brings what it needs.  Oh, how
fortunate I would feel if I could place that cloak over this
dress!"

As they were very near the empress, he pulled Tirant's cloak.
When he felt his cloak being tugged, he stopped, and Diafebus
placed the cloak over the princess's dress, and said:

'My lady, now the stone is in its place."

"Oh, wretched me!" said the princess.  "Have you gone mad, or
have you lost your senses?"  Are you so shameless that you say
these things in front of so many people?"

"No, my lady," said Diafebus.  "No one hears or notices or sees
anything, and I could say the Pater Noster backward and no one
would understand me."

"You must," said the princess, "have learned about honor in
school, where they read that famous poet, Ovid, who speaks of
true love in all his books.  If you knew what tree the fruits of
love and honor are plucked from, and if you knew the customs of
this land, you would be a very fortunate man."

As she was saying this they reached the church.  The empress went
behind the curtain, but the princess did not want to go in,
saying that it was very hot.  The truth was that she did not go
in so that she could observe Tirant at her pleasure.  He went
near the altar where there were many dukes and counts, and they
all gave him the honor of being first because of his station.  He
said mass on his knees, and when the princess saw him kneeling on
the ground, she took one of the brocade pillows that had been
placed there for her, and gave it to one of the maidens to give
to Tirant.  The emperor saw his daughter performing that
courteous act, and he was very pleased.  When Tirant saw the
pillow that the maiden was giving him to kneel on, he stood up
and then, with his cap in his hand, he bowed deeply on one knee
to the princess.

Do not imagine that during the entire mass the princess could
finish saying her Hours as she looked at Tirant and all his men
dressed in the French fashion.  When Tirant had gazed at the
striking beauty of the princess, he let his mind play over all
the ladies and maidens he could remember seeing, and he thought
to himself that he had never seen or hoped to see anyone as well
endowed by nature as she, for in lineage, in beauty, in grace, in
wealth, along with infinite wisdom, she seemed more angelic than
human.

When mass was finished they returned to the palace, and Tirant
took his leave of the emperor and of the ladies, and went to his
quarters with his men.  As they reached their quarters he went
into his chamber and fell upon the bed, thinking of the
princess's great beauty.  And her beautiful features only served
to make him feel worse: so that while he had felt one pain
before, he now felt one hundred.  Diafebus went into the chamber,
and when he saw him with such a sad face he said:

"My captain, you are the most extraordinary knight I have ever
seen in my life.  Anyone else would hold a great celebration for
all the joy they had when they saw their lady.  And the flattery
and honor she paid you--more than to all the great lords there.
And then she presented the brocade pillow to you with such grace
and love in everyone's presence.  Here, when you should feel like
the most fortunate man in the world, you seem to have lost all
reason."

When Tirant heard Diafebus' comforting words he said in a
mournful voice:

"The reason my heart is grieving is that I am in love, and I
don't know if my love will be returned.  This is what torments me
most, and makes my heart colder than ice.  I have no hope of
gaining my desire, because fortune always opposes those who are
in love."

When Diafebus saw how tormented Tirant was, he would not let him
continue, and he said:

"If you keep on behaving that way, infamy will follow you the
rest of your life.  And if this should reach the emperor's ears,
God forbid, what would happen to you and the rest of us?  He
would say that you fell in love with his daughter the day you
arrived in order to bring shame to his entire realm, the crown
and the empire.  So, my captain, use your discretion, and don't
let anyone guess you're in love."

Tirant listened to the wise words of Diafebus, and he was very
glad to have the advice of his good friend and relative.  He
thought for a moment, and then got out of bed and went to the
hall to join his men who had been surprised at Tirant's
discourteous behavior.

After they had eaten he begged Diafebus to go to the palace and
give the infanta some very singular Hours he had, from Paris,
which had solid gold covers and were very delicately decorated.
They also had an ingenious lock so that when the key was removed
no one could see where it opened.  Diafebus wrapped the Hours and
gave them to a page to carry.  When Diafebus was in the palace he
found the emperor in the ladies' chamber, and following Tirant's
instructions, he told him:

"Your Majesty, your captain begs your permission to go see the
Moorish camp within a few days.  And he also sends Your Highness
these Hours.  If you don't care for them, he says they should be
given to one of the infanta's maidens."

As soon as the emperor saw them he was astonished at their
uniqueness.  "This," said the emperor, "can only belong to a
maiden of the royal family."

He gave them to his daughter, Carmesina.  She was very happy
because the Hours were so beautiful, and also because they were
Tirant's, and she stood up and said:

"Sire, would Your Majesty approve if we sent for the captain and
the minstrels, and had a small party?  The mourning and this
sadness have lasted such a long time."

"My dearest daughter, don't you know that I have no other
consolation in this world except you and Isabel, the Queen of
Hungary who, for my sins, is absent from my sight?  And since my
son died I have no other worldly good but you.  All the happiness
you can have will bring me peace in my old age."

The infanta quickly sent a page for Tirant and had Diafebus sit
next to her.  When Tirant received his lady's command he left his
quarters and went to the emperor, who asked him to dance with his
daughter, Carmesina.  The dancing lasted nearly till evening when
the emperor wanted to dine.  Then Tirant returned to his lodging
very happily, because he had danced continuously with the infanta
and she had said many delightful things to him.

The following day the emperor held a great banquet for Tirant.
All the dukes, counts and marquis ate at the table with him, the
emperor and his daughter.  The rest ate at other tables.  When
the meal was over there was dancing.  After they had danced for a
while came the collation.  Then the emperor had them mount their
horses so he could show Tirant the entire city.

Afterward the emperor called for a general council, and he told
his daughter to be there because many times he had said to her:

"My daughter, why don't you come to the council often so that you
will know how it is conducted?  After I die you will need to know
how to rule your land."

The princess went, both to see how the council was run and to
hear Tirant talk.  And when everyone was seated at the council,
the emperor spoke to Tirant.

"I beg you, captain, to prepare for battle with our enemies, the
Genoese.  We have received news that Genoese ships, coming from
Tuscany and Lombardy, have reached the port of Aulis, filled with
soldiers, horses and provisions.  Our own ships have reached the
island of Euboea, and I believe they will soon be here."

Tirant took off his cap and said:

"Command me to go against the Genoese whenever you wish, Your
Majesty.  I am ready."

"I'll tell you what you must do for now," said the emperor.  "Go
to where my judgment seat is.  I want you to sit on it, listen to
the cases brought before you and judge them with mercy."

One of the members of the council named Montsalvat stood up and
said:

"Sire, Your Majesty should take a closer look at these matters,
for there are three obstacles.  First, the Duke of Macedonia
should not be deprived of his rights: he has the captaincy, and
it is his privilege since he is closer to the throne.  Second, it
should not be given to a foreigner who has no official position
in the empire.  Third, before the soldiers leave here they should
make a pilgrimage, bearing gifts to the island where Paris stole
Helen, for that is how the Greeks were victorious over the
Trojans in ancient times."

The emperor could not tolerate the knight's foolish words, and he
said very angrily:

"If it were not for the respect I have for our Heavenly Father I
would have you beheaded.  It would fit all your merits, and it
would be a sacrifice to God and an example to this world, because
you are a wicked Christian.  It is my command that Tirant, who is
our captain now, be above all our captains: he deserves it
because of his virtue and shining chivalry.  The Duke of
Macedonia, who is cowardly and inept at war, never knew how to
win a battle.  The person I designate will be captain, and anyone
who contradicts him will receive my punishment in such a way that
they will be remembered throughout the world."

The emperor stood up, and would not hear another word from
anyone.  He had a proclamation read throughout the city that
anyone having a complaint against anyone else should go to the
hall of justice the following day and from that day forward, and
justice would be meted out.

The following day the captain sat on the imperial judgment seat,
and heard everyone with a complaint, and made judgments on them
all.  For from the time the Grand Turk and the Moorish sultan
had come into the empire no justice at all had been given.

Two weeks after Tirant came, all the emperor's ships arrived,
carrying men, wheat and horses.  Before the arrival of the ships
the emperor presented the captain with eighty-three large and
beautiful horses, and many suits of armor.  Tirant had Diafebus
come up first so he could choose from the weapons and horses.
Then Ricart made his choice, and finally all the others, while
Tirant took nothing for himself.

Tirant was deeply in love with the princess, and his suffering
increased daily.  His love was so great that when he was with her
he did not dare talk to her about anything concerning love.  And
the day for his departure was drawing near, for they were waiting
only for the horses to recover from the hardships they had
endured at sea.

The discreet princess knew about Tirant's love.  She sent a page
to ask Tirant to be at the palace at noon because that was the
time when all the others would be resting.  When Tirant received
his lady's command, he was the happiest man in the world.  He
immediately sent for Diafebus, to give him the news, and to tell
him that she wanted only the two of them to go.  Diafebus said:

"Captain, I am very pleased at this beginning, even though I
don't know what the end will bring."

At the appointed hour the two knights went up to the palace and
quietly entered the princess's chamber, hoping to have victory.
When she saw them she was very happy.  She stood up and took
Tirant's hand, and made him sit next to her.  Then Diafebus took
Stephanie by one arm and Widow Repose by the other, and led them
aside so they would not hear what the princess was saying to
Tirant.  The princess smiled and softly said:

"Since you are a foreigner I would not want you to come to any
harm unknowingly.  I know you came to this land at the bidding of
the King of Sicily, because he had confidence in your merits.
But he could not tell you of the danger that might befall you,
because he did not know about it."

Tirant answered:

"So that you will not think me ungrateful for what you are
telling me, I kiss your hands and feet, and I promise to do
everything Your Highness commands me."

Tirant begged her to give him her hand so he could kiss it, but
she would not.  Then he insisted several times, and when he saw
that she still would not, he called Widow Repose and Stephanie.
To satisfy the captain they begged her to allow him to kiss her
hand.  She did it this way: not wanting to let him kiss the back
of her hand, she opened it so he would kiss the palm.  Because
kissing the palm is a sign of love, and kissing the back of the
hand is a sign of dominance.  Then the princess said to him:

"Blessed knight, may merciful God keep you from the hands of that
ravenous lion, the Duke of Macedonia: he is a cruel and envious
man, and very knowledgeable about treachery.  He is infamous for
the fact that he has only killed people wickedly.  It is well
known that he killed that valiant knight, my brother.  When my
brother was fighting courageously against the enemy, he came up
behind him and cut the straps of his helmet so that his head
would be uncovered, and he was killed by the Moors.  A great
traitor like him should be feared.  And so, virtuous knight, I
advise you, when you are in battle, be wary of him.  Don't trust
him even while you are eating or sleeping."

It happened one day at dinner time that Tirant found the empress
and the princess still at the table.  He came into the hall and
served the empress and her daughter as steward and cup-bearer,
since this was his privilege as captain.  When Tirant saw that
the meal was nearly over, he asked the empress to clear up a
matter he was uncertain about.  The empress answered that if she
could she would do it very gladly.

"Tell me, my lady," said Tirant, "for a knight, which is most
honorable, to die well or to die badly, since he must die?"

And he said not a word more. The princess said:

"Holy Mother of God!  What a question to ask my mother.  Everyone
knows it's better to die well than to die badly."

Then Tirant struck the table with his clenched fist and muttered,
"So be it," so softly that they could barely hear him.  Without
another word he got up and went to his lodgings.  And everyone
was left astonished at Tirant's behavior.

The following day the princess was feeling very upset by what
Tirant had said.  In the morning, while the emperor was at mass
with all the ladies, Tirant went into the church for prayer, and
he told the emperor:

"Sire, the galleys are ready to go to Cyprus to bring back
provisions.  Does Your Majesty want them to leave?"

The emperor said:

"I wish they were one hundred miles out to sea right now!"

Tirant quickly went to the port to give the order for them to set
sail.  When the princess saw Tirant leaving, she called Diafebus
and asked him to give Tirant the message that after he had eaten
he should come to see her immediately, because she wanted very
much to talk to him, and that later they would dance.

When Tirant heard the news he considered at once what it might
mean.  He had the most beautiful mirror bought that could be
found, and put it inside his sleeve.  When he thought it was
about time, they went to the palace and found the emperor talking
to his daughter.  The emperor saw them coming and sent for his
minstrels, and they danced for a good while.  After watching them
for a time the emperor withdrew to his chambers.  The princess
immediately stopped dancing, and taking Tirant by the hand they
sat at a window.  The princess said:

"Virtuous knight, I have great pity for you, seeing how disturbed
you are.  Tell me, I beg you, what is troubling you."

"My lady, since Your Highness is forcing me to tell you, I can
only say that I am in love."

He said nothing more, and lowered his eyes.

"Tell me, Tirant," said the princess, "who is the lady that is
causing you so much pain?  If I can help you in any way, I will
be very glad to."

Tirant put his hand in his sleeve, drew out the mirror, and said:

"My lady, the face you will see here can bring me life or death."

The princess quickly took the mirror, and with hurried steps she
went into her chamber, thinking she would find a portrait of some
woman in the mirror.  But she saw only her own face.  Then she
was astonished that a lady could be courted in this way, without
words.

While she was happily reflecting on what Tirant had done, Widow
Repose and Stephanie came in.  They found the princess sitting
with the mirror in her hands, and they said to her: "My lady,
where did you get such a pretty mirror?"

The princess told them about the way Tirant had declared his love
for her, and she said she had never heard of it being done
before:

"Not even in all the story books I've read have I ever found such
a graceful declaration.  How knowledgeable these foreigners are!"

Widow Repose answered:

"Tell me, my lady, should Your Highness be paying as much
attention as you are to a servant your father has taken into his
house nearly out of charity, and who was thrown out by that
famous king of Sicily, along with other foreigners wearing gold
and silk clothes they've borrowed?  Do you want to lose your good
reputation for a man like him?"

The princess was very upset by what the Widow had said, and she
went into her chambers nearly crying.  Stephanie went with her,
telling her not to be so upset, and consoling her as best she
could.

"Isn't it terrible?" said the princess.  "Here I am, scolded by
the very mistress who nursed me!  What if she had seen me doing
something really bad?  I believe she would have sent out a crier
to advertise it in the court and to the entire city.  I trust God
that her wicked, dishonest, cursing tongue will have the
punishment it deserves."

"It's normal," said Stephanie, "for maidens in the court to be
loved and courted, and for them to have three kinds of love:
virtuous, profitable and vicious.  The first one, which is
virtuous, is when some grandee loves a maiden, and she feels very
honored when others know that he dances, jousts, or goes into
battle for her love.  The second is profitable, and it is when
some gentleman or knight of ancient and virtuous lineage loves a
maiden and sways her to him with gifts.  The third is vicious,
when the maiden loves the gentleman or knight for her own
pleasure, and he is generous in words that give her life for a
year, but if they go too far they can end in a heavily curtained
bed among perfumed sheets where she can spend an entire winter's
night.  This last kind of love seems much better to me than the
others."

When the princess heard Stephanie say such witty things, she
began to smile and most of her melancholy left her.  While they
were talking the empress asked where her daughter was, since she
had not seen her for a long time.  She went out into the hall and
met the empress who asked her why her eyes were red.

"My lady," said the princess, "all day long today I've had a
headache."

She made her sit on her knees, and kissed her at length.

The following day Tirant said to Diafebus:

"My brother, go to the palace, I beg you, and talk to the
princess.

See if you can find out how she felt about the mirror."

Diafebus went at once and met the emperor going to mass.  When it
was over Diafebus went up to the princess, and she asked him what
had become of Tirant.

"My lady," said Diafebus, "he left his lodging to go sit in the
judgment seat."

"If you only know," said the princess, "the trick he played on
me!  He declared his love for me with a mirror.  Just let me see
him and I'll tell him a few things he won't like "

"Oh my good lady!" said Diafebus.  "Tirant brought a flaming log
and found no wood to burn here."

"Yes," said the princess, "but the log has gotten wet.  However,
here in this palace you'll find a bigger and better one that
gives much more warmth than the one you're talking about.  It's a
log called Loyalty, and it's very tender and dry, and it gives
happiness to anyone who can warm themselves by it."

"My lady, let us do this," said Diafebus.  "If it pleases Your
Highness, let us take some of yours which is good and dry, and
some of ours which is wet and moist, and let us make a shape in
your likeness and Tirant's "

"No," said the princess, "it isn't a good idea to make two
opposites into one."

And they joked in this way until they had returned to her
chamber.  Then Diafebus took his leave and went back to his
lodgings where he told Tirant everything he and the princess had
said.

After they had eaten Tirant knew that the emperor must be asleep,
so he and Diafebus went to the palace.  Through a window
Stephanie saw them coming, and she quickly went to tell the
princess:

"My lady, our knights are coming now."

The princess came out of the chamber.  When Tirant saw his lady,
he made a deep bow before her.  The princess returned his
greeting with a less pleasant expression than usual.  Tirant was
not very happy at the lady's expression, and in a low voice, he
said:

"Lady, full of perfection, I beg Your Excellency to tell me what
you are thinking.  I don't believe I have seen Your Highness
behave this way for many days."

"My behavior," said the princess, "cannot please God, and much
less the world, but I will tell you the reason, and your lack of
knowledge and goodness will be revealed.  What will people say
about you when they hear of this?  That the emperor's daughter,
who is in such a lofty position, has been courted by his captain
whom he loved deeply and trusted.  You have not kept the honor
and reverence you are obligated to have for me.  Instead you have
acted with bad faith and dishonest love."

She got up to go back into her chambers.  When Tirant saw that
she was leaving he caught up to her, took hold of her shawl, and
begged her to listen to him.  Stephanie and Diafebus pleaded with
her so much that she sat down again, and Tirant said:

"If there was any fault, you must forgive me, for love has
absolute control over me.  Doesn't Your Highness remember the day
when the empress was present and I asked if it was better to die
well or to die badly?  And Your Majesty answered that it was
better to die well than badly.  I knew that if I did not let you
know of my suffering, one night they would find me dead in the
corner of my room, and if I did tell you, I would come to the
point where I am now.  And so, on my knees, I ask only that after
my death your angelic hands dress me, and that you write letters
on my tomb that say this: Here Lies Tirant lo Blanc Who Died of
Great Love."

His eyes became a sea of tears, and sighing painfully he got up
from the princess's feet, and left the chamber to go to his
lodging.  When the princess saw him leaving so disconsolately,
she began to cry uncontrollably, and she sighed and sobbed so
that none of her maidens could console her.  Then she said:

"Come here, my faithful maiden, you know how to have pity on my
torment.  Poor me, what shall I do?  I think he is going to kill
himself.  That's what he told me, and his heart is so lofty and
noble that he will do it.

Have pity on me, my Stephanie; go run to Tirant and beg him for
me not to do anything, for I am very displeased at what he told
me."

The princess was crying helplessly while she said this.  To carry
out her lady's wishes, Stephanie took a maiden with her and went
to Tirant's lodging, which was very near the palace.  She went to
his room and found him taking off a brocade cloak, with Diafebus
at his side, consoling him.

When Stephanie saw him in his doublet she thought he had taken
off his clothes to place his body in the grave.  Stephanie threw
herself at Tirant's feet as if he were her real lord, and she
said to him:

"My lord, Tirant, what are you trying to do to yourself?  Her
Majesty was saying all that just to tease you, I swear it."

She was silent and said no more.  When Tirant saw Stephanie
kneeling down, he at once knelt beside her.  He did this because
she was a maiden who served the emperor's daughter, and even more
because she was the emperor's niece, daughter of the Duke of
Macedonia, the greatest duke in all Greece.

Tirant replied:

"Death does not bother me when I think I'll be dying for such a
lady.  By dying I will come back to life in glorious fame, for
people will say that Tirant lo Blanc died of love for the most
beautiful and virtuous lady in the world.  So, my lady, I beg you
to go away and leave me with my pain."

The princess was in undescribable anguish when she saw that
Stephanie was not coming back with news of Tirant.  Not being
able to endure it, she called one of her maidens, named
Plaerdemavida.  She took a veil and put it over her head so she
would not be recognized, and went down the stairs to the garden.
With the garden door open, she went to the house where Tirant
was, without being seen by anyone.  When she saw Tirant and
Stephanie on their knees, talking, she knelt down too and said:

"I beg you, Tirant, if my tongue said things that offended you,
do not keep them in your heart.  I want you to forget everything
I told you in anger, and I beg your forgiveness."

When Tirant saw his lady speaking with so much love, he was the
happiest man in the world.  Stephanie said

"Since peace has been made, my lady, I promised him that Your
Highness would let him kiss your hair."

"I will be very happy," said the princess, "to have him kiss my
eyes and my forehead if he promises me, upon his word as a
knight, not to do anything untoward."

Tirant promised very willingly, and swore it, and their sadness
turned into great happiness and contentment.  The princess,
accompanied by Tirant and Diafebus, quickly went to the garden.
The princess told Plaerdemavida to have all the other maidens
come, and in a short time they were all in the garden, and Widow
Repose with them.  She had seen all the moves and suffered deeply
because of the princess, and with her own involvement in the
matter she had even more to think about.  The emperor soon saw
Tirant and his daughter in the garden.  He went down to the
garden and said to Tirant:

"Captain, I sent for you at your lodging, but they didn't find
you there.  I'm glad to see you here."

"My lord," said Tirant, "I asked for Your Majesty, but they told
me Your Highness was sleeping.  So that I wouldn't awaken you I
came here with these knights to dance or practice some sport."

"What a black, evil sport we have!" said the emperor.  "We must
hold a council: it is very important."

He gave the order for the council bell to be rung.  When everyone
in the imperial council was together, the emperor had the
emissary come forward, and said that everyone should know the bad
news because it was not something that could be kept secret.
Then he ordered the emissary to explain his mission.  Making a
humble bow he said:

"Most excellent lord, last Thursday night, fourteen thousand men
came on foot and concealed themselves in a large meadow.  Because
of all the water there the grass grew very tall, and no one
could see them.  When the sun rose we saw horses and Turkish
horsemen who must have numbered, in all, one thousand four
hundred, more or less, together in a part of the water.  The Duke
of Macedonia, a very haughty man of little intelligence as his
actions show, had the trumpets blow so that everyone would mount
their horses.  The constable and the others, who know more about
war than he does, protested and told him not to leave.  But no
matter what they said he would not obey anyone.  He went up to
the river with all his men, and he ordered them to cross, both
those on horseback and those on foot.  The water came up to the
horses' cinches and there were even places where they had to
swim.

"Near the enemy's side there was a bank that the horses had great
difficulty in climbing, and the enemy met them there.  At the
slightest advance that the soldiers or their horses made, they
quickly fell into the water and were not able to get up, and they
were all swept down river.  If the duke had only gone one mile
upstream all his men would have been able to get across without
getting wet.  The enemy drew back a little so that the men would
come across, and they pretended to retreat to a small hill there,
and the duke used all his forces to try to take them.  When the
men in ambush saw the Greeks fighting so boldly, they came out
furiously and fell into the thick of the Christians, spilling
their blood.  The duke could not take the fierce battle any
longer and he secretly fled without doing much harm to the enemy.
And those who were able to escape went with him.

"After their victory the Moors laid siege to the city.  The Grand
Turk himself came, along with the Moorish sultan and all the
kings that had come to aid them, and all the dukes, counts and
marquis of Italy and Lombardy who were mercenaries.  As soon as
the sultan heard the news he gave himself the title of Emperor of
Greece, and said he would not lift the siege until he had taken
the duke and all those with him prisoner, and that he would then
come here to attack this city.  I can tell you, Sire, that the
duke has provisions for only one month, a month and a half at
most.

So, my lord, Your Majesty must look into what we should do about
all this."

Tirant said:

"Tell me, knight, upon your honor, how many men were lost in
battle?"

The knight answered:

"Captain, it is known that of the men killed in battle, those who
were drowned and those taken prisoner, we've lost eleven thousand
seven hundred twenty-two men."

The emperor said:

"Captain, I beg you to do whatever has to be done, out of
reverence for God and love of me, so that you can leave in
fifteen or twenty days with all your men to help those miserable
people."

"Oh, Sire!" said Tirant.  "How can Your Majesty say that we won't
have left in twenty days?  In that time the enemy could attack
the city, and they are so powerful that they could invade it."

Tirant again asked the emissary how many men there might be in
the enemy's forces.  The emissary answered:

"In faith, there are many Turks and they are very skillful in
warfare, and are cruel, ferocious men.  In our opinion and
according to what some prisoners say, they number more than eight
hundred thousand."

"My feeling," said Tirant, "is that a royal proclamation should
be read throughout the city.  All those who have hired themselves
out, and those who want to, should go to the Imperial House to
receive their payment, and they should all be ready to leave in
six days."

The emperor thought that was good advice, and he thanked Tirant.
As soon as the proclamation was read, all the grandees outside
the city were notified and they were all soon there with their
horses rested.  And those who had come from Sicily were ready.
The bad news of the losses that had been sustained ran throughout
the city, and many of the townsfolk, both men and women, gathered
in the market square.  Some were crying for their brothers,
others for their sons, some for their friends and relatives, and
still others for the destruction of the empire.  Most of the
empire was lost, and the hope of the emperor and those around him
was placed only in God.  They were afraid there would be great
starvation and thirst because of the enemy's victory, and that
the city would be burned, and they could imagine themselves in
captivity and miserable slavery.  Two of the empire's barons
told the emperor that he should send his daughter Carmesina to
Hungary to be with her sister.

When Tirant heard these words, his face turned pale as death.
All the maidens and even the emperor noticed, and he asked Tirant
what had made his color change so much.

"Sire," said Tirant, "I've had a bad stomachache all day today."

The emperor had his doctors come immediately to give him some
medicine.  When the emperor saw that Tirant was all right, he
turned to Carmesina and said to her:

"My daughter, what do you think of the things the council has
said about you?  In my opinion, it would be a good idea, because
if the empire and all its people were lost, you would be safe."

The discreet lady answered her father, saying:

"Oh, merciful father!  Your Highness should not allow me to be
separated from you.  I prefer to die near Your Majesty and in my
own land than to be wealthy and living a life of pain and sorrow
in a foreign land."

When the emperor heard such discreet and loving words from his
daughter he was very pleased.

On the morning of the following day the banners were blessed with
a great procession and celebration.  All the men armed themselves
and mounted their horses to depart.

When the emperor saw all the men outside he called the captain
from his window and told him not to leave.  He wanted to talk to
him, and he had some letters for him to give to the Duke of
Macedonia and a few others.  As soon as the foot soldiers and
those on horseback were outside the city, Tirant returned and
went upstairs to the emperor's chambers.  He found him in his
chamber with the secretary, writing, and did not want to disturb
him.

When the princess saw Tirant, she called to him and said:

"Captain, I see that you are ready to leave.  I pray that God
will give you an honorable victory."

Tirant knelt before her and thanked her for her words.  And he
kissed her hand as a token of good luck.  Then the princess said:

"Is there anything you would like from me, Tirant, before you
leave?  Tell me if there is, for I will grant you whatever you
wish."

"My lady," said Tirant, "I would only like Your Highness to do me
the favor of giving me this blouse you are wearing, because it is
closest to your precious skin.  And I would like to take it off
with my own hands."

"Holy Mary, protect me!" said the princess.  "What are you
telling me?  I'll be very happy to give you my blouse, my jewels,
my clothes, and everything I have.  But it would not be right for
your hands to touch me where no one else has ever touched."

She quickly went to her room, and took off the blouse and put on
another.  She went out to the great hall where she found Tirant
joking with the maidens.  She took him aside and gave him the
blouse, kissing it many times to make him more content.  Tirant
took it very happily and went to his lodging.  And he told the
maidens:

"If the emperor calls me, tell him I'll be right back, that I've
gone to arm myself so that I can leave quickly."

When Tirant was at his lodging he finished arming himself, and he
found Diafebus and Ricart there.  They had come back to put on
the coats of arms that had been made, of metal plates.

Then the three knights went to take their leave of the emperor
and of all the ladies.  When they went upstairs they found the
emperor waiting for the captain to come, because he wanted to
dine with him.  When the emperor saw Tirant, he said:

"Captain, what coat of arms is this that you're wearing?"

"My lord," said Tirant, "if you knew what was in it, you would be
astonished."

"I would like very much to know about it," said the emperor.

"Its force," said Tirant, "is to do well.  When I left my land a
maiden gave it to me, and she is the most beautiful maiden in the
world.  I'm not speaking in offense of the princess here, or of
the other ladies of honor."

The emperor said:

"It is true that no good feat of arms was ever accomplished
unless it was for love."

"I promise you," said Tirant, "on my word as a knight, that in my
first battle I will make friends and enemies marvel at it."

The emperor sat down to eat, as did the empress and her daughter,
and the captain sat beside her.  And he had the two knights sit
at another table with all the ladies and maidens.  Then they all
ate with great pleasure, and especially Tirant who shared a plate
with his lady.

