CHAPTER VII.

THE UNSEEN UNIVERSE.

  ‘For I reckon, that the sufferings of this present time are not
  worthy to be compared with the glory which shall be revealed in
  us. For the earnest expectation of the creature waiteth for the
  manifestation of the sons of God.’—ST. PAUL (Rom. viii. 18, 19).

  ‘Rabbi Jacob said, “This world is as it were the anteroom of
  the world to come. Prepare thyself in the anteroom so that thou
  mayest be fit to enter the banquet-room.”’—_Mishna_, _Pirke
  Aboth_, chap. iv. par. 16.

      ‘Eternal process moving on
        From state to state the spirit walks,
        And these are but the shatter’d stalks,
      Or ruin’d chrysalis of one.’—TENNYSON.


192. In the preceding chapters we have examined by the light of
our present knowledge the possibilities contained in the visible
universe. What is it good for in the way of possible immortality? is
the question we have tried to answer. It will have been seen that
the reply is eminently unfavourable. If we take the individual man
to begin with, we find that he lives his short tale of years, and
that then the visible machinery which connects him with the past, as
well as that which enables him to act in the present, falls into ruin
and is brought to an end. If any germ or potentiality remains, it is
certainly not connected with the visible order of things.

If we next consider the human race we find that the state of
advancement to which they have attained is in many respects greatly
due to their physical surroundings. Coal and iron have been as
instrumental in promoting knowledge as Galileo and Newton, but our
whole stock of these materials will come to an end. By economy it
may be possible to lengthen out the period during which they can be
supplied, but is it not manifest that we are year by year exhausting
them as sources of available energy?

Are we not inevitably led to conclude that our present state cannot
last even for a lengthened period, but will be brought to an end long
before the inevitable dissipation of energy shall have rendered our
earth unfit for habitation?

193. But even supposing that man, in some form, is permitted to
remain on the earth for a long series of years, we merely lengthen
out the period, but we cannot escape the final catastrophe. The
earth will gradually lose its energy of rotation, as well as that
of revolution round the sun. The sun himself will wax dim and
become useless as a source of energy, until at last the favourable
conditions of the present solar system will have quite disappeared.

But what happens to our system will happen likewise to the whole
visible universe (Art. 116), which will, if finite, become in time
a lifeless mass, if indeed it be not doomed to utter dissolution.
In fine, it will become old and effete, no less truly than the
individual—it is a glorious garment this visible universe, but not
an immortal one—we must look elsewhere if we are to be clothed with
immortality as with a garment.

194. Now, if we regard the dissipation of energy which is constantly
going on, we are at first sight forcibly struck with the apparently
wasteful character of the arrangements of the visible universe. All
but a very small portion of the sun’s heat goes day by day into what
we call empty space, and it is only this very small remainder which
can be made use of by the various planets for purposes of their
own. Could anything be more perplexing than this seemingly prodigal
expenditure of the very life and essence of our system? That all but
a petty fraction of this vast store of high-class energy should be
doing nothing but travelling outwards in space at the rate of 188,000
miles per second is hardly conceivable, especially when the result of
it is the inevitable destruction of the visible universe, unless we
imagine this to be infinite, and so capable of endless degradation.

195. If, however, we continue to dwell upon this astounding
phenomenon, we begin to perceive that we are not entitled to assert
that this luminous energy does nothing but continue to travel
outwards. It is perhaps too much to say that Struve’s speculations
prove an ethereal absorption, but they must be taken in connection
with other considerations. We have already maintained (Art. 151),
that we cannot regard the ether as a perfect fluid. Now it is not
easy to suppose that in such a substance all vibratory motion should
pass outwards without in the smallest degree becoming absorbed or
changing its type.

We are prepared doubtless to expect a great difference between the
ether and visible matter in this respect, but can hardly imagine that
it is absolutely free from the capacity of altering the type of the
energy which passes through it. Such a hypothesis appears to us to
violate the principle of continuity.

196. But we may go even further than luminiferous vibrations which
take their rise chiefly at the surfaces of bodies, and extend our
speculations into the interior of substances, since the law of
gravitation assures us that any displacement which takes place in
the very heart of the earth will be felt throughout the universe,
and we may even imagine that the same thing will hold true of those
molecular motions (Art. 56) which accompany thought. For every
thought we think is accompanied by a displacement and motion of
the particles of the brain, and we may imagine that somehow these
motions are propagated throughout the universe. Views of this nature
were long ago entertained by Babbage, and they have since commended
themselves to several men of science, and amongst others to Jevons.
‘Mr. Babbage,’ says this author,[57] ‘has pointed out[58] that
if we had power to follow and detect the minutest effects of any
disturbance, each particle of existing matter must be a register of
all that has happened.’

197. But again, we are compelled to imagine (Art. 215) that what we
see has originated in the unseen, and in using this term, we desire
to go back even further than the ether, which, according to one
hypothesis (Art. 152), has given rise to the visible order of things.
And again, we must resort to the unseen not only for the origin of
the molecules of the visible universe, but also for an explanation
of the forces which animate these molecules (Art. 150), and not
only so, but we are always carried back from one order of the unseen
to another (Art. 220). Now if this be the case—if THE UNIVERSE be
constructed with successive orders of this description connected with
one another—it is manifest that no event whatever, whether we regard
its antecedent or its consequent, can possibly be confined to one
order only, but must spread throughout THE ENTIRE UNIVERSE.

198. To conclude: we are thus led to believe that there exists now
an invisible order of things intimately connected with the present,
and capable of acting energetically upon it—for, in truth, the energy
of the present system is to be looked upon as originally derived
from the invisible universe, while the forces which give rise to
transmutations of energy probably take their origin in the same
region.

And it appears to us to be more natural to imagine that a universe of
this nature, which we have reason to think exists, and is connected
by bonds of energy with the visible universe, is also capable of
receiving energy from it, and of transforming the energy so received.
In fine, it appears to us less likely that by far the larger portion
of the high-class energy of the present universe is travelling
outwards into space with an immense velocity, than that it is being
gradually transferred into an invisible order of things. This last
conclusion is, however, more of the nature of a speculation, and is
by no means essential to our argument.

199. If we now turn to thought, we find, (Art. 59) that, inasmuch
as it affects the substance of the present visible universe, it
produces a material organ of memory. But the motions which accompany
thought must originate in and also affect the invisible order of
things, because in the first place the forces which cause those
motions are derived from the unseen, and because, secondly, the
motions themselves must act upon the unseen, and thus it follows,
that ‘_Thought conceived to affect the matter of another universe
simultaneously with this may explain a future state_’ (see Anagram,
_Nature_, October 15, 1874).

200. This idea, however, requires further development and
explanation. Let us therefore begin by supposing that we possess a
frame, or the rudiments of a frame, connecting us with the invisible
universe, which we may call the soul.

Now each thought we think is accompanied by certain molecular motions
and displacements in the brain, and parts of these, let us allow, are
in some way stored up in that organ, so as to produce what may be
termed our material or physical memory. Other parts of these motions
are, however, communicated to the invisible body, and are there
stored up, forming a memory which may be made use of when that body
is free to exercise its functions.

201. Again, one of the arguments (Art. 84) which proves the existence
of the invisible universe, demands that it shall be full of energy
when the present universe is defunct. We can therefore very well
imagine that after death, when the soul is free to exercise its
functions, it may be replete with energy, and have eminently the
power of action in the present, retaining also, as we have shown
above, a hold upon the past, inasmuch as the memory of past events
has been stored up in it, and thus preserving the two essential
requisites (Art. 61) of a continuous intelligent existence.

202. The conception of an unseen universe is not a new one, even
among men of science. The deservedly famous Dr. Thomas Young has the
following passage in his lectures on Natural Philosophy:—‘Besides
this porosity, there is still room for the supposition, that even
the ultimate particles of matter may be permeable to the causes
of attractions of various kinds, especially if those causes are
immaterial: nor is there anything in the unprejudiced study of
physical philosophy that can induce us to doubt the existence of
immaterial substances; on the contrary, we see analogies that lead
us almost directly to such an opinion. The electrical fluid is
supposed to be essentially different from common matter; the general
medium of light and heat, according to some, or the principle of
caloric, according to others, is equally distinct from it. We see
forms of matter, differing in subtility and mobility, under the names
of solids, liquids, and gases; above these are the semi-material
existences, which produce the phenomena of electricity and magnetism,
and either caloric or a universal ether. Higher still, perhaps, are
the causes of gravitation, and the immediate agents in attractions
of all kinds, which exhibit some phenomena apparently still more
remote from all that is compatible with material bodies. And of these
different orders of beings, the more refined and immaterial appear
to pervade freely the grosser. It seems therefore natural to believe
that the analogy may be continued still further, until it rises into
existences absolutely immaterial and spiritual. We know not but that
thousands of spiritual worlds may exist unseen for ever by human
eyes; nor have we any reason to suppose that even the presence of
matter, in a given spot, necessarily excludes these existences from
it. Those who maintain that nature always teems with life, wherever
living beings can be placed, may therefore speculate with freedom on
the possibility of independent worlds; some existing in different
parts of space, others pervading each other unseen and unknown,
in the same space, and others again to which space may not be a
necessary mode of existence.’

203. It may now be desirable to reply by anticipation to certain
objections which are likely to be made to the theory we have
proposed. Let us divide these into three categories—religious,
theological, and scientific.

_Objection First (Religious)._—It may be said to us, ‘Who are you who
are wise beyond what is written? Are ye of them to whom it was said
of old, “Eritis sicut Deus scientes bonum et malum”? Beware of the
words of the great Apostle of the Gentiles:—Φάσκοντες εἶναι σοφοὶ
ἐμωράνθησαν.’

_Reply._—As we have already said (Art. 50), we do not write for
those who are so assured of the truth of their religion that they
are unable to entertain the smallest objection to it. We write for
honest inquirers—for honest doubters, it may be;—who desire to know
what science, when allowed perfect liberty of thought, and loyally
followed, has to say upon those points which so much concern us all.
We are content in this work to view the universe from the physical
standpoint; you may therefore perchance esteem us of the earth
earthy; nevertheless we think that our strength lies in keeping up a
communication with those verities which we all acknowledge.

204. _Objection Second (Theological)._—Your idea of the spiritual
universe is analogous to that of Swedenborg, and we must therefore
dismiss it as untrue, inasmuch as we cannot recognise the assumption
of the spiritual body until after the resurrection.

_Reply._—All that we have done is to remove the scientific objection
to a future state, supposed to be furnished by the principle of
Continuity. We know nothing about the laws of this state, and
conceive it to be quite possible, if otherwise likely, that the soul
may remain veiled or in abeyance until the resurrection. We maintain
only that we are logically constrained to admit the existence of
some frame or organ which is not of this earth, and which survives
dissolution—if we regard the principle of Continuity and the doctrine
of a future state as both true. Besides, the analogy of Paul, in
which the body of the believer at death is compared to a seed put
into the ground, not only implies some sort of continuity, but also
expresses his belief in a present spiritual body. _There is_, says
the apostle (observe, not _there shall be_), a spiritual body. Again
the same apostle tells us (2 Corinthians v. 1), ‘That if our earthly
house of this tabernacle were dissolved, we _have_ a building of God,
a house not made with hands, eternal in the heavens.’

205. _Objection Third (Theological)._—Your argument will apply to
the brute creation as well as to man; now we cannot recognise the
immortality of the brutes.

_Reply._—As before stated, we know nothing about the laws of the
invisible universe, except that it is related by bonds of some kind,
possibly of energy, to the present. All we have attempted has been
to remove an objection to the doctrine of immortality which has
been wrongly put forth as scientific, or at least as consistent with
scientific knowledge.

206. _Objection Fourth (Theological)._—The reasoning you adopt being
founded on the law of continuity, seems to imply the development of
man’s frame from those of the inferior animals, and therefore by
implication contradicts the scriptural account of the creation and
fall of man.

_Reply._—We cannot perceive that our reasoning is in the least degree
inconsistent with the account of man’s origin given in Scripture.
This account implies no doubt a peculiar operation of the invisible
universe, but our reasoning compels us to look in this direction for
the origin of certain occurrences. Whether the production of man has
been the occasion for a peculiar interposition of the unseen it is
not within our province to discuss. We can only say that we see no
reason from our principles to question the view which asserts that
man was made by a peculiar operation out of a pre-existent universe.

207. _Objection Fifth (Theological)._—The resurrection consistent
with your theory could not be a resurrection of the same particles as
were laid in the grave, and in this respect it would be dissimilar to
that of Christ.

_Reply._—A dissimilarity between the two exists under any theory, for
the body of Christ did not experience corruption, while the bodies of
believers in Christ are manifestly dissolved by death.

[We make the following suggestion with much hesitation.

What we have to say is founded upon an exceedingly able work by
Edward White, entitled _Life in Christ_, which has recently been
published, and from which we extract the following passage (page
263):—

  ‘But the Saviour was Divine. As man, identified with human
  nature, He died, and His death became a sin-offering; as God He
  could not die. As man He was made “under the law;” as God He was
  above the law laid on creatures.... He arose, therefore, as the
  Divine Conqueror of death, “God over all, blessed for evermore,”
  and was thus “declared to be the Son of God with power, according
  to the Spirit of holiness, by _His resurrection_ from the
  dead.”—Rom. i. 4. He rose, not “in the likeness of sinful flesh;”
  not “under the law,” but in the character of the “Lord from
  heaven,” “our Lord and our God:”—not in the image of the “son of
  Adam,” but as the “Son of the Highest,” having delivered us from
  wrath by the death of His humanity, to endow us with immortality
  through the life of His Divinity. He was no longer “the man of
  sorrows,” but The First and The Last and The Living One; no
  longer crowned with thorns, and clothed in a peasant’s robe, but
  wearing the diadem of the Lord of the Universe, and shining with
  the supereminent splendours of the Godhead.’

If then Christ died as man, and was reanimated in virtue of His
divinity, the analogy between Christ, who is the head, and believers,
who are His body, will be complete if we suppose that each believer
dies as a man, but is raised up by virtue of the divinity of Christ,
and inasmuch as the Head is not present here in His glorified bodily
form, so it cannot be supposed that His members should at present
assume that form.

But when Christ appears again upon earth we are told that His members
being raised in what is termed the first resurrection will then
accompany Him.

And judging from S. Matthew (chap. xxvii. verse 52), something of
this kind, but of a partial nature, took place when Christ locally
appeared, after His resurrection, in Jerusalem.

In fine, the true analogy between Christ and the believer should
prevent us from supposing that while Christ is absent in His
glorified body believers should nevertheless assume theirs.

Now this delay implies the corruption of the believer’s body, and
renders us unable to believe that the very same particles will be
raised again as in the case of Christ. But surely no one can suppose,
that if moral and spiritual identity is secured, the mere material
particles can be of any consequence.]

208. _Objection Sixth (Scientific)._—If the general principles on
which all material organisms are constructed are the same throughout
the world, is not this an argument by analogy that all such organisms
have a similar relation to the universe? On what principle then can
immortality be assumed to be possible for men while it is denied to
brutes?

_Reply._—When we speak of the general principles on which all
organisms are constructed being the same, we mean that certain
chemical and physical laws apply both to man and the brute creation.
Gravitation and chemical affinity are the same for both. There must
also be a similarity in tangible substance, inasmuch as both co-exist
in the same visible world. In fine, there must be many points in
which man is very similar in construction to the lower animals.
Thus each possesses nerves—each has what may be termed delicacy of
construction—the frame of each possesses materials which will burn in
the fire. In fine, not only do strong similarities exist between all
animals, but there are also strong similarities between animals and
vegetables. But what are the points of dissimilarity between man and
the lower animals? Is it not that the latter are utterly incapable
of thinking thoughts such as those which form the present subject
of discussion? In fine, the greatest difference between man and the
lower animals is not so much in bodily structure as in style of
thought. But each thought has no doubt (Art. 59) a concomitant in the
brain. Inasmuch therefore as the style of thought is very different
in man and in the lower animals, the physical concomitants of thought
must be very different in the two cases. But this is the very region
into which science has been as yet utterly unable to penetrate. We
have, however, strong reason for supposing that in such a region the
concomitants of thought would prove to be very different in man and
in the brutes. Thus the argument tells quite the other way; and we
are entitled to say, that inasmuch as there are enormous practical
differences in thought and the higher kinds of power between man and
the lower animals, so the scientifically perceivable concomitants of
these differences would (if we were able to examine them) be found
extremely different in the two cases.

209. _Objection Seventh (Scientific)._—If there be, as you say,
this duality in the present human frame, how can the spiritual part
remain latent so long as it does? Even if trammelled by the grosser
substance, we might expect that at least on rare occasions it should
somehow manifest itself.

_Reply._—As a matter of fact we know that ordinary consciousness can
remain latent or inactive for hours, if not for days, and then return
to us again. There would be force in this objection if it were not
true that consciousness is capable of entering into the dormant or
quiescent state.

Again, it is possible that there have been and that there are
occasional manifestations of this spiritual nature.

For, in the Christian records visible manifestations of the spiritual
element, even in this life, are asserted to have taken place on
rare occasions. But if you have dismissed these manifestations as
inconceivable, you cannot now bring their absence forward as an
objection.

210. _Objection Eighth, (Scientific)._—Your doctrine of immortality
does violence to that great principle, the conservation of energy.
For it is manifest that if energy is transferred from the visible
into the invisible universe, its constancy in the present universe
can no longer be maintained.

_Reply._—In reply to this objection we may state that when we
assert the conservation of energy it is as a principle applicable
under special limitations. For instance, it is only by assuming the
continual passage through ether of a large portion of the energy of
the visible universe that the doctrine as at present held can be
maintained. Now the only addition that our theory suggests is the
gradual carriage into the invisible universe of some part at least of
the energy of gross matter which is associated with thought. But is
even this necessary? for this supposes thought to originate through
the matter of the visible universe, and then to affect the invisible.

But the reverse order of occurrences is quite as tenable, especially
if we suppose with Le Sage that the forces which set in motion the
molecules of visible matter are derived from the unseen universe. It
may safely be said that our hypothesis is not upset, and never can be
upset, by any experimental conclusion with regard to energy.

211. _Objection Ninth (Scientific)._—We cannot understand how
individuality is to be preserved in the spiritual world.

_Reply._—This is no new difficulty. We are as much puzzled by what
takes place in our present body as we can be with respect to the
spiritual. Thus, let us allow that impressions are stored up in
our brains, which thus form an order connecting us with the past
of the visible universe. Now thousands, perhaps even millions, of
such impressions pass into the same organ, and yet, by the operation
of our will, we can concentrate our recollection upon a certain
event, and rummage out its details, along with all its collateral
circumstances, to the exclusion of everything else. But if the brain
or something else plays such a wonderful part in the present economy,
is it impossible to imagine that the universe of the future may
have even greater individualising powers? Is it not very hazardous
to assert this or that mode of existence to be impossible in such a
wonderful whole as we feel sure the universe must be?

212. _Objection Tenth (Scientific)._—Even if it be allowed that the
invisible universe receives energy from the present, so that the
conservation of energy holds true as a principle, yet the dissipation
of energy must hold true also, and although the process of decay may
be delayed by the storing up of energy in the invisible universe, it
cannot be permanently arrested. Ultimately we must believe that every
part of the whole universe will be equally supplied with energy, and
in consequence all abrupt living motion will come to an end.

_Reply._—Perhaps the best reply to this objection is to say that the
laws of energy are rather generalisations derived from our experience
than scientific principles, like that which we call the _Principle
of Continuity_. There would be no permanent confusion of thought
introduced if these laws should be found not to hold, or to hold in a
different way, in the unseen universe. Nor can we regard the law of
the Dissipation as equally fundamental with that of the Conservation
of Energy. What is to prove it in the unseen? We have shown
(Art. 112) how Clerk-Maxwell’s demons (though essentially finite
intelligences) could be made to restore energy even in the present
universe without spending work. Much more may of course be expected
in a universe free from gross matter.

213. _Objection Eleventh (Quasi-Scientific.)_—You speak of energy
being transferred to the unseen, so as to store up for each
individual a record of his every thought. You have not shown, as you
were bound to do, how such transferred energy could be definitely
localised in the unseen.

_Reply._—The obligation is entirely the other way. It is you
who are bound to show that such localisation is impossible. You
quasi-scientific men assert that science disproves all such
things. We have shown that Continuity demands an infinite series
of developments. These _may_ be either living or dead. But
scientific analogy shows that they bear all the marks of intelligent
developments. How can there be any doubt or difficulty about our
choice under these circumstances? Obviously we cannot accept dead
and yet intelligent developments. And although our evidence from
analogy may not amount to proof, it is very strong. Yet you objectors
virtually assert that you can show its impossibility. Do so, if you
can. Give us any proof of the impossibility of an organ connecting
us with the unseen universe, or any analogy even apparently against
it, and we shall be glad to receive and consider it. We have no doubt
that you will thus help us to strengthen our case. You forget that it
is you who are the dogmatists—you who assert that these things are
incompatible with scientific knowledge, but who, strangely, do not
bring forward any proofs of the truth of your assertions.

But in the present case, it so happens that, even with ordinary
matter, an infinitely extended medium could be constructed (as
Clerk-Maxwell has shown), such that all rays diverging from any
point of it whatever shall be brought accurately to a focus at
another definite point; every point of space having thus its definite
conjugate.

214. Having replied to these objections, let us now endeavour to
realise our present position. It is briefly as follows:—What we have
done is to show that a future state is possible, and to demolish any
so-called scientific objection that might be raised against it. The
evidence in favour of the doctrine is not derived from us. It comes
to us from two sources: in the first place, from the statements
made concerning Christ; and, in the second place, from that intense
longing for immortality which civilised man has invariably possessed.
The case stands thus: certain evidence from these two sources in
favour of our doctrine has been adduced, but scientific objections
have been raised against the possibility of the doctrine itself,
and these we have attempted to overcome. But while we may suppose
the scientific objections to the doctrine itself surmounted, there
yet remains an equally strong scientific objection to that portion
of the evidence in favour of the doctrine which is derived from
the Christian records. ‘Granting,’ it may be said to us, ‘that
immortality is possible, what reason have we, beyond certain vague
yearnings, for believing it likely? No doubt, if Christ rose from the
dead, the probability in favour of it would be very strong; but we
have an objection to the assumed fact of the resurrection of Christ
no less formidable than that which you have overcome with regard to
the doctrine of immortality itself.’

215. We must now proceed to examine the validity of this objection,
and in so doing we find it convenient to approach the problem of the
universe not from the side of the future but from that of the past.

We have already (Art. 85) defined the principle of Continuity, in
virtue of which we believe ourselves entitled to discuss every event
which occurs in the universe, without one single exception, and to
deduce from it, if we can, the condition of things that preceded the
event—this being also in the universe. We have likewise given reasons
for believing that the visible universe must have had a beginning in
time, and it may be desirable to recapitulate these here. In the
first place, it is generally allowed by men of science that atoms
form the stuff or substance out of which the visible universe is
built. Why, then, it is asked by the materialists, cannot we suppose
these atoms to be infinite in number, in which case, as far as
energy is concerned, we may very well suppose this universe to last
from eternity to eternity; and if in addition we may conceive these
eternally existing atoms to be in some sense alive, have we not here
a hypothesis which will explain the continuous life of the universe
as well as its continuous energy?

Let us in the meantime reply to the first statement in the
hypothesis, reserving that part of it which concerns life for a
future occasion (Art. 240).

Our objection to regarding the visible universe as having endured
from eternity is threefold. In the first place, this hypothesis,
to be tenable, assumes the infinity of the visible universe.
This, however, is a pure assumption. We may not be able to prove
the contrary, but we perceive no reason why the visible universe
should be regarded as infinite. No doubt, if scientific principle
imperatively demanded the eternity of the present visible universe,
we should be compelled to acknowledge its infinity as a consequence;
but we shall see presently that scientific principle leads quite in
the opposite direction. So that the weakness of the hypothesis in
question is, that while it is contrary to scientific principle it
likewise assumes the infinity of the visible universe, which is a
pure assumption.

Our second objection is that, in virtue of the principle of
Continuity, we are compelled to believe in the infinite depth of
nature, and hold that, just as we must imagine space and duration
to be infinite, so must we imagine the structural complexity of the
universe to be infinite also. To our minds it appears no less false
to pronounce eternal _that aggregation we call the atom_, than it
would be to pronounce eternal (Art. 85) _that aggregation we call the
sun_. All this follows from the principle of Continuity, in virtue
of which we make scientific progress in the knowledge of things, and
which leads us, whatever state of things we contemplate, to look for
its antecedent in some previous state of things also in the Universe.

Our third objection is that which we have stated in Art. 163. It
arises from the belief that the dissipation of the energy of the
visible universe proceeds _pari passu_ with the aggregation of mass,
and therefore that since the large masses of the visible universe are
of finite size, we are sure that the process cannot have been going
on for ever, or, in other words, the visible universe must have had
its origin in time.

216. Let us therefore apply to that stupendous event, the production
of the visible universe, not irreverently, but in hopeful trust, the
principle of Continuity, and ask ourselves the question, What state
of things also in the universe, what conceivable antecedent can have
given rise to this unparalleled phenomenon—an antecedent, we need
hardly say, which must have operated from the invisible universe?
It is a great and awful phenomenon, but we must not shrink before
size; we must not be terrified by the magnitude of the event out of
reliance upon our principles of discussion.

Now, if we regard the appearance of the visible universe, and
approach it as we would any other phenomenon, we have only two
alternatives before us. Creation is not one of these, inasmuch as we
are carried by such an act out of the universe altogether. We are,
therefore, driven to look to some kind of development as the cause of
the appearance of the visible universe. This development may either
have been through the living or through the dead; either it was the
result of a natural operation of the invisible universe, or it was
brought about by means of intelligence residing in that universe
and working through its laws. To determine which of these two
alternatives is the more admissible, we must bear in mind the nature
of the production, and argue about it just as we should argue about
anything else.

217. Now, this production was, as far as we can judge, a sporadic
or abrupt act, and the substance produced, that is to say the atoms
which form the material substratum of the present universe, bear (as
Herschel and Clerk-Maxwell have well said) from their uniformity of
constitution all the marks of being manufactured articles.

Whether we regard the various elementary atoms as separate
productions, or (according to Prout and Lockyer) view them as
produced by the coming together of some smaller kind of primordial
atom—in either case, and even specially so in the latter case, we
think that they look like manufactured articles. Indeed, we have
already shown (Art. 164) that development without life, that is
to say dead development, does not tend to produce uniformity of
structure in the products which it gives rise to.

218. Thus the argument is in favour of the production of the visible
universe by means of an intelligent agency residing in the invisible
universe.

But again let us realise the position in which we are placed by the
principle of Continuity—we are led by it not only to regard the
invisible universe as having existed before the present one, but the
same principle drives us to acknowledge its existence in some form as
a universe from all eternity. Now we can readily conceive a universe
containing conditioned intelligent beings to have existed before the
present; nay, to have existed for a time greater than any assignable
time, which is the only way in which our thoughts can approach the
eternal. But is it equally easy to conceive a dead universe to have
existed in the same way during immeasurable ages? Is a dead universe
a fully conditioned universe? For, regarding the laws of the universe
as those laws according to which the intelligences of the universe
are conditioned by the Governor thereof, can we conceive a dead
universe to exist permanently without some being to be conditioned?
Is not this something without meaning, an unreality—a make-believe?
And if it be said that under these circumstances the conception in
any form of immeasurable ages of time is unreal, we may reply by
granting it, and asserting that in such a case we are driven not
merely from the fully conditioned to the partially conditioned,
but even to the unconditioned; in other words, the hypothesis of
a permanently dead universe would hardly appear to satisfy the
principle of Continuity, which prefers to proceed from one form of
the fully conditioned to another. Nor is the difficulty removed by
the hypothesis that the matter of the unseen universe was always in
some simple sense alive, and that the motions of its various elements
were always accompanied with a very simple species of consciousness,
much more simple and rudimentary than any life that we know of here.
For to this it may be replied, how is it possible to conceive that
life has remained in this rudimentary form through a past eternity,
and only developed into intelligence since the production of the
visible universe?

219. For the benefit of our readers we shall now endeavour to review
as clearly as we can the point at which we have arrived, and the
steps which have brought us to it.

It will be remembered that in our definition (Art. 54) we agreed to
look upon the Creator—the Absolute One, as conditioning the universe,
confining the term universe to that which is conditioned. Thus we
conceive a stone to be in the universe, we conceive a man to be in
the universe, and to work in it, but we conceive Absolute Deity to
be above the universe rather than to work in it in any way analogous
to that in which a man works in it. Would there not be a confusion
of thought if we regarded the same Person as conditioning and yet
conditioned? Now, what the principle of Continuity demands is an
endless development of the conditioned. We claim it as the heritage
of intelligence that there shall be an endless vista, reaching from
eternity to eternity, in each link of which we shall be led only from
one form of the conditioned to another, never from the conditioned to
the unconditioned or absolute, which would be to us no better than
an impenetrable intellectual barrier. It has also been seen that in
this endless chain of conditioned existence we cannot be satisfied
with a make-believe universe, or one consisting only of dead matter,
but prefer a living intelligent universe, in other words, one
fully conditioned. Finally, our argument has led us to regard the
production of the visible universe as brought about by an intelligent
agency residing in the unseen.

220. We have arrived at this result from general principles, and
without any definite theory as to the _modus operandi_ of the
intelligent developing agency which resides in the unseen universe.
When we keep to well-ascertained principles we are on solid ground,
but when we speculate on the method by which the development is
accomplished we enter a very different region, where the chances are
greatly against our particular hypothesis representing the truth.
Nevertheless, _for the sake of bringing our ideas in a concrete form
before the reader, and for this purpose only_, we will now adopt a
definite hypothesis.[59] Let us begin by supposing an intelligent
agent in the present visible universe,—that is to say a man—to be
developing vortex-rings—smoke-rings, let us imagine. Now, these
smoke-rings are found to act upon one another, just as if they were
things or existences; nevertheless their existence is ephemeral, they
last only a few seconds. But let us imagine them to constitute the
grossest possible form of material existence. Now, each smoke-ring
has in it a multitude of smaller particles of air and smoke, each of
these particles being the molecules of which the present visible
universe is composed. These molecules are of a vastly more refined
and delicate organisation than the large smoke-ring; they have lasted
many millions of years, and will perhaps last many millions more.
Nevertheless, let us imagine that they had a beginning, and that they
will also come to an end similar to that of the smoke-ring. In fact,
just as the smoke-ring was developed out of ordinary molecules, so
let us imagine ordinary molecules to be developed as vortex-rings
out of something much finer and more subtle than themselves, which
we have agreed to call the invisible universe. But we may pursue the
same train of thought still further back, and imagine the entities
which constitute the invisible universe immediately preceding ours to
be in themselves ephemeral, although not nearly to the same extent as
the atoms of our universe, and to have been formed in their turn as
vortex-rings out of some still subtler and more enduring substance.
In fine, there is no end to such a process, but we are led on from
rank to rank of the order imagined by Dr. Thomas Young, or by
Professor Jevons, when he says that ‘the smallest particle of solid
substance may consist of a vast number of systems united in regular
order, each bounded by the other, communicating with it in some
manner yet wholly incomprehensible.’ Our meaning will be made clear
by the following diagram.

Here (0) denotes the evanescent smoke-ring, (1) the visible universe,
(2) the invisible universe immediately anterior to the present, (3)
that of the next order, and so on.

Again, (0) is developed out of (1); (1) is developed out of (2); (2)
out of (3); (3) out of (4), and so on. Further, (1) both precedes and
follows (0) in point of duration, while (2) bears a similar relation
to (1), (3) to (2), and so on.

[Illustration: (Five concentric rings marked 0 to 4)]

Again, the material substance of (0) is a phenomenon of that of (1),
that of (1) a phenomenon of that of (2), and so on. Go back as far
as we choose, we are only led from one phenomenon to another; so
that, as far as their essential nature is concerned, all are equally
phenomenal, and the mind cannot repose in any order as its ultimate
haven of thought, but is driven inexorably forward to look for
something different.

We see too, that, as far as energy is concerned, that of (1) is
greater than that of (0), inasmuch as (1) develops (0), that of
(2) greater than that of (1), inasmuch as (2) develops (1), and so
on. Therefore, if we go infinitely far back, we shall be led to a
universe possessing infinite energy, and of which the intelligent
developing agency possesses infinite energy.

It will also be seen that, inasmuch as all these various orders exist
together at the present moment, the energy of their sum must be
infinite, and this energy will never come to an end. In other words,
the Great Whole is infinite in energy, and will last from eternity to
eternity.

[If merely to prevent, in future, the possibility of a mistake
which has already been made by some of our critics, including even
Professor Clifford, it may be well to sketch here very briefly
another and quite different concrete illustration of our idea.

Just as points are the terminations of lines, lines the boundaries of
surfaces, and surfaces the boundaries of portions of space of three
dimensions:—so we may suppose our (essentially three-dimensional)
matter to be the mere skin or boundary of an Unseen whose matter
has _four_ dimensions. And, just as there is a peculiar molecular
difference between the surface-film and the rest of a mass of
liquid—wherever such a surface-film exists, even in the smallest
air-bubble—so the matter of our present universe may be regarded as
produced by mere rents or cracks in that of the Unseen. But this may
itself consist of four-dimension boundaries of the five-dimensional
matter of a higher Unseen, and so on. We might even try to explain
by this how it is that so very little of the nature of definite
description of the Unseen is given, even by a learned man like
Paul—for the notion of four dimensions would have been totally
unintelligible to any one eighteen hundred years ago. And just as
he says he heard in the third heaven ‘unspeakable words which it is
not possible for a man to utter,’ so he may have seen things which
language was incompetent to describe. But on this hypothesis, as
on the former, reflection leads us to the ultimate conception of
an infinite series of Universes, each depending on another, and
possessing of course among them an infinite store of energy.]

Before concluding this article we would desire to reply to two
objections which have been made to our book. It has been alleged by
some that we advocate the doctrine of the past eternity of stuff or
material. We therefore take this opportunity of stating that the
Principle of Continuity as upheld by us has reference solely to the
intellectual faculties. We are led, for instance, by this principle
to assert that the process of production of the visible universe must
have been of such a nature as to be comprehensible more or less to
the higher intelligences of the universe.

But we are not led to assert the eternity of stuff or matter, for
that would denote an unauthorised application to the invisible
universe of the experimental law of the conservation of matter, which
belongs entirely to the present system of things. Again, it has been
objected that we advocate an ethereal future state. To this we reply
that our principles do not lead us to assert that the ether must
play some important part in our future bodies, for our knowledge
of things is vastly too limited to enable us to come to any such
conclusion.

221. Let us here pause for a moment and consider the position into
which science has brought us. We are led by scientific logic to an
unseen, and by scientific analogy to the spirituality of this unseen.
In fine, our conclusion is, that the visible universe has been
developed by an intelligence resident in the Unseen.

Of the nature of this intelligent agency we are profoundly ignorant
as far as Science is concerned. So far as Science can inform us, it
may consist of a multitude of beings, as the Gnostics have supposed,
or of one Supreme Intelligence, as is generally believed by the
followers of Christ. As scientific men we are absolutely ignorant of
the subject. Nor can we easily conceive information to be attainable
except by means of some trustworthy communication between the beings
resident in the Unseen and ourselves. It is absolutely and utterly
hopeless to expect any light on this point from mere scientific
reasoning. Can scientific reasoning tell us what kind of life we
shall find in the interior of Africa, or in New Guinea, or at the
North Pole, before explorers have been there, and if this be so, is
it not utterly absurd to imagine that we can know anything regarding
the spiritual inhabitants of the unseen, unless we either go to them
or they come to us?

It is therefore of supreme importance for us to know whether there
has been any such communication. It would be affectation in us not to
say that if there be any such trustworthy communication, we believe
it will be found in the Christian records.

It has been said to us by our critics, ‘What have you to do with
these records?’ To this we reply, Not perhaps so much as a professed
theologian, but still something.

There is a well-known record, which claims to give us the history
of a communication with the spiritual intelligences of the unseen.
If true, it must of course teach us many things which science is
utterly incompetent to reveal. Nevertheless it is the object of
this book to prove that science alone gives us by logic and analogy
combined a certain insight into this most interesting and mysterious
region. Working our way upwards, we have reached by the principle
of Continuity certain regions. Working their way downwards, the
Christian records have reached these same regions of thought. Now
if our scientific logic be correct, and if the Christian records be
trustworthy, we should expect the two accounts of this common region
to be consistent with one another.

Let us here therefore inquire what the Christian records say
regarding this mysterious, infinitely energetic, intelligent
developing agency residing _in_ the universe, and therefore in some
sense conditioned, to which we have been led by scientific analogy.

222. These records, as they are interpreted by the majority of the
disciples of Christ, are believed to lead to a conception of the
Godhead, in which there is a plurality of persons but a unity of
substance. It ought, however, to be remembered that here the word
_person_ does not mean the same thing as it does when applied to
ourselves, but only denotes some distinction which may be regarded as
best expressed by this word. _Our_ idea of person or individual is
derived solely from our experience in the position which we occupy in
the universe.

The first Person in this Trinity, God the Father, is represented as
the unapproachable Creator—the Being in virtue of whom all things
exist.

Thus it is said (John i. 18), ‘No man hath seen God at any time;
the only begotten Son which is in the bosom of the Father, he hath
declared him.’

Again, Paul tells us (Rom. xi. 36), ‘For of him and through him and
to him are all things.’ Also (1 Cor. viii. 6), ‘But to us there is
but one God, the Father, of whom are all things, and we to him (εἰς
αὐτόν); and one Lord Jesus Christ, by whom are all things, and we by
him.’

Also (Eph. iv. 6), ‘One God and Father of all, who is above all, and
through all, and in all.’ Also (1 Timothy vi. 16), ‘Who only hath
immortality, dwelling in the light which no man can approach unto;
whom no man hath seen, nor can see.’

223. Again, of the second Person of the Trinity we are told, in
addition to what we gather from the expressions just quoted (John i.
1), ‘In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and
the Word was God. The same was in the beginning with God. All things
were made by him, and without him was not any thing made that was
made.’

Again (2 Cor. v. 10): ‘For we must all appear before the judgment
seat of Christ.’

Again (Col. i. 15): ‘Who is the image of the invisible God, the
first-born of every creature: for in him were all things created that
are in heaven, and that are in earth, visible and invisible, whether
they be thrones, or dominions, or principalities, or powers.’

Again (Heb. i. 1): ‘God, who at sundry times, and in divers manners,
spoke in time past unto the fathers by the prophets, hath in these
last days spoken unto us by his Son, whom he hath appointed heir of
all things, by whom also he made the worlds.’

224. It is, we believe, a prevalent idea among theologians that
these passages indicate, in the first place, the existence of an
unapproachable Creator—the unconditioned One who is spoken of as God
the Father; and that they also indicate the existence of another
Being of the same substance as the Father, but different in person,
who has agreed to develop the will of the Father, and thus in some
mysterious sense to submit to conditions and to enter into the
universe.[60] The relation of this Being to the Father is expressed
in Hebrews[61] in the words of the Psalmist, ‘Then said I, Lo, I
come: in the volume of the book it is written of me, I delight to do
thy will, O my God: yea, thy law is within my heart.’ In fine, such
a Being would represent that conditioned, yet infinitely powerful
developing agent, to which the universe, objectively considered,
appears to lead up. His work is twofold, for, in the first place, he
develops the various universes or orders of being; and secondly, in
some mysterious way He becomes Himself the type and pattern of each
order, the representative of Deity, so far as the beings of that
order can comprehend, especially manifesting such divine qualities as
could not otherwise be intelligibly presented to their minds.

Such a being is therefore, in virtue of His office, the King of
angels and ruler of the invisible universe, and to him the term Lord
in the poem of Job is supposed to apply (Job i. 6): ‘Now there was a
day when the Sons of God came to present themselves before the Lord,
and Satan came also among them.’

225. It would thus appear that what may be termed the Christian
theory of development has a twofold aspect, a descent and an
ascent; the descent of the Son of God through the various grades of
existence, and the consequent ascent of the intelligences of each led
up by him to a higher level,—a stooping on the part of the developing
Being, in order that there may be a mounting up on the part of the
developed. Thus it is said (John iii. 13), ‘And no man hath ascended
up to heaven, but he that came down from heaven, even the Son of man
which is in heaven.’ Again (Eph. iv. 9): ‘Now that he ascended, what
is it but that he also descended first into the lower parts of the
earth? He that descended is the same also that ascended up far above
all heavens, that he might fill all things.’

226. It is naturally in accordance with these views that the Angelic
Host should be represented as taking an intelligent interest, even
if they did not, as the Gnostics thought, take an active part, in
the creation of the visible universe. Thus the Lord is represented
as asking Job (Job xxxviii. 4), ‘Where wast thou when I laid the
foundations of the earth? declare, if thou hast understanding.
Who hath laid the measures thereof, if thou knowest? or who
hath stretched the line upon it? Whereupon are the foundations
thereof fastened? or who laid the corner-stone thereof, when the
morning-stars sang together, and all the sons of God shouted for joy?’

227. It is also in accordance with these views that the same
hierarchy should take an intelligent interest in the life of Christ.
Thus we read (Luke ii. 13), ‘And suddenly there was with the angel a
multitude of the heavenly host praising God, and saying, Glory to God
in the highest, and on earth peace, good-will toward men.’ And again
(1 Timothy iii. 16): ‘And without controversy great is the mystery of
godliness: God was manifest in the flesh, justified in the Spirit,
seen of angels, preached unto the Gentiles, believed on in the world,
received up into glory.’

228. It will be remarked that the views which we have now put before
our readers have been developed more especially from the objective
point of view, and that our reasoning has been founded on the
principle of Continuity as applied to the outward universe. In truth
we seem to get a much firmer and more tangible hold on the objective
element of the universe, that is to say, on energy (Art. 103), than
we can on intelligence and life. For if we approach our individual
consciousness it is very manifest that we have no well-founded
principle wherewith to guide our speculations similar to the
principle of Continuity; for this, if we had it, would at once inform
us whether the doctrine of immortality is true or false.

We know very well that the universe will remain after we are laid
in the grave, but some of us are not equally certain whether we
ourselves shall then continue to exist.

Thus there appears to be a difficulty which we see at present no
means of surmounting in dealing with individual consciousness. But
while the continuance of individual life is enveloped in mystery,
it is believed that we have obtained hold of a general principle
regarding the distribution of life not greatly inferior in breadth
and generality to the law of Continuity. We mean the principle
that life proceeds from life, or, to speak more accurately, that a
conditioned living thing proceeds only from a conditioned living
thing. That dead matter cannot produce a living organism is the
universal experience of the most eminent physiologists.[62] In
fact, the law of Biogenesis is justly regarded by Professor Huxley
and others as the great principle underlying all the phenomena of
organised existence.

Professor Roscoe, again, approaching the subject from the chemical
point of view, says, speaking of red blood corpuscles, ‘We have not
been able, and the evidence at present rather goes to show that there
is not much hope of our being able, to construct these granules
artificially; and the question is in this position, that so far as
science has progressed at present we have not been able to obtain
any organism without the intervention of some sort of previously
existing germ.’

229. If we assume the truth of this principle it appears to lead us
directly to infer that life is not merely a species of energy, or
a phenomenon of matter. For we have seen (Art. 103) that the great
characteristic of all energy is its transmutability—its Protean power
of passing from one form to another. We may no doubt produce large
quantities of electricity by means of an electrified nucleus, but we
can do the same without any such nucleus—we can make unlimited steel
magnets by the help of one piece of loadstone, but we can do this
even more effectually by means of a galvanic battery—we may produce
fire from a spark, but we can obtain it without a spark.

Life, however, can be produced from life only, and this law would
seem to give an indication that the solution of the mystery is not
to be found by considering life as merely a species of energy. It is
some time since we gave up the idea that life could generate energy;
it now seems that we must give up the idea that energy can generate
life.

230. In preceding chapters we have given our readers a sketch of the
methods according to which men of science imagine that evolution has
been carried out in the universe of energy and in that of life. In
both worlds the principle of Continuity requires that in endeavouring
to account for the origin of phenomena we shall not resort to the
hypothesis of separate creations, that we shall not pass over from
the conditioned to the unconditioned; and Darwin, Wallace, and
their followers have, as we have shown, endeavoured to prove that
processes still pursued by nature are sufficient in a great measure,
if not entirely, to account for the present development of organised
existence without the necessity of resorting to separate creations.
Darwin especially imagines that all the present organisms, including
man, may have been derived by the process of natural selection from
a single primordial germ. When, however, the backward process has
reached this germ, an insuperable difficulty presents itself. How was
this germ produced? All really scientific experience tells us that
life can be produced from a living antecedent only; what then was the
antecedent of this germ? Hypotheses have no doubt been started, but
we cannot regard them in any other light than as an acknowledgment of
a difficulty which cannot be overcome. We appear to have reached an
impenetrable barrier similar to that which stood in our way when we
contemplated the production of the visible universe. And precisely
as we felt compelled by the logic of scientific process to deal with
this first barrier, so we must likewise assert for ourselves with
becoming reverence a similar freedom of action in dealing with the
second. Therefore, if life be one of the things of the universe,
if the assumption of a creation of life in time be inadmissible,
and if it be contrary to all experience to allow the possibility
of the production of life from antecedents not possessing life,
we are entitled, even in such a case as the present, to make use
of this conclusion derived from experience, and are thus forced
to contemplate an antecedent possessing life and giving life to
this primordial germ,—an antecedent in the universe, not out of
it,—conditioned, not unconditioned. Now, what is the meaning of this
conclusion? In the first place, it does not mean that the antecedent
to the primordial germ must be a like germ, for we know from
experience that while life is always produced from life, like is by
no means always produced from like. In this case more especially the
living antecedent must be in the invisible universe, and therefore
altogether different from the germ.

231. If we now turn once more to the Christian system, we find that
it recognises such an antecedent as an agent in the universe. He is
styled the Lord, and Giver of Life. The third Person of the Trinity
is regarded in this system as working in the universe, and therefore
in some sense as conditioned. One of His functions consists in
distributing and developing this principle of life, which we are
forced to regard as one of the things of the universe; just as the
second Person of the Trinity is regarded as developing the objective
phenomena of the universe. Thus one has entered from everlasting into
the universe, in order to develop it objectively, while the other has
also entered from everlasting into the universe, in order to develop
its subjective elements, life and intelligence.

Thus we read (Gen. i. 2), ‘And the earth was without form, and void;
and darkness was upon the face of the deep: and the Spirit of God
moved upon the face of the waters;’ implying, we may imagine, a
peculiar operation of this Spirit preceding the advent of life into
the world. Again, when in the fulness of time, Christ, the developing
agent, made His appearance here, and submitted to the trammels of
a human nature, this appearance was preceded by an operation of the
same Spirit.

232. It may here be desirable to discuss somewhat fully the position
of life in the universe, as we are constrained to view it in virtue
of the scientifically established principles of biogenesis.

If then the matter of this present visible universe be not capable of
itself, that is to say, in virtue of the forces and qualities with
which it has been endowed, of generating life; but if we must look
to the unseen universe for the origin of life, this would appear to
show that the peculiar collocation of matter which accompanies the
operations of life is not a mere grouping of particles of the visible
universe, but implies likewise some peculiarity in the connection
of these with the unseen universe. May it not denote in fact some
peculiarity of structure extending to the unseen?

In fine, to go a step further, may not life denote a peculiarity
of structure which is handed over not merely from one stage to
another—from the invisible to the visible—but which rises upwards
from the very lowest structural depths of the material of the
universe, this material being regarded as possessed of an infinitely
complex structure such as we have pictured to our readers in a
previous part of this chapter (Art. 220).

If we suppose any such peculiarity to accompany life we cannot fail
at once to see the impossibility of its originating in the visible
universe alone.

233. Again, it is well known to many of our readers that discussions
have frequently arisen regarding the peculiar place and function of
life in the universe. What is its relation to energy? it certainly
does not create energy—what then does it do?

One way of replying to this question is indicated in the following
passage, which we quote at length from an article on ‘The Atomic
Theory of Lucretius,’ in the _North British Review_ for March 1868:—

  ‘It is a principle of mechanics that a force acting at right
  angles to the direction in which a body is moving does no work,
  although it may continually and continuously alter the direction
  in which the body moves. No power, no energy, is required to
  deflect a bullet from its path, provided the deflecting force
  acts always at right angles to that path....

  ‘If you believe in free-will and in atoms, you have two courses
  open to you. The first alternative may be put as follows:
  Something which is not atoms must be allowed an existence, and
  must be supposed capable of acting on the atoms. The atoms may,
  as Democritus believed, build up a huge mechanical structure,
  each wheel of which drives its neighbour in one long inevitable
  sequence of causation; but you may assume that beyond this
  ever-grinding wheelwork there exists a power not subject to but
  partly master of the machine; you may believe that man possesses
  such a power, and if so, no better conception of the manner of
  its action could be devised than the idea of its deflecting the
  atoms in their onward path to the right or left of that line in
  which they would naturally move. The will, if it so acted, would
  add nothing sensible to nor take anything sensible from the
  energy of the universe. The modern believer in free-will will
  probably adopt this view, which is certainly consistent with
  observation, although not proved by it. Such a power of moulding
  circumstances, of turning the torrent to the right, where it
  shall fertilise, or to the left, where it shall overwhelm, but
  in nowise of arresting the torrent, adding nothing to it, taking
  nothing from it,—such is precisely the apparent action of man’s
  will; and though we must allow that possibly the deflecting
  action does but result from some smaller subtler stream of
  circumstance, yet if we may trust to our direct perception of
  free-will, the above theory, involving a power in man beyond that
  of atoms, would probably be our choice....

  ‘We cannot hope that natural science will ever lend the least
  assistance towards answering the Free-will and Necessity
  question. The doctrines of the indestructibility of matter and
  of the conservation of energy seem at first sight to help the
  Necessitarians, for they might argue that if free-will acts
  it must add something to or take something from the physical
  universe, and if experiment shows that nothing of the kind
  occurs, away goes free-will; but this argument is worthless,
  for if mind or will simply deflects matter as it moves, it may
  produce all the consequences claimed by the Wilful school, and
  yet it will neither add energy nor matter to the universe.’

234. Now there appears to us to be a very serious objection to
this mode of regarding the position of life, unless it be somewhat
modified. Let us take one of the visible masses of this present
universe, such as a planet. Suppose for a moment that instead of
being attracted to a fixed and visible centre of force such as
the sun, it is bound to an invisible and vagrant centre, the only
condition imposed upon whose irregularities is that it shall always
move in such a manner that there shall be neither creation nor
destruction of energy.

We have only to imagine for a moment such a universe in order to
realise the inextricable confusion into which its intelligent
inhabitants would be plunged by the operation of a viewless and
unaccountable agency of this nature. No doubt the hypothesis
regarding life, which we have quoted above, limits this mode of
action to the molecular motions of matter, but if our line of
argument has been followed throughout, the reader will probably
acknowledge that the superior intelligences of the universe may
have the same appretiation of molecular motions that we have of
those of large masses. Now they would in turn be put to inextricable
confusion by the advent of an unperceivable, and, from the nature of
the case, irresponsible force entitled _will_ operating towards the
deflection of these molecular motions, even although the energy of
the universe should remain the same. We think that Professor Huxley
and some others who have opposed this mode of regarding the position
of life have been somewhat unjustly blamed. They have driven the
operation of the mystery called life or will out of the objective
universe, out of that portion of things which is capable of being
scientifically studied by intelligence, and in so doing they have
most assuredly done right. The mistake made (whether by this party or
by their adversaries) lies in imagining that by such a process they
completely get rid of a thing so driven before them, and that it thus
disappears from the universe altogether. It does no such thing. It
merely disappears from that small circle of light which we may call
the universe of scientific perception.

But the greater the circle of light (to adopt the words of Dr.
Chalmers), the greater the circumference of darkness, and the mystery
which has been driven before us looms in the darkness that surrounds
this circle, growing more mysterious and more tremendous as the
circumference is increased. In fine, we have already remarked that
the position of the scientific man is to clear a space before him
from which all mystery shall be driven away, and in which there shall
be nothing but matter and energy subject to certain definite laws
which he can comprehend. There are however three great mysteries
(a trinity of mysteries) which elude, and will for ever elude, his
grasp, and these will persistently hover around the border of this
cleared and illuminated circle,—they are the mystery of the soul’s
domicile, in other words, of the universe objectively viewed; the
mystery of life and intelligence; and the mystery of God,—and these
three are one.

235. But in this latter statement we have transgressed the limits of
our inquiry, and are content to be driven back. Suffice it to say
that these three gigantic mysteries will persistently hover around
the illuminated circle, or, to speak more properly, the illuminated
sphere of scientific thought, of which duration, extension, and
structural complexity may be regarded as the three independent
co-ordinates in terms of each of which the process of development
goes on simultaneously as the boundary of the sphere is enlarged.

Within this sphere we have only that which can be grasped by Physical
Science, but we are not therefore to infer that matter and the laws
of matter have a reality and a permanence denied to intelligence.

It is rather because they are at the bottom of the list—are in fact
the simplest and lowest of the three—that they are capable of being
most readily grasped by the finite intelligences of the universe.
The following words of Professor Stokes, in his presidential address
to the British Association at Exeter, occur to us as very clearly
embodying this thought:—

  ‘Admitting to the full as highly probable, though not completely
  demonstrated, the applicability to living beings of the laws
  which have been ascertained with reference to dead matter, I
  feel constrained at the same time to admit the existence of a
  mysterious _something_ lying beyond, a something _sui generis_,
  which I regard, not as balancing and suspending the ordinary
  physical laws, but as working with them and through them to the
  attainment of a designed end. What this _something_ which we call
  life may be is a profound mystery.... When from the phenomena
  of life we pass on to those of mind, we enter a region still
  more profoundly mysterious. We can readily imagine that we _may_
  here be dealing with phenomena altogether transcending those
  of mere life, in some such way as those of life transcend, as
  I have endeavoured to infer, those of chemistry and molecular
  attractions, or as the laws of chemical affinity in their turn
  transcend those of mere mechanics. Science can be expected to do
  but little to aid us here, since the instrument of research is
  itself the object of investigation. It can but enlighten us as to
  the depths of our ignorance, and lead us to look to a higher aid
  for that which most nearly concerns our well-being.’

236. In fine, the physical properties of matter form the alphabet
which is put into our hands by God, the study of which will, if
properly conducted, enable us more perfectly to read that Great Book
which we call the Universe.

We have begun to recognise some of the chief letters of this
alphabet, and even to put them two and two together; and, like an
intelligent but somewhat conceited child, we are very proud of our
achievement. Like such a child we have not yet, however, completely
grasped the fact that these letters are only symbols, but look upon
them with intense awe as the great thing in the world, meaning of
course our world. We look with a sort of adoration towards those
pages in which there are words of two syllables, and are ready
to fall down at the feet of that older and wiser child who has
penetrated into the depths of such profound mysteries. Our belief
is that all knowledge is made for the alphabet just as the little
musician believes that all music is made for the piano.

237. Life, then, whatever be its nature, may be supposed to penetrate
into the structural depths of the universe. Its seat is in a region
inaccessible to human inquiry, and equally inaccessible, we may
well suppose, to the inquiries of the higher created intelligences.
Intimations of its presence are no doubt constantly emerging from
this region of thick darkness into the objective universe, but when
they have reached it they obey the ordinary laws of phenomena,
according to which a material effect implies a material antecedent.

Notwithstanding all this, life exists just as surely as the Deity
exists. For we have subjected both these mysteries to the same
process, and have found it as difficult to rid ourselves of the one
as of the other.

We have driven the creative operation of the Great First Cause into
the durational depths of the universe,—into the eternity of the
past,—but for all that we have not got rid of God. In like manner we
have driven the mystery of life into the structural depths of the
universe,—that region of thick darkness which no created eye is able
to pierce,—but we have not got rid of life, nor are we likely to do
so. Before concluding this digression upon the place of life, let us
briefly review the attempts made to account for the origin of life by
those who have yet fallen short of the scientific conception of an
Unseen Universe.

238. Sir W. Thomson has gone further than any one else in such
inquiries. We have already alluded to his attempt to explain the
origin of the material universe by the vortex-ring hypothesis, and
also to his other attempt to explain gravitation by the modification
of the hypothesis of ultra-mundane corpuscles. If we add to these his
attempt to explain the origin of life as consistently as possible
with the principle of Continuity, we think it must be acknowledged
that he is a true pioneer in such inquiries as those of this volume
as well as in the more ordinary branches of Physical Science.

The explanation of the origin of life proposed by Sir W. Thomson
had also occurred independently to Professor Helmholtz. This latter
physicist, in an article on the use and abuse of the deductive method
in Physical Science,[63] tells us very clearly what led himself, and
no doubt Sir W. Thomson likewise, to suggest the meteoric hypothesis
as a possible way of accounting for the origin of terrestrial
life:—‘If failure attends all our efforts to obtain a generation
of organisms from lifeless matter, it seems to me (says Professor
Helmholtz) a thoroughly correct procedure to inquire whether there
has ever been an origination of life, or whether it is not as old as
matter, and whether its germs, borne from one world to another, have
not been developed wherever they have found a favourable soil.’

239. We have already sufficiently pointed out that the man of science
objects to separate creations, and that, in consequence, he tries to
explain the present terrestrial life by means of a single primordial
germ. But the difficulty still remains regarding the original
appearance of this germ.

Now, according to the meteoric hypothesis, this germ may have been
wafted to us from some other world, or its fragments, and thus one
act of creation of life might possibly serve for many worlds. If
therefore this hypothesis were otherwise tenable it would diminish
the difficulty implied by separate creations, but would it entirely
remove it? We doubt this very much.

For, in the first place, as far as we can judge (Art. 163) the
visible universe—the universe of worlds—is not eternal, while however
the invisible universe, or that which we may for illustration at
least associate with the ethereal medium, is necessarily eternal.
The visible universe must have had its origin in time (Art. 116),
no doubt from a nebulous condition. But in this condition it can
hardly have been fit for the reception of life. Life must therefore
have been created afterwards. We have thus at least two separate
creations, both taking place in time—the one of matter and the other
of life. And even if it were possible, which it is not, to get over
one of the difficulties attending this hypothesis, that of creation
in time, by regarding the visible universe as eternal; yet even then
we must regard matter and life as implying two separate creative acts
if we assume the nebulous hypothesis to be true. For if _x_ denote
the date of the advent of life, and _x_ + _a_ that of the advent of
matter, _a_ being a constant quantity, the two operations cannot
be made simultaneous by merely increasing the value of _x_ without
limit. Now this is what we mean by eternity, and therefore we cannot
help thinking that this want of simultaneity implies a defect in this
mode of viewing the origin of things.

240. Yet another hypothesis has been produced, which starts with the
assumption that all matter is in some simple sense alive. Looking
upon the atom as the essential thing in the universe, the various
motions of the atom are by this school supposed to be accompanied
by a species of consciousness inconceivably simple. Under certain
circumstances this eternal and immortal consciousness is supposed to
be consistent with that which we call the life of the individual,
while under other circumstances these two lives are not consistent
with one another. The individual then dies, but nevertheless the
simple immortal lives of the atoms which compose his body remain
attached to them as truly as before.

There is no disappearance of anything from the universe, only the
mode in which the simple immortal life becomes manifested has
undergone a change of expression, just as energy may be supposed to
undergo a change without disappearing. It is thought by the members
of this school that such a hypothesis satisfies the Principle of
Continuity more fully than any other. For, looking at things from
the old point of view, we see that certain atoms are concerned in
the manifestation of consciousness, as for instance the particles of
our brains, while certain other atoms are not so concerned, as for
instance the inorganic matter we see around us.

Here then, it is argued, we have a breach of the Principle
of Continuity, inasmuch as certain things of the universe
(brain-particles) have a function assigned to them in their
association with consciousness, which other things (gold, silver,
etc.) do not possess in any measure, if the distinction between
organic and inorganic be an essential one. To avert this breach, it
is essential that all matter should be considered as in some sense
alive. It is furthermore argued, that by this hypothesis there is no
difficulty in accounting for the introduction of life, inasmuch as
life always accompanies matter, the mode of manifestation of the one
being regulated by the mode of collocation of the other.

241. Now it appears to us that this school of thought is justified
in declining to accept a hypothesis which attributes to certain
substances of the universe a power which is entirely wanting in
others, or that gives to the same substance at one time a fundamental
power or property that is entirely wanting at another. It is not so
much the premiss as the conclusion of this school to which we object.
For let us consider for a moment what is implied in the astounding
inference that the atom is the true abode of immortal life in the
universe, and that its life is of an extremely simple kind.

It implies, in the first place, that the atom is eternal, and to this
we object. It implies, in the next place, that the atom is extremely
simple in its constitution, and to this we object. It implies,
thirdly, that for the antecedents of the motions of the atom it is
unnecessary to resort to anything beyond the atom itself, and to this
we object.

242. We have in other places sufficiently set forth our objection
to regarding the atom either as eternal or as extremely simple in
constitution, let us now state our objection to regarding the motions
of the atom (in this generalisation) apart from the surrounding
universe.

Our objection is, that in order to conceive the nature of the forces
by which atoms act upon each other, we are driven at once, if not to
the very hypothesis of Le Sage, at least to something which implies
the existence and agency of the Unseen Universe.

But when once we have taken this step, we are not permitted to rest,
for another journey is before us, and after that another, and so on.
In fine, there is no end to the process, and no halting-place for the
mind, except in the belief that the universe as a whole participates
in every motion which takes place even in the smallest of atoms.[64]

Undoubtedly as regards certain practical scientific results, it
is allowable to regard the atom as a thing by itself, and to sum
up the _apparent_ actions of the various atoms as if each were
independent of everything else. But when we come to a generalisation
so fundamental as this hypothesis regarding life, we are forced to
ask whether the apparent and visible action of atoms on one another
is really everything which takes place, and then we find, as we have
just shown, that we are driven at once into the Unseen Universe, and
thence into an endless complexity of antecedent.

In fine, we conclude that inasmuch as the universe in its various
orders participates in every conceivable motion, the consciousness
which accompanies this motion cannot logically be confined to the
apparently moving body or atom, but must in some sense extend to the
Unseen Universe in its various orders. But this is only another
way of expressing the conclusions at which we have already arrived,
for (of course) if we imagine a Divine Agency to be resident in the
universe, we cannot but suppose that every motion of any kind is
accompanied with a consciousness of this Divine Agency.

In fine, we maintain that _what we are driven to is not an under-life
resident in the atom, but rather_, to adopt the words of a recent
writer, _a Divine over-life in which we live and move and have our
being_.

243. Here it is desirable to consider what we gain by this
hypothesis. Our gain is simply in the way in which we regard the
functions of matter, and a little reflection will convince us that
neither form of this hypothesis, whether we hold by an under- or an
over-life, will enable us to explain the introduction of life into
the visible universe by natural laws alone, and without resorting to
some peculiar action of the unseen. As a matter of fact we are led by
science to receive the law of Biogenesis as expressing the present
order of the world. But the introduction of life into the world does
not become more consistent with this law by virtue of an hypothesis
which associates a consciousness of some sort with every motion of
the universe.

It still remains a fact as much as ever, that there is a marked
distinction between the living and the dead—the organic and the
inorganic. And it still remains true that, as a matter of universal
scientific experience, a living thing can only be produced from a
living thing, and that the inorganic forces of the visible universe
can by no means generate life.

In fine, our hypothesis, in which the material as well as the life
of the visible universe are regarded as having been developed from
the Unseen, in which they had existed from Eternity, appears to us to
present the only available method of avoiding a break of continuity,
if at the same time we are to accept loyally the indications given by
observation and experiment. It may be said (just as anything else may
be said) that the visible universe is eternal, and that it has the
power of originating life; but both statements are surely opposed to
the results of observation and experiment. Now we must be content in
such matters as these to be guided by probabilities, and it certainly
appears most probable that the visible universe is _not_ eternal, and
that it has _not_ the power of originating life. In fine, life as
well as matter comes to us from the Unseen Universe.

244. Let us here again pause for a moment and review the position
which we have reached. By taking the universe as we find it, and
regarding each occurrence in it, without exception, as something upon
which it was meant that we should exercise our intellects, we are led
at once to the principle of Continuity, which asserts that we shall
never be carried from the conditioned to the unconditioned, but only
from one order of the fully conditioned to another. Two great laws
come before us: the one of which is the Conservation of Mass and of
Energy; that is to say, conservation of the objective element of
the universe; while the other is the law of Biogenesis, in virtue
of which the appearance of a living Being in the universe denotes
the existence of an antecedent possessing life. We are led from
these two great laws, as well as from the principle of Continuity,
to regard, as at least the most probable solution, that there is an
intelligent Agent operating in the universe, one of whose functions
it is to develop the universe objectively considered; and also that
there is an intelligent Agent, one of whose functions it is to
develop intelligence and life. Perhaps we ought rather to say that,
if we are not driven to this very conclusion, it appears at least to
be that which most simply and naturally satisfies the principle of
Continuity.

But this conclusion hardly differs from the Christian doctrine; or,
to speak properly, the conclusion, so far as it goes, appears to
agree with the Christian doctrine.

In fine, we are led to regard it as one of the great merits of
the Christian system, that its doctrine is pre-eminently one of
intellectual liberty, and that while theologians on the one hand,
and men of science on the other, have each erected their barriers to
inquiry, the early Christian records acknowledge no such barrier, but
on the contrary assert the most perfect freedom for all the powers of
man.

245. We have now reached a stage from which we can very easily
dispose of any scientific difficulty regarding miracles. For if the
invisible was able to produce the present visible universe with all
its energy, it could of course, _a fortiori_, very easily produce
such transmutations of energy from the one universe into the other
as would account for the events which took place in Judea. Those
events are therefore no longer to be regarded as absolute breaks of
continuity, a thing which we have agreed to consider impossible,
but only as the result of a peculiar action of the invisible upon
the visible universe. When we dig up an ant-hill, we perform an
operation which, to the inhabitants of the hill, is mysteriously
perplexing, far transcending their experience, but _we_ know very
well that the whole affair happens without any breach of continuity
of the laws of the universe. In like manner, the scientific
difficulty with regard to miracles will, we think, entirely
disappear, if our view of the invisible universe be accepted, or
indeed if any view be accepted which implies the presence in it of
living beings much more powerful than ourselves. It is of course
assumed that the visible and invisible are and have been constantly
in a state of intimate mutual relation.

246. We have as yet only replied to the scientific objection, but
there are other objections which might be raised. Thus, for instance,
it might be said, What occasion was there for the interference
implied in miracles? And again, Is the historical testimony in favour
of their occurrence conclusive? We must leave the last objection to
be replied to by the historian; but with respect to the former, it
appears to us as almost self-evident that Christ, if He came to us
from the invisible world, could hardly (with reverence be it spoken)
have done so without some peculiar sort of communication being
established between the two worlds. No doubt we may well imagine
that the acts of interference in virtue of this communication were
strictly limited; and in proof of this conclusion we may cite the
fact that what did occur was sufficiently startling to have secured
the ear of humanity ever since, but not sufficiently overwhelming to
preclude the exercise of individual faith. The very fact of there
being sincere sceptics proves, we think, the limited extent of
these interferences.[65] And we must remember, on the other hand,
that it is quite possible to accept fully the truth of a statement
without the slightest influence resulting as regards modification of
our course of action. Perhaps the most terrible portion of the New
Testament is the passage (James ii. 19), ‘the demons also believe,
and tremble.’

247. We have now considered miracles, or those apparent breaks of
continuity which have been furnished by history, but our readers are
already well aware that equally formidable breaks are brought before
us by science. There is, to begin with, that formidable phenomenon,
the production in time of the visible universe. Secondly, there is
a break hardly less formidable, the original production of life;
and there is, thirdly, that break recognised by Wallace and his
school of natural history, which seems to have occurred at the first
production of man. Greatly as we are indebted to Darwin, Huxley, and
those who have prominently advocated the possibility of the present
system of things’ having been developed by forces and operations
such as we see before us, it must be regarded by us, and we think it
is regarded by them, as a defect in their system, that these breaks
remain unaccounted for. Our readers will now, however, if we mistake
not, perceive what is the real source of the perplexity felt by the
school of evolutionists. It is that they have been unable to regard
an interference of the invisible universe in any other light than
as an absolute break of continuity; and holding with justice to the
principle of continuity, they have been unable to do more than
acknowledge these difficulties and allow them to remain.

But from our point of view these difficulties are by no means
impenetrable barriers, barring for ever the progress of research. On
the contrary, we assert that, if approached with sufficient boldness,
and examined with sufficient care, they will be found to contain
avenues leading up to the invisible universe, and directing our
inquiries thitherwards. There may be possibly other apparent breaks
or barriers, but these appear to be the best established; and, with
these exceptions, we may suppose that the visible universe, in so
far as we are capable of investigating it, has been left to develop
itself in accordance with those laws of energy which we see in
operation at the present day.

In fine, the visible universe was plainly intended to be something
which we are capable of investigating, and the few apparent breaks
are in reality so many partially concealed avenues leading up to the
unseen.

248. Our readers must not however infer from what we have now said,
that we do not recognise any present points of contact between us and
the invisible. There may possibly be (but even of this we are not
quite sure) no points of _apparent interference_ between the two, so
that the man of science cannot say,—Here is a break;—but nevertheless
there may be _a close and vital union_ between the two universes,
in those regions into which investigation cannot penetrate, and
who shall say that the laws of these regions do not admit of the
objective efficacy of prayer? There may be an action of the invisible
world upon the individual mind, and there is no reason why there
should not also be an action upon the visible universe, by means of
those processes of delicacy which, as we have already seen, obtain
in that quarter (Art. 184). Neither the one action nor the other
would be detected by science, unless we except certain providential
occurrences, which are generally, however, better recognised by
the individuals to whom they refer than by the world at large. And
just as reversibility (Art. 113) is the stamp of perfection in the
inanimate engine, so a similar reversibility may be the stamp of
perfection in the living man. He ought to live for the unseen—to
carry into it something which may not be wholly unacceptable. But, in
order to enable him to do this, the unseen must also work upon him,
and its influences must pervade his spiritual nature. Thus a life
_for_ the unseen _through_ the unseen is to be regarded as the only
perfect life.

249. In fine, the unseen may have a very wide field of influence,
but from its very nature its working is not discernible, or at least
easily discernible, by the eye of sense, and we are therefore led to
consult the Christian records for otherwise unattainable information
regarding the reality of a present influence exercised by the
invisible universe upon ours.

In the first place, we have the following words of Christ himself
(Matt. xiii. 41): ‘The Son of man shall send forth his angels, and
they shall gather out of his kingdom all things that offend, and them
which do iniquity, and shall cast them into a furnace of fire: there
shall be wailing and gnashing of teeth.’ Again (Matt. xxv. 31): ‘When
the Son of man shall come in his glory, and all the holy angels with
him, then shall he sit upon the throne of his glory: and before him
shall be gathered all nations; and he shall separate them one from
another, as a shepherd divideth his sheep from the goats.’ Again
(Matt. xxvi. 53), speaking to Peter: ‘Thinkest thou that I cannot now
pray to my Father, and he shall presently give me more than twelve
legions of angels?’ Furthermore, we read (Heb. i. 14): ‘Are they not
all ministering spirits, sent forth to minister for them who shall be
heirs of salvation?’

These passages (and many more might be quoted) would appear to show
that, according to the Scriptures, the angels take a very prominent
part in the administration of the universe under the direction of
the Son of God. They are his ministers, his messengers, who execute
his decrees and perform his errands, whether of mercy or of justice.
Therefore it is said of Christ, ‘Thou art the King of angels;’ and
of himself in his glorified state, speaking to his disciples, Christ
says (Matt. xxviii. 18): ‘All power is given unto me in heaven and in
earth. Go ye therefore, and teach all nations, baptising them in the
name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, teaching
them to observe all things whatsoever I have commanded you; and, lo,
I am with you alway, even unto the end of the world.’

Let us close these quotations by one from the Old Testament—2 Kings
vi. 15-17: ‘And when the servant of the man of God was risen early,
and gone forth, behold, an host encompassed the city both with horses
and chariots: and his servant said unto him, Alas, my master! how
shall we do? And he answered, Fear not; for they that be with us are
more than they that be with them. And Elisha prayed, and said, Lord,
I pray thee, open his eyes, that he may see. And the Lord opened the
eyes of the young man: and he saw: and, behold, the mountain was full
of horses and chariots of fire round about Elisha.’

Finally, it is the belief of a large portion of the Christian
Church that the Spirit of God dwells in and acts upon the souls of
believers. This action represents the influence which reaches the
soul of man _from_ the unseen, enabling him to live _for_ the unseen.

250. We have in our opening chapter quoted a very remarkable passage
from Swedenborg upon the particular nature of God’s providence.
Let us now hear what the Scriptures say upon the same subject.
Christ tells us (Luke xii. 6): ‘Are not five sparrows sold for two
farthings, and not one of them is forgotten before God? But even the
very hairs of your head are all numbered. Fear not therefore: ye are
of more value than many sparrows.’ Again, St. Paul tells us (Rom.
viii. 28): ‘And we know that all things work together for good to
them that love God, to them who are called according to his purpose.’
Also (Rom. viii. 38): ‘For I am persuaded, that neither death, nor
life, nor angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor things present,
nor things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature,
shall be able to separate us from the love of God, which is in Christ
Jesus our Lord.’

251. We think it may be concluded from all these passages that the
doctrine of a particular providence is taught in the Scriptures.
Nevertheless it is one of the hardest things to understand how this
doctrine can be made consistent with the working out of general laws
which, so far as we can study them, appear to have no reference
whatever to individuals. This was a difficulty intensely felt by the
late John Stuart Mill. He says, in a work published after his death:—

  ‘For how stands the fact? That, next to the greatness of these
  cosmic forces, the quality which most forcibly strikes every
  one who does not avert his eyes from it is their perfect and
  absolute recklessness. They go straight to their end without
  regarding what or whom they crush on the road. Optimists, in
  their attempts to prove that “whatever is, is right,” are obliged
  to maintain, not that Nature ever turns one step from her path
  to avoid trampling us into destruction, but that it would be
  very unreasonable in us to expect that she should. Pope’s “Shall
  gravitation cease when you go by?” may be a just rebuke to any
  one who should be so silly as to expect common human morality
  from Nature. But if the question were between two men, instead
  of between a man and a natural phenomenon, that triumphant
  apostrophe would be thought a rare piece of impudence. A man who
  should persist in hurling stones or firing cannon when another
  man “goes by,” and, having killed him, should urge a similar plea
  in exculpation, would very deservedly be found guilty of murder.
  In sober truth, nearly all the things which men are hanged or
  imprisoned for doing to one another are Nature’s every-day
  performances.’

This objection to belief in the reality of the government of God has
been clothed in very eloquent language in a sermon by the Rev. James
Martineau:—‘The battle of existence’ (he tells us, putting himself
for the moment into the position of Mill and his school) ‘rages
through all time and in every field; and its rule is to give no
quarter—to despatch the maimed, to overtake the halt, to trip up the
blind, and drive the fugitive host over the precipice into the sea.’

In very beautiful language the poet Tennyson, after proposing the
same riddle, replies to it thus:—

      ‘Are God and Nature then at strife
        That Nature lends such evil dreams?
        So careful of the type she seems,
      So careless of the single life;

             *       *       *       *       *

      “So careful of the type”? but no.
        From scarped cliff and quarried stone
        She cries, A thousand types are gone:
      I care for nothing: all shall go.

             *       *       *       *       *

      O life as futile, then, as frail!
        O for thy voice to soothe and bless!
        What hope of answer or redress?
      Behind the veil, behind the veil.’

In another passage of equal beauty the same poet expresses his
conviction

      ‘That nothing walks with aimless feet:
        That not one life shall be destroy’d
        Or cast as rubbish to the void,
      When God hath made the pile complete.

      That not a worm is cloven in vain;
        That not a moth with vain desire
        Is shrivel’d in a fruitless fire,
      Or but subserves another’s gain.’

Professor Jevons, again, in his _Principles of Science_ (vol. ii.
p. 468) alludes in the following terms to this difficulty:—‘The
hypothesis, that there is a Creator, at once all-powerful and
all-benevolent, is surrounded, as it must seem to every candid
investigator, with difficulties verging closely upon logical
contradiction. The existence of the smallest amount of pain and evil
would seem to show that He is either not perfectly benevolent, or
not all-powerful. No one can have lived long without experiencing
sorrowful events of which the significance is inexplicable. But
if we cannot succeed in avoiding contradiction in our notions of
elementary geometry, can we expect that the ultimate purposes of
existence shall present themselves to us with perfect clearness?
I can see nothing to forbid the notion that in a higher state
of intelligence much that is now obscure may become clear. We
perpetually find ourselves in the position of finite minds attempting
infinite problems, and can we be sure that where we see contradiction
an infinite intelligence might not discover perfect logical harmony?’

252. Before we leave this subject there is one consideration which
ought not to be forgotten. It is evident that the development of the
visible universe is of such a nature that we can understand it, and
to a great extent explain it by means of laws and processes with
which we are familiar: nay, the order of the universe is something
which it is our very duty to investigate. But the result of our
inquiry is, and can only be, the appretiation of general laws of
action. The working out of these laws can have, from this point of
view, no possible reference to individual interests. If gravity acted
sometimes, and at other times refrained from acting, we could derive
no certain information from our experience; we could not advance
in art or science, and should infallibly be plunged into speedy
confusion. Nevertheless, it is not impossible that the occurrences
which take place through the action of gravity may, after all, be so
arranged as to have reference to the real welfare of individuals,
although this reference may not be apparent because we are not in
a position to recognise it, and it is not intended that we should
do so, at least in this life. The ability to do so would be a very
dangerous gift, and would go far to upset the present economy.
We know very little about the bearings of events on our own best
interests, and nothing at all about their bearings on those of our
neighbour. We may, however, believe with Jevons, that in a future
state the adaptation between the two may become apparent to us, even
if we do not ourselves become instruments in bringing this adaptation
about.

253. The outcome of all these speculations would thus lead us to
regard the Christian system as affording a full scope for development
in all respects, whether of the universe or of the individual. Its
law is pre-eminently that of liberty, and it has conducted us to the
conclusion that the doctrine of the Trinity, or something analogous
to it, forms, as it were, the avenue through which the universe
itself leads us up to the conception of the infinite and eternal One.

Nevertheless, not a few of our readers may be disinclined to
entertain any precise conception of the Divine nature. Neither
atheists nor theists, they simply dismiss the Deity as being quite
above their comprehension, and all doctrines founded upon definite
conceptions of the Deity, as superstructures without foundation.

Now, the results regarding a future state at which we have arrived
are, as we think, and as we have said in our introduction, capable of
being very nearly, if not altogether, detached from all conceptions
regarding the Divine essence.

We have merely to take the universe as it is, and, adopting the
principle of Continuity, insist upon an endless chain of events, all
fully conditioned, however far we go either backwards or forwards.
This process leads us at once to the conception of an invisible
universe, and to see that immortality is possible without a break of
continuity.

We have, however, no physical proof in favour of it, unless we allow
that Christ rose from the dead. But it will be admitted that, if
Christ rose from the dead, a future state becomes more than possible;
it becomes probable; and we do not see that this conclusion is, in
itself, greatly modified by differences in our mode of regarding the
exact nature of Christ.

Again, the production of the visible universe in time leads us,
by the principle of Continuity, to the conception of a fully
conditioned intelligent universe, existing prior to the production
of the visible. And furthermore, we are induced by our argument
(Art. 218) to regard the production of the visible universe as
the work of an intelligent agency residing in the invisible. If,
then, such an agency could produce the visible universe, it could
certainly accomplish the resurrection of Christ, without any break of
continuity, so far as the whole universe is concerned.

254. The joys of the Christian Heaven are celebrated in Hymns which
are frequently very beautiful, even if they do not mount to the
sublimity of the ancient Hebrew ode. One of the finest of these is
the free translation by Pope of the Latin (not originally Christian)
ode standing at the commencement of this volume. It runs thus:—

      ‘Vital spark of heavenly flame!
      Quit, oh, quit this mortal frame!
      Trembling, hoping, ling’ring, flying!
      Oh, the pain, the bliss of dying!
      Cease, fond Nature, cease thy strife,
      And let me languish into life!

      Hark! they whisper—angels say,
      “Sister spirit, come away!”
      What is this absorbs me quite;
      Steals my senses, shuts my sight;
      Drowns my spirits, draws my breath?
      Tell me, my soul, can this be—death?

      The world recedes! it disappears!
      Heaven opens to my eyes!—my ears
        With sounds seraphic ring:
      Lend, lend your wings! I mount! I fly!
      O Grave! where is thy victory?
        O Death! where is thy sting?’

Many specimens might be given if our object were to collect together
the Christian Hymns relating to Heaven. Sometimes, too, we have
beautiful descriptions not in verse, and Bunyan’s account of the
reception of Christian and Hopeful at the Celestial City will at once
occur to the reader as not inferior in the claims of true poetry to
anything that we have in verse.

255. Now, if we analyse such hymns of joy, we find in them two
prominent chords, one or other of which is always struck. The first
expresses the Christian’s sense of relief from sorrow and death, and
the second his joy in the anticipated presence of Christ—his intense
desire to behold the King in his beauty.

These chords are struck together by St. John, when he says (Rev.
xxi. 3, 4), ‘And I heard a great voice out of heaven saying, Behold,
the tabernacle of God is with men, and he will dwell with them, and
they shall be his people, and God himself shall be with them, and be
their God. And God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes; and
there shall be no more death, neither sorrow, nor crying, neither
shall there be any more pain: for the former things are passed away.’
In other respects the descriptions of the Christian heaven are no
doubt figurative. They are intended for Christians of all ages of the
world, and have hardly any reference to the material conditions of
life in a future state. These could not be apprehended by believers
1800 years ago, inasmuch as we can hardly be said to grasp them now.
Nevertheless there is one direction in which _we do think_ we are
able to obtain a glimpse into the conditions of this future life.

256. One of the most prominent characteristics of even the
well-directed human mind is its insatiable curiosity. How intensely
anxious we all are to realise the conditions of the life of our
forefathers in the ruder and earlier times; how interested in every
scrap of intelligence which reaches us from the dead old world!
How interested too in any light thrown upon the civilisation which
preceded these old times! What would not any man give for half an
hour with Socrates or Plato? what would he not give, be he Christian
or unbeliever, to have pictured out vividly and truly before him some
episode in the life of Christ? In a tedious, toilsome, tantalising,
roundabout way we do indeed get some passing glimpses into these
ancient historical ages.

The earth is not unlike the human brain, in that it contains in
itself certain memories of the past: and, just as we rummage out
and hunt up in our brains old memories, so do the historian and the
antiquary search about in the earth for that memory which it retains
of those distant but glorious ages. But the universe, no less than
the individual, has another memory besides the material one, and we
have endeavoured (Art. 196) to convince our readers that nothing is
really lost, the past being always present in the universe. If this
be the case, it may readily be conceived that this universal memory
may by some process of exaltation and intensification, or as it were
by some relay battery of the universe, be occasionally quickened into
such a life that the individual in the future and glorified state may
be enabled (through the power of the Lord) to realise scenes that
happened in the far distant past. For if so much can be accomplished
with a thing so little plastic as the material memory of the earth,
what may not be done with that infinitely more plastic form of
existence which we term the world to come?

257. Again, if in this present world we have great difficulty in
realising our own past, we have even greater difficulty in realising
what is at this very moment taking place in remote parts of the
present visible universe. Astronomers and Physicists agree that
life is possible in the planet Mars, and it is quite likely that
intelligent beings analogous to ourselves exist at the present moment
on the surface of that planet, but we shall never in this life know
for certain anything about them. There is an insurmountable barrier
to physical inquiry as great as if Mars belonged to the unseen
universe, instead of being, what he is in reality, our next-door
neighbour in the present.

Now, may not this barrier be removed in the future state? This has
been a favourite topic with scientific theologians, and we believe
that all who have speculated on the conditions of a future life have
unanimously agreed that we shall have much greater freedom of motion
in the world to come. There can be no doubt that our relations to
time and space will then be greatly altered and enlarged. Men shall
run to and fro in the universe, and knowledge shall be increased.

258. But yet the picture is not altogether one of intellectual
brightness and beauty. It wears also a moral aspect, and upon this
almost exclusively the Christian records dwell. We are told in these
records that nothing is forgotten. Christ tells us (St. Luke viii.
17), ‘Nothing is secret, that shall not be made manifest; neither
anything hid, that shall not be known and come abroad.’ And again St.
John tells us (Rev. xx. 12), ‘I saw the dead, small and great, stand
before God: and the books were opened; and another book was opened,
which is the book of life: and the dead were judged out of those
things which were written in the books, according to their works.’
This thought has been developed by the Rev. Alexander Macleod, D.D.,
in a work entitled _Our own Lives the Books of Judgment_. This author
points out that in many cases it may not be even necessary to appeal
to the universe for the record which is therein written, for this is
sufficiently stamped upon the body itself, and he then draws a vivid
and lurid picture of the sensual man in whom the mortal body is like
a parchment written within and without—a truly mournful and terrible
record of the deeds done in the body.

But if all this is possible with an organism possessing so little
plasticity as the natural body, and where the wish of the individual
is to preserve a respectable exterior, what must be the case in the
soul[66] of such a man?—‘If they do these things in a green tree,
what shall be done in the dry?’ What a hideous and horrible likeness
must not that foul thing have that issues forth from the ‘grave and
gate of Death’ into the presence of the Unseen and Eternal?

259. It is extremely striking to read in this connection the
following extract from Plato’s _Gorgias_. We quote from Jowett’s
translation. Socrates is the speaker:—

  ‘This is a tale, Callicles, which I have heard and believe, and
  from which I draw the following inferences: Death, if I am right,
  is in the first place the separation from one another of two
  things, soul and body;—this, and nothing else. And after they
  are separated they retain their several characteristics, which
  are much the same as in life; the body has the same nature and
  ways and affections, all clearly discernible; for example, he
  who by nature or training, or both, was a tall man while he was
  alive, will remain as he was after he is dead; and the fat man
  will remain fat; and so on: and the dead man, who in life had a
  fancy to have flowing hair, will have flowing hair. And if he
  was marked with the whip and had the prints of the scourge, or
  of wounds in him while he was alive, you might see the same in
  the dead body; and if his limbs were broken or misshapen while
  he was alive, the same appearance would be visible in the dead.
  And, in a word, whatever was the habit of the body during life
  would be distinguishable after death, either perfectly or in a
  great measure and for a time. And I should infer that this is
  equally true of the soul, Callicles; when the man is stripped of
  the body all the natural or acquired affections of the soul are
  laid open to view. And when they come to the judge, as those from
  Asia came to Rhadamanthus, he places them near him and inspects
  them quite impartially, not knowing whose the soul is: perhaps
  he may lay hands on the soul of the great king, or of some other
  king or potentate, who has no soundness in him, but his soul is
  marked with the whip, and is full of the prints and scars of
  perjuries, and of wrongs which have been plastered into him by
  each action, and he is all crooked with falsehood and imposture,
  because he has lived without truth. Him Rhadamanthus beholds,
  full of all deformity and disproportion, which is caused by
  licence and luxury and insolence and incontinence, and despatches
  him ignominiously to his prison, and there he undergoes the
  punishment which he deserves.’

260. As, in Eastern monarchies, a veil was sometimes cast over the
face of the guilty;[67] so in the New Testament the veil of darkness
is drawn over the fate of the lost soul who falls into the hands of
the living God. ‘And when the king came in to see the guests, he saw
there a man which had not on a wedding-garment: and he saith unto
him, Friend, how camest thou in hither, not having a wedding-garment?
And he was speechless. Then said the king to the servants, Bind him
hand and foot, and take him away, and cast him into outer darkness;
there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth.’[68]

We greatly question whether any school of theologians have succeeded
in throwing a single ray of real light into this mysterious
region.[69] Our readers are well aware that there are three such
schools. One of these contemplates the eternity of punishment
physical, mental, or both; another the final salvation of all men;
while a third expects the annihilation of the wicked in Gehenna.
Now while it is entirely without our province to enter into these
discussions, we may yet be permitted to point out that, as it appears
to us, the principle of Continuity demands not merely one state, but
rather an eternal and infinite succession of states, in order to
constitute true immortality.

The precise conditions of such an immortality it is not for us
to discuss. Under any school of theological thought a glorious
immortality implies the ultimate union, morally and spiritually,
of the individual with the Divine over-life, while the fate of the
impenitent must surely be something so awful that language fails to
bring it fully before the mind.

261. But this graphic and powerful picture of the fate of the lost
fared as badly as other New Testament conceptions when it fell
into the hands of the materialists of the middle ages. Its meaning
was entirely altered, and the Christian Hell, instead of being the
Gehenna of the Universe, where all its garbage and filth is consumed,
was changed into a region shut in by adamantine walls and full of
impossible physical fires—the Devil being the chief stoker.

The one idea is awful, while the other is simply grotesque. An
antient Jew who had occasion to pass by the valley of Hinnom, and
whose senses were invaded by the sights and smells of that doleful
region, must have entertained a conception of the Hell described
by Christ as different as possible from that which has reached us
from the middle ages, and to which some even of the readers of this
book may have been accustomed in their earlier years. The reader who
desires to know something of the more than fiendish malignity with
which human beings (mainly Christian ministers) have _improved upon_
the solemn but markedly reserved language of Scripture on such points
has only to refer to the _Inferno_. Perhaps the hideous realism of
Doré’s illustrations will of itself be enough for him. If not, a very
few lines of the original cannot fail to suffice.

      Perch’ io dissi:—Maestro, esti tormenti
      Cresceranno ei dopo la gran sentenza,
      O fien minori, o saran si cocenti?
      Ed egli a me:—Ritorna a tua scienza,
      Che vuol, quanto la cosa è più perfetta,
      Più senta ’l bene, e così la doglienza.
      Tutto che questa gente maledetta
      In vera perfezion giammai non vada,
      Di là, più che di qua, essere aspetta.[70]

Since the time of Dante many attempts have been made, unsuccessfully,
by men without his genius, to import additional horror.

To some extent no doubt Christ’s description of the Universal
Gehenna must be regarded as figurative, but yet we do not think that
the sayings of Christ with regard to the unseen world ought to be
looked upon as nothing more than pure figures of speech. We feel
assured that the principle of Continuity cries out against such an
interpretation—may they not rather be descriptions of what takes
place in the unseen universe brought home to our minds by means of
perfectly true comparisons with the processes and things of this
present universe which they most resemble? And just as, in the
visible universe, there is apparently an enormous and inexplicable
_waste_ of germs, seeds, and eggs of all kinds, which die simply
because they are useless—analogy would lead us to conclude that
something similar, and to at least as enormous an extent, happens
in the Unseen with the germs of spiritual frames. The caterpillar
which has not chosen a secure place of refuge in which to assume the
chrysalis form does not live to become a perfect insect. The seeds
that fell by the wayside, though scattered by an intelligent sower,
were devoured by the birds of the air. ‘Let every one of them pass
away, like the untimely birth of a woman, that they may not see the
sun.’ ‘For many are called, but few chosen.’[71]

262. Thus the Christian Gehenna bears to the Unseen Universe
precisely the same relation as the Gehenna of the Jews did to the
city of Jerusalem; and just as the fire was always kept up and the
worm ever active in the one, so are we forced to contemplate an
enduring process in the other.

For we cannot easily agree with those who would limit the existence
of evil to the present world. We know now that the matter of the
whole of the visible universe is of a piece with that which we
recognise here, and the beings of other worlds must apparently be
subject to accidental occurrences from their relation with the outer
universe in the same way as we are. But if there be accident, must
there not be pain and death? Now these are naturally associated in
our minds with the presence of moral evil.

We are thus drawn, if not forced, to surmise that the dark thread
known as evil is one which is very deeply woven into that garment of
God which is called the Universe.

In fine, just as the arguments of this chapter lead us to regard
the whole Universe[72] as eternal, so in like manner are we led
to surmise that evil is eternal, and therefore we cannot easily
imagine the Universe without its Gehenna, where the worm dieth not,
and the fire is not quenched. The _process_ at all events would
seem to us to be most probably an enduring one. [Many passages of
the New Testament, however, seem to point to a continuity of moral
development in the unseen universe, a development whose climax is to
be reached when the last enemy, death, is destroyed in Gehenna.]

263. But it is fruitless to expect that Science should throw any
light upon that greatest of all mysteries—the origin of evil. We
have now come to a region where we must suffer ourselves to be led
solely by the light which is given us in the Christian Records. And
while here we would quote from a very remarkable work on the Lord’s
Prayer[73] by the Rev. Charles Parsons Reichel, B.D., which exhibits
in a singularly clear light the testimony given by Scripture, as well
as the fruitlessness of all attempts to obtain information from any
other quarter. Our first extract relates to the personality of ‘The
Evil One:’—

  ‘In refutation’ (says the writer) ‘of the objections that have
  been urged against the personal existence of the Adversary, this
  one observation is quite enough: that of the world of spirits we
  cannot possibly know anything save by direct revelation. It is
  beyond the domain of the senses; it is beyond the cognisance of
  reason. A man born blind might therefore as rationally attempt
  to disprove by a process of reasoning the existence of a sense
  of which he can know nothing except by testimony, as we attempt
  by a process of reasoning to disprove the existence of a spirit
  of whose existence we can know nothing save by testimony. The
  only point to be ascertained in either case is whether the
  testimony be sufficient. If the testimony of Scripture be deemed
  sufficient, then I cannot see that it is possible to deny the
  Personal existence of Satan any more than that of God. _How_
  Satan exists, or _where_ at the present time, or how his power
  _avails_, as we are told it does, to contrive and suggest
  temptations to the mind of man; and to what extent he is aware of
  what is passing in men’s minds, so as to adapt his suggestions
  to their weakness, we are not told, and do not therefore know.
  But our not being told the manner in which his power is exercised
  and brought to bear, is no proof of the unreality of that fearful
  Being who is everywhere in the New Testament exhibited as the
  adversary of God and goodness, whether in the individual, or in
  the development of the human race.’

The next passage is one which all of us may study with much
advantage. It refers to temptation:—

  ‘Every risk incurred unnecessarily for the sake of exhibiting
  our trust in God, every unusual or unnecessary act done merely
  or chiefly for the purpose of displaying our privileges or our
  conviction, or of attracting attention and admiration, every
  stepping out of the plain, unadorned, and _unadmired_ path of
  simple duty, is a phase of it.’

       *       *       *       *       *

  ‘Why God should permit any of his creatures to be tempted is
  a question we can no more answer than we can that question of
  which indeed it is but a case, why God should permit evil to
  exist at all. But we know that evil does exist; and we know too
  that temptation does exist. That evil was first introduced into
  the world by a Being who goes under the name of Satan or the
  Adversary (2 Cor. xi. 3) we are told: that this Being endeavoured
  first to seduce, and afterwards to menace our Saviour into evil;
  and that he is constantly engaged in tempting us as he tempted
  Christ, we are also told.’

       *       *       *       *       *

  ‘And the true rendering of the last clause in Christ’s own prayer
  would seem to intimate that the same Being is also busy in
  suggesting temptations to every follower of Christ—“Lead us not
  into temptation, but deliver us from the Evil One.”’

264. But we must now draw to a close; first of all, however, let us
briefly sum up the results of our discussion.

The great scientific principle which we have made use of has been the
Law of Continuity. This simply means that the whole universe is of a
piece; that it is something which an intelligent being is capable of
understanding, not completely nor all at once, but better and better
the more he studies it.

In this great whole which we call the Universe there is no
impenetrable barrier to the intellectual development of the
individual. Death is not such a barrier, whether we contemplate
it in others, or whether we experience it ourselves. And the
same continuity which has been insisted on with reference to our
intellectual conceptions of the universe applies, we have little
doubt, to the other faculties of man, and to other regions of thought.

When we regard the universe from this point of view we are led to
a scientific conception of it which is, we have seen, strikingly
analogous to the system which is presented to us in the Christian
religion. For not only are the nebulous beginning and fiery
termination of the present visible universe indicated in the
Christian records, but a constitution and power are therein assigned
to the Unseen Universe strikingly analogous to those at which we
arrive by a legitimate scientific process.

265. Our readers are now in a position to perceive the result of
questioning science in this manner, and of abandoning ourselves
without mistrust or hesitation to the guidance of legitimate
principles. It is that science so developed, instead of appearing
antagonistic to the claims of Christianity, is in reality its most
efficient supporter; and that the burden of showing how the early
Christians got hold of a constitution of the unseen universe,
altogether different from any other cosmogony, but similar to that
which modern science proclaims, is transferred to the shoulders of
the opponents of Christianity.

266. For the present we would only add that the principle, of the aid
of which we have availed ourselves, is not a mere theological weapon,
but will, we believe, ultimately prove a most powerful scientific
auxiliary. Already we have used it in our endeavour to modify the
most probable hypothesis which has been formed concerning the
ultimate constitution of matter.

The truth is, that science and religion neither are nor can be two
fields of knowledge with no possible communication between them. Such
a hypothesis is simply absurd.

There is undoubtedly an avenue leading from the one to the other, but
this avenue is through the unseen universe, and unfortunately it has
been walled up and ticketed with ‘_No road this way_,’ professedly
alike in the name of science at the one end, and in the name of
religion at the other.

We are in hopes that when this region of thought comes to be further
examined it may lead to some common ground on which followers of
science on the one hand, and of revealed religion on the other, may
meet together and recognise each other’s claims without any sacrifice
of the spirit of independence, or any diminution of self-respect.
Entertaining these views we shall welcome with sincere pleasure any
remarks or criticism on these speculations of ours, whether by the
leaders of scientific thought or by those of religious inquiry.

It must never be forgotten that, whether we take the scientific
or the religious point of view, one great object of our life in
the visible universe is obviously to _learn_; and that (as human
beings are constituted) advance in learning necessarily implies a
high purpose kept steadily before us, and a continuous and arduous
pursuit. For, as we are told in the First Epistle of John, ‘This is
the victory which overcometh the world, even our faith.’


                  Τῷ νικῶντι δώσω αὐτῷ φαγεῖν ἐκ τοῦ
                          ξύλου τῆς ζωῆς ...


                     Edinburgh University Press:
       THOMAS AND ARCHIBALD CONSTABLE, PRINTERS TO HER MAJESTY




FOOTNOTES:

[1] It will be seen from our last chapter that we have used by
preference the word _Soul_ to represent that which survives death
both in the righteous and the wicked.

[2] See also Job xxi. 14, 15.

[3] See _Westminster Sermons_, by the Rev. Charles Kingsley.

[4] Wilkinson.

[5] Wilkinson.

[6] Exod. vi. 2.

[7] Gen. xix. 12.

[8] _Lectures on the Jewish Church._

[9] Dan. xii. 2.

[10] Dan. xii. 13.

[11] 2 Macc. vii. 14.

[12] _Wars of the Jews_, II. viii. 14.

[13] _Essays on some of the Peculiarities of the Christian Religion._

[14] _Phædrus_, quoted by Wilkinson.

[15] _Chips from a German Workshop._

[16] 1 Cor. xv. 35.

[17] Ps. cii. 25.

[18] 2 Cor. iv. 18.

[19] 2 Pet. iii. 10.

[20] Rev. xx. 11.

[21] See footnote to Art. 224.

[22] John v. 30.

[23] Gal. iv. 4.

[24] John viii. 28.

[25] See Professor Huxley’s Birmingham Lecture.

[26] _Life and Writings of Swedenborg_ by William White.

[27] We are aware that a certain class of thinkers regard all matter
and combinations of matter as in some unexplained sense alive. We
will discuss this doctrine in another place; meanwhile it must be
understood that we do not here allude to this peculiar life, which
from its very conception must exist as truly in a dead body as
in a living one; what we are discussing at present is individual
consciousness of the ordinary recognised type.

[28] As will be seen in Chap. III., the more important half of the
realities of the physical world are forms of Energy, _which cannot
exist_ except when associated with Matter. We mention this merely in
a footnote now, as we do not wish to diverge too far from our present
line of argument.

[29] A very striking analogy to this will be found in Chapter III.,
where it is shown that energy of visible motion often disappears by
transformation into the dormant or latent energy of position.

[30] See Essay on this subject by the Hon. Sir W. R. Grove, in his
book on _The Correlation of Physical Forces_.

[31] See _Contributions to Solar Physics_, by De la Rue, Stewart, and
Loewy.

[32] In Chap. IV. the reader will see that the only attempt to
explain the mechanism of gravitation, which can be called even
_hopeful_, does not give _rigorously_ the law of the inverse square
of the distance.

[33] ‘I hope all will be well. And, as for the gate you talk of, all
the world knows that it is a great way off our country. I cannot
think that any man in all our parts doth so much as know the way to
it; nor need they matter whether they do or no, since we have, as you
see, a fine, pleasant, green lane, that comes down from our country,
the next way into the way.’

[34] This is discussed in Chapter IV. below.

[35] It is hardly needful to inform our readers that the word
_substance_ is used in this chapter in the ordinary sense.

[36] See Thomson and Tait’s _Natural Philosophy_, § 269; or Tait’s
_Thermodynamics_, § 91.

[37] Thus paraphrased for us:—

      Nature, bewildering in diversity,
      Of marvels Marvel most inscrutable,
      Like Proteus, altereth her shape and mould;
      But Fate remaineth ever immovable,
      And, changeless in persistency, outwears
      The Time of men, the gods’ Eternity.

[38] For a more complete statement of Carnot’s work see Tait, _Recent
Advances in Physical Science_, 1876.

[39] They virtually showed that in a perfect steam-engine with
pressure equal to ‘one atmosphere’ in its boiler, and with its
condenser at the temperature of melting ice, the ratio of the heat
taken in to the heat given out is 1·365 to 1. Hence if the difference
between the numbers is to be 100, these must be 374, 274.—_Phil.
Trans._, 1854.

[40] See Tait, _Phil. Mag._, 1872, I. 338, 516; II. 240.

[41] Thomson and Tait’s _Natural Philosophy_, § 300; or Tait and
Steele’s _Dynamics of a Particle_, 3d ed. § 299.

[42] Stewart and Tait _on the Heating of a Disk by Rotation_ in vacuo
(_Proceedings of the Royal Society_). See also Stewart’s _Elementary
Treatise on Heat_, 3d edition, Art. 387 (Clarendon Press Series).

[43] If the visible universe be imagined to be infinite, we should
have (following out our line of thought) infinitely large masses
separated from each other by infinite distances, appearing for
infinite ages in the liquid and solid states, and thence transformed
by means of infinite collisions into the gaseous condition in which
they will remain for another infinite series of ages. Is there much
gained by this conception?

[44] i. 641. Thus rendered by Munro:—‘For fools admire and like all
things the more which they perceive to be concealed under involved
language, and determine things to be true which can prettily tickle
the ears and are varnished over with finely sounding phrase.’

[45] This has been spoken of as an exaggeration. We hope it may be
so; but when it was written (in the winter of 1874) the newspapers
were full of the sickening details of the gouging of an old man by
a gang of miners, who afterwards filled the sockets with quicklime!
These human fiends are probably already at liberty, having had their
few months of simple imprisonment!

[46] Tait, _Proc. R.S.E._, 1874-5.

[47] See also the extremely interesting article _Atom_, by
Clerk-Maxwell, in the 9th ed. of the _Encyclopædia Britannica_.

[48] Here it is important to observe that the speculations of Sir
W. Thomson with regard to the density of the Ether assign only the
inferior limit of that density. The _real_ density may possibly be
very much greater.

[49] _Études d’Astronomie Stellaire_, 1847.

[50] In Art. 148 we made a suggestion that gravitation might be the
visible result of a tendency to a minimum of some affection of the
fluid in which atoms are immersed. The exertion of gravitating force
might thus be associated with a change in the constitution of visible
things, and might perhaps point to an ultimate dying out, just as the
radiation from the sun, which obeys the same formal law as that of
gravity, points to a dying out of our luminary.

If this be conceivable, the really trivial nature of gravitating
force (Art. 139) might come to be associated with the extraordinary
persistence of the present state of things.

[51] The words ‘left to its own laws’ must not be taken too
literally. We ought perhaps rather to say, the procedure of the
Governor of the visible universe is at present such as to indicate
uniformity of physical laws, while, on the other hand, His procedure
when producing the universe indicated an intelligent agent designing
uniformity of product.

[52] _Lay Sermons, Essays, and Reviews._

[53] Stewart on the _Conservation of Energy_.

[54] Stewart on the _Conservation of Energy_.

[55] Stewart on the _Conservation of Energy_.

[56] See Meldrum on the _Periodicity of Rainfall_.

[57] _Principles of Science_, vol. ii. p. 455.

[58] So-called Ninth Bridgewater Treatise.

[59] It is surely unnecessary to inform our readers that we adopt
this hypothesis, not because we imagine it to have any inherent
probability, but simply as a concrete mode of bringing development
before the understanding.

[60] We are not here opposing the theological doctrine that _the
Universe is in the Son of God_. In fact, when we contemplate any past
phase of the Universe, we are driven to look upon this as having been
previously developed by the Son of God, who doubtless also sustains
it. This therefore represents the theological doctrine, nevertheless
it will at once be acknowledged that we may speak of Christ as being
in the Universe.

[61] Heb. x. 7.

[62] See a specially interesting and exhaustive paper by Lister
(_Trans. R. S. E._, 1874-5). A very clear analysis of it is given by
Crum Brown (_Proc. R. S. E._, 1875).

[63] _Nature_, January 14, 1875.

[64] The Rev. James Martineau has, we perceive, taken up a similar
line of argument. (See Art. on ‘Modern Materialism,’ _Contemporary
Review_, February 1876.)

[65] See Sermon preached at Belfast by Dr. Reichel, August 23, 1874.

[66] [Those who believe that the New Testament asserts the
annihilation of the wicked in _Gehenna_, of course hold that only the
just obtain the spiritual body. But we have no definite term for the
body as it shall be (in the _Hades_ of the New Testament) between
death and the resurrection. It is probable that the want of such a
term is due to the fact that the authors of our recognised version
have unfortunately rendered both Hades and Gehenna indifferently by
the word Hell, itself a term from Scandinavian mythology.]

[67] ‘As the word went out of the king’s mouth, they covered Haman’s
face.’—Esther vii. 8.

[68] St. Matthew xxii. 11-13. [See, however, also Luke xiii. 28,
where the true meaning obviously is ‘_while ye are being cast out_.’
There are other obvious mistranslations in our version; such as for
instance that of Mark ix. 43, where for ‘the fire that cannot be
put out’ we have ‘the fire that never shall be quenched.’ It is to
be hoped that the revised version will be such as to give readers
ignorant of Greek a thoroughly correct idea of the meaning of the
original, most especially on points of such awful importance as this.]

[69] The extent of our knowledge, or rather of our ignorance, on this
subject has been happily rendered by the Rev. Dr. Irons, when he
states that all we are authorised to infer is that retribution will
be morally complete.

[70] The sense is as follows:—Master, said I, will these torments
increase after the great judgment, will they be less, or equally
severe? He replied—Go back to your scholastic learning, which tells
you that the more perfect the being the more he feels both pleasure
and pain. And, although these accursed ones can never reach full
perfection, they expect to be more perfect after than before (the
judgment).

[71] [We ought perhaps to inform our readers that what we have here
said refers to that particular state after the present—the dying out
of which, in consequence of voluntary separation from its centre of
life and energy, has been called the second death. Whether this dying
out is equivalent to absolute annihilation is a point which we do not
pretend to discuss.]

[72] Including in it _a state of things_ like the present physical
universe; not, however, _the very things_ that now exist, these being
evanescent in energy at least, if not also in material.

[73] _Cambridge_, Macmillan, 1855.




  TRANSCRIBER’S NOTE

  Obvious typographical errors and punctuation errors have been
  corrected after careful comparison with other occurrences within
  the text and consultation of external sources.

  Some hyphens in words have been silently removed, some added,
  when a predominant preference was found in the original book.

  Except for those changes noted below, all misspellings in the text,
  and inconsistent or archaic usage, have been retained.

  Pg 78: ‘tell us’ replaced by ‘tells us’.
  Pg 115: ‘τρισμυριόις’ replaced by ‘τρισμυρίοις’.
  Pg 118: ‘first to recal’ replaced by ‘first to recall’.
  Pg 150: ‘The griding sword’ replaced by ‘The grinding sword’.
  Pg 205: ‘in the charracter’ replaced by ‘in the character’.
  Pg 213: ‘its continous energy’ replaced by ‘its continuous energy’.
  Pg 227: ‘John iii. 16’ replaced by ‘John iii. 13’.
  Pg 243: ‘school of thought are’ replaced by ‘school of thought is’.
  Footnote 44, Pg 131: ‘tickle the the ears’ replaced by
          ‘tickle the ears’.



