Chapter I • The Plight of the Farmer


I • Democratic Reactions to Plutocracy

The Middle Border was the first to recover from the heady romanticisms
of Whiggery. The malady of preëmption and exploitation quickly ran
its course there and after the first enthusiasm of settlement had
subsided--the staking of claims, the scramble over townsites, the
bidding for railway lines--the farmer settled down amidst his corn
and wheat and cattle and hogs to learn what sort of living the
prairies might provide. With his feet on the sobering earth he was no
middle-class adventurer, no buccaneer lying in wait for the golden
argosies of Spain, but a sober realist kept sane by wind and weather
and kept honest by his daily occupation of tilling and reaping.

As the first wave of settlers spread over the prairies a mood of
buoyant hopefulness colored their dreams. The earlier conquest of the
Inland Empire had entailed exhausting labor in preliminary clearings,
and the stumpage from great forests remained for years to obstruct
clean tillage; but here in the Middle Border were treeless fields
of black soil, level, uncluttered by stones, inviting the plow. For
ages the prairie grass had been growing there, tall as a horseman
in the bottoms and plentiful on the uplands; and as the unmarked
seasons passed, the potash from the decaying vegetation added a richer
fertility to the soil. In natural productiveness it was the fairest
portion of America, and as the land-hungry settlers made their pitch
there, filing on broad homesteads and building their cabins, a mood
of buoyant expectation filled the land. It was not the flamboyant
spirit of the Gilded Age, but the hopefulness of those who within a few
short years were to transform a wilderness into the world’s granary.
In his wistful account of the glamour that lay upon the prairies in
those first pioneer years--a glamour that soon passed like the morning
dews--Hamlin Garland was no frontier romantic but a sober historian.

But as the seventies gave place to the eighties a subtle change came
over the mood of the Middle Border. Disappointment and disillusion
settled upon a land that before had smiled in the spring sunshine.
The harvest was not fulfilling the expectations of the seedtime.
The changed mood came in part from the harsh toil and meager living
that were the necessary price the frontiersman must pay for his
small winnings. It is no holiday job to subdue an untamed land and
wrest abundance and comfort from a virgin soil. Only for the young
who can project their hopes into the future is it endurable; for the
middle-aged and the old it is a heart-breaking task. The history of
the western frontier is a long drab story of hardship and privation
and thwarted hopes, of men and women broken by the endless toil, the
windows of their dreams shuttered by poverty and the doors to an
abundant life closed and barred by narrow opportunity. It is true that
the prairies took no such toll as the forests had taken; the mean and
squalid poverty through which Lincoln passed was not so common in the
Middle Border as it had been along the earlier frontier. Nevertheless
a fierce climate and a depressing isolation added their discomforts
to a bleak existence. The winds were restless on the flat plains, and
the flimsy wooden houses, stark and mean, unprotected by trees and
unrelieved by shrubbery, were an ill defense against their prying
fingers. In winter the blizzards swept out of the North to overmaster
the land, and in summer the hot winds came up from the Southwest to
sear the countrysides that were rustling with great fields of corn.
Other enemies appeared, as it were, out of a void. Endless flights of
grasshoppers descended like a plague of locusts, and when they passed
the earth was bare and brown where the young wheat had stood. Armies
of chinch-bugs came from nobody knew where, and swarming up the tender
corn-stalks left them sucked dry and yellow. It is nature’s way, to
destroy with one hand what it creates with the other; and for years the
western farmers were fighting plagues that had possessed the prairies
before the settlers came.

The disillusion of the Middle Border deepened into gloom as the
widespread economic depression of the times added its discouragements.
A period of falling prices was curtailing industry and forcing down the
market values of all produce. From such depressions a debtor community
always suffers most severely, for falling produce-prices mean rising
money-values and a shifting standard of value for deferred payments.
The farms of the Middle Border were heavily encumbered to provide
tools and livestock and buildings, and the earnings were consumed by
the interest that went East to the mortgage-holders. Debt was a luxury
the farmer could ill afford, and when the debt was silently augmenting
by the rising value of the dollar he was forced to consider his
situation. The plight into which he had fallen was graphically summed
up in the phrase “ten-cent corn and ten per cent interest”--a phrase
that was to become a spark to all the tinder that was gathering from
frontier hardships and disappointments. Falling market-values were at
the bottom of his troubles. The prices of his staples were sinking
below the cost of production. With four-cent eggs, five-cent butter,
ten-cent corn, and fifty-cent wheat, with more hogs and cattle than
the stockyards would take, and with debts contracted at interest-rates
fixed by a higher scale of values, the economic position of the Middle
Border was becoming desperate, and in the later eighties a sullen
bitterness took possession of the land. As the farmer sat by the
kitchen stove and stoked the fire with great ears of corn that were
cheaper than coal, he had ample time to contemplate his lot. Ungathered
crops for which there was no market would not pay interest. There was
coming to be “too much hog in the dollar,” as one commentator remarked
quaintly. The Middle Border, all too clearly, was strangling from its
own productiveness.

It was easy for newspaper critics, armed with the wisdom of the
Board of Trade, to point out that overproduction was the trouble
with the western farmer, and that so vast a development of staple
crops resulting from sowing the prairie states to corn and wheat was
certain to bring on disastrous market slumps. It was true. Production
had outrun consumption; quantity output had brought on a glut. But
it was also true--as the armchair critics were not so careful to
point out--that other causes contributed equally to the deflation
of the western farmer, the result of which was to despoil him of
the last moiety of his earnings. He was in the grip of a complex
middleman organization that gouged him at every turn. The gap between
producer and consumer was widening to a chasm. The railways charged
twenty cents a bushel cartage for wheat from the Mississippi to
Chicago, and fifty-two and a half cents to the Atlantic seaboard.
The elevator companies fixed monopoly tolls, swindled the farmer in
their grain-gradings, and combined to force down the market price at
harvest time and raise it after the crop came under their control. The
“Livestock Ring,” managed by the railways, controlled the Union Stock
Yards at Chicago and squeezed the marginal profits from the farmer’s
cattle and hogs.[734] When on the other hand he bought implements or
groceries or household goods he was at the mercy of a non-competitive
market, protected by patent-rights and tariffs, to which were added
extortionate transportation and middleman charges.

It was his own fault, of course. Due to his own political slackness
the farmer had allowed himself to become the common drudge of society.
All the exploiting classes had their hands in his pockets. His was the
only considerable economic group that exerted no organized pressure to
control the price he sold for or the price he paid. While capitalism
had been perfecting its machinery of exploitation he had remained
indifferent to the fact that he himself was the fattest goose that
capitalism was to pluck. He had helped indeed to provide the rope
for his own hanging. He had voted away the public domain to railways
that were now fleecing him; he took pride in the county-seat towns
that lived off his earnings; he sent city lawyers to represent him
in legislatures and in Congress; he read middle-class newspapers and
listened to bankers and politicians and cast his votes for the policy
of Whiggery that could have no other outcome than his own despoiling.
And now in the middle eighties he began to feel the rope about his
neck, and realized the predicament he was in. It was not alone the
local middlemen, or even the railways--he had come to believe--that
were to blame. It was the money-power of the East, the grip of Wall
Street, that was strangling him--a power that controlled the government
at Washington, that manipulated the currency system, and that was
engaged in a scheme to augment its holdings by forcing up the value of
the dollar and automatically increasing the value of the indebtedness
it had gathered in its vaults. Clearly it was high time for the
deflated farmer to get into politics on his own account if he were to
save himself from beggary, and so during the Gilded Age began a great
agrarian revolt against capitalism that was to turmoil the next quarter
of a century--a revolt that was to mark the last effective organization
of the farmers to combat the new order, the last flare-up of an
old-fashioned agrarian America before it was submerged by the middle
class.


II • The Farmer Considers Politics

By the early seventies it was becoming clear to the Middle Border
that the policy of Whiggery took no account of the needs of the
farmer. Government was indifferent to him, whether at the capital of
his state or at Washington, and governmental programs--whether in
the matter of protective tariffs and land-grants, in its unconcern
at monopoly extortion, or in the contraction of the currency with
a view to the resumption of specie payments--ran so counter to his
interests that the dullest began to question the fairness of the
state. It had ceased to concern itself with the welfare of the whole.
The combination of paternalism and _laissez faire_ that marked the
Whiggery of the times could be interpreted by the suspicious farmer,
indeed, only as a surrender of government to capitalism. It had lost
all pretense of fairness in the distribution of governmental favors,
and withheld or granted aid with the single objective of furthering
the interests of powerful groups. It sanctioned the use of the state
by business interests for purposes of exploitation, and declined to
exercise its power in the interests of the consumer. It granted tariffs
and subsidies, yet refused to regulate the monopoly power it had
created. It was no longer a government of the people but a government
of business, concerned for the interests of exploitation, and if the
farmer were to gain a hearing he must first make himself feared.

Of necessity, therefore, the agrarian program entailed a political
struggle of great bitterness. There would be no adequate relief granted
until the farmers had wrested control of government from the class that
was exploiting them. The battle between agrarianism and capitalism,
in consequence, from the outset was a struggle for control of the
political state, that beginning in single commonwealths was eventually
carried to the federal government. Hope of effective aid from state
governments quickly proved illusory, for when the Illinois farmers
passed a law to curb the railways the federal courts set aside their
enactment and bade the farmers--to use a later phrase--go home and slop
the hogs. They must not meddle with matters beyond their comprehension.
In consequence of such slaps in the face the farmers fell to perfecting
their organizations and arousing class consciousness until there issued
from the long debates of the Grange and the Farmers’ Alliance the great
movement of Populism that proposed to reach as far as Washington,
install there the representatives of the producing classes, and
refashion the political state in accordance with the democratic needs
of the plain people.

So ambitious a program needed time, not only for the farmers to
organize but to clarify their policy. They were ill equipped for a
serious struggle. With the rise of capitalism agriculture had been
steadily falling in social prestige. As a result of the decline of the
landed squirearchy in the North and the overthrow of the plantation
economy in the South, agriculture had lost its traditional leaders
who had furnished the brains and supplied the spokesmen in earlier
political struggles. In the seventies agriculture was no longer
reckoned a pursuit peculiarly suitable to gentlemen. The business
man had risen in social prestige as the farmer declined, and instead
of being recruited from the natural leaders of society agriculture
suffered a draining-off of the more energetic and capable to the
cities, leaving the farms in the hands of the less ambitious, who were
supplemented in the seventies and eighties by European peasants who
settled great portions of the Middle Border. With this loss of social
prestige came a new urban contempt for farm life that expressed itself
in “Hayseed” cartoons, and in the heedlessness of politicians who were
quick to transfer allegiance from a decaying to a rising order.

The farmers of the Middle Border, drawn from many commonwealths
and with a high percentage of aliens, were far from a homogeneous
class-conscious group like the southern planters. Race, language,
and cultural antecedents held them apart, intensifying the aloofness
that was a common characteristic of the frontier. Week-days they
stuck to their plows and Sundays, unlike the New England farmer, they
were little given to churchgoing. The landholdings were commonly a
homestead of a hundred and sixty acres, often running to an entire
section of six hundred and forty acres. Much land was held idle by
speculators, with the result that the isolation of the farmer--dwelling
convenient to his fields rather than to neighbors--deepened the
suspicious individualism that was an obsession of the agrarian mind,
and unfitted him for effective coöperative effort. No political or
social philosophy answerable to his needs was at hand, no intellectual
leaders like Jefferson or John Taylor to adapt old-world theory to
the conditions of the Middle Border, no commanding figure like Old
Hickory to marshal the scattered hosts. The Physiocratic theory with
its prestige of distinguished advocates and its elaborate social
economics had never taken root in the Middle Border; although certain
of its prejudices--that the farmer is the sole producer and the sterile
middleman must somehow be got rid of--had taken possession of the
western mind and largely influenced the ultimate program. But if the
western farmer inherited no ready-made philosophy he was daily prodded
by harsh reality. He got up and went to bed under the prick of economic
necessity, and this made of him a realist and an opportunist, eager
to apply homely remedies to homely ills. With the discipline got from
hard times he was not easily gulled by bright young city lawyers with
their handbooks of capitalistic economics. The new agrarianism of the
prairies, in consequence, was a hard-headed, homespun theory, fashioned
on the farms, intended to serve the producer rather than the middleman.
It had behind it none of the high authority of the schools, and
naturally it was mocked and scoffed at by all the spokesmen--editors,
lawyers, bankers, scholars, intellectuals--of the prosperous middle
class. The farmer had to make his way against the embattled prejudices
and contempt of the rest of America.

But before he could become a power in political councils he must
organize and use his voting strength as a unit; and as early as the
late sixties the work of organization was got under way. It began
as a social movement with the Grange that spread widely through the
South and Middle West and even gained foothold in the East, bringing
together in social groups the farmer families of the neighborhood. It
professed to stand outside politics and strove to awaken an interest
in coöperative buying and selling, but the community gatherings were
certain to find politics waiting for them at the schoolhouse door,
and after the program of coöperation had been discussed the talk ran
easily into political debate. From the Grange issued in the eighties
the Farmers’ Alliance, more consciously political in its objective,
active in arousing the farmers to political action; and with the hard
times that came with the turn of the decade the different groups merged
in the broad movement of Populism--a militant political uprising with
a definite party program and organization. The flare-up came swiftly
and in the first years of the nineties the prairies were aflame and
even the cotton-fields of the South were fired. Populism swept from
township to township, a militant agrarian movement, providing its
own leaders--Tom Watson in Georgia, General Weaver in Iowa, Ignatius
Donnelly in Minnesota, sockless Jerry Simpson in Kansas, with Hamlin
Garland, and B. O. Flower, and other intellectuals rallying to the
farmers’ standard. It set up the banner of agrarian democracy, summoned
its followers and drilled them for the battles that lay ahead. Huge
meetings gathered of the farmers of a county and day-long they listened
to speeches that came straight from the hay-fields and the corn-rows,
speeches that were an echo of the daily experience of the farmer and
the farmer’s wife.

It was Mary Ellen Lease of Kansas who struck from the common bitterness
a phrase that embodied the militant spirit of Populism. Week after week
she traveled the prairie country urging the farmers to “raise less corn
and more hell,” and at her call the sunburned faces settled into grim
purpose. The farmers had become class-conscious. They were enlisted in
a class struggle. They used the vocabulary of realism, and the unctuous
political platitudes and sophistries of county-seat politicians rolled
off their minds like water from a duck’s back. They were fighting
a great battle--they believed--against Wall Street and the eastern
money-power; they were bent on saving America from the plutocracy;
and they swept over the county-seat towns, burying the old machine
politicians under an avalanche of votes, capturing state legislatures,
electing Congressmen and Senators, and looking forward to greater
power. In 1896 Populism gained control of the Democratic party and
entered on its great campaign to establish the principle of democracy
at Washington. It was the last mortal struggle between agrarianism
and capitalism, and to understand it one must turn back to the long
agitation over the money question.


III • The Greenback Movement

If in the early nineties the currency question had come to overshadow
the questions of the tariff and railway regulation, it was because that
problem lay at the heart of the struggle between the rival agrarian and
capitalistic economies. The control of the national monetary system
by the bankers was vital to the smooth functioning of a capitalistic
order, and to assure such control it was desirable that monetary
standards and emissions of currency be removed from the sphere of
political action and lodged in the hands of business. The problem was
difficult, for the right to “coin money and to regulate the value
thereof” were functions of sovereignty specifically recognized in the
Constitution; and it was a series of moves designed to transfer such
functions to private groups that brought on a long political debate
over systems of currency.

The intellectual background against which the struggle was set may be
sketched briefly. Despite the long battle over the Bank in Jackson’s
time, little serious thinking on the principles of money and currency
had been done in America. Financiers and economists alike followed the
current English school, and since the appearance of the famous Bullion
Report of 1811 that school had adhered to the intrinsic-value theory
of money. While accepting banknotes as a useful medium of exchange,
the English classical economists held that only coin is real money,
and that the issue of notes must bear a definite ratio to the amount
of coin and bullion in the vaults. Money is not a creature of the law.
Government cannot create it. Rather it is a convenient token of labor
done, and the stamp of the mint is only a certification of weight
and fineness. There are but two ways, indeed, in which government
can acquire money--through taxation and by borrowing. The “natural
operation of the specie standard” was reckoned one of the fundamental
“laws of trade,” and for government to tamper with it--setting aside
the intrinsic-value principle by the emission of irredeemable paper
money--was to violate the sanctity of contracts, cheat creditors,
increase prices, and disorder business. The law of supply and demand
answered all the needs of money regulation.

This was no more than the application of the current theory of
_laissez faire_ to the problem of currency. But between the Bullion
Report of 1811 and the Parliamentary Bank Act of 1844, English theory
and practice had undergone two important modifications: the vast
development of credit had suggested a free use of banknotes based on
securities other than coin or bullion, and the bimetallic standard had
been superseded by the gold standard. By the terms of the Act of 1844
all banknotes were to be issued against securities and gold and silver
coin and bullion in the bank vaults. The margin of issue was fixed at
fourteen million pounds sterling. The total amount of banknotes thus
“issued on the Credit of such Securities, Coin and Bullion,” might not
be increased, but within the limits set the Bank was free to increase
or decrease issues at will. The Act further provided that “whereas
it is necessary to limit the Amount of Silver Bullion on which it
shall be lawful ... to issue Bank of England notes,” it should “not
be lawful for the Bank of England to retain in ... said Bank at any
time an Amount of Silver Bullion exceeding One Fourth Part of the Gold
Coin and Bullion.”...[735] That gold should eventually have thrust
silver aside was natural. In addition to its convenience as a commodity
for international shipment, it was less in quantity, not widely
dispersed or popularly held, and therefore more easily controlled
by the money-brokers. With the function of government restricted to
coining such gold as came to the mint, the whole business of currency
emissions, with the attendant power of inflation and deflation of
credit, would lie in the hands of the bankers who became the custodians
of the national monetary system.

During the bitter discussions of currency policies that followed the
dislocations of the Civil War, the two most authoritative spokesmen in
America on the subject were Senator John Sherman of Ohio, for years
Chairman of the Senate Committee on Finance, and David A. Wells,
statistician, special Commissioner of the Revenue Bureau, and a scholar
deservedly distinguished as an economist. In their views on the
currency question both were followers of the classical English school.
In two speeches in the Senate, of January 27, 1869, and January 24,
1870, the former stated his position definitely. “Let us,” he said,
“recognize as an axiom that nothing but coin is real money before we
undertake to deal with the currency”; and in another place, narrowing
his definition in terms of the English Bank Act, he asserted, “We must
... recognize the immutable law of currency; and that is, there is but
one true standard, and that standard is gold.”[736] The weakness of
paper money, he believed, was its instability; the ratio of exchange
with gold fluctuates too greatly to make it a safe or convenient medium
of business. “Last year the fluctuation in paper money amounted to
forty-five per cent. Gold, however, remained as stable as the eternal
hills, because it was not only the product of labor, but it was labor
and value itself.”[737] One may make of such an assertion what one
will, but it is clear that John Sherman thought ill of the greenbacks,
and wanted substituted for them a system of banknotes.

  It is impossible [he argued] to give a currency issued by
  a Government the flexibility to meet the movement of the
  exchanges.... It must have a flexibility which will enable it to be
  increased in certain periods of the year, and to flow back again
  into the vaults of the bank at others. I am convinced ... that in
  time it will be wise to retire our United States notes and all
  forms of Government circulation, and depend upon notes issued by
  private corporations.[738]

Brief as these passages are, they suffice to make clear Sherman’s
position. He accepted without question the English theory and practice,
and he wished to shape American legislation in conformity with them.
The experience of the Civil War, and--shall we add--his intimate
connections with Wall Street,[739] had confirmed him in his preference
for a _laissez-faire_ policy in currency matters. He would establish
the gold standard, encourage the issue of banknotes, and turn over the
custodianship of the national currency to private interests.

The position of David A. Wells was essentially similar. Wells wrote
much and skillfully and he seems to have been the chief authority on
whom such intellectuals as Godkin and Dana relied for materials for
their editorials on the currency question. Indirectly, therefore,
through the medium of editors and newspaper writers his opinions came
to have wide influence. During the discussion of resumption of specie
payments in the seventies his pen was particularly active. Amongst
other things he then wrote _The Cremation Theory of Specie Resumption_,
in which he advocated a policy of progressive contraction by the
expedient of burning annually a fixed sum in greenbacks; _Robinson
Crusoe’s Money_, an exposition of the bullion theory of money for
popular reading, illustrated by Nast and containing some witty thrusts
at such well-known expansionists as Ben Butler, Wendell Phillips, Henry
C. Carey, and Senator O. P. Morton; _Contraction_, in which he defended
the thesis, “He who is not in favor of contracting the currency is
not in favor of paying it, and he who is not in favor of paying it
is a repudiator”; and certain other papers later gathered into his
_Practical Economics_ (1885).

Wells was an uncompromising bullionist and his theory of money is as
simple as the doctrine of _laissez faire_ on which it rests. Honest
money represents labor and therefore possesses intrinsic value. The
experience of the ages has demonstrated that of all commodities gold
and silver are the most convenient for the purpose and in consequence
they have come to be accepted universally as real money. Every dollar’s
worth of gold represents a dollar’s worth of labor, always and
everywhere, measured by the test of the world’s needs. It is foolish
for politicians and theorists to worry their poor heads over the supply
of money, or attempt to predetermine the quantity best suited to the
needs of business. The amount of money in circulation will always be
regulated by the law of supply and demand. There is limitless gold
locked up in the treasure-house of nature, and just so much is unlocked
by human labor as the immediate needs of the world require. Gold can
neither be inflated nor deflated, for, “There is one and the same law
governing alike the supply of gold and of wheelbarrows. They are both
tools or commodities, and the country will have and use all of either
that it can use profitably.”[740] Let government keep its hands off
and money will regulate itself. “The value of the gold dollar is fixed
and cannot be altered. The value of the paper dollar is constantly
fluctuating.”[741] That business conditions would be seriously affected
by the withdrawal of the greenbacks, or that injustice would be done
to debtors, Wells refused to believe. When the poison is withdrawn
from the system a state of health reëstablishes itself. “I also count
as an absurdity the idea that the business of the country is likely
to be unfavorably affected by a deficiency of currency consequent
upon contraction in the manner proposed.”[742] The gold to take its
place would be provided automatically by the infallible law of supply
and demand. Thus triply armed with the logic of economic theory Wells
pronounced for deflation, immediate and drastic:

  I desire the federal government to get out of and abandon forever
  and as soon as possible this whole business of creating and issuing
  paper money, be it redeemable or irredeemable, for I believe as
  long as the federal government continues to recognize anything as
  money except hard matter-of-fact “labor representing” gold and
  silver, just so long the country will not have [a] stable and
  unfluctuating currency....[743]

Such neat logic was out of date on the day that Wells penned it.
The needs of business had outgrown the bullion theory of money and
credit was taking the place of a metallic currency. The fiction of a
gold standard would be adhered to till another seismic dislocation
proved its utter inadequacy to a world in confusion and it would be
unofficially abandoned. Yet it was such logic that prevailed in America
in post-war days, bringing acute distress upon the country as a whole
and particular hardship to the Middle Border; and it prevailed because
the banking interests followed a selfish and narrow policy marked out
for them by the English theory and practice.

The financing of the war had been wasteful and slovenly beyond all
precedent, and it had been fiercely criticized by the agrarians. It was
a system, said the militant Greenbacker, Thaddeus Stevens, the like
of which “no human folly had ever before witnessed.”[744] When the
war was over and the reorganization of the public finances was up for
settlement, the bankers were shrewd enough to make the confusion serve
their interests. Their great objective was to get back once more the
control of the national credit that the war had taken from them. The
National Bank Act of 1863--foolishly opposed by shortsighted state-bank
advocates who were jealous of local rights--had been the first great
step. By the provisions of the act the national banks were permitted to
issue currency on the security of government bonds, in such quantities
as they chose, on highly favorable terms, and the result was to drive
out of circulation the wild-cat issues of state banks. But the crux of
the problem was the question of the greenbacks that the necessities of
the war had forced upon the government. The greenbacks were reckoned
political money, the control of issues of which lay wholly with
Congress. At any moment, responding to popular demand, Congress might
deflate the bankers by the emission of new bills. At the time of first
issue the financial interests had succeeded in vitiating the greenbacks
by writing into the bill a repudiation of the issue by the government
itself, and no sooner was the war over than they set about the business
of retiring them. Their objective was the same end that English bankers
had reached in 1844.

In the reorganization three broad policies were insisted upon by the
banking interests: the speedy retirement of the greenbacks, in order
to take government out of the credit market, the refunding of all
debts on a gold basis, and an immediate return to specie payments. The
result was a drastic policy of deflation that brought further turmoil
to the country. In ten years the money in circulation was reduced
from somewhat over $2,100,000,000 to a little over a billion, or from
fifty-eight dollars per capita in 1865 to seventeen dollars per capita
in 1876.[745] The inevitable results followed, a swift appreciation in
the value of the dollar and the automatic increase in the debt of the
country, both public and private, with the fall of commodity prices.
Within a decade, measured in commodity values, the liabilities of the
American people were nearly doubled by the simple device of changing
the standard of deferred payments. Gold might remain as stable as
the eternal hills, but somehow all other commodities were shrinking
daily. “Them steers,” Solon Chase indeed said aptly, “while they grew
well, shrank in value as fast as they grew.” This remarkable result
was brought about, it is well to remember, by the plea for honest
money and the plighted faith of the nation. Keeping the public faith,
it would seem, meant permitting the creditors to change the terms of
their payments after the contract was made. “Who are these reasoners,”
cried Thaddeus Stevens, in disgust, “who talk so learnedly of the
laws of finance and the morality of human dealings, whose consciences
are so raw and stick out so far from their excited coverings that no
pharmaceutist can heal their inward wound?”[746]

As a debtor community the Middle Border felt the pinch of deflation
acutely, and in consequence the money question was thrust sternly upon
agrarian attention. On this issue it came finally to fight its great
battle, pitting its homespun experience against the authority of the
bankers and the teaching of the schools. To the bankers’ argument that
note issues should be taken out of politics and lodged in the hands
of business men, it replied that the issue of currency was a function
of sovereignty, and to surrender it to private corporations, as was
done by the National Bank Act, was undemocratic. The monetary system
of the nation must not become the football of class interests. To the
argument of the bullionists that gold was the only fixed and stable
standard for deferred payments, it replied that the gold standard was
too narrow a base on which to erect a monetary system for an expanding
country, that it was notoriously susceptible to manipulation, and that
it had been devised by Lombard Street in the interests of capitalism.
Since the days of the great struggle over the Bank a remarkable
change had come over the agrarian mind in its thinking on monetary
affairs. In their distrust of all banks and bank-issues Jackson and
Benton had swung sharply back to the bullion theory of money. They
were militant hard-money men. But in the intervening years a new and
revolutionary conception had been slowly making its way to recognition.
In the minds of obscure economists the quantitative theory of money
had risen to challenge the bullion theory. In unorthodox pamphlets and
newspaper discussion it was being pointed out that the value of money
is dependent on the amount in circulation, that gold and silver are
commodities fluctuating in value like other commodities, and that it
is the plain duty of the state to regulate the per capita circulation
in accordance with business needs. To allow the bankers to erect a
monetary system on gold is to subject the producer to the money-broker
and measure deferred payments by a yardstick that lengthens or shortens
from year to year. The only safe and rational currency is a national
currency based on the national credit, sponsored by the state,
flexible, and controlled in the interests of the people as a whole.[747]

By far the most suggestive of these obscure pamphleteers was Eleazar
Lord, a New York banker, who for thirty-five years was a propagandist
for a new currency system and who watched the bungling of the war
finance with acute concern.[748] With the undemocratic nature of
banknotes he was not concerned. As a banker he accepted them as
desirable and wished to establish them on a sound national basis. He
was in ardent sympathy with the patriotic nationalism of Henry C.
Carey. The loose system of state-bank issues seemed to him chaotic
and he was earnest in espousal of a common national system. Lord was
an acute and stimulating thinker on monetary matters. He was one of
the first Americans to understand the significance of credit, and he
was realist enough to foresee that the system of the future would
be a credit system. This was the clue to his dissatisfaction with
the bullion theory of money, which he attacked with vigor, and to
his acceptance of the quantitative theory.[749] He had the scantest
respect for Sherman’s dogma that gold is as stable as the eternal hills
because it is “labor and value itself,” or for Wells’s belief that the
law of supply and demand automatically produces gold enough to meet
the needs of business. He would treat gold and silver as commodities
varying in price with supply and demand, and make no attempt to
relate the money scale to their fluctuations. For years, he said,
America accepted the English “standard of currency, their aristocratic
definition of wealth, and their distinction between capital and
credit,” to its disaster.

  The so-called specie basis, whenever there is a foreign demand
  for coin, proves to be a mere fiction, a practical humbug; and
  whenever, by an excess of imports, this pretended basis is exported
  to pay foreign debts, the bank-notes are withdrawn from circulation
  or become worthless, the currency for the time is annihilated,
  prices fall, business is suspended, debts remain unpaid, panic and
  distress ensue, men in active business fail, bankruptcy, ruin, and
  disgrace reign.[750]

To provide a safe, flexible, and convenient currency, Lord proposed a
system of national banknotes, based on the wealth of the country and
responsive to the needs of a business world founded on credit.

  Necessity must teach us whether we can and must have a currency of
  purely representative value, wholly disconnected from the precious
  metals, as a basis and standard, or prolong the conflict between
  coin and paper, commerce and exchange. The existing theory on the
  subject is too firmly fixed by education, prescription, prejudice
  and interest, to be overthrown.... Such words as _safe, secured,
  national, uniform, economical, inalienable_, when predicated of
  any thing but gold as currency, are to the specie-paying theorist
  mere sounds devoid of significance.... Credit must triumph. Can any
  one blame the well-meaning theorist if he manifests some degree of
  doubt and alarm in view of the extent to which the actual use of
  credit, and of the confidence in the use of credit, has already
  attained?[751]

In the writings of these obscure economists are to be found the seeds
of the later agrarian program. Some of them were clear-headed and able
men, but they underestimated the power of the banking group. They
failed to realize that in a capitalistic society no monetary system
would be tolerated that was not to the bankers’ liking, and that if
it were to their liking they would easily convince the public that
it was the only honest and just system. It was this lesson that the
Greenbackers and Free Silver men were to learn. No sooner was the issue
joined between paper money and the gold standard than a scurrilous
hue and cry was raised by the “sound-money” men. The bitter dispute
that marked American politics for more than a score of years is a
classic example of the distortion of fact for partisan ends that seems
to be an inevitable consequence of referring a matter of policy to a
democratic electorate. Denunciation took the place of exposition, and
hysteria of argument; and in this revel of demagoguery the so-called
educated classes--lawyers and editors and business men--were perhaps
the most shameless purveyors of humbuggery. Stripped of all hypocrisy
the main issue was this: Should the control of currency issues--with
the delegated power of inflation and deflation--lie in the hands of
private citizens or with the elected representatives of the people?
It is a question on which wide disagreement may well exist, for it
involves important differences of social and political theory. But
the significant thing is that throughout the years when the subject
was debated in every newspaper and on every stump the real issue was
rarely presented for consideration. The bankers did not dare to present
it, for too much was at stake and once it was clearly understood by a
suspicious electorate their case was lost. Hence the strategy of the
money group was to obscure the issue, an end they achieved by dwelling
on the single point of inflation and charging the agrarians with a
dishonest policy of repudiation.

Certainly in the minds of many conscientious men the fear of
repudiation was very real and acute, and their fears made timid souls
panicky. The newspapers took their cue from this bogey and beat the
drums so loudly in the cause of “honest money” that all hope of
calm discussion was lost. The issue became so distorted from class
feeling that later historians find it difficult to view the question
dispassionately. So late as 1916 Joseph Gilpin Pyle in his _Life
of James J. Hill_ could still speak of the Greenback movement as a
vicious scheme of “inflation, the boon of the demagogue and the dream
of the great debtor class in this new country,” who “increased ... by
the opening up of the West on borrowed capital, welcomed any measure
that might give them a specious justification for discharging their
obligations with something worth less than what they had promised to
pay.” Describing the genesis of the free silver movement, he said:

  Hence grew up a formidable coalition between mine owners, debtors
  unable or unwilling to pay, ambitious politicians, honest theorists
  led captive by barren and unpractical abstractions, and a host of
  men too ignorant to inform themselves, too impassioned by what they
  heard to wish to know the truth.[752]

Obviously it was not so simple--or so wicked--as that. To determine
the justice of the charge of repudiation certain facts must be borne
in mind. The gist of the money problem pressing so heavily on the
Middle Border was the question of stabilizing the currency with a view
to stabilizing prices. Under the prick of war-necessities a sharp
inflation of prices had taken place. With the drastic contraction of
the currency following the war, prices fell as sharply. From 1873 to
1896 a world-wide appreciation in the value of gold, aggravated by
recurrent economic crises, further depressed the market values of
commodities, rendering the question of the solvency of the Middle
Border increasingly doubtful. Falling prices are only the obverse of
rising money-values, and to stop the one it was proposed to cheapen
the other, either through the issue of greenbacks as proposed by the
Greenback party, or through the free coinage of silver as proposed in
the plank of the Democratic platform of 1896. It was not a question of
repudiation in favor of debtors, but a question of correcting an unjust
deflation that favored the creditor class.


IV • Greenbackism and Peter Cooper

The opposition to the program and methods of the rising plutocracy was
not confined to the farmers of the Middle Border. It was nourished by
a widespread distrust of banks and bank-currencies that was a heritage
of the Jacksonian struggle. Amongst the leaders of the Greenback
movement were many eastern men, some of wide industrial experience,
whose economic views and prejudices were a hold-over from the days
of John Taylor, and who discovered in the post-war finances the same
class manipulations of public credit that marked the funding operations
of Washington’s administration. Men as dissimilar as Horace Greeley,
Thaddeus Stevens, Wendell Phillips, Henry C. Carey, and Peter Cooper,
made common cause with the western farmers in seeking to wrest control
of government from the bankers, and establish what they conceived
to be a just democratic economy. Picturesque militants grown old in
warfare, they were of an earlier generation, inheritors of the ideals
of simpler times before production for consumption had been superseded
by consumption for profit, ardent equalitarians who would not see their
hopes frustrated and America become a plutocracy without a struggle.
Greeley, Carey, and Phillips have been considered elsewhere; Stevens
was the last of the rugged equalitarians who followed their principles
to the bitter end; and Peter Cooper was an unregenerate Jeffersonian
who dedicated his last years to combating Wall Street, accepting in
1876, at the age of 85, nomination for the presidency by the National
Independent Party, commonly called the Greenback Party.

Like Thaddeus Stevens an ironmaster, grown wealthy by a long life
of useful and adventurous industry, builder of the first American
locomotive that made possible the success of the Baltimore and Ohio
railway, Peter Cooper was the most picturesque figure in New York City
in the seventies. With Bryant he shared the distinction of being the
patriarch of Broadway. Bred up amidst stern and harsh conditions, at a
period when, he said, within his “own recollection unmarried white men
could be sold for debt in the State of Connecticut,”[753] he was not
hardened by the struggle for subsistence. A tender social conscience
mellowed an old-fashioned probity and gave character and dignity to
a simple rugged nature. Transparently honest, with a certain innate
austerity softened by a homely courtesy, he was not a reed to sway
in every vagrant breeze, but a great oak with fibers toughened by
the storms of years. Like Horace Greeley, whom he much resembled in
honest kindliness, he carried the burdens of his country on his heart,
and in the midst of abundant prosperity still reckoned himself his
brother’s keeper. By “nature and temperament a radical reformer,” his
strongest instinct was a quick sense of justice. He was oppressed by
the poverty and misery he saw about him, and he gave so generously to
all good causes that he was known to his generation as “the greatest
philanthropist in the world.” His chief accomplishment was the founding
of Cooper Union for free instruction in “practical art and science,”
on which he expended a fortune.[754] But he was not one to salve his
conscience with a gift of superfluous wealth. His heart was as open as
his pocketbook, and he must explore to its hidden sources the infection
that was breeding social injustice in the new world. His private
interests never blinded him to his larger duties, but he gave his time
and strength as readily as his money to whatever cause he espoused.

Such a man was morally incapable of the buccaneering exploitation
that marked the Gilded Age. Between Peter Cooper and Jim Fisk was an
impassable gulf; they were products of different worlds and different
economies. The speculative middleman who thrust himself between the
producer and the consumer, with no sense of responsibility to either,
but concerned only with immediate profit, was a figure to excite the
wrath of an older-fashioned industrialist who had been taught that the
only just reward is the reward that comes from productive labor; and
in the days of the great barbecue Peter Cooper became deeply concerned
for the future of America. It was the new breed of bankers with their
control of the money system that were to blame, he came to believe, and
he would have reckoned himself false to the obligations of citizenship
if he failed to protest against their selfish manipulation of the
public credit. He had watched the callous juggling of the national
finances by the money-lenders during the Civil War, and had seen a debt
of some three billions nearly doubled in the decade after Appomattox
by the bond-holders. The new system of National Banks that issued
from the emergencies of war had come to control the financial policy
of the country, and to Peter Cooper it seemed that their purpose was
to perpetuate a debt that enabled them to tax the productive labor
of America and to squeeze wealth from a calculating expansion and
contraction of the currency. To surrender to such mercenaries the
sovereign power of issuing and regulating money seemed to him the
abdication of sovereignty, and in so far as he could he felt called in
honor to prevent it.

It needed rare courage and complete self-sacrifice to take up the gage
of battle and in his old age to renew the war that Andrew Jackson
had engaged in forty years before. His good name and his honorable
career could not save him from the gibes of politicians or the caustic
criticism of honest men. It was a losing fight at best. The struggle
had been venomous in Jackson’s day when the money-power was in its
infancy; and now that the banking interests had grown mighty it was
as hopeless as the charge of the Light Brigade. The cause had been
lost on the day when Congress wrote into the bill establishing a legal
tender for war purposes the single word “except,” thereby invalidating
the greenback for interest payments on bonds and duties on imports--an
act that “drew tears from the eyes of Thaddeus Stevens”; and the
bankers who could assert their control in war times had no intention a
dozen years later of suffering that control to pass from hands that had
grown enormously stronger.

Yet Peter Cooper refused to consider the outlook hopeless. With all
the resources he could command he threw himself into the struggle. He
scattered “more than a million of documents” broadcast--most of the
matter of which he wrote; he appealed to Congress and the President,
he challenged candidates, he cited the opinions of the Fathers, and
when he was buried under an avalanche of votes--as Horace Greeley
had been four years before--he preserved his faith in the “people’s
cause” and to the last day of his life kept up the great battle. “I
always have been, am, and ever shall be with the poor toilers and
producers; therefore I desire Congress to legislate for the poor as
well as for the rich, who can take care of themselves,”[755] he wrote
in his ninety-second year, and the spirit that stirred in his old veins
appears from such a comment as this:

  I consider the persistent class legislation of Congress since
  the war, a worse despotism than that of Great Britain before the
  Revolution; because it reduces the laboring classes to periodic
  distress and starvation, that are worse than any despotism ever
  was; for monopolizing corporations, whether in the shape of banks
  or railroads, have no soul.[756]

Peter Cooper’s political philosophy was simple and transparent. His
teachers were Albert Gallatin, Henry C. Carey, and George William
Curtis, and from them he drew three major ideas that had emerged from
three generations of American experience: the need for a national
monetary system based on legal tender; the necessity for a protective
tariff; and the need for an effective civil service. The first was
an adaptation of the old agrarian dislike of banknotes; the second
came out of Clay’s American System as it had been elaborated by Henry
C. Carey in the fifties; and the third issued from the Civil Service
Reform movement of the seventies. The exigencies of the political
situation, however, thrust into the foreground the money question,
and nine-tenths of his writings deal with that pregnant issue. As an
ardent Jacksonian he was deeply suspicious of the rising money-power,
with its corporations and monopolies, its land-grants and railways and
banks, for behind them he saw the specter of aristocracy. “In America,”
he said in 1882, “we have no aristocrats except those who have sprung
up in a night--as toad-stools do in a dung-hill.”[757] But class
legislation must end in creating classes, and at another time he said,
“There is fast forming in this country an aristocracy of wealth--the
worst form of aristocracy that can curse the prosperity of any
country.... Such an aristocracy is without soul and without patriotism.
Let us save our country from this, its most potent, and, as I hope, its
last enemy.”[758]

His deep interest in political measures was quickened by an anxious
concern at the hard times that resulted from the policy of drastic
currency deflation. That matters were going ill in America during the
middle seventies every fool knew, and Peter Cooper was only giving
expression to the common knowledge in describing to President Hayes, in
a letter dated August 6, 1876, the “appalling” economic situation. That
it was equally bad in England he did not point out.

  More than two hundred thousand men, within the last few weeks, have
  joined in “strikes” on the various railroad lines, the workshops
  and the mines of the country, on account of the further reduction
  in their wages, already reduced to the living point. That some of
  these strikes have been attended with lawless and unjustifiable
  violence, only shows the intensity of the evils complained of,
  and the despair of the sufferers. For four years past, since the
  “panic of 1873,” millions of men and women, in this hitherto rich
  and prosperous country, have been thrown out of employment, or
  living on precarious and inadequate wages, have felt embittered
  with a lot, in which neither economy nor industry, nor a cheerful
  willingness to work hard, can bring any alleviation. Is it to be
  wondered at, that _enforced idleness_ has made tramps of so many of
  our laboring population, or induced them to join the criminal and
  dangerous classes?[759]

After pointing out the disastrous effects of such hard times on mining,
railways, real estate, and the western farmers, he asserted that the
bankers, although they also were embarrassed, were “very patient with
their troubles ... for they know, that _money is appreciating in value
all the time_.” He then uncovers the kernel of his thought--that it is
a sovereign duty of government to provide an adequate national currency.

  This bondage has its manifold centre and its secret force in more
  than two thousand banks, that are scattered through the country.
  All these banks, are organized expressly to loan out their own
  money and the money of all those, who will entrust them with
  deposits. These loans are made to men, whose business-lives will
  soon become dependent on money, borrowed from corporations, that
  have a special interest of their own. Such a power of wealth,
  under the control of the selfish instincts of mankind, will always
  be able to control the action of our Government, unless that
  Government is directed by strict principles of justice and of
  the public welfare. The banks will favor a course of special and
  partial legislation, in order to increase their power ... they will
  never cease to ask for more, as long as there is more, that can be
  wrung from the toiling masses of the American people.

  Such a power should never be allowed to go out from the entire and
  complete control of the people’s Government. The struggle with this
  money-power, intrenched in the special privileges of banks, has
  been going on from the beginning of the history of this country.
  It has engaged the attention of our wisest and most patriotic
  statesmen. Franklin, Jefferson, Webster, Calhoun, Jackson, have all
  spoken of the danger of such a power and the necessity of guarding
  against it.[760]

The solution he offered for the vexing monetary problem accorded with
that of the Greenback Party,[761] namely, refusal to recharter those
banks “_deceitfully styled national_” and the retirement of all bank
currency; the abandonment of the policy of currency contraction; the
issue of legal-tender notes to the amount last found necessary for the
functions of industry and business; the rejection of a specie basis,
the notes to be interconvertible with government bonds bearing interest
at 3.65 per cent; issued on demand in any amount in exchange for
legal-tender notes; and the establishment of a Postal Savings Bank. No
man ever believed more ardently in the sufficiency of his program than
Peter Cooper. It was a suggestive proposal, that only a knave would
call the visionary scheme of a fool. He was tireless in explanation and
argument, the quality of which may be judged from the following passage
from a letter to Hayes and Tilden written during the campaign of 1877:

  The worth or exchangeable value of gold is as uncertain as other
  products of human labor, such as wheat or cotton. The exchangeable
  value of anything depends on its _convertibility into something
  else_ that has value _at the option of the individual_. This
  rule applies to paper money as to anything else. But how shall
  Government give an exchangeable value to a paper currency? Can
  it be done by a standard which is beyond its control and which
  naturally fluctuates, while the sign of exchange indicated by the
  paper remains the same?...

  ... we must trust our Government with this _whole function_ of
  providing the standards and measures of exchange, as we trust
  it with the weights and measures of trade.... We must require
  the Government to make this currency, at all times, and, at the
  option of the individual, _convertible_. But the currency must be
  convertible into something over which the Government has entire
  control, and to which it can give a definite as well as a permanent
  value. This is its own _interest-bearing bonds_. These are, in
  fact, a mortgage upon the embodied wealth of the whole country.
  The reality of their value is as sound and as permanent as the
  Government itself, and the degree of their value can be determined
  exactly by the rate of interest the Government may think proper to
  fix.[762]

The Jeffersonianism of Peter Cooper, like the Jeffersonianism of the
Middle Border, had taken a bias from the confident nationalism that
during the fifties so deeply colored American thought. To assure
an adequate national economy, superior in its self-sufficiency to
European--and especially English--policies, was a persuasive program
that Henry C. Carey devoted his later life to formulating, and that
men like Horace Greeley and Peter Cooper disseminated amongst their
wide agrarian following. That such a program implied a paternalistic
government did not trouble them. Peter Cooper accepted paternalism as
a necessary governmental function. He would have the state build and
own the great western railway systems; he would use the national domain
for the benefit of the settler; he would not turn over the state to
plunderers nor the resources of the nation to speculators. An honest
man with a sensitive social conscience, he would have no hand in the
great barbecue that wasted more than it consumed; but the times were
heedless of the counsels of honest men, and he was loved and laughed
at and ignored. Like Franklin in the Constitutional Convention, he had
outlived his generation and was thrust aside by the new economy that
was taking over the custodianship of America.[763]


Footnotes

[734] See Nevins, _The Emergence of Modern America_, pp. 163-164

[735] _The Statutes at Large: 7 & 8 Victoriae_, Vol. 84, pp. 188-189.

[736] _Speeches and Reports on Finance and Taxation_, pp. 188, 190.

[737] _Ibid._, p. 233.

[738] “Speech of January 24, 1870,” _ibid._, pp. 225-226.

[739] This laid him open to frequent and often bitter attack. See,
among many, Mrs. Marion Todd, _Pizzaro and John Sherman_, Chicago, 1891.

[740] _Practical Economics_, p. 54.

[741] _The Cremation Theory of Specie Resumption_, p. 10.

[742] _Ibid._, p. 10.

[743] _Ibid._, p. 13.

[744] J. A. Woodburn, _The Life of Thaddeus Stevens_, p. 573.

[745] _Ibid._, p. 573.

[746] _Ibid._, pp. 573-574.

[747] See, amongst many, _Homo’s Letters on a National Currency_,
Washington, 1817; _Currency Explosions, their Cause and Cure_, New
York, 1858; _Our Currency: Some of Its Evils, and the Remedies for
them_, by a Citizen of North Carolina, Raleigh, 1861.

[748] His titles are: _Credit, Currency and Banking_, New York, 1828;
_A Letter on the National Currency_, New York, 1861; _Six Letters on
the Necessity and Practicability of a National Currency, etc._, New
York, 1862; and _National Currency: A Review of the National Banking
Law_, New York, 1863.

[749] From what source Lord, and the other amateur economists, derived
their theory is not clear. It is possible, of course, to assume that
it was from Ricardo and the English economists. For an analysis and
rejection of the quantity theory, see J. Lawrence Laughlin, _The
Principles of Money_, Chapter VIII.

[750] _A Review of the National Banking Law_, p. 8.

[751] _Ibid._, p. 34.

[752] Vol. I, p. 485.

[753] _Ideas for a Science of Good Government_, p. iii.

[754] _Political and Financial Opinions of Peter Cooper_, p. 23.

[755] _Ideas for a Science of Good Government_, p. 272.

[756] _Ibid._, p. 271.

[757] _Ibid._, p. 261.

[758] _Ibid._, p. 123.

[759] _Ibid._, p. 117-118.

[760] _Ibid._, pp. 109-110.

[761] See _Ibid._, pp. 59-60.

[762] _The Political and Financial Opinions of Peter Cooper_, pp. 22-23.

[763] In his original plan Professor Parrington included here a
discussion entitled “Bimetallism: A heritage of Jacksonian democracy;
Ignatius Donnelly, ‘Coin’ Harvey,” but from the references in the next
chapter it seems evident that as he worked out his plan he decided to
omit this.--_Publisher._




