Chapter II • Political Thinkers • The French Group


The change which came over political thought in America in consequence
of the rise of French Jacobin philosophy is not inadequately revealed
in the writings of two men, quite dissimilar in antecedents and
training, but alike in fundamental purpose--Thomas Paine and Thomas
Jefferson. Both were speculative thinkers, profoundly in sympathy with
French revolutionary ideals: but the former was detached from local
patriotisms and national interests, a delegate at large in the cause
of human rights, concerned with spreading the gospel of freedom in
all lands; the latter remained wholly American, and while a keenly
interested spectator of the French upheaval, he was primarily concerned
to discover principles that would apply to native conditions and
further the cause of American democracy. Paine therefore became the
popular disseminator of the philosophy of republicanism, and Jefferson,
the practical statesman embodying it in political programs. Warm
friends, their influence became closely interwoven during the years
when agrarian democracy was gathering its strength to strike down the
rule of Federalism.


I • Tom Paine • Republican Pamphleteer

No more striking figure emerges from the times than the figure of the
Thetford Quaker. English in birth and rearing, in middle life Paine
came to embody the republican spirit of the American revolution;
and that spirit he made it his after business to carry overseas and
spread among the discontented of all lands. He was the first modern
internationalist, at home wherever rights were to be won or wrongs
corrected. “My country is the world,” he asserted proudly, “to do good,
my religion.” Throughout his later life he was a fearless skirmisher on
the outposts of democracy--another “Free born John” Lilburne, seeking
to complete the great work begun and thwarted in an earlier century;
and his career remains a stirring record of a time when revolution
threatened to sweep away the power and privilege of all kings and
aristocracies. Naturally his zeal cost him dear in reputation. The
passions of all who feared the loss of sinecures gathered about his
head, and he became the victim of an _odium theologicum et politicum_,
without parallel in our history. The Tories hunted him in packs,
and their execration and vituperation outran all decency. In London
clubs it became the fashion for gentlemen to wear TP nails in their
boot-heels to witness how they trampled on his base principles. He
was proscribed and banished, and his books burnt by the hangman. He
was regarded as worse than a common felon and outlaw, because more
dangerous. In America gentlemen echoed the common detestation--to be a
Paine-hater was a badge of respectability. “The filthy Tom Paine,” John
Adams called him, and the phrase stuck like a burr to his reputation.
But “reason, like time,” as Paine remarked “will make its own way,” and
the years are bringing a larger measure of justice to him.

Like Hamilton, Paine was an alien, but endowed with a heritage quite
unlike that of the brilliant boy from the West Indies. When he landed
in Philadelphia in the second week in December, 1774,[344] he was
in his thirty-seventh year, and had seemingly made shipwreck of his
life. He had been schooled in misfortune and was marked as a social
inefficient. A broken staymaker and tobacconist, he had twice been
removed from the office of petty exciseman for what today would be
called unionizing activity. He had separated from his wife, and his
mean and petty environment seemed to offer no hope of a decent living.
One stroke of good fortune had come to him, when as a delegate from
his union on some business with Parliament, he made the acquaintance
of Franklin, who was taken with “those wonderful eyes of his,” and
advised America as a likely place for getting on. So provided with
little more than Franklin’s letter of introduction, he set sail for new
worlds, cherishing the unmilitant plan of setting up in Philadelphia
a seminary of polite learning for young ladies. But the times proved
unpropitious for such a venture. He found himself in a world hesitating
fearfully on the brink of revolution, the electric atmosphere of which
he found strangely congenial. He at once threw himself whole-heartedly
into the colonial dispute, quickly seized the main points, mastered
the arguments, and thirteen months after his arrival published _Common
Sense_, a pamphlet that was to spread his name and fame throughout
America.

The amazing influence of _Common Sense_ on a public opinion long
befogged by legal quibble flowed from its direct and skillful appeal to
material interests. For the first time in a tedious, inconsequential
debate, it was openly asserted that governmental policies rest on
economic foundations; that the question of American independence was
only a question of expediency, and must be determined in the light of
economic advantage. Government is no more than a utility, and that
policy which was most likely to secure freedom and security “with the
least expense and greatest benefit,” must be preferred. The point at
issue before the American people, therefore, was whether a more useful
arrangement would result from continuing the old connection with
England, or from setting up for themselves; and it must be decided,
not in the court room or council chambers, but in the countinghouse
and market place, in the field and shop, wherever plain Americans
were making a living. Let the common people consult their own needs,
and determine the case without regard to legal or constitutional
precedents. It was a simple matter to be judged in the light of common
sense and their particular interests.

To further clear thinking on this fundamental matter Paine commented
on the economic consequences to America of the English connection.
Throughout colonial history, he asserted with some disregard to
fact, dependence had resulted in disadvantage to America; England
had systematically exploited the colonies and hampered development.
Whatever prosperity had been won heretofore, had been won in spite of
English hostility and interference; the peculiar economic position of
the colonies had proved their best reliance in the past, and would
prove still more advantageous in the future, if America were free
from jealous, paternal restrictions. What reason was there to expect
generous treatment from a power that had never shown generosity in past
dealings? How skillful was the appeal to colonial self-interest is
revealed in such passages as these:

  We are already greater than the King wishes us to be, and will he
  not hereafter endeavour to make us less? To bring the matter to one
  point, Is the power who is jealous of our prosperity, a proper
  power to govern us? Whoever says _No_, to this question, is an
  Independent, for independency means no more than this, whether we
  shall make our own laws, or, whether the King, the greatest enemy
  this continent hath, or can have, shall tell us _there shall be no
  laws but such as I like_.

  America would have flourished as much, and probably much more,
  had no European power taken any notice of her. The commerce by
  which she hath enriched herself are the necessaries of life, and
  will always have a market while eating is the custom of Europe.
  As Europe is our market for trade we ought to form no partial
  connection with any part of it. It is the true interest of America
  to steer clear of European contentions, which she never can do
  while by her dependence on Britain she is made the makeweight in
  the scale of British politics.

  Our corn will fetch its price in any market in Europe, and our
  imported goods must be paid for buy them where we will.... ’Tis as
  great folly to pay a Bunker-hill price for law as for land.

But Paine well knew that self-interest may be so clouded by prejudice
as not to see the way its nose is pointing. Though the colonial
talked of his grievances, he remained colonial in psychology, held
in unconscious subjection to English traditions. He was in the
clutch of outworn loyalties--loyalty to the crown and loyalty to the
British constitution; and to this difficult problem Paine addressed
himself with great skill. To a republican, as Paine seems to have
been from his landing in America, the odium which George III had
incurred was a heaven-sent opportunity. In order to strike at the
monarchical principle, it was only necessary to point out that the
folly of the King was the best commentary upon the foolishness of
hereditary monarchy. The boldness and audacity of Paine’s attack
on the king-principle must have added greatly to the popularity of
_Common Sense_ along the frontier. It was the first clear, far-carrying
appeal for republicanism addressed to American ears. How successful
it was, how ruthlessly it stripped away the divinity that doth hedge
a king, laying bare the stupidity of the king-cult, is suggested by
the remarkable change in the American attitude towards monarchy that
a few months brought about. After the appearance of _Common Sense_,
middle and lower class Americans shed their colonial loyalties like a
last year’s garment, and thenceforth they regarded the pretentions of
kings as little better than flummery. King George’s disgraced exciseman
had his revenge; he had thrust his royal master out of the colonial
affection and destroyed the monarchical principle in America.

A more difficult task remained, that of instituting “an inquiry into
the _constitutional errors_ of the English form of government,” in
order to prove what gains would result if America took herself out of
the English system. Here Paine faced, single-handed, a solid phalanx
of lawyers. He was the first pamphleteer to question the excellence of
a constitution that was proclaimed by American Tories as the wonder of
the world and the envy of other nations. In the acrimonious disputes
between 1765 and 1775, this was the single point on which all professed
to agree. A vast deal of laudation had been uttered; innumerable legal
pamphlets had been written; and no colonial had had the temerity to
question the adequacy of the British constitution to colonial needs.
And now came this republican, with penetrating comment on its origin
and working, to disturb the common complacency by pointing out how ill
fitted it was to answer the needs of America. It was a telling attack,
made with skill and shrewd insight; and it had a great part in arousing
a bitter antagonism to the English system in the minds of the American
yeomanry.

Paine was not a constitutional historian, but he had a keen eye for
realities. The fundamental fallacy of the English system, he asserted,
lay in the so-called “mixt aristocracy,” which was presumed to gather
the wisdom of the realm in council with the king, but which was no
more than a convenient arrangement for dividing the spoils. The House
of Commons had grown out of the struggles of feudal barons against
the king. It presumed to speak for the common people, but the rights
of the people were thus recognized only to be thwarted by the old
tyrannies. The “Republican materials, in the persons of the Commons,
on whose virtue depends the freedom of England,” were held in check by
the “remains of aristocratical tyranny in the person of the Peers,”
and further restrained by the “remains of Monarchical tyranny in the
person of the King.” From the play of these elements arose the system
of checks and balances which placed control in the hands of landed
property. It was based on the assumption that “the King is not to
be trusted without being looked after,” and that “the Commons, by
being appointed for that purpose, are either wiser or more worthy of
confidence than the Crown.” But in spite of the supposed balance “the
provision is unequal to the task,” for the Crown, as the dispenser of
places and pensions, is more than a match for Commons in the game of
politics.

  The will of the king; is as much the law of the land in Britain
  as in France, with this difference, that instead of proceeding
  directly from his mouth, it is handed to the people under the
  formidable shape of an act of parliament. For the fate of Charles
  the First hath only made kings more subtle--not more just.

This was but the beginning of a long assault on the British
constitution which was to engage him much in after life. _Common Sense_
was a pronouncement of the new philosophy of republicanism that was
taking firm hold of the American mind, and which the French Revolution
was to spread so widely. It was a notable contribution, of which Paine
to the end of his life was justly proud.

As he came to America almost casually, with no conscious revolutionary
intent, so in the critical year 1787 he returned to Europe with the
peaceful intention of perfecting an iron bridge on which he was
engaged. True to his Quaker breeding he was more interested in the
arts of peace than of war, but again circumstance was too much for
him. Before he had completed his bridge, delegates from France came to
invite him to a seat in the National Assembly. A new day was rising
there; the constitution of a freer order was being constructed, and so
competent a workman could not be spared. In the thick of that eager
world of constitution-making, Paine finally clarified his political
philosophy and gave it wide currency. He became the pamphleteer of
revolution to the English-speaking world, to Philadelphia and New York
equally with London. Yet he was never an extremist; he was a Girondist
rather than a Jacobin, and when the Girondists were overthrown and a
dictatorship set up, he remained a constitutionalist. By the Jacobin
radicals he came to be regarded as a reactionary from his willingness
to retain monarchy in France; but Paine was a practical Englishman with
a shrewd judgment of what was politically possible, and he refused to
outrun reasonable expectations of accomplishment.

It was the simplicity and clarity of his political philosophy that
made its appeal so widely effective. His thinking turned on the two
fundamental questions, the source of government and the purpose for
which it is instituted among men; and the major premise on which
he reared his logic was the thesis that sovereignty inheres in the
majority will. At the basis of his philosophy was the natural-rights
theory, but given a fresh significance and vitality by the assertion
of the doctrine of continuous reaffirmation of the social compact.
Instead of deriving the sovereign state from a fictitious compact,
presumably entered into in a remote past, he derived it--as Roger
Williams had done a century and half before--from a continuous compact
reaffirmed by each generation. With the birth of each individual appear
fresh rights which no pre-contract can justly circumscribe or nullify;
ancestral arrangements are valid only to the extent that they are
acceptable to the living. Hence it follows, first, that the general
body of the people may at any time remake the fundamental law, and
bring it into accord with present desire; and second, that there can be
no law superior to this popular will expressed through the majority.
His most celebrated dictum--“That which a nation chuses to do it has a
right to do”--a dictum that aroused a bitterer hostility than any other
of his pronouncements--was the logical expression of his republicanism
that differentiated between the sovereign people and their agency, the
government; and this in turn he justified by a celebrated saying out
of Swift, “Government is a plain thing, and fitted to the capacity of
many heads.” Like Jefferson, he would not have government kept from the
people, the agent domineer over the principal.

The purpose of government Paine discovered in the Benthamite principle
of expediency. If a diffused well-being results from the policies
of government, such government is justified; but if the tax-levies
are wasted in unsocial ways, if unjust impositions are levied, if
exploitation or tyranny results, such government is not justified.
The agent has cheated the principal, and must be called to account.
The final test of every government Paine found in its concern for
the “_res publica_, the public affairs, or the public good”; any
government that “does not make the _res publica_ its whole and sole
object, is not a good government.” In its most obvious phase, concern
for the _res publica_ means concern for the national economy, and this
in turn conditions the taxes that shall be levied and the ends for
which they shall be spent--whether upon the arts of peace or war. A
beneficent government has no need of standing armies and navies, or an
inquisitorial police; it is established in the hearts of the people
and rests securely on the common good will. It is the injustice of
government that creates armies to defend the earnings of injustice.
But every wise government will respect its limitations. As a child of
the eighteenth century, Paine hated the leviathan state as a monster
created by a minority to serve the ends of tyranny. The political
state he accepted as a present necessity, but he would not have its
prestige magnified and the temptation to tyranny increased by the cult
of nationalism. “Government is no farther necessary,” he believed,
“than to supply the few cases to which society and civilization are not
conveniently competent.” At best it is an artificial thing.

  Formal government makes but a small part of civilized life; and
  when even the best that human wisdom can devise is established, it
  is a thing more in name and idea than in fact.... The more perfect
  civilization is, the less occasion has it for government, because
  the more does it regulate its own affairs, and govern itself....
  All the great laws of society are laws of nature.[345]

The maturest elaboration of Paine’s political philosophy is found in
_The Rights of Man_. This extraordinary work, the most influential
English contribution to the revolutionary movement, was an examination
of the English constitution in the light of what Paine held were the
true source and ends of government. It is a brilliant reply to Burke,
who rested his interpretation of the English constitution on the
legal ground of the common law of contract. Following the Revolution
of 1688, Burke had argued, the English people through their legal
representatives, entered into a solemn contract, binding “themselves,
their heirs, and posterities forever,” to certain express terms; and
neither in law nor in equity were they, of whatever generation, free
to change those terms except by the consent of both parties to the
contract. This was an elaboration of the theory of government tacitly
held by the Old Whigs, which derived government from a perpetual civil
contract as opposed to the radical doctrine of a revocable social
contract; and in attacking it Paine allied himself with such thinkers
as Price, Priestley, Franklin and Rousseau.[346] He pointed out the
absurdity of carrying over the law of private property into the high
realm of political principle--to seek to impose the dead past upon the
living sovereignty. If sovereignty inhered in the English people in
1688, it must inhere in the English people in 1793, unless it had been
violently wrested from them; no parchment terms of another age can bind
that sovereignty other than voluntarily. Over against Burke’s theory of
a single, static contract, Paine set the doctrine of the reaffirmation
of natural rights. Any generation--as the generation of 1688--is
competent to deal with its affairs as it sees fit, but it cannot barter
away the rights of those unborn; such a contract on the face of it is
null and void.

  Every age and generation must be free to act for itself _in
  all cases_ as the ages and generations which preceded it. The
  vanity and presumption of governing beyond the grave is the most
  ridiculous and insolent of all tyrannies.... Every generation is,
  and must be, competent to all the purposes which its occasions
  require. It is the living, and not the dead, that are to be
  accommodated.[347]

Burke’s defense fares even worse when the argument is examined in the
light of expediency. Illogical as the English system must appear to the
political philosopher, can it plead the justification that it works;
that it does well the things it is paid to do; that it makes the _res
publica_ its main concern? The reply to such questions, Paine believed,
should be sought in the condition of the national economy; more
particularly by an examination of the account-books of the exchequer.
The English people paid annually seventeen millions sterling for the
maintenance of government, and what did they get in return? Nine
millions of the total went to pay interest on old wars, which in the
budget was known as the funded debt; of the remaining eight millions
the larger part was spent in new wars and sinecure pensions; whereas
the real needs of England--the true _res publica_--were shamelessly
neglected. The English people got little for their money except new
debts to justify new taxes. The poor were even taxed for the benefit
of the great. Thus my Lord Onslow, who was particularly zealous in
the business of proscribing Paine as “the common enemy of us all,”
drew four thousand pounds from the royal chest in sinecures, which
made him “the principal pauper of the neighbourhood, and occasioning a
greater expense than the poor, the aged, and the infirm, for ten miles
around.”[348] Government on the hereditary principle of Burke did not
appear to advantage in the light of such facts.

The injustice of aristocratic government, Paine believed, was fast
bringing it to its “rotting time” in England. “The opinions of men with
respect to government are changing fast in all countries; the enormous
expense of governments has provoked the people to think, by making
them feel.” Englishmen must soon throw aside the outworn monarchical
system and set up a republic. Economics was on the side of revolution.
The great work of revising fundamental laws was the pressing business
of the time. If this could be done peacefully, by means of a national
convention, it were well; if not, it would come by means of an uprising
of the people. It was no lawyer’s business to be determined by the
law of private property, but a practical matter of determining the
real will of the nation and putting it into execution. The judgment of
the people must be recorded, and the judgment of the people could be
had only through an adequate system of representation based on free
publicity. “I do not believe that the people of England have ever
been fairly and candidly dealt by,” Paine declared. Henceforth they
must be taken into full confidence. There must be no more _arcana
imperii_--“Nations can have no secrets; and the secrets of courts, like
those of individuals, are always their defects.”[349]

  One of the great advantages of the American Revolution has been,
  that it has led to a discovery of the principles, and laid open the
  imposition of governments. All the revolutions till then had worked
  within the atmosphere of a court, and never on the grand floor of
  a nation. The parties were always of the class of courtiers.... In
  all cases they took care to represent government as a thing made up
  of mysteries, which only themselves understood; and they hid from
  the understanding of the nation the only thing that was beneficial
  to know, namely, _That government is nothing more than a national
  association acting on the principles of a society._[350]

For the follies of government the people pay the bill--it was this
elementary lesson in public economics that Paine sought to impress upon
the popular mind; and they would still be cheated and plundered by
gentlemen who prospered in cozening, until they took matters into their
own hands. He had no fear of popular government. He believed in the
essential fairness of men and their capacity to deal wisely with the
problems of society if the necessary information were set before them.
“As far as my experience in public life extends, I have ever observed
that the great mass of people are always just, both in their intentions
and their object; but the true method of attaining such purpose does
not always appear at once,”[351] he argued before the French Assembly;
and the words express his settled conviction. Those who fear the
people usually have very good reasons. Heretofore politics had been
jealously guarded from free discussion; but now that the common people
were coming to understand that government is justified only by its
measure of service, the beginning of a new age was at hand.

The ripest product of Paine’s speculations on the relation of
government to the individual, is _Agrarian Justice_, a work too little
known to modern readers. It is a slender tract, written in the winter
of 1795-96, although not published till a year later; and it was an
answer to a sermon by Watson, Bishop of Llandaff,[352] entitled _The
Wisdom and Goodness of God in having made both Rich and Poor_. In this
remarkable essay, Paine advanced from political to social theory,
pushing his thought into the unexplored realm of economic justice. The
prime impulse of his speculation is found in the contrast between the
augmenting poverty of Europe and the ideal of equality; a contrast
which in France had lately produced a proletarian revolt under Babeuf,
and which in England was harshly aggravated by the brutal inclosure
movement of the last forty years of the eighteenth century. The
question which he considers lies at the heart of our social problem,
namely, whether civilization is competent to cure the disease of
poverty which everywhere it disseminates?

The question emerged naturally from the development of Paine’s
thinking. It was implied in his major principle of the _res publica_,
and the solution must lie in the problem of the relation of government
to social well-being. But in prescribing means to end, he parted
company from Babeuf.[353] The latter was a Communist who approached
the problem from the point of view of the proletarian who had been
disappointed of the promised equality; whereas Paine, like Jefferson,
was essentially a Physiocratic agrarian. His long residence in America
had confirmed him in the belief that land monopoly was the root of
economic inequality; and his observations of the evictions then going
on in England, uprooting the peasants and sending them to industrial
centers to become wage-workers, strengthened his conviction. The land
problem must be solved if civilization were to be worth its cost, and
the technique of the solution, he believed, must be worked out by the
state. With his usual directness Paine went to the heart of the problem:

  The first principle of civilization ought to have been, and ought
  still to be, that the condition of every person born into the
  world, after a state of civilization commences, ought not to be
  worse than if he had been born before that period. But the fact
  is, that the condition of millions, in every country in Europe, is
  far worse than if they had been born before civilization began, or
  had been born among the Indians of North-America at the present
  day.[354]

  It is not charity but a right, not bounty but justice, that I am
  pleading for. The present state of civilization is as odious as
  it is unjust. It is absolutely the opposite of what it should
  be.[355]... The contrast of affluence and wretchedness ... is like
  dead and living bodies chained together.[356]

  It is the practice of what has unjustly obtained the name of
  civilization ... to make some provision for persons becoming poor
  and wretched only at the time they become so. Would it not, even as
  a matter of economy, be far better to adopt means to prevent their
  becoming poor?[357]

The crux of the problem, Paine proceeds to point out, lies in the
principle of private property; whether property rights are sacredly
individual--as Locke had asserted--or are limited by social needs.
In reply to this searching question Paine laid down the principle of
social values, a theory curiously modern and profoundly suggestive,
which makes _Agrarian Justice_ read like a chapter out of _Progress
and Poverty_. The principle is so broad, as Paine states it, that it
applies equally to a capitalistic and an agrarian order.

  Personal property is the _effect of society_; and it is as
  impossible for an individual to acquire personal property without
  the aid of society, as it is for him to make land originally....
  All accumulation, therefore, of personal property, beyond what a
  man’s own hands produce, is derived to him by living in society;
  and he owes on every principle of justice, of gratitude, and of
  civilization, a part of that accumulation back again to society
  from whence the whole came ... if we examine the case minutely it
  will be found that the accumulation of personal property is, in
  many instances, the effect of paying too little for the labor that
  produced it; and the consequence of which is, that the working hand
  perishes in old age, and the employer abounds in affluence. It is,
  perhaps, impossible to proportion exactly the price of labor to the
  profits it produces; and it will also be said, as an apology for
  the injustice, that were a workman to receive an increase of wages
  daily he would not save it against old age, nor be much better
  for it in the interim. Make, then, society the treasurer to guard
  it for him in a common fund; for it is no reason, that because he
  might not make a good use of it for himself, another should take
  it.[358]

  It is the value of the improvement only, and not of the earth
  itself, that is individual property. Every proprietor, therefore,
  of cultivated land, owes to the community a _ground-rent_ ... for
  the land which he holds; and it is from this ground-rent that the
  fund proposed in this plan is to issue.[359]

Having thus pointed out an equitable source of social income--the
returning to society what society has created--Paine proposed to deal
with the problem of poverty by means of a ten per cent inheritance tax
to provide a fund for the endowment of the young and the pensioning
of the old. It was an early form of the state insurance idea. In his
own thinking Paine doubtless went much farther than this, but the
practical difficulty of separating the social moiety from the private
right inclined him to favor an inheritance tax as the simplest and best
plan; that it would lead to greater things as the social intelligence
quickened, he very likely believed. To bring men to realize that
society is responsible for poverty, and that its total eradication must
be regarded as the first object of civilization, was his prime purpose.
He was seeking to awaken the social conscience of his generation--a
generation sorely in need of idealism to offset its love of profits.
_Agrarian Justice_ was a contribution to the slowly developing
humanitarian sentiment, and it made appeal to minds already aroused by
the revolutionary movement. The republican clubs that were springing up
in England and America reflected the new social thought, and the most
radical became the most humanitarian. As early as 1791, in an address
signed by Horne Tooke, one of Paine’s English lieutenants, it was
declared:

  We are oppressed with a heavy national debt, a burthen of taxes, an
  expensive administration of government, beyond those of any people
  in the world. We have also a very numerous poor; and we hold that
  the moral obligation of providing for old age, helpless infancy,
  and poverty, is far superior to that of supplying the invented
  wants of courtly extravagance, ambition, and intrigue.[360]

The more critically one follows the thought of Paine the more evident
it becomes that the master passion of his later years was concern for
a new social economy. The well-being of society became an engrossing
interest with him; and his zeal for political revolution was predicated
on the belief that popular control of the political state was a
necessary preliminary to a juster social economy. Nothing was to be
expected from the old aristocratic order. His main attack, therefore,
was directed against the monarchical system, but now and then he paused
to level a thrust at the rising system of capitalism. If he hated King
George and the Tories, he hated the younger Pitt and the imperialists
even more. Over against _Agrarian Justice_ should be set his pamphlet
entitled _The Decline and Fall of the English System of Finance_,
written in 1796, a skillful attack upon the new funding system. Paine
could not foresee, of course, the enormous expansion of credit that was
to accompany the industrial revolution, but in his commentary on the
quantitative theory of money, and the social consequences of inflation,
he unconsciously foretold later conditions. War he regarded as the
great waster, the fruitful mother of social misery. With his Quaker
training he was dedicated to pacifism, and he spent his life warring
against war, and disease, and poverty, and injustice, and ignorance,
and unreason; but no other war would he sanction. For those futile wars
bred of the ambitions of courts and monarchs, and which for all their
cost in blood and money served no social purpose, he would substitute
arbitration. “War is the Pharo-table of governments, and nations the
dupes of the game,” he declared[361]--whereas arbitration is an appeal
to reason which alone should adjudicate and determine between nations.

It would be idle to attempt to trace to their sources the major ideas
of his philosophy. Probably Paine did not know where he got them. He
was not a student like John Adams, familiar with all the political
philosophers; rather he was an epitome of a world in revolution. He
absorbed ideas like a sponge. He was so wholly a child of his age that
the intellectual processes of the age were no other than his own. But
he was very much more than an echo; he possessed that rarest of gifts,
an original mind. He looked at the world through no eyes than his
own. There is a curious remark in an early pamphlet which admirably
expresses his method: “When precedents fail to assist us, we must
return to the first principles of things for information, and _think_,
as if we were the _first men_ that thought.”[362] It was his remarkable
ability to think from first principles that gave such freshness and
vigor to his pen. He drew largely from French thought, but at bottom he
remained English. If he was Gallic in his psychology of human nature
and his passionate humanitarianism, he was English in his practical
political sense and insistence on the economic sources of political
action. In his political theory he was curiously like Roger Williams.
A thoroughgoing idealist in aim, generous and unsparing in service
to humanity, he was a confirmed realist in the handling of facts. He
refused to be duped by imposing appearances or great reputations, but
spoke out unpleasant truths which gentlemen wished to keep hidden.
Clear and direct in expression, he seasoned his writings with homely
figures and a frequent audacity of phrase that made wide appeal.
He was probably the greatest pamphleteer that the English race has
produced-and one of its great idealists.

During his residence abroad Paine habitually thought and spoke
of himself as an American. He conceived it to be his mission to
disseminate throughout Europe the beneficent principles of the
American Revolution; yet nowhere was he hated more virulently than
in America. To the animosity which his political principles excited
among Federalists was added the detestation of the orthodox for the
deism of the _Age of Reason_. The ministers outdid the politicians in
virulent attack upon his reputation, until the generous Quaker, the
friend of humanity and citizen of the world, was shrunk and distorted
into “the infidel Tom Paine.” It was a strange reward for a life spent
in the service of mankind. Like all idealists he made the mistake of
underestimating the defensive strength of vested interests, and their
skill in arousing the mob prejudice. His thousands of followers among
the disfranchised poor could not protect his reputation against the
attacks of the rich and powerful. Although reason may “make its own
way,” it makes its way with wearisome slowness and at unreasonable
cost. How tremendous were the obstacles that liberalism confronted in
post-revolutionary America is revealed with sufficient clearness in the
odium visited upon our great republican pamphleteer.


II • Thomas Jefferson • Agrarian Democrat

The years following the great defeat were disastrous to the party of
agrarian democracy. Under the brilliant leadership of Hamilton the
Federalists went forward confidently, gaining daily a firmer grip
on the machinery of government, and establishing their principles
in far-reaching legislative enactments. Their appeal to the wealthy
classes, to those who made themselves audible above the clamor, was
electrical. Hamilton was the hero of the hour, and the effusive
approval that augmented with every added profit to the money brokers,
seemed to indicate that the country was enthusiastically behind the
Federalist policy. To what despondency the democrats were reduced is
revealed in Maclay’s _Journal_, with its caustic comment on political
measures and motives. But the tide was already at the turn. The ideas
let loose by the French Revolution were running swiftly through
America, awakening a militant spirit in the democracy. Antagonism to
the aristocratic arrogance of Federalism, and disgust at its coercive
measures, were mounting fast. If that inchoate discontent were
organized and directed by a skillful leader, it might prove strong
enough to thrust the Hamiltonian party from power. To that work Thomas
Jefferson devoted himself with immense tact and untiring patience. A
master of political strategy, he spun his webs far and wide, quietly
awaiting the time when the bumbling Federalist bees should range too
carelessly in search of their honey. Accepted at once as the leader of
agrarian America, he was to prove in the course of a long life the most
original and native of the political leaders of the time.

Despite the mass of comment that has gathered about Jefferson, the full
reach and significance of his political philosophy remains too little
understood. Uncritical praise and censure have obscured or distorted
his purpose, and allied his principles with narrow and temporary ends.
Detraction will not let him alone. The hostility of his enemies, as a
recent biographer has remarked, has frequently taken “the peculiar form
of editing his works or writing his life.”[363] For this distortion
there is, perhaps, more than usual excuse. Certainly Jefferson is the
most elusive of our great political leaders. Apparently inconsistent,
changing his program with the changing times, he seemed to his enemies
devoid of principle, a shallow demagogue who incited the mob in order
to dupe the people. One of the most bitterly hated and greatly loved
men in the day when love and hate were intense, he was the spokesman
of the new order at a time of transition from a dependent monarchical
state, to an independent republican state. Back of the figure of
Jefferson, with his aristocratic head set on a plebeian frame, was
the philosophy of a new age and a new people--an age and a people not
yet come to the consistency of maturity, but feeling a way through
experiment to solid achievement. Far more completely than any other
American of his generation he embodied the idealisms of the great
revolution--its faith in human nature, its economic individualism,
its conviction that here in America, through the instrumentality of
political democracy, the lot of the common man should somehow be made
better.

From the distinguished group of contemporary political thinkers
Jefferson emerges as the preëminent intellectual, widely read, familiar
with ideas, at home in the field of speculation, a critical observer
of men and manners. All his life he was a student, and his devotion to
his books, running often to fifteen hours a day, recalls the heroic
zeal of Puritan scholars. He was trained in the law, but he was too
much the intellectual, too curious about all sorts of things, to
remain a lawyer. For such a man the appeal of political speculation
was irresistible, and early in life he began a wide reading in the
political classics that far outweighed Coke and Blackstone in creative
influence on his mind. He was equally at home with the English
liberals of the seventeenth century and the French liberals of the
eighteenth; and if he came eventually to set the French school above
the English, it was because he found in the back-to-nature philosophy,
with its corollary of an agrarian economics and its emphasis on social
well-being, a philosophy more consonant with Virginian experience
and his own temperament than Locke’s philosophy of property. But
he was very far from being a narrow French partisan, as has been
often charged; rather he judged old-world theory in the light of its
applicability to existing American conditions, and restrained his
love of speculation by immediate practical considerations. The man of
affairs kept a watchful eye on the philosopher in his study.

In the major doctrines of his political philosophy Jefferson was
an amalgam of English and French liberalisms, supplemented by the
conscious influence of the American frontier. That fusion early took
place in his mind. The first bill that he introduced into the Virginia
Assembly, at the age of twenty-six, was a bill to permit slave-owners
to manumit their slaves; and his first published pamphlet, issued
in 1774,[364] rejected the legal reasoning of John Dickinson and
Daniel Dulaney--supporting the parliamentary right to impose external
taxation--and took its stand on the doctrine of natural right to
local self-government and freedom of trade. When two years later he
drafted the Declaration of Independence the fusion was complete. The
strong influence of French humanitarianism is revealed in the passage
on slavery that was stricken out on the floor of Congress, and more
significantly in the change in the familiar phrasing of the several
natural rights. Samuel Adams and other followers of Locke had been
content with the classical enumeration of life, liberty, and property;
but in Jefferson’s hands the English doctrine was given a revolutionary
shift. The substitution of “pursuit of happiness” for “property” marks
a complete break with the Whiggish doctrine of property rights that
Locke had bequeathed to the English middle class, and the substitution
of a broader sociological conception; and it was this substitution
that gave to the document the note of idealism which was to make its
appeal so perennially human and vital. The words were far more than
a political gesture to draw popular support; they were an embodiment
of Jefferson’s deepest convictions, and his total life thenceforward
was given over to the work of providing such political machinery for
America as should guarantee for all the enjoyment of those inalienable
rights. If the fact that he set the pursuit of happiness above
abstract property rights is to be taken as proof that Jefferson was an
impractical French theorist, the critic may take what comfort he can
from his deduction.

That Jefferson was an idealist was singularly fortunate for America;
there was need of idealism to leaven the materialistic realism of the
times. It was a critical period and he came at the turn of a long
running tide. He watched the beginnings of the political shift in
America from isolated colonial commonwealths to a unitary sovereign
state; and his wide reading and close observation had convinced him
that the impending change was fraught with momentous issues for the
common man. He had meditated much on the social results of the slow
oscillations in western civilization between social decentralization
and centralization, with their contrasting political and economic
structures; and he understood how the movement from simplicity to
complexity--from freedom to regimentation--creates a psychology and
an institutionalism that conducts straight to the leviathan state,
controlled by a ruling caste, serving the demands of exploitation,
heedless of the well-being of the regimented mass. This great lesson
in social drifts he brought home to America. There had been created
here the psychology and institutions of a decentralized society, with
a corresponding exaltation of the individual and the breakdown of
caste. In the broad spaces of America the old-world coercive state had
dwindled to a mere police arrangement for parochial duties; the free
citizen refused to be regimented; the several communities insisted
on managing their affairs by their own agents. Such was the natural
consequence of free economics; but with the turning of the tide would
not the drift towards centralization nullify the results of earlier
American experience and repeat here the unhappy history of European
peoples?

To the philosophic mind of Jefferson, such a question was not academic,
but urgent and vital. He had been bred in that older world, he believed
passionately in the excellence of its virtues, and his political and
social philosophy was determined by that experience. He sprang from a
society deep-rooted in an agrarian economy, and he wished to preserve
that society. Born on the Virginia frontier, he had never seen a hamlet
so large as twenty houses before his eighteenth year; his neighbors
and associates were capable and vigorous frontier democrats, who
managed the affairs of local government with the same homespun skill
that went to their farming. “It is not difficult,” remarks an acute
critic, “to see how the great principle of Jefferson’s life--absolute
faith in democracy--came to him. He was the product of the first West
in American history; he grew up with men who ruled their country well,
who fought the Indians valiantly.... Jefferson loved his backwoods
neighbors, and he, in turn, was loved by them.”[365] This early
conviction of the excellence of a freehold order was confirmed by later
experience; wide observation and much travel convinced him that no
other people was so favored by circumstance as the American, or so
vigorously self-reliant. That such well-being resulted from a plastic
economics, he regarded as self-evident; and from this economic freedom
came political freedom. In his European travels he saw everywhere
want and wretchedness dwelling in the shadow of the aristocratic
state, and he could not dissociate the two. Political tyranny was the
outward and visible sign of greater tyrannies that ran down to the very
roots of society; the leviathan state was the convenient instrument
through which those tyrannies took their heavy toll of the common
well-being. America was a land of free men; it was exploited neither
by an aristocracy nor a plutocracy. Surely there could be no greater
or nobler ambition for an American than to assist in preserving his
country from the misery that must attend a change from the present
happy condition of democratic industry, to the serfdom of the European
wage-taker and peasant.

To a mind imbued with such conceptions the appeal of the Physiocratic
theory of social economics would be irresistible. The ground was
prepared for the sowing of the seeds of the liberal French thought.
With its emphasis laid upon agriculture, its doctrine of the _produit
net_, its principle of _laissez faire_, and its social concern, the
Physiocratic theory accorded exactly with his familiar experience,
and it must have seemed to Jefferson that it was little other than a
deduction from the open facts of American life. He had read much in
the works of the Physiocratic group, and was intimately acquainted
with DuPont de Nemours; and the major principles of the school sank
deep into his mind and creatively determined his thinking, with the
result that Jeffersonian democracy as it spread through Virginia and
west along the frontier assumed a pronounced Physiocratic bias. The
sharp struggle between Jefferson and Hamilton must be reckoned, in
part at least, a conflict between the rival principles of Quesnay and
Adam Smith, between an agrarian and a capitalistic economy. Much as
Jefferson feared the ambitions of an aristocracy, he feared quite as
much the creation of a proletariat. As he looked into the future he saw
great cities rising to breed their Roman mobs, duped and exploited by
demagogues, the convenient tools of autocracy; and counting the cost
in social well-being, he set his face like flint against the rising
capitalism. A free yeomanry he regarded as the backbone of every great
people, the producers of the real wealth, the guardians of manly
independence; and the number of factory workers measured for him the
extent of social disease. It is this Physiocratic conception that
explains his bitter hostility to protective tariffs, national banks,
funding manipulations, the machinery of credit, and all the agencies of
capitalism which Hamilton was skillfully erecting in America. Not to
have hated such things Jefferson must first have emptied his mind of
the teachings of experience and the lessons of the social philosophers.

In the _Notes on Virginia_ there is a well-known passage that amplifies
his favorite thesis that a sound American economy was an agrarian
economy:

  The political economists of Europe have established it as a
  principle, that every State should endeavor to manufacture for
  itself; and this principle, like many others, we transfer to
  America.... But we have an immensity of land courting the industry
  of the husbandman. Is it best then that all our citizens should
  be employed in its improvement, or that one half should be called
  off from that to exercise manufactures and handicraft arts for
  the other? Those who labor in the earth are the chosen people of
  God, if ever he had a chosen people, whose breasts he has made his
  peculiar deposit for substantial and genuine virtue. It is the
  focus in which he keeps alive that sacred fire, which otherwise
  might escape from the face of the earth. Corruption of morals in
  the mass of cultivators is a phenomenon of which no age nor nation
  has furnished an example. It is the mark set on those, who not
  looking up to heaven, to their own soil and industry, as does the
  husbandman, for their subsistence, depend for it on casualties
  and caprice of customers. Dependence begets subservience and
  venality, suffocates the germ of virtue, and prepares fit tools
  for the designs of ambition.... Generally speaking the proportion
  which the aggregate of the other classes of citizens bears in
  any state to that of its husbandmen, is the proportion of its
  unsound to its healthy parts, and is a good enough barometer
  whereby to measure its degree of corruption. While we have land to
  labor then, let us never wish to see our citizens occupied at a
  work-bench, or twirling a distaff ... for the general operations
  of manufacture, let our work-shops remain in Europe. It is better
  to carry provisions and materials to work-men there, than bring
  them to the provisions and materials, and with them their manners
  and principles.... The mobs of great cities add just so much to
  the support of pure government, as sores do to the strength of the
  human body. It is the manners and spirit of a people which preserve
  a republic in vigor. A degeneracy in these is a canker which soon
  eats to the heart of its laws and constitution.[366]

Such was his attitude in 1782, an attitude identical with Franklin’s.
Thirty-four years later he had modified his views of industrialism.
The bitter experience of the Napoleonic wars, with the hardships
and losses visited upon neutral shipping, had convinced him of the
need of domestic manufactures, and he was then deeply interested in
improved machinery, new methods, original ventures. “We must now place
the manufacturer by the side of the agriculturist,” he conceded, or
remain in economic dependence. But how much further the country should
be industrialized, whether it “shall be proposed to go beyond our own
supply” to compete in foreign markets, was not yet clear to him; the
problem remained still to be determined whether “the _surplus_ labor”
would be “most beneficially employed in the culture of the earth, or
in the fabrications of art.”[367] In such commentary Jefferson failed
to measure the thrust of economic determinism that drives every people
to go through with the industrial revolution, once it is begun; but
if we recall the primary principle of his political philosophy, that
the “care of human life and happiness, and not their destruction,
is the first and only legitimate object of good government,” we may
perhaps judge what would have been his attitude towards a centralized
industrialism. He would have judged its desirability, not by the
balance sheet of corporate business, but by the social ledger. As a
social economist he could not think in terms of the economic man, nor
simplify human beings to labor commodity, nor reduce the social tie
to the cash nexus. It is inconceivable that he should have shared
Hamilton’s satisfaction at the contemplation of women and children--and
many of the latter “of tender age”--wasting away in the mills; he was
too social-minded for that, too much an idealist, too human in short.
Though necessity might force him away from a simple agrarian economy,
it does not follow that he would become partisan to a centralizing
industrialism, with control vested in banking credit.

It is a common charge that Jefferson was consumed with suspicion, and
it is set down against him as the mark of a mean and ungenerous nature.
That in later years he was suspicious of fair-spoken advocates and
plausible programs was as true of Jefferson as of Sam Adams; he had
learned like the Boston democrat the virtue of the saying, _felix qui
cautus_, and with so much at stake he would practice caution. He feared
many things, for he was acutely aware of the incapacity of the heedless
majority to defend itself against an able and instructed minority. As
a child of an aristocratic age he fell into the mistake of visualizing
that minority in the guise of a landed gentry, rather than in the
guise of plutocracy; but in his quick fear of a minority he had all
history as counselor. When he took his seat in Washington’s cabinet
his suspicions of the Hamiltonian program were quickly aroused. He
believed that a monarchy was aimed at, and if that proved unattainable,
then a highly centralized state designed to hold in check the
democratic tendencies. His line of reasoning may be summarized thus:
In consequence of the republican enthusiasm of the early years of the
Revolution, democratic reorganization of the several state governments
had been successfully achieved. Very great progress towards democracy
had been made. Certain legislative acts of agrarian assemblies were now
being turned against democracy, to invalidate it as a working system of
government. But if agrarian majorities had used their power to enact
laws beneficial to their interests, they were only applying a lesson
learned from long experience with aristocratic legislatures. Such acts
were no serious indictment of the democratic principle, and to make
partisan use of them to justify curtailing the powers of the majority,
was a betrayal of popular rights. And this, Jefferson believed, was
the deliberate purpose of the Federalist leaders. Unable to stem the
popular tide in the several commonwealths, the wealthy minority had
devised a plan to superimpose upon the sovereign commonwealths a
centralized federal government, so hedged about as to lie beyond the
reach of local majorities, and hence able to override and nullify the
democratic will. Once safely established, this federal government would
gather fresh powers into its hands, until there emerged a rigorous
machine, modeled after the British system, and as little regardful of
the common interests. If this were not the Federalist purpose, why all
the praise of the British system as the ripe product of experience,
exactly adapted to the political genius of the English race?

In the matter of appeal to past experience, which provided the staple
of Federalist argument, Jefferson discovered fresh grounds of fear.
The past he looked upon as evil, and the record of experience was a
tale of injustice and bitter wrong. He would not have America follow
the trodden paths, for whither they led he knew too well. He would
countenance no entangling alliances with old-world upper-class systems
of statecraft, for such systems would reproduce in America the evils
it should be the chief business of America to prevent. There must be
erected here no counterpart of the European state; there must be no
king, no aristocracy, no plutocracy; but a new democratic organization
of government, in which the welfare of the whole people should be the
sole concern.

  When I left Congress in ’76 [he wrote as an old man] it was in the
  persuasion that our whole code must be revised, adapted to our
  republican form of government, and now that we had no negatives of
  Councils, Governors and Kings to restrain us from doing right, that
  it should be corrected in all its parts with a single eye to reason
  and the good of those for whose government it was planned.[368]

Not past experience but present need should instruct America in
drawing the plans of a new system of government and a new code of
law. In analyzing the evils of European systems Jefferson came to
certain conclusions that dominated all his later thinking, and
that may be phrased thus: The political state tends inevitably to
self-aggrandizement, the logical outcome of which is a political
leviathan, too big and too complex for popular control. With sovereign
powers vested in the hands of governmental agents, those agents lie
under a constant temptation to corruption and tyranny, and in the end
they align the powers of the state on the side of the most ambitious
and capable. The greater the power of government, the ampler its
revenues, the more energetic its administration, the more dangerous
it may become to the rights of men; for where the prize is greatest,
men struggle most ruthlessly, and what prize could be greater than the
privilege of exploiting society in the name of the state? History knows
no objective more tempting to the will to power, than the control of
the absolute state. A government adequately socialized, intent solely
upon furthering the common well-being, Jefferson would have been
unanxious about. But such governments existed only in the dreams of
Sir Thomas More and the Utopians; he could discover none such either
in the past or present. Everywhere strong governments were little more
than efficient tax-machines to support armies and provide subsidies and
places for the minority. Against such forces of corruption the people
struggle in vain.

If such was the common testimony of old-world experience--and no man
who knew the inner workings of government there would deny it--what
reason was there to expect that like causes would work unlike results
in America? To what purpose was the talk of strong government
encouraged amongst the holders of the public debt? To what end had
lobbyists for the funding bill invaded the floor of Congress? It was
idle to expect in America a nullification of the law, that where power
sits within, corruption waits without. The love of power is universal.
Most men are potential autocrats, the strong and capable may become
actual autocrats. No man is good enough, no group of men, to be trusted
with unrestrained powers--in America any more than in Europe. A
centralized government in control of the tax-machine, and secure from
popular restraint, would undo the results of the Revolutionary War. The
movement to consolidate power, Jefferson asserted, was “but Toryism in
disguise.” “The generalizing and concentrating all cares and powers
into one body ... has destroyed the liberty and the rights of men in
every government which has ever existed under the sun.”

  Our country is too large to have all its affairs directed by a
  single government. Public servants at such a distance, and from
  under the eye of their constituents, must, from the circumstance
  of distance, be unable to administer and overlook all the details
  necessary for the good government of the citizens; and the
  same circumstance, by rendering detection impossible to their
  constituents, will invite the public agents to corruption, plunder
  and waste.[369]

The practice of local home rule had grown up in America in response to
native conditions; it had resulted from democratic needs; and Jefferson
was too thoroughly American, too instinctively democratic, to overlook
the significance of local sovereignties in a democratic philosophy.
From the sharp contrast between American and European practice he
deduced a cardinal principle, namely, that good government springs from
a common interest in public affairs, and that such common interest
is possible only when the field of activities is circumscribed. Set
government apart from the people, or above them, and public interest
is lost in a sense of futility. The danger of an encroaching tyranny
by a superimposed sovereignty, is made easy by the public lethargy
in respect to distant and unfamiliar things, and establishes itself
through the psychology of custom. Jefferson was never greatly concerned
about stable government; he was very much more concerned about
responsive government--that it should faithfully serve the majority
will. He made no god of the political state. He had no conventional
reverence for established law and order; he inquired rather what
sort of law and order he was asked to accept, was it just or unjust.
Changing conditions make ancient good uncouth, and established
institutions tend to fall into dry-rot, or to become tyrannical. Men
are more important than constitutions, and the public well-being is
more sacred than statutes. An occasional revolution, he commented
grimly apropos of the hue and cry over Shays’s Rebellion, is salutary;
if it does not come of itself it might well be brought about. Progress
in government results from experiment; and it is easier and safer to
experiment on a small scale than on a great. Inertia increases with
size, and the more consolidated the government, the more unyielding it
becomes. The longest delayed revolutions are the gravest.

In asserting the principle of the majority will, Jefferson like other
democratic thinkers of the time, found himself countered by the
argument of abstract justice. Vehement denunciation had greeted Paine’s
doctrine that what a nation chooses to do, it has a right to do. There
can be no rights, it was confidently asserted, superior to the right.
The people may legislate, but it remains to determine the validity of
statutes in the light of justice; that which is unjust is _ipso facto_
null and void. It was Coke’s doctrine of judicial review, set up in
America after its repudiation in England, and Jefferson’s hostility
to it was bitter. As an intellectual he had none of the lawyer’s
complacency with legal principles, or conceit of the law’s sufficiency;
and as a democrat he would not yield sovereignty into the hands of the
judiciary. He had no veneration for the Common Law of England: it had
grown up by slow accretions during centuries of absolutism; how should
it be expected to answer the needs of a freer age? It must be purged
of outworn elements, imbued with democratic sympathies. The Revolution
had been fought in defense of rights that are broader and more human
than legal principles; and to hand over those rights to be interpreted
away by lawyers, seemed to him moonstruck madness. It was the law of
Blackstone rather than of Coke that he feared most--that “elegant”
canonization of the malign influences of Tory reaction, and that was
so cried up by the smatterers and “ephemeral insects of the law” in
America; whereas Coke “was as good a Whig as ever wrote”:

  Blackstone and Hume have made tories of all England, and are
  making tories of those young Americans whose native feelings of
  independence do not place them above the wily sophistries of a
  Hume or a Blackstone. These two books, and especially the former
  [Blackstone], have done more towards the suppression of the
  liberties of man, than all the million of men in arms of Bonaparte,
  and the millions of human lives with the sacrifice of which he will
  stand loaded before the judgment seat of his Maker.[370]

As Jefferson grew older his fear of judicial encroachment on the
popular will became acute, but it shifted from distrust of the Common
Law to concern over the Supreme Court. A strong and outspoken hatred
of the Federal judiciary runs through all his later writings, and he
lost no opportunity to popularize the thesis--“It is a misnomer to call
a government republican, in which a branch of the supreme power is
independent of the nation.”

  The great object of my fear is the Federal Judiciary. That body,
  like gravity, ever acting, with noiseless foot, and unalarming
  advance, gaining ground step by step, and holding what it gains, is
  engulfing insidiously the special governments into the jaws of that
  which feeds them.[371]

  It is a very dangerous doctrine to consider the judges as the
  ultimate arbiters of all constitutional questions. It is one
  which would place us under the despotism of an oligarchy.... The
  Constitution has erected no such single tribunal, knowing that to
  whatever hands confided, with the corruptions of time and party,
  its members would become despots.[372]

As Jefferson watched Chief Justice John Marshall gathering all
things within the purview of the Federal judiciary, preparing future
strongholds by the skillful use of _obiter dicta_, legislating by
means of judicial interpretation, nullifying the will of the majority,
and with the power of repeal made nugatory by the complexity of the
process, he saw clearly what the outcome would be. Surely that was
no democracy where judge-made laws were enforced by bench warrants,
and where the sovereign power lay beyond the immediate reach of the
popular will. The government that he desired would not rest on the
legal fiction of an abstract justice above statutes and constitutions,
whereof a group of judicial gentlemen were the repositories and
guardians. It would be like Paine’s, “a plain thing, and fitted to the
capacity of many heads”; for “where the law of the majority ceases to
be acknowledged, there government ends; the law of the strongest takes
its place.”

Granted the truth of Jefferson’s premises that power tends to contract
to the hands of a few, and that all government of the few is
vicious, then democracy is the only form of government under which an
approximation to justice can be realized. A class will serve class
interests. Government by an aristocracy is government in the interest
of the aristocracy. For the staple argument of the Federalists, that
gentlemen of principle and property alone may be intrusted with affairs
of state, Jefferson had a quiet contempt. “I have never observed men’s
honesty to increase with their riches,” he remarked. On the contrary,
he regarded the “better sort of people” as a chief hindrance to the
spread of social justice. The past had been evil because the past had
been exploited by gentlemen of principle and property. They had kept
government away from the people, and with their secret councils and
secret diplomacy they had plundered the taxpayers and drenched nations
in blood. Their selfish rivalries everywhere exacted a heavy toll of
society and left behind a trail of poverty and wretchedness. The future
would be better in the degree that mastery passed into common hands.

From the conclusions of his democratic premise he did not shrink. If
it were indeed true that the people were beasts, then the democratic
government of the future would be a bestial government--and even that
might be better than the old arrangement of masters and slaves. But the
American people whom Jefferson trusted were very far from beasts; he
was convinced that they were honest and well-meaning; and if government
were brought close to them, kept responsive to their will, a new and
beneficent chapter in human history would open. The populistic laws
passed by the legislatures of Rhode Island and New Hampshire, about
which such an uproar was raised by fearful creditors, and which were
urged as an argument against popular government, gave him no concern.
He understood the ways of propaganda, and he never accepted judgment of
the American people from the mouths of their enemies. The cure for the
evils of democracy, he believed, was more democracy. The whole are far
less likely to be unjust than the few; and if sovereignty does not rest
in the majority will, where shall it lodge?

  Hume, the great apostle of toryism, says “the Commons established
  a principle, which is noble in itself, and seems specious [_i.e._
  pleasing], but is belied by all history and experience, _that the
  people are the origin of all just power_.” And where else will
  this degenerate son of science, this traitor to his fellow men,
  find the origin of _just_ power, if not in the majority of the
  society? Will it be in the minority? Or in the individual of that
  minority?[373]

The America of Jefferson’s day was a simple world, with a simple
domestic economy. More than ninety per cent were plain country folk,
farmers and villagers, largely freeholders, managing their local
affairs in the traditional way. There were no great extremes of
poverty and wealth, no closely organized class groups. With its sharp
restrictions on suffrage and the prestige accorded the gentry, it was
still far from a political democracy; but it was hastening towards a
more democratic order. Remote from the cesspools of European diplomacy,
and not yet acquainted with imperialism, it had no need for a leviathan
state. Economic conditions sanctioned a _laissez-faire_ government,
simple and unambitious. In such a world the well-known words of
Jefferson’s first inaugural address, justified themselves to all who
did not seek to use the state for personal advantage.

  A wise and frugal government, which shall restrain men from
  injuring one another, which shall leave them otherwise free to
  regulate their own pursuits of industry and improvement, and shall
  not take from the mouth of labor the bread it has earned. This is
  the sum of good government, and this is necessary to close the
  circle of our felicities.

In one significant direction he would extend the scope of
government--the encouragement of education. An intelligent people is
necessary to a democracy; free schools are a sign of a free society.
Tyranny thrives on ignorance and superstition, and every exploiting
group fears popular education. Free himself in thought and action,
believing in the unshackled commerce of ideas, hating all censorships,
Jefferson accounted the founding of the University of Virginia his
largest contribution to the well-being of his native commonwealth.

To all who profess faith in the democratic ideal Jefferson is a
perennial inspiration. A free soul, he loved freedom enough to deny it
to none; an idealist, he believed that the welfare of the whole, and
not the prosperity of any group, is the single end of government. He
was our first great leader to erect a political philosophy native to
the economics and experience of America, as he was the first to break
consciously with the past. His life was dedicated to the service of
freedom, and later generations may well recall his words, “I have sworn
upon the altar of God eternal hostility against every form of tyranny
over the mind of man.” Europe made Jefferson wholly American. From
his studies in France he came to see that where men enjoy free access
to the sources of subsistence, government is likely to be simple and
honest, and society free and content; but where a policy of preëmption
has run its course, the function of government is seduced from its
social purpose to perpetuate the inequalities which spring from the
progressive monopolization of natural resources, with augmenting
corruption and injustice. To preserve government in America from such
degradation, to keep the natural resources open to all, were the prime
desire and object of his life. That such an effort was foredoomed to
failure, in presence of imperious forces that shape society beyond the
capacity of political means to change or prevent, cannot detract from
the nobility of his ideal, or the inspiration of his life. Among the
greater thinkers of the constitutional period Jefferson remains by far
the most vital and suggestive, the one to whom later generations may
return most hopefully.


Footnotes

[344] For the date of his arrival, see _Massachusetts Historical
Society Proceedings_, Vol. XLIII, p. 246.

[345] _Rights of Man_, Part II, pp. 407, 408.

[346] For an excellent discussion of this, see C. M. Walsh, _The
Political Science of John Adams_, pp. 203-226.

[347] _The Rights of Man_, Part I, p. 278.

[348] “Letter to Lord Onslow,” in _Works_, Vol. III, p. 36.

[349] _Rights of Man_, Part II, p. 428.

[350] _Ibid._, pp. 410-411.

[351] Conway, _Life of Paine_, Vol. II, p. 4.

[352] Author of _An Apology for the Bible_ (a reply to Paine’s _Age
of Reason_), which was distributed among Harvard undergraduates. See
above, page 324.

[353] For the program of Babeuf, see R. W. Postgate, _Revolution from
1789 to 1906_, pp. 24, 54-60.

[354] _Works_, Vol. III, p. 329.

[355] This and the preceding sentence were expunged from all early
editions by the censor.

[356] _Ibid._, p. 337.

[357] _Ibid._, p. 338.

[358] _Ibid._, p. 340.

[359] _Ibid._, p. 329.

[360] _Address and Declaration of the Friends of Universal Peace and
Liberty_, quoted in Conway, _Life of Paine_, Vol. I, p. 316.

[361] _Rights of Man_, Part II, p. 413.

[362] _Works_, Vol. I, p. 155.

[363] Francis W. Hirst, _Life and Letters of Thomas Jefferson_, p. 266.

[364] _A Summary View of the Rights of British America_, Williamsburg.

[365] Dodd, _Statesmen of the Old South_, p. 23.

[366] _Writings_, Vol. III, pp. 268-269.

[367] _Ibid._, Vol. X, p. 8.

[368] “Autobiography”, in _Writings_, Vol. I, p. 57.

[369] _Writings_, Vol. VII, p. 451.

[370] _Ibid._, Vol. VI, p. 335.

[371] _Ibid._, Vol. X, p. 189.

[372] _Ibid._, Vol. X, p. 160.

[373] _Ibid._, Vol. VII, p. 356.




