Chapter II • The Culture of the Seventies


It was in the seventies that good taste reached its lowest ebb. Not
only in America, but in England as well, where rebels like William
Morris were contemptuously rejecting a machine civilization. A
veritable _débâcle_ of the arts was in process, the lesser as well
as the greater, in New York and Boston as well as in Chicago and San
Francisco, from which literature could not wholly escape; and that
_débâcle_ was an expression of profound changes taking place at the
bases of society. The dignified culture of the eighteenth century,
that hitherto had been a conserving and creative influence throughout
the Jeffersonian revolution, was at last breaking up. The disruptive
forces that swept out of the great West, bringing the frontier spirit
to every threshold, and the factory economy that displaced the wares of
the craftsman with the products of the machine, were destroying that
earlier culture and providing no adequate substitute. Distinction of
manners and dress was gone, dignity and repose were gone, traditional
standards were gone; and in their stead a bumptious restlessness, a
straining for originality and individuality that exuded in a shoddy and
meaningless grotesque. It was not without justification that Godkin
contemptuously applied the phrase, “a chromo civilization,” to the
works of that singular generation dwelling between worlds, the one
dead, the other seeming powerless to be born.

How much was lost in the break-up of the excellent culture of the
eighteenth century the children of the seventies neither knew nor
cared. Generations of growth had gone to its shaping. It had been
formed by the needs of men and women conscious of the ties that linked
them with the past. It was bound back upon the rich cultural life of
medieval times, and in the aristocratic eighteenth century it had come
to flower in forms of fine distinction and dignity. Touch that century
on any side--dress, architecture, furniture, manners, letters--and
the same note of refinement, of grace, of balanced harmonious form,
is everywhere evident. The culture of the times of the Coffee House
Wits was all of a piece, held together by an inner pervasive unity.
The formality of the wig and the heroic couplet was symbolic of a
generation that loved dignity, and the refinement of the Chippendale
sideboard, wrought in slender Honduras mahogany, was the expression of
a society that cultivated the graces of life. But when the tie-wig and
smallclothes disappeared before the social revolutions of the end of
the century, when the gentleman was pushed from his place by the banker
and manufacturer, and broadcloth gave way to tweeds, the culture of the
eighteenth century was doomed; and until another culture should impose
its standards upon society and reëstablish an inner spiritual unity,
there would be only the welter of an unlovely transition.

In no other field is the sprawling formlessness of the seventies
more grotesquely suggested than in its architecture and in interior
decoration, which is a lesser form of architecture. Upon the buildings
of the times the hallmark of the Gilded Age is stamped in gaudy
colors. By the end of the thirties the fine traditions of colonial
craftsmanship were gone and the builders set forth on a foolish quest
for historical styles. Revivals followed on each other’s heels. The
Greek revival and the Gothic revival marked the successive decline of
the noble art of building, until at last, turning away from the past,
architecture erupted in what it conceived to be a new American style,
the expression of a free democratic people, but which later generations
reckon a sign and proof of cultural bankruptcy. It was the golden
age of the jig saw, of the brownstone front, of the veranda that ran
about the house like a spider web, of the mansard roof, the cupola,
the house of stilts. Flamboyant lines and meaningless detail destroyed
the structural unity of the whole; tawdry decoration supplanted beauty
of materials and a fine balance of masses. A stuffy and fussy riot of
fancy, restrained by no feeling for structural lines, supplied the lack
of creative imagination, and architecture sank to the level of the
jerry-builder. Bad taste could go no further.

With this decay of aristocratic culture and the attendant
disintegration of the earlier cultural unity, three diverse strands
of cultural impulse remained, each of an individual fabric that
could not easily be woven into a harmonious pattern: a decadent
Federalistic culture that occupied the seats of authority in New
England and wherever New England opinion was respected; the body of
social aspiration that had come from the French Enlightenment, from
which individual dreamers still drew nourishment; and the vigorous
individualism of the frontier that bit so deeply into the psychology
of the age. Behind these diverse impulses lay still another that would
eventually shoulder them aside and provide the pattern for the America
that was rising--the culture of an urbanized and mechanized society
that in its vast warrens of business was creating the psychology and
manners of a standardized, middle-class world of salesmanship.


I • New England in Decay

In one spot in America, at least, the disruption of the fine old
aristocratic culture would not be suffered without a protest. Brahmin
New England would cling to its traditional standards though all the
rest of America should go whoring after strange gods. The welter of the
seventies it looked upon with undisguised contempt. It would not follow
the way that other portions of the country were hastening. It would
have nothing to do with a bumptious frontier spirit that recognized no
obligations to the past--for the excellent reason that it had no past.
It had had its fill of the visionary Enlightenment that had come to
logical fruit in the vagaries of Thoreau and the grotesque vaporings
of Alcott. It had had more than its fill of the strident causes that
spawned like mushrooms in the rank soil of French romanticism. Emerson
it could forgive, for Emerson was a Brahmin, but it quietly ignored
his philosophic anarchism and chose to dwell on pleasanter aspects of
his teaching. Wendell Phillips it regarded as a common nuisance, but
Edmund Quincy it forgave, for after a season of vagrant wanderings he
returned to the placid ways of his ancestral Brahminism. Of all these
things, whether frontier or Utopian or what not, it had had enough,
and so it turned back lovingly to the culture of earlier times and
drew comfort from a dignified Federalism--enriched now by a mellow
Harvard scholarship that was on intimate terms with Dante and Chaucer
and Cervantes and Shakespeare--a Federalism that fitted the dignified
Brahmin genius as comfortably as an old shoe.

It was an excellent heritage--that old culture. Never richly creative,
never endowed with a fleshly paganism, it possessed nevertheless a
solidity got from long wrestling with the eternities, a pleasantly
acrid flavor got from crotchety old books, and a sober morality got
from much contemplation of the sinfulness of the children of Adam. It
was as native to New England as Boston brown bread, and it issued in
self-respecting and dignified character. Underneath all transcendental
and other eruptions it had lain unmoved like the granite foundations
of the New England fields; and now after those eruptions had subsided
it provided the solid footing on which the later culture might rear
its chaste temples. But unhappily the building days of New England
were over. Matters were going ill there. Emigration to the West was
draining the vitality from farm and village, and in Boston disastrous
changes were under way. The familiar places where Sam Adams and Josiah
Quincy had dwelt with their fellows were being invaded by immigrants
who brought with them another faith and discordant manners. The Roman
Catholic church grew strong as the Old North declined; the Irish brogue
displaced the Yankee on Boston Common; Faneuil Hall was given over to
alien fishmongers. The Brahmin remnant was absorbed in banking and
brokerage and railway investments. It still held the Boston purse but
it was fast losing the Boston vote. The capital of the Puritan fathers
was being destroyed by the Industrial Revolution that their descendants
had set on foot. New England was visibly falling into decay and the
years of its intellectual leadership in America were numbered.

The days of high thinking were over and the familiar home of
humanitarian causes was inhabited by other tenants. All that remained
of the golden forties was the quiet atmosphere of good breeding.
Unitarianism, that Theodore Parker had kept open-minded and militant,
settled into a staid and respectable orthodoxy, its pale negations
sufficing to soothe its placid congregations. Transcendentalism, that
had thrown a lovely mist about the lean New England character, was
evaporating in the rising sun of science; and the ardor of reform, that
had burned fiercely in the Puritan heart, subsided into a well-bred
interest in negro schools and foreign missions. The Abolition leaders
laid aside their pens, convinced that the last injustice had been
removed from American society. Their work was done and they turned
unwilling ears to calls for new crusades. The New England conscience
was tired. It had borne the burden and heat of a long day and was glad
to be released from its cares to set up monuments to its sacred dead
and to write the chronicles of its past. New England lost interest in
ideas and turned away from creative intellectual life to catalogue
its libraries and revere the men who had written those libraries. The
Enlightenment was over in Boston and the stir of reform passed to New
York and the West, where Amelia Bloomer and Elizabeth Cady Stanton
carried forward the great crusades for temperance and women’s rights,
and Henry George was preaching the gospel of a new social economics.
Whatever militants existed in New England were not likely to be
Brahmins and their labors did not roil the quiet waters. Clamorous
distractions no longer disturbed the calm of Federalistic culture, and
Cambridge and the Back Bay quietly appropriated the literary earnings
of Concord and lived pleasantly on its revenues.

The inevitable fruit of such thin soil was the genteel tradition, the
excellence of which in the seventies New England maintained in the
face of all frontier leveling and romantic liberalisms--a timid and
uncreative culture that lays its inhibitions on every generation that
is content to live upon the past. It was a penalty for backsliding.
The men of the preceding generation had got their cheeses made--and
excellent cheeses they were, with a fine native flavor. But the
transcendental cow had gone dry and with no fresh cows coming in the
Brahmins of the seventies were hard put to it to live an adequate
intellectual life. Translations and medieval scholarship were no better
than remainder biscuit after voyage. Ever since Lowell put away his
youthful radicalisms and turned bookman, Brahmin culture had been
undernourished. The story of intellectual New England after 1870 is
little more than a repetition of the story of New England after 1790--a
resurgence of the traditional Toryism that assumed an unquestioned
custodianship of all matters intellectual.

That was her own business, of course, and it would have been of no
great concern to the rest of the country if New England had not set
up a cultural dictatorship over American letters. It was not content
to follow its own path to sterility, but was bent on dragging the
country with it. Boston taste determined American literary standards,
and Boston taste rejected most of the new movements then getting
under way. Stoddard and Stedman in New York, Boker in Philadelphia,
and Aldrich in Boston, stoutly upheld the genteel tradition, of which
the _Atlantic Monthly_ was the authoritative spokesman. Great figures
from the past--Emerson, Longfellow, Lowell, Whittier, Holmes, Motley,
Parkman--still walked the streets of Boston, and their extraordinary
reputations were little less than tyrannous in the inhibitions they
laid on younger men. It is incomprehensible today, the authority of
these great reputations. Young William Winter walking twenty miles
to stand in the moonlight at Craigie House gate and view reverently
the silent walls within which the great Longfellow was sleeping; Mark
Twain in the fullness of his powers abashed and put out of countenance
at his temerity in speaking humorously of Emerson and Longfellow and
Holmes at the _Atlantic_ dinner--one understands such things with
difficulty now that those reputations have so much bated and dwindled.
Yet to the generation of the seventies the inhibitions of the genteel
tradition were all-powerful, and the little Boston group set themselves
up as a court of final jurisdiction over American letters. New England
parochialism had become a nation-wide nuisance.

The genteel tradition, as Professor Santayana has pointed out, had
long been a disease in New England. Some of the finest minds of the
Renaissance--Emerson and Hawthorne in particular--had suffered from
it; their mental processes “had all a certain starved and abstract
quality,” a lack of the rich paganism that endows life and art with
sensuous beauty.

  They could not retail the genteel tradition [he goes on]; they were
  too keen, too perceptive, and too independent for that. But life
  offered them little digestible material, nor were they naturally
  voracious. They were fastidious, and under the circumstances they
  were starved.... Therefore the genius of ... Hawthorne, and even
  of Emerson, was employed in a sort of inner play, or digestion of
  vacancy. It was a refined labor, but was in danger of being morbid,
  or tinkling, or self-indulgent. It was a play of intra-mental
  rhymes. Their mind was like an old music-box, full of tender
  echoes and quaint fancies. These fancies expressed their personal
  genius sincerely, as dreams may; but they were arbitrary fancies
  in comparison with what a real observer would have said in the
  premises. Their manner, in a word, was subjective. In their own
  persons they escaped the mediocrity of the genteel tradition, but
  they supplied nothing to supplant it in other minds.[527]

If the thin pale atmosphere in which the genteel tradition throve
starved the minds of greater men in a more vigorous age, it would play
havoc with smaller men in an imitative age. After Emerson and Hawthorne
came Stedman and Stoddard and Aldrich, upon whose studiously correct
pages the genteel tradition laid a hand of death. In the seventies it
had become the refuge of a stale mentality, emptied of all ideals save
beauty, and that beauty become cold and anemic. Its taboos were no more
than cushions for tired or lazy minds. The idea of morality--with its
corollary of reticence--and the idea of excellence were well enough in
the abstract, but become empty conventions, cut off from reality, they
were little more than a refuge for respectability, a barricade against
the intrusion of the unpleasant. In compressing literature within
the rigid bounds of a genteel morality and a genteel excellence, New
England was in a way of falsifying it. Highways are easy traveling,
but the artist who will not venture from them misses much. In the
seventies and eighties the incurious Boston mentality missed pretty
much everything vital and significant in American life, and the more
daring children of Boston--men like Henry Adams and, shall we add,
Henry James--sought congenial atmosphere elsewhere.


1 • Thomas Bailey Aldrich and the Genteel

In the expansive days of Walt Whitman and Mark Twain the official
custodian of the genteel in letters was Thomas Bailey Aldrich, who
as editor of the _Atlantic_ from 1881 to 1890 sturdily combated all
literary leveling. Sitting in the high seat of Boston authority he
would countenance none of the “Josh Billingsgate” corruptions of
the English language that he professed to believe were sullying the
purity of American literary taste. A Portsmouth, New Hampshire, boy,
early transplanted to New York City, he lisped in numbers before he
learned to think. At the age of nineteen he published a volume of
poems entitled _The Bells, A Collection of Chimes_, the tintillations
of which were little more than faint echoes of Keats, Chatterton,
Tennyson, Poe, Bryant, Willis, and Longfellow; and to the end of his
life his state of ideal felicity was to be “loaded to the muzzle with
lyrics and sonnets” wherewith to do execution on all purveyors of
realism with its “miasmatic breath blown from the slums.” Transplanted
to Boston from the Bohemian world of Pfaff’s restaurant where Willis
held court, he settled down into the staid atmosphere of the Back
Bay with immense content. Though he was fond of calling himself only
Boston-plated he was soon as completely Bostonian as the Autocrat
himself. Intellectually and esthetically he had been Cambridge bred,
and the influence of Longfellow, Lowell, and Holmes determined his
every literary endeavor. Like the returned prodigal he wandered no
more but was satisfied to feast on the dainties of Back Bay culture.
He immersed himself in the genteel. His one ambition as editor of the
_Atlantic_ was to keep it as Lowell wished it kept. To the end of his
life he remained completely insulated against the creative forces of
the times, and in the year that Stephen Crane was writing _Maggie_
he published _The Sisters’ Tragedy_. He would have been shocked by
_Maggie_, if he had read it, as a later generation wonders at _The
Sisters’ Tragedy_.

It is easy to see why Aldrich should have been taken to Boston’s
heart. His refined and delicate technique more than compensated for
an intellectual sterility that seems never to have been apparent to
his ardent admirers. Witty, charming in manners, in love with art
and devoted to a painstaking craftsmanship, he was a hollow reed
through which blew into flawless form the refinements of his world and
group. Good taste found nothing to offend in his scanty pages. If he
worshiped at the altar of beauty, beauty to him was always a chaste
goddess, severe and pale and slight. A blowsy goddess like Whitman’s,
or a slattern like Mark Twain’s, he would have none of. As a youthful
poet, to be sure, he sometimes hinted that she had red cheeks and
plump breasts and rounded limbs, but on his removal to Boston he
discovered that she was quite Beacon Street with her slender form and
modest reserve--no Greek but a lovely Puritan maiden; and the mature
Aldrich came to prefer her chaste reticence to the freer ways the
younger generation liked. They were destroying beauty--this younger
generation--with their vulgar realism, besmirching the goddess with
their vulgarities. In an interlude entitled “Realism” he gave voice to
the following pastoral lament:

  Romance beside his unstrung lute
      Lies stricken mute.
  The old-time fire, the antique grace,
  You will not find them anywhere.
  To-day we breathe a commonplace,
  Polemic, scientific air:
  We strip Illusion of her veil;
  We vivisect the nightingale
  To probe the secret of his note.
  The Muse in alien ways remote
      Goes wandering.[528]

And in a dramatic monologue, quite evidently suggested by _The
Grammarian’s Funeral_, he voiced the following protest against an age
enslaved to realism:

  A twilight poet, groping quite alone,
  Belated, in a sphere where every nest
  Is emptied of its music and its wings.
  Not great his gift; yet we can poorly spare
  Even his slight perfection in an age
  Of limping triolets and tame rondeaux.
  He had at least ideals, though unreached,
  And heard, far off, immortal harmonies,
  Such as fall coldly on our ear to-day.
  The mighty Zolaistic Movement now
  Engrosses us--a miasmatic breath
  Blown from the slums. We paint life as it is,
  The hideous side of it, with careful pains,
  Making a god of the dull Commonplace.
  For have we not the old gods overthrown
  And set up strangest idols? We would clip
  Imagination’s wing and kill delight,
  Our sole art being to leave nothing out
  That renders art offensive. Not for us
  Madonnas leaning from their starry thrones
  Ineffable, nor any heaven-wrought dream
  Of sculptor or of poet; we prefer
  Such nightmare visions as in morbid brains
  Take form and substance, thoughts that taint the air
  And make all life unlovely. Will it last?
  Beauty alone endures from age to age,
  From age to age endures, handmaid of God.[529]

It was not the realists alone, he thought, who were fouling their own
nests, but all who turned aside from the narrow path of Victorianism
to explore new ways. Whitman he regarded as a charlatan whose
mannerisms were a “hollow affectation” representing “neither the
man nor the time.” Riley’s formal verse he preferred to his dialect
poems--“The English language is too rich and sacred a thing to be
mutilated and vulgarized,” he wrote, overlooking the _Biglow Papers_.
He held Kipling’s cockneyisms in contempt and said he would not have
opened the pages of the _Atlantic_ even to the “Recessional.” Lanier
he thought a less significant figure than Fitz-Greene Halleck, and
of Poe he remarked that if he “had been an exemplary, conventional,
tax-oppressed citizen, like Longfellow, his few poems, as striking as
they are, would not have made so great a stir.”[530] In such literary
judgments the arch-conservative is engaged in defending the genteel
tradition against every assault, convinced that the portals of creative
literature open into the past and that in following in the footsteps of
the dead we shall come upon a living world. The sterility of his own
refined craftsmanship is perhaps sufficient commentary upon his faith.

When in later years he turned to prose his work revealed the same
negative qualities. His prose style is finished, clean, and thin,
wanting in homely idiom and a rich suggestiveness. The water trickled
gently from the spring of his invention, cool and unroiled, but never
abundant. The dignity that results from a strong nature held in
restraint, he never achieved. There were no depths in him. He waited
patiently for his vessel to fill and measured it out carefully. As a
short-story writer he gained a surprising repute, and admirers like
Sarah Orne Jewett were never tired of praising the sprightliness of his
humor. Nevertheless his most celebrated story scarcely explains today
the immense stir it made. _Marjorie Daw_ is a clever _jeu d’esprit_ but
a bit thin and artificial, too consciously written backwards from its
surprise ending. Other distillings of his wit and wisdom, done in the
sententious manner and gathered up in _Ponkapog Papers_, are slight in
content, and the effervescence is long since gone out of them. _The
Story of a Bad Boy_, with its pleasant recollections of his Portsmouth
youth, remains his most important work in prose and deserves much
of the praise that has been lavished upon it; but set over against
_Huckleberry Finn_ its shortcomings are evident.

It is absurd, of course, to expect an aesthete to concern himself with
ideas, or to care greatly about what goes on outside his ivory tower.
The rumblings of the vulgar world beat ineffectually against the gate
behind which he sits and dreams. For years the editor of the _Atlantic_
was scarcely conscious of his complete aloofness from the world of
reality, and he wrote in some surprise to Hamilton Wright Mabie, in
1897:

  I like to have you say that I have always cared more for the
  integrity of my work than for any chance popularity. And what
  you say of my “aloofness” as being “due in part to a lack of
  quick sympathies with contemporary experience” (though I had
  never before thought of it) shows true insight. To be sure,
  such verse as “Elmwood,” “Wendell Phillips,” “Unguarded Gates”
  and the “Shaw Memorial Ode” would seem somewhat to condition
  the statement; but the mood of these poems is not habitual with
  me, not characteristic. They did, however, grow out of strong
  conviction.[531]

Yet though he spoke rarely on social themes, during the long years
in Boston most of the Back Bay prejudices seemed to have seeped into
his mind and when the “strong convictions,” to which he refers, found
utterance they proved to be Brahmin convictions. In the vigorous poem
“Unguarded Gates”--a poem tense, outspoken, almost unique in its
deliberate declamation--he sallied forth from his ivory tower to speak
to the American people on the dangers of uncontrolled immigration, a
subject that Boston Brahmins had been talking about since the days of
Harrison Gray Otis.

    Wide open and unguarded stand our gates,
  And through them presses a wild motley throng--
  Men from the Volga and the Tartar steppes,
  Featureless figures from the Hoang-Ho,
  Malayan, Scythian, Teuton, Kelt, and Slav,
  Flying the Old World’s poverty and scorn;
  These bringing with them unknown gods and rites,
  Those, tiger passions, here to stretch their claws.
  In street and alley what strange tongues are loud,
  Accents of menace alien to our air,
  Voices that once the Tower of Babel knew!

    O Liberty, white Goddess! is it well
  To leave the gates unguarded? On thy breast
  Fold Sorrow’s children, soothe the hurts of fate,
  Lift the down-trodden, but with hand of steel
  Stay those who to thy sacred portals come
  To waste the gifts of freedom. Have a care
  Lest from thy brow the clustered stars be torn
  And trampled in the dust. For so of old
  The thronging Goth and Vandal trampled Rome,
  And where the temples of the Caesars stood
  The lean wolf unmolested made her lair.[532]

What emotions lay back of the measured words of the poem, and how
deeply they were colored by the social passions of the times, he tells
in a letter to George E. Woodberry, written May 14, 1892:

  I went home and wrote a misanthropic poem called “Unguarded
  Gates” ... in which I mildly protest against America becoming the
  cesspool of Europe. I’m much too late, however. I looked in on an
  anarchist meeting the other night ... and heard such things spoken
  by our “feller citizens” as made my cheek burn. These brutes are
  the spawn and natural result of the French Revolution; they don’t
  want any government at all, they “want the earth” ... and chaos.
  My Americanism goes clean beyond yours. I believe in America for
  the Americans; I believe in the widest freedom and the narrowest
  license, and I hold that jail-birds, professional murderers,
  amateur lepers ... and human gorillas generally should be closely
  questioned at our Gates. Or the “sifting” that was done of old will
  have to be done over again.... A certain Arabian writer, called
  Rudyard Kipling, described exactly the government of every city and
  town in the ... United States when he described that of New York
  as being “a despotism of the alien, by the alien, for the alien,
  tempered with occasional insurrections of decent folk!”[533]

Two years later he again gave private expression to one of his rare
judgments on matters political and social:

  When not otherwise engaged I sit and smoke, and smile at the
  present administration [President Cleveland’s].... The best kind
  of Democracy (as per sample) is no better than the worst kind
  of Republicanism. The Income Tax is the deformed child of Coxey
  and his brother scalawags. I vote for McKinley. We shall have
  bloody work in this country some of these days, when the lazy
  _canaille_ get organized. They are the spawn of Santerre and
  Fouquier-Tinville. In about twenty years we shall bring out an
  American edition (illustrated with cuts) of the beautiful French
  Revolution.[534]

And again in 1899:

  Personally I must confess that I have never been very deeply
  impressed by the administrative abilities of what we call the lower
  classes. The Reign of Terror in France is a fair illustration of
  the kind of government which the masses give us when they get the
  happy opportunity.[535]

The literary conservative, it appears, was no better than a social
and political Tory. He has traveled back a hundred years and speaks
again the very language of Robert Treat Paine. _Canaille_ is not a
nice word to apply to American workingmen, and the French Revolution
has never been well thought of by the children of the _ancien régime_.
Thomas Bailey Aldrich was a cultivated gentleman, on the pleasantest
terms with the Muse of Beacon Street. Twice he traveled around the
world; innumerable summers he spent in Europe; yet of many things that
concern men greatly he was very, very ignorant. Of the American people
beyond the Hudson River, he knew nothing. Of social economics he knew
nothing. Fearful lest his art should get a smutch from the streets, he
withdrew within his tower, where perhaps it is well to leave him. Yet
it is odd to recall that he was once regarded as a significant literary
figure and that intelligent people listened to him seriously.


2 • The New England Scene

In fields less distinguished than poetry and the essay the sway of
the genteel was neither so magisterial nor so repressive. As fiction
somewhat tardily encroached upon the older literary preserves of New
England it brought with it a fresher and more realistic spirit that
was eventually to deny the validity of the traditional standards. The
group of fiction writers that arose in the seventies and eighties to
chronicle the life of New England, was greatly concerned with the decay
of the old New England world, and with the causes of that decay. As it
set down with loving fidelity the characteristics of an earlier order
it could not fail to consider the unloveliness of the new world that
was rising on the decay of the old--the alien industrial towns with
their polyglot workers that were flourishing as the native villages
and quiet countryside declined. New England fiction, therefore, came
to embody two main features, chronicle and criticism. It gathered up
such picturesque bits of the past as time and change had left, and it
questioned with some anxiety the ways of an industrialism that was
destroying what it loved. It was not Boston fiction, but up-country
fiction, given to exploring quiet villages and decaying towns; and in
both its chronicles and its criticisms the spirit of realism became
more searching as the years passed.

In its own fashion such fiction would finally be brought into service
to the social conscience and issue as sociological studies. As the
evils of sweated labor under the factory system were brought home to
the common knowledge, one would suppose that New England would have
been the first to conscript the novel to arouse the public conscience.
There had been anxious discussion amongst the Concord intellectuals
on the evils of industrialism, and in the early forties the talk had
turned upon associationism as the likeliest cure; but though from such
discussions came Brook Farm and other Utopian ventures, no fiction
resulted. It was elsewhere, in the Pennsylvania iron district where
exploitation was harsher and more brutal than in the textile mills,
that fiction first turned to consider the ways of industrialism. In
1861 Rebecca Harding contributed to the _Atlantic_ a story entitled
“Life in the Iron Mills,” that was stark and fierce in its drab
realism.[536] Nevertheless ten years were to pass before Elizabeth
Stuart Phelps published _The Silent Partner_ (1871), a dithyrambic plea
for justice for the mill-hands.

If this was not the first New England novel of industrialism it was
certainly one of the earliest. In conception, temper, and technique it
belongs to the emotional fifties, and is almost primitive in comparison
with Rebecca Harding’s work. Underlain with religion, it is sticky
with sentiment. Although Miss Phelps professed to base her work on
the Reports of the Massachusetts Bureau of Statistics of Labor, to
which she says she was “deeply in debt for the ribs” of her story,
the result is more a tract than a study. There is no realistic grasp
of the materials. She was grieved that the mill-masters should reveal
so little Christian understanding of the hard lot of the hands and
so little sympathy with their poverty. “I believe,” she said, “that
a wide-spread ignorance exists among us regarding the abuses of our
factory system, more especially, but not exclusively, as exhibited in
many of the country mills.” “Had Christian ingenuity been generally
synonymous with the conduct of manufacturing corporations, I should
have found no occasion for the writing of this book.”[537] It was to
lessen such ignorance and encourage Christian sympathy between the
classes that she offered her study.

The book is a closet study done with more unction than skill. It is the
work of an emotional woman who lived in a world of sentiment rather
than reality. Miss Phelps was an Andover Brahmin, highly sensitive,
whose deeply religious nature was ruffled by every vagrant wind. She
was tremulous in her eager desire to lessen the injustice of men. _The
Silent Partner_ is a story of a young woman brought up in luxury,
daughter of a manufacturer, who on her father’s death wishes to join in
the management of the factory, but on being politely rejected by her
partners she engages in personnel work amongst her employees. There she
comes upon poverty as a sordid fact, and that discovery works a moral
change in her life. She is overwhelmed by it and cannot understand why
the conscience of the world is not overwhelmed. “Sometimes I do not
see,” she exclaimed, “what else there can _be_ to talk about in such a
world as this! I’ve stepped into it, as we have stepped out into this
storm. It has wrapped me in....”[538] Of the complexity of the problem
she is wholly ignorant. Surely there must be some road that leads to
justice--justice based on understanding and Christian kindliness; and
the working girl whom she singles out for heroine becomes in the end
a street preacher to the textile workers, after refusing to marry and
bring children into a world of factory toil. _The Silent Partner_ is an
emotional Puritan document that was out of date when it came from the
press.

While Miss Phelps was thus summoning the New England conscience to
cleanse the textile mills, her Brahmin sisters were little inclined
to engage in such thankless labors, but preferred to gather up and
preserve such fragments of the homely traditional New England as
had not been swept away in the engulfing stream of industrialism.
Female writers, from the days of Mrs. Sarah Wentworth Morton, had
long been busy in New England but never had they written so well or
so understandingly as in the days of the New England decline. Harriet
Beecher Stowe, Elizabeth Stuart Phelps, Harriet Prescott Spofford,
Rose Terry Cooke, Mary Wilkins Freeman, and Alice Brown were not
great writers, but they essayed to be faithful recorders of what came
under their eyes. It was the earlier New England that quickened their
imaginations, the rugged Yankee character that had taken form under
a homely domestic economy. They had no liking for the New England
that was rising in the shadow of the mills; the cleavages of race and
religion that were sundering the old homogeneous society were bitterly
distasteful to them. The Irish, the French-Canadians, the masses of
raw immigrants that were swept into the hoppers of the mills, were
unwelcome gobbets to the Brahmin stomach. And so these recorders of the
New England decline turned away from the sordid industrial scene, and
it was not till thirty years later that Mary Wilkins Freeman, in _The
Portion of Labor_ (1901), essayed to do more adequately what Elizabeth
Stuart Phelps had first sketched.

From Catherine Sedgwick to Mrs. Freeman the note shifted from the
moralistic to the sentimental, then to the idyllic, then to the
realistic; and the successive changes are sufficiently marked by three
writers, Harriet Beecher Stowe, Sarah Orne Jewett, and Mary Wilkins
Freeman. Seeking their materials remote from Boston, amidst the old
native stock pottering through the traditional round of life, they
discovered a world of angular figures that had grown knotty and gnarly
from a harsh climate and a meager soil. The stoic repressions that were
a heritage from Puritan ancestors had bred a hard race that any twist
of circumstance was likely to turn into grotesques. Calvinists have
always at hand a providential justification of any freakish outcome to
men’s struggles, and in piously denying freedom of the will they often
put the seal of God’s approval on their own willfulness. Mrs. Freeman’s
_Pembroke_ is not unlike _Winesburg, Ohio_, as a record of abortive
lives; and Sarah Orne Jewett, in spite of a Brahmin temperament that
chose to see the idyllic rather than the grotesque, could not overlook
what New England provided so abundantly. In _A Country Doctor_ a
visitor in the village of Oldsfield thus analyzed the New England
character:

  ... for intense, self-centred, smouldering volcanoes of humanity,
  New England cannot be matched the world over. It’s like the regions
  in Iceland that are full of geysers. I don’t know whether it is
  the inheritance from those people who broke away from the old
  countries, and who ought to be matched to tremendous circumstances
  of life, but now and then there comes an amazingly explosive and
  uncontrollable temperament that goes all to pieces from its own
  conservation and accumulation of force. By and by you will all be
  blown up,--you quiet descendants of the Pilgrims and Puritans, and
  have let off your superfluous wickedness like blizzards; and when
  the blizzards of each family have spent themselves you will grow
  dull and sober, and all on a level, and be free from the troubles
  of a transition state. Now, you’re neither a new country nor an
  old one. You ought to see something of the older civilizations
  to understand what peace of mind is. Unless some importation of
  explosive material from the westward stirs them up, one century is
  made the pattern for the next.[539]

They deal wholly with the past--these chronicles of a decaying New
England--concerning themselves with a “primitive and Biblical people”
who dwelt in quiet inland towns or about the lonely shores of the Maine
coast; yet always under the shadow of the meeting-house, with few
defenses betwixt them and the eternities. The age had traveled far
beyond them and they were left pottering about in their narrow Hebraic
world, unaware that science and industrialism were undermining the
foundations on which village and meeting-house rested. “In that handful
of houses,” said old Captain Littlepage in _The Country of the Pointed
Firs_, “they fancy that they comprehend the universe.” But if they
understood God’s plan of redemption they knew nothing of the ways of
capitalism. A certain romantic quaintness colors the realism of these
country tales and imparts a note of the idyllic. Harriet Beecher Stowe
first discovered the literary possibilities of decaying New England,
and in _Old-Town Folks_, _Poganuc People_, and _The Minister’s Wooing_,
she turned back to the days of its prime and sketched the scene with
a loving hand. But it was rather in _The Pearl of Orr’s Island_,
especially the first part before the heavy moralism that was always
entrapping her art had closed upon the tale, that she revealed its
possibilities to later writers. In a letter of July 5, 1889, Sarah Orne
Jewett suggests the source of her own more finished work:

  I have been reading the beginning of _The Pearl of Orr’s Island_
  and finding it just as clear and perfectly original and strong as
  it seemed to me in my thirteenth or fourteenth year, when I read it
  first. I never shall forget the exquisite flavor and reality that
  it gave me.... It is classical--historical--anything you like to
  say, if you can give it high praise enough.[540]

But Miss Jewett desired a more adequate realism and so she turned
curiously to consider the technique of the great continental realists
of the eighties. She read Zola and Flaubert, Tolstoi and Turgenev, and
oddly enough was persuaded that she had long been trying to do what
Tolstoi was doing. In a letter of 1888 she wrote:

  That story of Tolstoi’s was such an excitement that I did not sleep
  until almost morning. What a wonderful thing it is!... It startled
  me because I was dimly feeling the same kind of motive (not the
  same plan) in writing the “Gray Man.”... I have felt something of
  what Tolstoi has been doing all the way along. I can tell you half
  a dozen stories where I tried to say it, “Lady Terry,” “Beyond the
  Toll-Gate,” and this “Gray Man.” Now and then it came clearer to
  me. I never felt the soul of Tolstoi’s work until last night ...
  but now I know what he means, and I know that I can dare to keep at
  the work I sometimes have despaired about....[541]

Yet to later readers the tie that drew her to Tolstoi seems the
thinnest of gossamers. The roots of her character--and of her art--went
down too deep into Brahmin soil, she was too completely under the
critical sway of Lowell and Fields and Aldrich, for her to turn
naturalist. Her realism--if one may use the word--was as dainty and
refined as her own manners--bleached out to a fine maidenly purity.
In _The Country of the Pointed Firs_--a story that Willa Cather would
destine for immortality in the select company of _Huckleberry Finn_
and _The Scarlet Letter_--she discovers an innate gentility, or at
least gentleness, in the simple fisherfolk of the Maine village, and
she suggests as its source a primitive environment supplemented by
an encompassing religion. Nowhere does she paint in the smutch of
vulgarity, for in these eddies of New England life she discovers no
vulgarity either of mind or manners. But in the cities it is different.
There she found evidence in plenty of what she called the “cheap side
of life,” and she attributed it to the increasing material well-being
of the country. Of the new middle class she held a low opinion--

  Their grandparents or even their own parents went hungry and ill
  clothed, and it will take some time for these people to have their
  fling, to eat all they want and to wear fine raiment, and flaunt
  authority. They must get to a state, and by slow stages too, where
  there is going to be something fit for education.... The trouble is
  to us old-fashioned New Englanders that “the cheap streak” so often
  spoils what there is of good inheritance, and the wrong side of our
  great material prosperity is seen almost everywhere.[542]

There spoke the Brahmin. That this “cheap streak” should have spread
so far through American life, that the vulgar middle class should have
taken over the rule of the country, gave her concern. To one brought
up on Carlyle and Lowell and Arnold the ways of the plutocracy were
abhorrent, and she clung the more tenaciously to the land of her
memories, where the gentry ruled, where the plain people respected
themselves and their betters, and where vulgar display was unknown. “I
think as Mr. Arnold does,” she wrote in 1884, “and as Mr. Lowell did,
that the mistake of our time is in being governed by the ignorant mass
of opinion, instead of by thinkers and men who know something.”[543]
Though she disliked and distrusted the America that was submerging
the old landmarks, she was as ignorant as her Maine fisherfolk of the
social forces that were blotting out the world of her fathers, and
she clung with pathetic futility to such fragments of the old order
as remained. Like Lowell in his later years her heart was given to a
Brahmin democracy where gentlemen ruled and where “the best traditions
of culture and manners, from some divine inborn instinct toward what is
simplest and purest,” were held in universal respect.

What Miss Jewett with her love of the idyllic did not see--the grim and
stark ugliness that resulted from the long Puritan repression--Mary
Wilkins Freeman was to make the very warp of her work. She did not come
of Brahmin stock. Bred up in the narrow village world of New England,
she was a part of that world and she knew it as Miss Jewett could not.
The decay of a social order was all about her in her youth. The more
ambitious were drifting to the cities or to the new West, and those
who remained were deeply marked by the constricting round of duties.
Catastrophe seems always to be lying in wait for the characters that
fill her meager pages. They are either timid and querulous, or fiercely
“sot,” yet in either case happiness has a way of slipping through their
fingers. There was too little of the wine of paganism in their veins
for them to enjoy what life offers. They held themselves in with too
tight a rein. The New England conventions were always building higher
the dams of their emotions until they broke and the roily waters
rushed out in a wasting flood. Potential disaster peeps out of every
page of her stories. _Pembroke_ is an extraordinary collection of
mean and petty and tragic lives, besotted with stubborn willfulness,
without grace or comeliness, extracting no pleasant flavors from the
crushed grapes of life. In that narrow world daily existence demands an
unending struggle and the pinching meanness breeds miserly instincts
and dour ways. _A Humble Romance_ is a stark bit of sordid futility,
and in many another of her short stories Mrs. Freeman etched in the
familiar scene with a mordant pen. Drawn with realistic strokes the
picture of New England in decay is not so lovely as Miss Jewett found
it to be.

Realizing poignantly what was happening in the home of Puritanism, Mrs.
Freeman turned eventually to deal with the problem of industrialism
that was subduing New England to its will. _The Portion of Labor_
picks up the theme where it had been dropped a generation before by
Miss Phelps, and attempts in realistic manner to portray the life of
the New England villager in the shoe factory. It is a tract rather
than a story, and it finds no difficulty in reconciling industrialism
with morality. It revives the old Puritan ethics of work--preached by
Richard Baxter to his Kidderminster weavers two hundred and fifty years
before; it discovers in discipline of character the great end of life;
and it accepts the factory as a necessary instrument of civilization.
It is the Cinderella story of a village girl who, refusing a chance to
be sent to Vassar, enters a shoe factory, becomes a proletarian leader,
engineers a strike, gains a wider vision of the function of labor,
accepts the principle of exploitation, and is rewarded by marriage into
the exploiting class. In her girlhood she was a radical in an untaught
way, and from her valedictory essay at the High School Commencement to
her organization of the factory workers she boldly attacked the factory
owners. With the machine itself she had no quarrel. This is how she
felt when she took her place for the first time in the mill:

  Scared she was not; she was fairly exultant. All at once she
  entered a vast room in which eager men were already at the machines
  with frantic zeal, as if they were driving labor herself. When she
  felt the vibration of the floor under her feet, when she saw people
  spring to their stations of toil, as if springing to guns in a
  battle, she realized the might and grandeur of it all. Suddenly it
  seemed to her that the greatest thing in the whole world was work
  and that this was one of the greatest forms of work--to cover the
  feet of progress of the travellers of the earth from the cradle to
  the grave. She saw that these great factories, and the strength
  of this army of the sons and daughters of toil, made possible the
  advance of civilization itself, which cannot go barefoot. She
  realized all at once and forever the dignity of labor, this girl of
  the people, with a brain which enabled her to overlook the heads
  of the rank and file of which she herself formed a part. She never
  again, whatever her regret might have been for another life for
  which she was better fitted, which her taste preferred, had any
  sense of ignominy in this. She never again felt that she was too
  good for her labor, for labor had revealed itself to her like a
  goddess behind a sordid veil.[544]

Nevertheless she is ready to fight for control of the machine--for a
return to the workers of a larger share of their earnings; but when the
strike fails and she contemplates the misery that it has spread amongst
the workers, she recants:

  Her youthful enthusiasm carried her like a leaping-pole to
  conclusions beyond her years. “I wonder,” she said to herself,
  “if, after all, this inequality of possessions is not a part of
  the system of creation, if the righting of them is not beyond the
  flaming sword of the Garden of Eden? I wonder if the one who tries
  to right them forcibly is not meddling, and usurping the part of
  the Creator, and bringing down wrath and confusion not only upon
  his own head, but upon the heads of others? I wonder if it is wise,
  in order to establish a principle, to make those who have no voice
  in the matter suffer for it--the helpless women and children?”...
  She reflected, as she had so many times before, that the world was
  very old--thousands of years old--and inequality was as old as
  the world. Might it not even be a condition of its existence, the
  shifting of weights which kept it to its path in the scheme of the
  universe?[545]

Mrs. Freeman wisely chose a girl in her teens as the leader in a fierce
labor battle, for Mrs. Freeman’s own thinking on social questions was
still in its teens. She had the warmest sympathy for the exploited
poor; her conscience was as tender as Miss Phelps’s; but her inadequate
knowledge of economics served her ill. If economic inequality is
necessary to keep the world from flying from its orbit, it serves the
purpose likewise of character development. When an old factory-hand
looks back upon a long life of futile labor he thus philosophizes:

  Andrew quoted again from the old King of Wisdom--“I withheld not
  my heart from any joy, for my heart rejoices in all my labor, and
  that was my portion of labor.” Then Andrew thought ... of all the
  toilsome lives of those beside him, of all the work which they had
  done with their poor, knotted hands, of the tracks which they had
  worn on the earth towards their graves, with their weary feet, and
  suddenly he seemed to grasp a new and further meaning for that
  verse of Ecclesiastes.

  He seemed to see that labor is not alone for itself, nor for what
  it accomplishes of the tasks of the world, not for its equivalent
  in silver and gold, not even for the end of human happiness and
  love, but for the growth in character of the laborer.

  “That is the portion of labor,” he said.[546]

So the book ends on a Hebraic note. In 1901 when Mrs. Freeman wrote
_The Portion of Labor_ the psychology of work had been pretty well
explored. For years William Morris had been preaching a very different
doctrine, pagan rather than Hebraic, yet Mrs. Freeman seems to have
been acquainted with Morris no more than was Ellen Brewster, her
girlish heroine. Even the starkest New England realism was not very
critical of the industrialism that was destroying the traditional New
England. A cynical reader might perhaps suggest that the explanation
is to be found in the fact that the Yankee was profiting enormously
from this fouling of the Puritan nest.


II • The Afterglow of the Enlightenment--Walt Whitman

If the philosophy of the Enlightenment was fast disintegrating in the
America of 1870, it still numbered its picturesque followers who sought
to leaven the age with the social spirit of an earlier generation. It
was a noble bequest--this gift of the French thinkers--with its passion
for liberty, its faith in man, its democratic program. From that great
reservoir had come pretty much all that was generously idealistic
and humanitarian in the life of the two preceding generations. Its
persuasive idealism had woven itself so closely into the fabric of
national thought that our fathers had come to believe that America
was dedicated in a very special sense to the principles of a free
society. The democratic movement returned to it constantly to refresh
its strength and take new bearings. At every great crisis the familiar
pronouncement of the Declaration of Independence had been confidently
appealed to in furtherance of social justice. And now in the days
of an acquisitive individualism, when idealism was begging alms in
the market-place, it still threw flashes of romantic splendor on
the crude American scene. Old Peter Cooper still dreamed his dreams
of social justice after eighty years had passed over his head; and
Thaddeus Stevens, grown crabbed and surly from bitter struggles, mutely
testified to his passionate equalitarianism on the day of his burial.
But it was Walt Whitman in his den at Camden--culturally and in the
things of the spirit countless leagues removed from Boston--who was the
completest embodiment of the Enlightenment--the poet and prophet of a
democracy that the America of the Gilded Age was daily betraying.

In his somewhat truculent pose of democratic undress Whitman was a
singular figure for a poet, and especially an American poet. The
amplitude and frankness and sincerity of his rich nature were an
affront to every polite convention of the day. Endowed with abundant
sensuousness and catholic sympathies, he took impressions as sharply as
wax from the etcher’s hand; and those impressions he transcribed with
the careful impartiality of the modern expressionist. His sensitive
reactions to experience were emotional rather than intellectual. A
pagan, a romantic, a transcendentalist, a mystic--a child of the
Enlightenment yet heeding the lessons of science and regarding
himself as a realist who honored the physical as the repository of
the spiritual--to an amazing degree he was an unconscious embodiment
of American aspiration in the days when the romantic revolution was
at flood tide. His buoyant nature floated easily on the turbulent
stream of national being, and his songs were defiant chants in praise
of life--strong, abundant, procreative--flowing through the veins of
America.

Oracular and discursive, Whitman lived and moved in a world of sensuous
imagery. His imagination was Gothic in its vast reaches. Thronging
troops of pictures passed before him, vivid, vital, transcripts
of reality, the sharp impress of some experience or fleeting
observation--his own and no one’s else, and therefore authentic.
Delighting in the cosmos he saw reflecting its myriad phases in
the mirror of his own ego, he sank into experience joyously like a
strong swimmer idling in the salt waves. Borne up by the caressing
waters, repressing nothing, rejecting nothing, he found life good in
all its manifestations. As an Emersonian he was content to receive
his sanctions from within, and as he yielded to the stimulus of the
environing present his imagination expanded, his spirits rose to
earth’s jubilee, his speech fell into lyric cadences, and from the
exalted abandon of egoistic experience there issued a strong rich note
of the universal. His like had not before appeared in our literature
for the reason that the childlike pagan had not before appeared.
Emerson with his serene intelligence almost disencumbered of the flesh,
and Hawthorne with his dessicating skepticisms that left him afraid
of sex, were the fruits of a Hebraized culture that Puritan America
understood; but Walt Whitman the caresser of life, the lover who found
no sweeter fat than stuck to his own bones, was incomprehensible, and
not being understood, it was inevitable that he should be inexorably
damned. The most deeply religious soul that American literature knows,
the friend and lover of all the world, the poet of the democratic ideal
to which, presumably, America was dedicated, Whitman was flung into
outer darkness by the moral custodians of an age that knew morality
only from the precepts of the fathers.

The early stages of Whitman’s intellectual development are obscure,
but that in his twenties he caught most of the infections of the
times, literary, political, and social, is clear enough. The young
printer-editor in frock coat and tall hat, with cane and boutonnière,
who often joined the Bohemian society at Pfaff’s restaurant, was a
callow romantic, practicing the conventional literary arts of the time,
writing formal verse, spinning romantic tales,[547] and seeking to
approve himself a reputable littérateur. But the passion of reform was
already stirring within him and a succession of causes--temperance,
anti-capital-punishment, abolitionism--recruited his pen. As a child
of Manhattan and of the Jacksonian revolution it was inevitable that
his first great passion should have been political, and when in the
late forties he found a suitable vehicle of expression in the _Brooklyn
Eagle_, his native Jeffersonianism took stock of current political
programs. His political master was the radical equalitarian William
Leggett--whose praises in after life he never stinted--and from Leggett
and the _Evening Post_, supplemented by Fanny Wright and Tom Paine and
other disreputable influences, he seems to have got the first clear
expression of the sweeping democratic postulates on which later he
was to erect his philosophy. The times were stirring everywhere with
revolution and on Manhattan Island Locofocoism, with the newfangled
matches, ten years before had started its little local bonfire by way
of preparation for a general conflagration that should consume the
accumulated mass of wrong and injustice. The ardent young Whitman was
deeply infected with Locofoco enthusiasm and his editorials for the
_Eagle_ were the pronouncements of an extreme left-wing Democrat, as
became a disciple of Leggett.

In this early phase of his democracy he fixed his hopes on the
great West where, he believed, a freer and more democratic America
was taking shape. He was an expansionist, full of ardent hopes, an
apostle of “manifest destiny.” In such lesser matters as finance and
governmental subsidies he was a good Jacksonian, following Old Bullion
Benton in his preference for hard money and dislike of shin-plasters.
He was opposed to the bankers and monopolists. He called himself a
“free-trader by instinct,” and so late as 1888 he said, “I object to
the tariff primarily because it is not humanitarian--because it is a
damnable imposition upon the masses.”[548] But these lesser things were
inconsequential in comparison with the great objective towards which
America was moving--the ever-widening freedom of men in society. “There
must be,” he wrote in those early years, “continual additions to our
great experiment of how much liberty society will bear.”[549] On that
grand theme he was never tired of speaking. With Tom Paine he believed
that just government was a simple thing, fitted to the capacity of many
heads; it is made complex to hide its dishonesty. After commenting on
the “once derided, but now widely worshipped doctrines which Jefferson
and the glorious Leggett promulgated,” he went on:

  ... this one single rule, rationally construed and applied, is
  enough to form the starting point of all that is necessary in
  government: _to make no more laws than those useful for preventing
  a man or body of men from infringing on the rights of other men_.

And again:

  There is not a greater fallacy on earth than the doctrine of
  _force_, as applied in government.... Sensible men have long seen
  that the best government is that which governs least.[550]

Such comments, of course, are only familiar echoes of the
Enlightenment--echoes that run through all the thinking of the
naturistic school, from Godwin and Paine to Channing and Emerson and
Thoreau. In the minds of the children of the Enlightenment the creative
ideal of individualism was always pointing toward the ultimate end
of philosophic anarchism, and Whitman with his assured faith in the
average man accepted the Godwinian political theory as naturally as
did Thoreau. What other politics, indeed, was possible for those who
built upon the postulates of the innate excellence of human nature
and the measureless potentialities of men when vicious social codes
have been swept away and the plastic clay is molded by a kindly
environment? The perfectibility of man was no romantic dream to the
disciples of the French school, but a sober statement of sociological
fact, based on a rationalistic psychology; and Whitman was convinced
that he was a competent realist in thus envisaging the social problem.
If man’s instincts are trustworthy, what justification is there for
narrow repressions laid on his freedom? Hitherto those repressions
have only maimed and distorted him, encouraging his baser rather than
his better impulses; and before he can realize his potentialities he
must put away all external compulsions and learn to rely solely upon
himself. Hence the immediate objective of the democratic revolution was
individual freedom, the breaking of all chains, to the end that free
men may create a society worthy of them.

So it was as a revolutionary that Whitman began his work; and a
revolutionary he remained to the end, although in his last years he
chose to call himself an evolutionist. A born rebel, he was always
preaching the gospel of rebellion. “I am a radical of radicals,” he
said late in life, “but I don’t belong to any school.”[551] It was this
revolutionary spirit that made him the friend of all rebellious souls
past and present. “My heart is with all you rebels--all of you, today,
always, wherever: your flag is my flag,”[552] he said to a Russian
anarchist; and it was this sympathy that enabled him to understand
Fanny Wright and Tom Paine and Priestley, who “have never had justice
done them.”[553] “The future belongs to the radical,” and so _Leaves of
Grass_--he says in “Starting from Paumanok”--“beat the gong of revolt.”
Conventional law and order he frankly despised and those individuals
who sought their own law and followed it awoke his admiration.
Thoreau’s “lawlessness” delighted him--“his going his own absolute
road let hell blaze all it chooses.” It is a coward and a poltroon who
accepts his law from others--as true of communities as it is true of
individuals. He was a good Jeffersonian in his fear of Federalistic
consolidation that must put an end to local rights and freedoms.

  To the States or any one of them, or any city of the States,
      _Resist much, obey little_,
  Once unquestioning obedience, once fully enslaved,
  ... no nation, state, city of this earth, ever afterward resumes
      its liberty.[554]

  I am for those that have never been master’d,
  For men and women whose tempers have never been master’d,
  For those whom laws, theories, conventions can never master.[555]

This is the spirit of the radical forties when men were prone to
repudiate their allegiance to the political state; when left-wing
Abolitionists were dissolving the Union by resolutions; and
transcendentalists were proclaiming the doctrine of nullification of
unrighteous law. It had come out of the Jacksonian upheaval, but it
was daily discovering fresh sanctions as the anarchistic premises of
the Enlightenment were more adequately explored and the revolutionary
spirit of Europe broke in upon America. During these turbulent years
Whitman’s great plan was in gestation, but before _Leaves of Grass_
came to print in the first slender edition of 1855 other influences had
been at work, confirming his earlier views, endowing them with lyric
passion and expanding them into a grandiose whole. Those influences
would seem to have been the fervid emotionalism of the fifties, the
monistic idealism of the transcendental school, and the emerging
scientific movement. On the whole perhaps it was the first, with its
vague and expansive Utopianism, that bit most deeply, stimulating his
rich pagan nature to unconventional frankness and encouraging him to
throw off the inhibitions of a Puritan ethicism that held American
thought in narrow bondage. The rude and ample liberalisms that so
shocked his early readers were in no sense peculiar to Whitman, despite
common opinion, but the expression of the surging emotionalism of the
times, and _Leaves of Grass_, can best be understood by setting its
frank paganism against the background of the lush fifties.

                   *       *       *       *       *

With its Calvinistic antecedents--Scotch-Irish and Huguenot as well
as New England Puritan--America had always been unfriendly to a
pagan evaluation of man’s duties and destiny, and the revolutionary
movement of the forties had been kept within sober ethical bounds.
John Humphrey Noyes was probably the most radical American of the
times, yet the Perfectionism of his earlier years, with its ascetic
religiosity, bore little resemblance to the later communism of the
Oneida Community. But the liberalism of the fifties was casting off all
Hebraic restraints and running wild, proclaiming a new heaven about to
appear on the free continent of America, and bidding the youth of the
land live joyously as children of the earth. Paganism for the first
time lifted up its head and surveyed the American scene--a youthful
paganism, lusty and vigorous, that suggested amazing applications of
the respectable doctrines of freedom and individuality, to the scandal
of older-fashioned folk. From the free spaces of the West, carried on
the tide of the Gold Rush, had come a spontaneous reaction from the
earlier repressions. Liberalism was passing from the political to the
social--a free welling-up of repressed desires, a vast expansiveness.
Too long had the natural human emotions been under the ban of
asceticism; too long had a God of wrath dispossessed a God of love.
Life is good in the measure that it is lived fully, and to live fully
is to live in the flesh as well as the spirit. Emerson the prophet of
the earlier decade had suffered from an extreme unfleshliness; Whitman
the prophet of the fifties would recover the balance. As the current of
emotionalism gathered force a frank _joie de vivre_ submerged the old
reticences; candor, frankness, a very lust of self-expression, was the
new law for free men and women--a glorification of the physical that
put to rout the traditional Hebraisms. A riotous sentimentalism ran
about the land until it seemed to timid souls as if liberty were quite
running away with decency. Freedom for black slaves was one thing,
but freedom for women--the loosening of social convention--suggested
terrifying eventualities like free love and the disruption of the
family. They would countenance no such immoral freedom and under the
leadership of young Anthony Comstock the forces of reticence and
respectability made ready to do battle with the new liberalisms.

It was not alone Walt Whitman who threw down the gage to the
Comstockian watchmen in the gates. The apostle of the new freedom,
the high priest of emotional liberalism, was Henry Ward Beecher,
lately come out of the West, who from the pulpit of Plymouth Church
swept his thousands of idolizing followers along the path of Utopian
emotionalism. With a rich amplitude and golden vagueness of metaphor
he preached the new gospel. From his lips flowed a lyric chant, a vast
paean, a very shout in praise of liberty and love, of godlike man and
a manlike God. “Life--affirmative, immediate, in a highly ornamented
Mayday world--he acknowledged and commemorated life!”[556] He bathed
in a “perpetual tropical luxuriance of blessed love.” “I never knew
how to worship until I knew how to love,” he cried; “and to love I
must have something ... that touching my heart, shall not leave the
chill of ice but the warmth of summer.” Like a good Emersonian he
discarded reason--the discipline of the ancestral Calvinism--to follow
the “secret chords of feeling,” the “heart’s instincts, whose channels
you may appoint but whose flowing is beyond control.” A “magnificent
pagan”--so Thoreau called him--he reveled in sensuous beauty. His
emotions mounted as he contemplated this new land, this new people,
the golden future that beckoned--with all shackles broken, dedicated
to freedom, warm and palpitating from abundant life--a radiant world
of lovely women and manly men. He dwelt on Pisgah and from the heights
looked out on a divine democracy. “The life of the common people is the
best part of the world’s life,” he exclaimed; “the life of the common
people is the life of God.” And to his congregation intoxicated with
his rhetoric he shouted, “Ye are gods! You are crystalline, your faces
are radiant!”[557] And the end and outcome envisaged by this prophet of
the American Idea was a vaguely grandiose fellowship, not of the Saints
alone, but of all the thronging children of men, for of such is God’s
kingdom of this world.

As such lyric chants fell on Whitman’s ears, they must have quickened
the ferment of thought that was eventually to clarify for him the
ideal of democracy, exalting it by making it warm and human and
social. The old Jacksonian leveling had been negative; its freedoms
had been individual, its anarchism selfish and unsocial. The great
ideal of the fellowship had been lost in the scramble for rights. Even
transcendental democracy had narrowed its contacts. The hermit Thoreau
in his cabin at Walden Pond was no symbol of a generous democratic
future. In the struggle for liberty and equality the conception of
fraternity had been denied and the golden trinity of the Enlightenment
dismembered. It was this idea of fraternity, made human and hearty by
his warm love of men and women, that Whitman got from the expansive
fifties and built into his thinking. The conception of solidarity,
then entering the realm of proletarian thought through the labors of
Friedrich Engels and Karl Marx, was his response to the new times--a
response that infused his democratic faith with a glowing humanism.
Democracy spiritualized by Channing and Emerson and Parker had suffered
limitations from their lingering Hebraisms--the Puritan passion for
righteousness had imposed strict ethical bounds on the democratic
will. In Thoreau it had been subjected to caustic skepticisms--the
transcendental individualist quizzically asked, “What _is_ your
people?” and refused to subject himself to the mass. But in Whitman
all limitations and skepticisms were swept away by the feeling of
comradeship. Flesh is kin to flesh, and out of the great reserves
of life is born the average man “with his excellent good manliness.”
Not in distinction but in oneness with the whole is found the good
life, for in fellowship is love and in the whole is freedom; and love
and freedom are the law and the prophets. The disintegrations of the
earlier individualism must be succeeded by a new integration; fear and
hate and jealousy and pride have held men apart hitherto, but love
will draw them together. After all solidarity--the children of America
merging in the fellowship, sympathetic, responsive, manlike yet divine,
of which the poet should be the prophet and literature provide the
sermons.

It was a noble conception--washing away all the meanness that befouled
Jacksonian individualism--and it somewhat slowly found its way to
parity with his first master conception, the universal ego, and settled
into place in those later opening lines of _Leaves of Grass_:

  One’s-self I sing, a simple separate person,
  Yet utter the word Democratic, the word En-Masse.[558]

Then came the war to strengthen his faith in the common man. As he
watched the soldiers marching, fighting, suffering, he was deeply
impressed with their courage, patience, kindness, manliness, and came
to reverence the deep wellspring of national being from which issued
such inexhaustible waters. It was not the few but the many that gave
him hope. “I never before so realized the majesty and reality of the
American people _en masse_,” he wrote of some regiments returning
from the front. “It fell upon me like a great awe.”[559] And as he
contemplated this fecund people, with its sons and daughters issuing
strong and wholesome from every part of the land, there came to him
a new conception of unity--the Union that Lincoln loved--the drawing
together into an indissoluble whole of the far-flung commonwealths--a
realization of the perfect State where reign liberty, equality,
fraternity. Solidarity had taken on a political complexion but its
life-blood was in the veins of a free people.

But pagan though he was in his deeper nature, a child of the emotional
fifties, he was a transcendentalist also and his democratic philosophy,
as it took shape, bears unmistakable marks of the New England school,
supplemented perhaps by Quakerism. His well-known comment, “I was
simmering and simmering; it was Emerson brought me to boil,” suggests
much, and in particular that the Enlightenment as it had come to him
through the Jeffersonian heritage was supplemented and spiritualized
by the Enlightenment as it had taken special form in passing through
the transcendental mind. To this latter source must be traced the
philosophic monism that served to draw his speculations together--a
mystic sense of the divine oneness of life that took his major
postulates in golden hands and fused them into a single spiritual
whole. Thus instructed the “great Idea, the idea of perfect and free
individuals,” became curiously Emersonian in all its amplifications.
There is the same glorification of consciousness and will, the same
exaltation of the soul, the same trust in the buried life that men call
instinct, the same imperious call to heed the voice of innate Godhood;
and round and about this “perfect and free individual” is a mystical
egocentric universe wherein the children of men may luxuriate in
their divinity. The body is excellent as the soul is excellent; away,
therefore, with all shamefacedness--the mean secretiveness, the putting
of fingers to the lips in presence of the naked, the lies in presence
of open palpable fact! For if this be indeed God’s universe, and He is
in and through it all, the children of Adam may stand in His presence
unafraid--nay, rather with pride in their own excellence. “I exist as I
am, that is enough,” for “Divine am I inside and out, and I make holy
whatever I touch or am touch’d from.”

Whitman not only accepted Emerson with ungrudging loyalty but he dwelt
much with Hegel and the German idealists, and with their help he
penetrated curiously to the core of things, discovering there an inner
spiritual reality that is the abiding substance behind the external
manifestation. He had come upon food to sustain his faith in presence
of the mean and base that compassed him about, and the puzzling
contradictions of life no longer troubled him. If man be perfectible,
if he be indeed a child of God though still in his infancy, how
glorious must be the future toward which he is pressing! The evil will
pass and the good remain.

  Roaming in thought over the Universe, I saw the little that is Good
  steadily hastening towards immortality,

  And the vast all that is call’d Evil I saw hastening to merge
  itself and become lost and dead.[560]

When he turned from the oracular utterance of _Leaves of Grass_ to
sober exposition, he phrased it thus:

  There is, apart from mere intellect ... a wondrous something that
  realises without argument ... an intuition of the absolute balance,
  in time and space, of the whole of this multifarious, mad chaos of
  fraud, frivolity, hoggishness--this revel of fools, and incredible
  make-believe and general unsettledness, we call the _world_; a
  soul-sight of that divine clue and unseen thread which holds the
  whole congeries of things, all history and time, and all events
  however trivial, however momentous, like a leash’d dog in the hands
  of the hunter.[561]

To discover this divine clue and be drawn by the unseen thread
into the orbit of things, to suffer the Me--the “human identity of
understanding, emotions, spirit”--to fuse with the Not Me--“the whole
of the material, objective universe and laws, with what is behind them
in time and space”--became therefore for Whitman the grand objective
of man’s life and effort. This for him was the sum and substance of
religion, which was no other than the binding of the individual back
upon the whole. “A vast similitude interlocks all.” And so from his
conception of social solidarity he went forward to the conception of
spiritual solidarity, and discovered religion to be the crown and
glory of the “American Idea.” Walt Whitman and America were to be the
prophets of religion. “Easily at home in a natural world of prodigious
brightness and scale, he ... saw ‘the most splendid race the sun ever
shone upon,’ and was urging the life of instinct and impulse. Love
was the key--taking form and in ‘Starting from Paumanok’ he asserted
his Love, Democracy, Religion--a new religion.”[562] His message was
purpose.

  The soul,
  Forever and forever--longer than soil is brown and solid--longer than
      water ebbs and flows.

  I will make the poems of materials, for I think they are to be the
      most spiritual poems,
  And I will make the poems of my body and of mortality,
  For I think I shall then supply myself with the poems of my soul and
      of immortality.

  I will make a song for these States that no one State may under any
      circumstances be subjected to another State,

                   *       *       *       *       *

  I will sing the song of companionship,

                   *       *       *       *       *

  I will write the evangel-poem of comrades and of love,

                   *       *       *       *       *

  I am the credulous man of qualities, ages, races,
  I advance from the people in their own spirit,

                   *       *       *       *       *

  I, too, following many and follow’d by many, inaugurate a
      religion, ...

                   *       *       *       *       *

  Each is not for its own sake,
  I say the whole earth and all the stars in the sky are for religion’s
      sake.

  I say no man has ever yet been half devout enough,
  None has ever yet adored or worship’d half enough,
  None has begun to think how divine he himself is, and how certain the
      future is.

                   *       *       *       *       *

  I say that the real and permanent grandeur of these States must be
      their religion,
  Otherwise there is no real and permanent grandeur;

                   *       *       *       *       *

  My comrade!
  For you to share with me two greatnesses, and a third one rising
      inclusive and more resplendent,
  The greatness of Love and Democracy, and the greatness of
      Religion.[563]

But this new religion of the mystical Whitman, in harmony with
post-transcendental thought, was deeply impregnated with the spirit of
science. He was in the very fullness of his powers when the conception
of evolution came to him and he greeted it gladly, weaving it into all
his thinking and discovering in it a confirmation of his idealistic
philosophy. It was the evolution of Herbert Spencer, it must be
remembered, that Whitman accepted--teleological, buoyantly optimistic,
dominated by the conception of progress, shot through with the spirit
of the Enlightenment; and such an evolution was a confirmation and not
a denial of his transcendental premises. It supplemented rather than
contradicted the tenets of his faith. Like Emerson as he saw the bounds
of the material universe slowly pushed back by science he discovered
amidst the constant change the presence of growth, development, the
natural passage from the simple to the complex; and like Theodore
Parker he felt that this slow unfolding was no other than the unfolding
of God, making Himself evident and unmistakable to man. Evolution was
God’s great plan. “The law over all, the law of laws, is the law of
successions,” he was persuaded; “for what is the present after all but
a growth out of the past?” But noble as is the evidence of God’s work
discoverable by science, the soul is not content to rest with such
evidence; it must seek out the reality behind the manifestation; and
for this work the poet alone is fitted. The poet must complete the work
of the scientist. The noble “Passage to India” is a lovely chant of
human progress, the adventurous soul conquering the earth; but it must
not pause there; it must seek God through the universe until it finds
Him, and “Nature and Man shall be disjoin’d and diffused no more,” and
“All these hearts as of fretted children shall be sooth’d.”

  Bathe me O God in thee, mounting to thee,
  I and my soul to range in range of thee.[564]

It was in this profoundly religious spirit that Whitman accepted
science, built it into his poetry, rested confidently upon it; and
it is this spirit that explains his formal statement in the “Song of
Myself.”

  I accept Reality and dare not question it,
  Materialism first and last imbuing.

  Hurrah for positive science! long live exact demonstration!
  Fetch stonecrop mixt with cedar and branches of lilac,
  This is the lexicographer, this the chemist, this made a grammar
      of the old cartouches,
  These mariners put the ship through dangerous unknown seas,
  This the geologist, this works with the scalpel, and this is
      the mathematician.

  Gentlemen, to you the first honors always!
  Your facts are useful, and yet they are not my dwelling,
  I but enter by them to an area of my dwelling.[565]

Equipped with such a philosophy and supported by such a faith Whitman
accepted the twin duties laid upon him: to make clear to America her
present failure in the great adventure--how far she had fallen short
hitherto of any adequate democratic reality; and to mark out afresh
the path to the Canaan of democratic hopes--reviving the early hopes of
the Enlightenment and drawing in lovelier colors the democratic Utopia
dreamed of for a hundred years. To be both critic and prophet--that
he conceived to be his mission, a mission that he was faithful to for
upwards of forty years. For the first duty he was admirably equipped.
No other knew this America so intimately or so broadly--had penetrated
so lovingly to the common heart and read so clearly its secret
hopes and fears. That America was not yet a democracy--was very far
indeed from a democracy--that it was a somewhat shoddy _bourgeois_
capitalistic society shot through with cant and hypocrisy and every
meanness, he saw with calm, searching eyes. No contemporary critic, not
Godkin, not Emerson, saw more clearly the unlovely reality or dealt
with it more scathingly, not only in _Leaves of Grass_ but especially
in his prose writings and in casual talk. Amongst scores of such
passages a single one must serve for illustration.

  I say that our New World democracy, however great a success in
  uplifting the masses out of their sloughs, in materialistic
  development, products, and in a certain highly-deceptive
  superficial popular intellectuality, is, so far, an almost complete
  failure in its social aspects, and in really grand religious,
  moral, literary, and esthetic results.... Shift and turn the
  combinations of the statement as we may, the problem of the future
  of America is in certain respects as dark as it is vast. Pride,
  competition, segregation, vicious wilfulness, and license beyond
  example, brood already upon us. Unwieldy and immense, who shall
  hold in behemoth? who bridle leviathan? Flaunt it as we choose,
  athwart and over the roads of our progress loom huge uncertainty,
  and dreadful threatening gloom. It is useless to deny it: Democracy
  grows rankly up the thickest, noxious, deadliest plants and
  fruits of all--brings worse and worse invaders--needs newer,
  larger, stronger, keener compensations and compellers. Our lands
  embracing so much ... hold in the breast that flame also, capable
  of consuming themselves, consuming us all.... Even today, amid
  these whirls, incredible flippancy, and blind fury of parties,
  infidelity, entire lack of first-rate captains and leaders,
  added to the plentiful meanness and vulgarity of the ostensible
  masses--that problem, the labor question, beginning to open like
  a yawning gulf, rapidly widening every year--what prospect have
  we? We sail a dangerous sea of seething currents, cross and
  under-currents, vortices,--all so dark and untried.[566]

As a realist Whitman granted the worst charges of the critics of
democracy, but he probed deeper and brought other facts to light
that modified the equation. It was the difficult question the old
Federalists had posed and that Carlyle had lately revived--the
question, is not this meanness inseparable from democracy? is not
your people in fact a great beast, requiring the lash and the curb?
It was the crux of the long debate over democracy and to it Whitman
gave anxious and frequent consideration. In fighting the battle of
1790 over again, like Jefferson he rested his case on the native
integrity and measureless potentiality of the “bulk-people”--they are
the deep soil from which spring the abundant fruits and flowers of
civilization. Gentle-nurtured folk do not understand this--they do
not like the rank qualities of vital being. Matthew Arnold “always
gives you the notion that he hates to touch the dirt--the dirt is so
dirty! But everything comes out of the dirt--everything: everything
comes out of the people ... not university people, not F.F.V. people:
people, people, just people!” In the rude, vital, natural man is the
inexhaustible wellspring of good and evil; “He’s got it all ... not
only the cruel, beastly, hoggish, cheating, bedbug qualities, but
also the spiritual--the noble--the high-born”;[567] in “some ways” he
is a “devil of a fellow,” but he is not “all devil or even chiefly
devil.”[568] And because he is not chiefly devil such love and beauty
and justice and comradeship as there is in the world, such progress
in civilization as has been made hitherto, have been possible--how
otherwise? If he has journeyed thus far out of the primeval slime, what
bounds shall be set to his eventual journeyings? Why put out one’s eyes
with a mere handful of years?

So Whitman projected his democratic commonwealth far into the future;
he would not have us believe that it had been realized here in America.
Political democracy, the struggle for political rights that had engaged
America hitherto, was only negative, a necessary preliminary to the
ultimate reality. “I submit,” he said, “that the fruition of democracy,
on aught like a grand scale, resides altogether in the future,” and its
realization depends upon the use to which the people put their freedom.
If from it emerges a proud and self-conscious individualism--“the
quality of Being, in the object’s self, according to its own central
idea and purpose, and of growing therefrom and thereto--not criticism
by other standards, and adjustments thereto”--then democracy on a grand
scale will be possible and the self-reliant citizen will take his
place in a free creative society. The ideal of the growing man, and
the ideal of the perfect State--broadly social rather than narrowly
political--these were his twin ideals; and the tie that is to bind
men together in spontaneous solidarity is love. How characteristic
is his sketch of the perfect city, and how deeply saturated with the
Enlightenment! There is wanting only a physiocratic economics to make
it perfect.

  A great city is that which has the greatest men and women,

                   *       *       *       *       *

  Where the city stands with the brawniest breed of orators and bards,
  Where the city stands that is belov’d by these, and loves them in
      return and understands them.
  Where no monuments exist to heroes but in the common words and deeds,
  Where thrift is in its place, and prudence is in its place,
  Where the men and women think lightly of the laws,
  Where the slave ceases and the master of slaves ceases,
  Where the populace rise at once against the never-ending audacity of
      elected persons,

                   *       *       *       *       *

  Where outside authority enters always after the precedence of inside
      authority.
  Where the citizen is always the head and ideal, and President, Mayor,
      Governor and what not, are agents for pay,
  Where children are taught to be laws to themselves, and to depend on
      themselves.
  Where equanimity is illustrated in affairs,

                   *       *       *       *       *

  Where the city of faithfulest friends stands,
  Where the city of the cleanliness of the sexes stands,

                   *       *       *       *       *

  There the great city stands.[569]

Individualism, solidarity--on such strong bases he erected his ideal
democracy, and the heaven-reaching temple will be overlaid with the
rich arts and graces of a civilization worthy at last of the name. Such
was the Enlightenment as it came to flower in the passionate idealism
of Walt Whitman--a dream that was mocked and flouted and nullified
by the Drews and Fisks and Goulds--the “hoggish, cheating, bedbug
qualities” of a generation that scorned him for a beast. Even his stout
faith was shaken at times by the infidelities of the Gilded Age. He
was troubled by the gap that opened between the free individual and
the perfect State. “I seem to be reaching for a new politics--for a
new economy,” he confessed in 1888; “I don’t quite know what, but for
something.”[570] Although he protested, “The older I grow ... the more
I am confirmed in my optimism, my democracy,” he projected his hopes
farther into the future. He sympathized with the socialists but he
was not one of them. His revolutionary ardor abated and he preferred
in later years to call himself an evolutionist.[571] “Be radical--be
radical,” he said to Traubel, “be not too damned radical.”[572] With
his catholic sympathies that refused all bitterness he could not be a
partisan--“after the best the partisan will say something better will
be said by the man.”[573]

So in the twilight of the romantic revolution Whitman quietly
slipped away. The great hopes on which he fed have been belied by
after events--so his critics say;[574] as the great hopes of the
Enlightenment have been belied. Certainly in this welter of today, with
science become the drab and slut of war and industrialism, with sterile
money-slaves instead of men, Whitman’s expansive hopes seem grotesque
enough. Democracy may indeed be only a euphemism for the rulership of
fools. Yet in a time of huge infidelities, in the dun breakdown and
disintegration of all faiths, it is not wholly useless to recall the
large proportions of Walt Whitman, his tenderness, his heartiness, his
faith, his hope. There was in him no weak evasion, no sniveling over
the shards of the goodly vessel broken at the well, but even when “old,
alone, sick, weak-down, melted-worn with sweat,” a free and joyous
acceptance of life.

  Thanks in old age--thanks ere I go,

  For health, the midday sun, the impalpable air--for life, mere life,

                   *       *       *       *       *

  For all my days--not those of peace alone--the days of war the same,

  For gentle words, caresses, gifts from foreign lands.

  For shelter, wine and meat--for sweet appreciation,

                   *       *       *       *       *
For beings, groups, love, deeds, words, books--for colors, forms,

  For all the brave strong men--devoted, hardy, men--who’ve forward
  sprung in freedom’s help, all years, all lands,

  For braver, stronger, more devoted men--(a special laurel ere I go,
  to life’s war’s chosen ones,

  The cannoneers of song and thought--the great artillerists--the
  foremost leaders, captains of the soul:)

  As soldier from an ended war return’d--As traveler out of myriads,
  to the long procession retrospective.

  Thanks--joyful thanks!--a soldier’s, traveler’s thanks.[575]

A great figure, the greatest assuredly in our literature--yet perhaps
only a great child--summing up and transmitting into poetry all
the passionate aspirations of an America that had passed through
the romantic revolution, the poet of selfhood and the prophet of
brotherhood, the virile man and the catholic lover--how shall Walt
Whitman become dumb or cease to speak to men unless the children of
those who are now half-devil and half-God shall prove to be wholly
devil--or wholly moron?


III • The Backwash of the Frontier--Mark Twain

As Whitman contemplated the feeble literature purveyed by the
worshipers of the genteel he asked with some irritation: “What
is the reason in our time, our lands, that we see no fresh local
courage, sanity, of our own--the Mississippi, stalwart Western men,
real mental and physical facts, Southerners, etc., in the body of
our literature?” That was in 1870 and the answer was at hand in the
person of Mark Twain. Here at last was an authentic American--a native
writer thinking his own thoughts, using his own eyes, speaking his own
dialect--everything European fallen away, the last shred of feudal
culture gone, local and western yet continental. A strange and uncouth
figure in the eyes of Thomas Bailey Aldrich, yet the very embodiment of
the turbulent frontier that had long been shaping a native psychology,
and that now at last was turning eastward to Americanize the Atlantic
seaboard. Yet in spite of a rare vein of humor, the outcropping of
a rich and whimsical imagination, he made his way slowly to polite
recognition. For years he was regarded by authoritative critics as
little more than a buffoon, an extravagant fun-maker with a broad
streak of western coarseness; and it was not till near the end, when
he had long been an international figure, that the culture of the
East accepted him. It was Howells then who pronounced him “the sole,
the incomparable, the Lincoln of our literature ... the very marrow of
Americanism.”

Just as that judgment was at the time, it needs qualification
now. The marrow of Americanism is not the same substance from
generation to generation. The outer environing life of a people
works itself slowly into the bones and brings about subtle changes.
Mark Twain was indubitably an embodiment of three centuries of
American experience--frontier centuries, decentralized, leveling,
individualistic; but the Americanism that issued from them came to
its flower and was quickly succeeded by another kind as the fields of
experience were re-plowed by industrialism and sowed to a different
grain. Mark Twain was the child of a frontier past--as Lincoln was, as
the Gilded Age was--and the America of today could no more breed him
than it could breed Lincoln, or Greeley, or Whitman; his Americanism
was the reflection of an environment that is no longer ours, in the
slack folk-ways of the frontier that we have outgrown. Child of the
Southwest in its early boom days, he was cradled in profitless schemes
and nourished on dreams of vast potential wealth. The frontier spirit
was an effervescence in his blood and golden expectations flung their
mirage over the drab reality. As a boy he took impress from a kindly,
ignorant, slave-holding, Calvinistic village world, and he quitted the
slattern village life to plunge into the picturesque traffic of the
Mississippi in the boom days when every river pilot drove his boat
full steam ahead. Then the Far West of silver mines and the Golden
Gate took him in hand--a gambling, romantic, optimistic frontier,
feverish with flush times, “a beggar’s revel of potential millionaires
without the price of a square meal.”[576] And finally this buoyant,
irreverent adolescent was taken in hand by the Far East: by New England
respectability in the persons of Olivia Langdon of Elmira, William Dean
Howells of Cambridge, Twitchell and Warner of Hartford; and by New York
in the persons of Carnegie and Gilder and Whitelaw Reid and Henry H.
Rogers, to be made over into a man of the world.

Such were his origins and his schooling. All his life he remained a
boy, with the imitativeness of youth, and yet with something deep
within him that cherished its own integrity. Quick to take color from
his environment and at home in crowds, he lived nevertheless in the
solitude of his own heart. Acutely conscious of his rough western
ways, he admired the culture of the Langdons and the refined art of
Howells, and he wanted to be approved by them. A kinsman of Beriah
Sellers, he delighted in the great barbecue and wanted to carve great
portions for himself, to heap up his plate as others were doing. His
reactions to experience were always emotional. He was not a Walt
Whitman to penetrate curiously to the core of his own being and grow
thence outwardly, content to wait till the world came round to him.
He loved to make a splurge, to be talked of, to be in the public eye,
to live on an ample scale; he accepted the world’s standards and
wished to be measured by them. It was characteristic of the frontier.
Wanting other standards, the frontier measured success by obvious
material standards. Its aggressive individualism was never spiritual or
intellectual or cultural. So with all his heritage of generations of
frontier individualism he never achieved an intellectual or spiritual
unity, an untroubled conscious integrity, as Emerson did and Whitman
did. He never was at home in the world of catholic thought, but all
his life he suffered from the petty inhibitions of his origins. He
could not throw off the frontier--its psychology and its morality were
too deeply intertwined with his primitive self; and the result was a
harassing inner conflict that left him maimed.

Yet with all his shortcomings--because of them indeed--Mark Twain is
an immensely significant American document. He is a mirror reflecting
the muddy cross-currents of American life as the frontier spirit washed
in, submerging the old aristocratic landmarks. To know Mark Twain is to
know the strange and puzzling contradictions of the Gilded Age. With
unconscious fidelity he reveals its crudity, its want of knowledge,
discipline, historical perspective; its intellectual incapacity to deal
with the complexities of a world passing through the twin revolutions
of industrialism and science. And he reflects with equal fidelity
certain other qualities that go far to redeem the meanness: a great
creative power; an eager idealism, somewhat vague but still fine; a
generous sympathy; a manly independence that strove to think honestly;
a passionate hatred of wrong and injustice and an honest democratic
respect for men as men. A significant if not an unsoiled or heroic
document!

That in his later years an impassable gulf opened between Mark Twain
and his generation, that the buoyant humorist of the seventies ripened
into the bitter satirist of the nineties, is a matter that has been
much remarked upon. The fact is clear enough but the explanation
is not so clear. In part no doubt--as Van Wyck Brooks has pointed
out--the change resulted from a thwarting of the creative artist by a
disastrous surrender to the ideals of the Gilded Age; in part, also,
it was the inevitable toll exacted by the passing years. A humane and
generous spirit cannot long watch with indifference the motley human
caravan hastening to eternity--cannot find food for laughter alone
in the incredible meanness and folly of men cheating and quarreling
in a wilderness of graves. Tenderness, chivalry, love of justice,
are poor bucklers to withstand the blows of fate, and Mark Twain had
little skill in defense. The humorist like the poet is sensitively
responsive to life and the scars multiply fast. Endowed with a nature
not unlike Swift’s in its fierce rage at inhumanity, not unlike Sir
Philip Sidney’s in its romantic chivalry, he was not a stoic to endure
with equanimity. He was foredoomed to suffer vicariously. The comment
he wrote Howells in 1899 throws a white light on the man. “I have been
reading the morning paper,” he said. “I do it every morning--well
knowing that I shall find in it the usual depravities and basenesses
and hypocrisies and cruelties that make up civilization, and cause me
to put in the rest of the day pleading for the damnation of the human
race.”

Yet granting so much, and granting also a morbid conscience that
harassed him with self-condemnation--“What a man sees in the human race
is merely himself in the deep and honest privacy of his own heart”--it
still remains true that the bleakness of his later years was due in
part, at least, to the insubstantial dwelling he chose to live in. The
architects of the Gilded Age were jerry-builders, and Mark Twain found
his jerry-built house a poor protection against the winter winds. It
was perhaps not greatly his fault that he built so flimsily. He was
too willing to be caught in the web of material things. He could not
reach out for companionship with the great earth. Hamlin Garland in a
bleak Dakota shack found help and comfort in the philosophy of Taine,
but Mark Twain could not get outside his own skin. He could not break a
path through the provincialism of his environment. He was held prisoner
to his own thoughts and his only release was through the window of
imagination. When harassed beyond endurance he sought release in
writing that hid the evidence of his rebellion. What would Livy say,
what would the American public say, if they knew he had come to deny
all the tribal gods!

There is no more pathetic figure in American literature than Mark
Twain, alone and solitary amid the blatant American crowd, living in
a dreary wash of speeches and banquets, spinning the threads of a
rebellious philosophy out of his own bowels, unaware of what others
were spinning, regarding himself as a dangerous fellow and stowing away
in his strong-box intellectual bombs that he thought too explosive for
the Gilded Age to play with. In his intellectual isolation he could
not take the measure of his speculations and he did not realize how
common were such conclusions--that his own generation indeed, under
the tutelage of the physical sciences, was fast drifting in the same
direction, and that the clouds of pessimism were obscuring for many
the brighter horizons of an earlier day. If he had known Henry Adams
as intimately as he knew Henry H. Rogers, very likely his eyes would
have been opened to many things that would have done him good. As it
was he knew only that his speculations ran counter to the formal creed
of his middle-class neighbors and friends. To deny the dogmas of the
conventional orthodoxy and in the face of a smug optimism to assert a
mechanistic pessimism, was an unpleasant business that he would have
avoided if he could.

But he couldn’t avoid it wholly, and in that fact is to be found the
thread that runs through his later life, giving to it such unity and
coherence as it possessed. It is this: here was a thoroughly honest
mind, that hated all sham and quackery and humbug, and a singularly
warm heart, that hated all wrong and cruelty and injustice; and this
honest mind and chivalrous heart, deceived and led astray by the mass
_mores_, espoused and defended such fragments of ideals, such bits
of truth, as he came upon in his solitary brooding, until driven
from one stronghold after another he came to doubt the adequacy
of all strongholds and took refuge in a black pessimism--God is a
malignant being, the universe is a machine, and man is a creature of
determinism. It was a fierce and stark reaction from the emotionalism
of the fifties--from Beecher’s God of love and Whitman’s religion of
democracy. His earlier loyalty to half-gods had brought him at last to
deny all the gods. And so a maimed giant, stumbling and uncertain, he
made such way as he could; and his journeyings wrung from him many a
fierce comment that his generation did not understand.

When the milk of western humor curdled in his veins, a Mark Twain
emerged who was a puzzle to the Gilded Age. A humorist who was a good
Republican and business man, the Gilded Age could understand; but a
satirist who launched his shafts at sacred things--at evangelical
religion, the Republican party, the government at Washington, the
damned human race itself--it could not understand. The professional
fun-maker had outgrown his audience. Expecting the familiar
exaggeration, they accounted his bitterest sally a characteristic
whimsy, and laughed when he commented bitterly on “this plodding sad
pilgrimage, this pathetic drift between the eternities,” or when he
exclaimed, “Everything human is pathetic. The secret source of Humor is
not joy but sorrow. There is no humor in heaven.” But the significant
thing is that in the end the tyrannizing _mores_ did not conquer, they
did not destroy him wholly; but such convictions as he had hewn from
puzzling experience, however bleak or repellent they might be, he clung
to firmly, desperately, and at last flung them in the face of the
Gilded Age that had kept him prisoner.

The slow drift of Mark Twain’s thought from humor to satire--it smacks
of Philistinism to call it progress with its many false alarums and
excursions and its huge frontier wastefulness--is plain enough to
anyone who will take the trouble to chart his course. Roughly it
falls into definite stages: the swaggering gayety of western youth
in _Innocents Abroad_ and _Roughing It_--the mood of flush times,
down-grade with the brakes off; then a gay plunge into satire in _The
Gilded Age_; then the West recalled in middle life--_Tom Sawyer_, _Life
on the Mississippi_, _Huckleberry Finn_--living over again a youth
that is gone; then an excursion into the Middle Ages--_The Prince
and the Pauper_ and _A Connecticut Yankee in King Arthur’s Court_--a
romantic flare-up of the democratic passions of the Enlightenment; then
the search for the ideal in _Joan of Arc_--the dream of the perfect
woman, the Domnei of James Branch Cabell; and finally _The Mysterious
Stranger_ and _What is Man?_--a fierce satire of disillusion, the cry
of an idealist who realizes at last how greatly he has been cheated by
his dreams.

That he should have begun by burlesquing life was itself a broad
sign of his frontier origins. Since the first crossing of the
Allegheny Mountains a swaggering extravagance of speech had been a
hallmark of the Westerner. In part this swagger was an unconscious
defense-mechanism against the drabness of frontier life; and in part
it was the spontaneous expression of new experiences in an untrammeled
world, the spirit of wilderness-leveling. Its procreative source would
seem to have been the Ohio River where the rough flatboatmen bequeathed
the Mike Fink legend to literature; and it expanded in the huge
Davy Crockett hoax--a hoax that would have tickled the ribs of Mark
Twain had he traced its genesis and progress, as a colossal example
of how the damned human race loves to be humbugged. It developed
further in Gus Longstreet’s _Georgia Scenes_ with its grotesque Ransy
Sniffle--sorriest of backwoods heroes, too mean-spirited to ruffle like
Canebrake Davy; and in Joseph Baldwin’s _Flush Times of Alabama and
Mississippi_, with its greasy frontier blackguard, Colonel Simon Suggs.

This earliest backwoods humor had been done in realistic colors and
bears the impress of authenticity. But the school that succeeded--John
Phoenix, Artemus Ward, Petroleum V. Nasby--quickly conventionalized
its technique, relying on burlesque, tall lying, distorted spelling,
genial philosophy. The picaresque strain was softened and perverted by
deliberate human-interest touches--a better case must be made out for
the untutored children of nature. It was this humor that Mark Twain
inherited, and he enriched it with a wealth dug from his own large and
generous nature. An incorrigible idealist, as all great humorists must
be, he recreated some of the earlier types, translating Colonel Simon
Suggs into Colonel Sellers, and Ransy Sniffle into Huck Finn. It was a
glorious transformation, but the result lacked something of the soiled
reality of the earlier blackguards. Yet underneath his idealism was a
generous deposit of the common mud of life. The spirit of Mike Fink was
never far from Mark Twain. It haunted him like an evil genius, refusing
to be exorcised by Olivia Clemens, and it found vent in sly literary
sprees that begot offspring to be handed about furtively and chuckled
over by the sons of Adam; but for the most part it was kept in strict
subjection to the proprieties of Elmira and Hartford.

_Roughing It_ and _The Gilded Age_ are brilliant complementary pictures
of the gaudy frontier spirit that was washing in upon the staid realm
of the genteel, to the vast concern of such genteelists as Thomas
Bailey Aldrich. The former is a buoyant chronicle of the West of
Captain Carver and Wild Bill Hickok, the West of the Pony Express,
the Comstock lode, the bad man and the lynch law, a land of young
men in red flannel shirts, heavy boots, and six-shooters, who feared
neither God nor the devil. Bret Harte in San Francisco first realized
the literary possibilities of this picturesque world, and his tales
of life in the mining-camps were received with a shout of approval.
But Bret Harte had never been a miner. He was not realist enough, nor
honest enough, to portray the West in its stark, grotesque reality. He
was only a literary middleman who skillfully purveyed such wares as
his eastern readers wanted. In consequence he coated his tales with a
sentimental picaresque--pandered to the common taste by discovering
nuggets of pure gold in the dregs and outcasts of the mining-camps.
But Mark Twain was too honest for that. He had been a part of the
flush times and had seen the economic process work itself out. He had
seen the grub-stake prospector succeeded by the wild-cat speculator,
and him in turn followed by the eastern capitalist. He had seen
the mining frontier become a thing of the past in a single decade,
with the Comstock lode in the hands of competent exploiters and the
pick-and-shovel miners plunging deeper into the mountains to pursue
their feverish hopes. From that experience he had learned a lesson he
was to carry East with him. “Because we judged that we had learned,” he
said, “the real secret of success in silver mining, which was, not to
mine the silver ourselves by the sweat of our brows and the labor of
our hands, but to _sell_ the ledges to the dull slaves of toil and let
them do the mining.”[577]

It was the great lesson of his generation, and thus instructed he
proposed to sell his brains in the best market. Exploitation was the
royal road to wealth and he was eager to exploit both himself and
his fellows. Yet not all of Mark Twain was thus eager. Deep in his
heart was another Mark Twain, the artist, the chivalrous lover of
justice, the simple child puzzled at life--and this Mark Twain was
already plotting treason against the exploiting Mark Twain. For the
first time this deeper self got out of hand in _The Gilded Age_. As he
contemplated the common scoundrelism at Washington and elsewhere, his
anger exuded in scathing satire. He hated the dirty thing, yet he seems
never to have realized that such scoundrelism was only the backwash of
the spirit of exploitation and that he himself was riding on its waves.
With the soap-bubble dreams of Colonel Sellers he dealt lovingly, for
he was sketching his own origins; the Colonel and the Hawkinses were
his own flesh and blood and the Tennessee lands were an old investment
about which the family dreams of wealth had been woven for years. He
delighted in the Colonel’s childlike faith that prosperity only awaited
a vote of Congress--with adequate appropriations, of course. He asked
no questions about unearned increment; to question that would have been
treason to the frontier philosophy. So into Colonel Sellers he put all
that was naïve and lovable in the Gilded Age. But Senator Dillworthy
was another matter. Hypocrite and corruptionist, he was laying obscene
hands on sacred things, betraying his high trust for sordid ends. Mark
Twain hated graft--the word had not been coined but the ugly thing was
there--and with the innocence of his generation he damned the agent
and overlooked the principal. It was not his fault. The economics of
history was a closed book to Americans of the seventies, and even
Henry Adams in his analysis of the current corruption in his novel
_Democracy_ was no better than a mole nosing blindly underground.

He had opened another door to his genius and discovered the satirist.
There lay the real Mark Twain. But the wares of the satirist were not
in demand at the barbecue, so he closed the door and fell to purveying
what the public wanted. _Tom Sawyer_ was in part a malicious thrust
at the Sunday School tale, and in part a whimsical pronouncement
of the natural rights of the small boy. But it is in _Huckleberry
Finn_--the one great picaresque tale of the frontier--that the western
philosophy of Mark Twain, a philosophy that derives straight from the
old naturistic school, crops out most sharply. It is a drama of the
struggle between the individual and the village _mores_, set in a loose
picturesque framework, and exemplifying the familiar thesis that the
stuff of life springs strong and wholesome from the great common stock.
Huck Finn is a child of nature who has lived close to the simple facts
of life, unperverted by the tyrannies of the village that would make
a good boy of him. He had got his schooling from the unfenced woods,
from the great river that swept past him as he idly fished, from the
folk-tales of negroes and poor whites, from queer adventures with Tom
Sawyer; and from such experiences he had got a code of natural ethics.
Then he found himself on the raft with Jim the runaway nigger, and
his little pagan soul felt the stirrings of the problem of right and
wrong. The village code and the natural code clashed and the conflict
was terrifying. The village code warned him that hell yawned for one
who helped a slave escape, and the human code warned him that betrayal
was a blackguardly thing. With the fear of hell upon him he wrote to
Miss Watson, and then his sense of the kindliness of Jim, the honest
humanity under the black skin, rose up in fierce protest.

  It was a close place. I took [the letter] up, and held it in my
  hands. I was a-trembling, because I’d got to decide, forever,
  betwixt two things, and I knowed it. I studied for a minute, sort
  of holding my breath, and then says to myself:

  “All right, then, I’ll _go_ to hell”--and tore it up.

  It was awful thoughts and awful words, but they was said. And I let
  them stay said; and never thought no more about reforming.[578]

It was a triumph over the sacred tribal law of conformity--the
assertion of the individual will in opposition to society--and it
reveals the heart of Mark Twain’s philosophy. The rebel Huck is no
other than the rebel Mark Twain whose wrath was quick to flame up
against the unrighteous customs and laws of caste. If men were only
honest realists--that is, if they were men and not credulous fools--how
quickly the stables might be cleansed and life become decent and
humane. If only the good brains could be segregated and trained in a
real “man-factory,” the history of civilization might become something
the angels need not weep over as they read it. It all comes back to an
honest realism that in accepting fact will clear away the superstitious
fogs in which men have floundered and suffered hitherto. The one sacred
duty laid on every rational being is the duty of rebellion against
sham--to deny the divinity of clothes, to thrust out quack kings and
priests and lords, to refuse a witless loyalty to things. This creed of
the rebel is written all through Mark Twain’s later work, edging his
satire and lending an Emersonian note to his individualism. In such a
passage as this it emerges sharply:

  You see my kind of loyalty was loyalty to one’s country, not to
  its institutions or its office-holders. The country is the real
  thing, the substantial thing, the eternal thing; it is the thing
  to watch over, and care for, and be loyal to; institutions are
  extraneous, they are its mere clothing, and clothing can wear
  out, become ragged, cease to be comfortable, cease to protect the
  body from winter, disease, death. To be loyal to rags, to shout
  for rags, to worship rags--that is a loyalty to unreason, it is
  pure animal; it belongs to monarchy, was invented by monarchy;
  let monarchy keep it. I was from Connecticut, whose Constitution
  declares “that all political power is inherent in the people, and
  all free governments are founded on their authority and instituted
  for their benefit; and that they have _at all times_ an undeniable
  and indefeasible right to _alter their form of government_ in such
  manner as they may think expedient.”

  Under that gospel, the citizen who thinks he sees that the
  commonwealth’s political clothes are worn out, and yet holds his
  peace and does not agitate for a new suit, is disloyal; he is a
  traitor. That he may be the only one who thinks he sees this decay,
  does not excuse him; it is his duty to agitate anyway, and it is
  the duty of others to vote him down if they do not see the matter
  as he does.[579]

In the Middle Ages clothes-worship had been exalted to a religion,
he believed, and he turned with gusto to reply to the aristocratic
romanticism of Sir Walter, who, delighting in the picturesque company
gathered in the great hall, forgot to penetrate to the _oubliettes_--is
not the word commentary enough on the ways of the seigneur?--where
nameless wretches were rotting under the walls of the castle. He had
small patience with the cult of medievalism that was turning such
men as Henry Adams and William Morris back to the Middle Ages as to
their lost home. He had the frontier contempt for medieval ways, and
for the _ancien régime_ that was the last rags of the Middle Ages.
The French Revolution had thrust the abomination away forever, and he
thanked God for that “ever memorable and blessed Revolution, which
swept a thousand years of ... villainy away in one swift tidal wave of
blood.” He had no tears for Marie Antoinette. What was the Terror but
“a settlement of that hoary debt in the proportion of half a drop of
blood for each hogshead of it that had been pressed by slow tortures
out of that people in the weary stretch of ten centuries of wrong and
shame and misery the like of which was not to be mated but in hell ...
that unspeakably bitter and awful Terror which none of us has been
taught to see in its vastness or pity as it deserves.”[580] The past
that had been consumed in that fierce conflagration had been a brutal,
tyrannical, superstitious past, and not till king and priest had been
flung out on the dung-heap did the people walk their native soil as
free men. The whole king business was preposterous to him; with Freneau
he cried, “Kings are the choicest curse that man e’er knew.” The battle
against medievalism had been fought and won and why go maundering back
over past battlefields, when other battles await?[581]

Mark Twain’s passionate republicanism was a product of the
Enlightenment as it had passed into the psychology of western
Americans, and it retained the militant idealism of Jeffersonian times.
It is shot through with the nature philosophy. In _The Prince and the
Pauper_, the heir of Offal Court and the heir of the Tudors are both
children of nature, endowed with warm hearts, generous sympathies,
and clever wits. Put rags on the prince and robes on the pauper and
their own kin cannot tell them apart. The latter, indeed, promises to
make the better king, for he has suffered the lot of the subject, and
not till the prince has put on rags does he come to know his people.
It is caste that breeds cruelty and wrong; the brutalities of the
English criminal code were deviltries devised by king and nobles to
safeguard their stealings. Only when the laws spring from the people
are they just. “The world is made wrong,” cried the young king when
he was brought out of prison to watch the burning at the stake of two
women who had befriended him--women whose only crime was that of being
Baptists--“the world is made wrong, kings should go to school to their
own laws, at times, and so learn mercy.” And this great lesson of mercy
is exemplified in the acts of the pauper king, who during his brief
reign tempers the harshness of the law with a sense of justice learned,
like Huck Finn’s, from sharp contact with reality.

It is in _A Connecticut Yankee in King Arthur’s Court_--a curious
medley, half philippic and half farce--that Mark Twain’s passion for
justice rises to white heat. The book has been grossly misunderstood.
It is not an attack on chivalry--at least not primarily; it is rather
an attack on thirteen centuries of reputed Christian civilization
that under pretense of serving God has enslaved and despoiled the
children of God. The keen satire is given point and edge by the long
tragic perspective. Thirteen centuries heavy with sorrow and misery
and frustrated hopes--a meaningless succession of foolish and futile
generations, wandering in fogs of their own brewing, hagridden by
superstitions, deceived and exploited by priest and noble, with no will
to be free--here is a perspective to correct our callow enthusiasms,
our revolutionary hopes! Why indeed should we expect men to possess
the will to freedom, seeing that each generation is molded after the
likeness of the past and none has been free? There is change, advance
and recession, but the story of the generations is no more than a “sad
drift between the eternities,” without purpose or meaning. In the
brain of the Connecticut Yankee are secrets hidden from the children of
King Arthur’s time--a curious ability to use the forces of nature, some
glimmerings of social justice. But to what purpose have Hartford and
the nineteenth century used their knowledge? It is a world of slaves
still as it was in King Arthur’s day. The human animal cannot lift
himself to heaven by his own bootstraps, and heaven will not stoop to
lift him. For a “clammy atmosphere of reverence, respect, deference,”
it has substituted smartness, vulgarity, irreverence.

As one slips back and forth between the two worlds the satire takes
on vaster perspectives; it cuts deep into all civilizations, for all
alike are sham, all have issued from the conquest of man’s native
intelligence by his superstitions that are too useful to his masters
to be dissipated. Clearly in Mark Twain’s philosophy of history the
hopes of the Enlightenment are fading. Passionately dedicated to the
program of the Enlightenment--freedom, individuality, humanitarianism,
democracy--his faith in reason, free will, progress, was burning low,
in presence of the historical record. The determinism that lurked
at the bottom of John Locke’s psychology, unperceived by the French
idealists, was revealing itself to Mark Twain and he was already
trimming his sails to the chill winds blowing from the outer spaces of
a mechanistic cosmos.

More immediately of course _A Connecticut Yankee_ is an attack on the
aristocratic romanticism of Sir Walter. There is little loitering in
the great hall--except to comment on the coarseness of the knights
and ladies--and much poking about in unlovely secret places where
one comes upon a rare collection of human animals thrust away in the
_oubliettes_ or pigging together in mean huts. Few chapters in American
literature are so noble in their _saeva indignatio_, so beautiful in
their stern simplicity, as certain sketches of the king’s progress
through his realm--not a royal progress but a peasant’s. There are no
tears in them, they go far beyond that. The scene in the smallpox hut
where the wife is glad her husband and daughters are dead--they are
either in heaven or hell, it makes little difference, for they are no
longer in Britain and so are happy; and the scene of the young mother
hanged for stealing a piece of cloth of an ell’s length or so, hanged
that property in Britain might be safe--such pictures reveal how far
he had traveled from the days of _Roughing It_. He was no longer a
good Federalist-Whig concerned about exploitation and the safeguards
of property. Although he voted the Republican ticket he made merry
over the tariff[582] and he frankly hated the dominant Republican
property-consciousness. Like Lincoln he was for the man rather than the
dollar when the rights of the two clashed. In these later years he was
steadily drifting to the left, on the side of the social underling,
sympathetic with those who do the work of the world. “He never went so
far in socialism, as I have gone,” said Howells, “if he went that way
at all ... but from the first he had a luminous vision of organized
labor as the only present help for workingmen.... There was a time when
I was afraid that his eyes were a little holden from the truth; but in
the very last talk I heard from him I found that I was wrong, and that
this great humorist was as great a humanist as ever.”[583]

It is good for an American to read _A Connecticut Yankee_--and _Joan
of Arc_ as well; for in them is a flame that sears and shrivels the
mean property-consciousness which lays a blight on every civilization.
In the peasant girl of Domrémy, the rapt mystic led by her Voices,
Mark Twain found his ideal, the lily that bloomed out of the muck of
medieval times; and as he contemplated her life and work he was lifted
to the plane of worship. She had waged heroic warfare against the
embattled lies and shams and treacheries of a sordid age, and that she
should have died at the stake was inevitable. What other reward was to
be expected from bishops and kings and suchlike spawn of the devil? Not
till the people grow to manhood can any savior help them, and in that
day they will need no savior but themselves. The Sieur Louis de Conte
struggles with the idea confusedly.

  I believe that some day it will be found out that peasants are
  people. Yes, beings in a great many respects like ourselves. And
  I believe that some day _they_ will find this out, too--and then!
  Well, then I think they will rise up and demand to be regarded as
  a part of the race, and that by consequence there will be trouble.
  Whenever one sees in a book or in a king’s proclamation those words
  ‘the nation,’ they bring before us the upper classes; only those;
  we know no other ‘nation;’ for us and the kings no other ‘nation’
  exists. But from the day I saw old D’Arc the peasant acting and
  feeling just as I should have acted and felt myself, I have carried
  the conviction in my heart that our peasants are not merely
  animals, beasts of burden put here by the good God to produce food
  and comfort for the ‘nation,’ but something more and better. You
  look incredulous. Well, that is your training; it is the training
  of everybody; but as for me, I thank that incident for giving me a
  better light, and I have never forgotten it.[584]

No Bayard ever did his devoir more knightly to his lady than Mark Twain
to Joan, finding in the noble drama of her life the romance he had
not found at Arthur’s court. The knights of the Round Table were “but
ghosts fighting in the fog,” but Jeanne D’Arc was human and lovable
and divine. And then the outlet through which his idealism had found
release slowly closed in, and he was left alone with his comfortless
speculations. What profits it to rail at the damned human race when man
has about as much chance for happiness as a blind puppy in a sack? The
bitter lot of humanity is due not to institutions alone or chiefly,
it is a part of the mad plan of a bleak mechanical universe. For Mark
Twain the solid earth was dissolving, leaving only a rack behind. It
is futile to lament. A sympathetic heart, indeed, is the last and
bitterest irony--for why weep over an evil exhalation! “_Life itself is
only a vision, a dream ... Nothing exists save empty space--and you._”

  In a little while you will be alone in shoreless space, to wander
  its limitless solitudes without friend or comrade forever--for you
  will remain a _thought_, the only existent thought, and by your
  nature inextinguishable, indestructible. But I, your poor servant,
  have revealed you to yourself and set you free. Dream other dreams,
  and better. Strange, indeed, that you should not have suspected
  that your universe and its contents were only dreams, visions,
  fiction! Strange, because they are so frankly and hysterically
  insane--like all dreams ... the silly creations of an imagination
  that is not conscious of its freaks--in a word that they are a
  dream, and you the maker of it....[585]

So, like Cabell, Mark Twain asserts that man must build within and
by letting his dreams flow out create for himself such shelter as he
can against the chill of the eternal void. A flea on the epidermis of
earth, nevertheless he is thought and thought is deathless. To such a
conclusion did the buoyant youth of _Roughing It_ arrive in the dun
twilight years. _The Mysterious Stranger_ is only _Tom Sawyer_ retold
in the midnight of his disillusion.

What an ending for a child of the Gilded Age! In his youth a complete
frontiersman, with vast potential wealth within him, he hewed and
hacked at his genius, working the easiest veins, exploiting the most
accessible resources, wasting much to cash in on a little. And when in
the end the fool’s gold turned to ashes in his mouth, as a frontiersman
still he pursued his way alone, a solitary pioneer exploring the
universe, seeking a homestead in an ironical cosmos, until overwhelmed
by the intolerable solitude he made mock at all the gods. What a
commentary on the Gilded Age!


Footnotes

[527] _The Genteel Tradition in American Philosophy, University of
California Chronicle_, Vol. XIII, Number 4.

[528] _Poetical Works_, Vol. I, p. 45.

[529] “At the Funeral of a Minor Poet,” _Ibid._, Vol. II, p. 94.

[530] Ferris Greenslet, _Life of Thomas Bailey Aldrich_, p. 215.

[531] _Ibid._, p. 200.

[532] _Poetical Works_, Vol. II, p. 72.

[533] Ferris Greenslet, _Life of Thomas Bailey Aldrich_, pp. 168-169.

[534] _Ibid._, p. 176.

[535] _Ibid._, p. 205.

[536] Fred Lewis Pattee, _The Development of the American Short Story_,
pp. 171-172. See the entire chapter for a discussion of early realism
in the _Atlantic_.

[537] Preface, p. 5.

[538] Chapter VIII, p. 183.

[539] Chapter IX, p. 100.

[540] _Letters of Sarah Orne Jewett_, pp. 46-47.

[541] _Ibid._, pp. 38-39.

[542] _Ibid._, pp. 186-187.

[543] _Ibid._, p. 23.

[544] Chapter XXXV, p. 350.

[545] Chapter LVII, pp. 519-520.

[546] _Ibid._, p. 563.

[547] See Mabbott, _Short Stories by Walt Whitman_, Columbia University
Press, 1927.

[548] For his late views see Horace Traubel, _With Walt Whitman in
Camden_, Vol. I, p. 99, and elsewhere.

[549] Cleveland Rogers and John Black, _The Gathering of the Forces_,
Vol. I, p. 12.

[550] _Ibid._, Vol. I, pp. 53, 54, 57.

[551] Traubel, _op. cit._, Vol. I, p. 215.

[552] _Ibid._, Vol. I, p. 65.

[553] _Ibid._, Vol. I, pp. 79-80.

[554] _Leaves of Grass_, inclusive edition ed. by Emory Halloway,
Garden City, N. Y., 1927. Hereafter called _Leaves_. “To the States,”
p. 8.

[555] _Ibid._, “By Blue Ontario’s Shore,” p. 297, ll. 21-23.

[556] Constance Mayfield Rourke, _Trumpets of Jubilee_, p 171.

[557] _Ibid._, p. 172.

[558] _Leaves_, “One’s-Self I Sing,” p. 1, ll. 1-2.

[559] _Autobiographia_, p. 73. See also _Democratic Vistas_, p. 74.

[560] _Leaves_, “Roaming in Thought,” p. 233.

[561] “Carlyle from the American Point of View,” in _Specimen Days,
Prose Works_, pp. 174-175.

[562] Rourke, _op. cit._, p. 173.

[563] _Leaves_, “Starting from Paumanok,” p. 14, ll. 22-26; p. 15, ll.
1, 13, 19, 22-23; p. 16, ll. 2, 5-11; p. 17, ll. 7-10.

[564] _Leaves_, p. 349, ll. 18-19.

[565] _Leaves_, p. 43, ll. 9-17.

[566] _Democratic Vistas, Prose Works_, pp. 254-255.

[567] Traubel, _op. cit._, Vol. I, p. 174.

[568] _Ibid._, Vol. I, p. 285.

[569] _Leaves_, “Song of the Broad Axe,” p. 160, ll. 7, 14-20, 21-22;
p. 161, ll. 1-2, 6-7, 10.

[570] Traubel, _op. cit._, Vol. I, p. 101.

[571] _Ibid._, Vol. I, pp. 193, 215.

[572] _Ibid._, Vol. I, p. 223.

[573] _Ibid._ Vol. I, p. 363.

[574] See Norman Foerster, _American Criticism_, pp. 211-222; Lucy
Lockwood Hazard, _The Frontier in American Literature_, pp. 170-177.

[575] _Leaves_, “Thanks in Old Age,” p. 435.

[576] Lucy Lockwood Hazard, _The Frontier in American Literature_, p.
223.

[577] Vol. I, Chapter XXXIII, p. 237.

[578] Chapter 31.

[579] _The Connecticut Yankee_, N. Y., 1917, p. 107.

[580] _Ibid._, Chapter XIII, pp. 105-106.

[581] Cf. Whitman’s view, _The Gathering of the Forces_, Vol. II, pp.
284-286.

[582] See Chapter 33.

[583] W. D. Howells, _My Mark Twain_, p. 43.

[584] _Joan of Arc_, Chapter 37, p. 290.

[585] _The Mysterious Stranger_, p. 151.




