Chapter III • Political Thinkers • The English Group


Of this great age of American political thought, two important
characteristics emerge: it was overwhelmingly English in its
antecedents; and it was already differentiating its program from
that of contemporary English liberalism. Nearly all the outstanding
men--Jefferson, Adams, Washington, Wilson, Mason, Madison, Gouverneur
Morris--were of the older liberal tradition, and with some notable
exceptions, of the school of Pitt. Contemporary English liberals such
as Priestley, Bentham, and Godwin numbered few adherents among the
leaders of American thought. Economic conditions in America already
were imposing conclusions that pointed in a direction other than that
which English liberalism was traveling. The doctrine of the diminished
state, which was making persistent headway among English liberals,
could make no appeal to men who desired an augmented state; and
liberalism as a policy was in ill repute at a time when men believed
they were suffering from too much liberalism. American political
thought, therefore, followed an independent path, and in spite of its
English origin came to conclusions that differentiated it broadly from
the old-world theory.


I • Alexander Hamilton • The Leviathan State

Of the disciplined forces that put to rout the disorganized party
of agrarianism, the intellectual leader was Alexander Hamilton,
the brilliant Anglo-French West Indian, then just entered upon his
thirties. A man of quite remarkable ability, a lucid thinker, a great
lawyer, a skillful executive, a masterly organizer, a statesman of
broad comprehension and inflexible purpose, he originated and directed
the main policies of the Federalist group, and brought them to
successful issue. For this work he was singularly well equipped, for
in addition to great qualities of mind and persuasive ways he was free
to work unhampered by the narrow localisms and sectional prejudices
that hampered native Americans. He was rather English than American,
with a certain detachment that refused to permit his large plans to be
thwarted by minor, vexatious details, or the perversity of stupid men.
He was like the elder Pitt in the magnificence of his imperial outlook.

Such a man would think in terms of the nation rather than of the
state. He would agree with Paine that the continental belt must be
more securely buckled. The jealousies and rivalries that obstructed
the creation of a centralized Federal government found no sympathy
with him. He was annoyed beyond all patience with the dissensions of
local home rule. In his political philosophy there was no place for
“the political monster of an _imperium in imperio_”; he would destroy
all lesser sovereignties and reduce the several commonwealths to a
parish status. For town-meeting democracies and agrarian legislatures
he had frank contempt. The American villager and farmer he never knew
and never understood; his America was the America of landed gentlemen
and wealthy merchants and prosperous professional men, the classes
that were most bitterly anti-agrarian. And it was in association with
this group of conservative representatives of business and society
that he took his place as directing head in the work of reorganizing
the loose confederation into a strong and cohesive union. When
that work was accomplished his influence was commanding, and for a
dozen years he directed the major policies of the Federalist party.
His strategic position as Secretary of the Treasury enabled him to
stamp his principles so deeply upon the national economy that in all
the intervening years since he quitted his post they have not been
permanently altered. That we still follow the broad principles of
Hamilton in our financial policy is a remarkable testimony to the
perspicacity of his mind and his understanding of the economic forces
that control modern society. And hence, because the Hamiltonian
principles lie at the core of the problem which has proved so difficult
of solution by modern liberalism, the life and work of Hamilton are of
particular significance in our democratic development.

Hamilton was our first great master of modern finance, of that finespun
web of credit which holds together our industrial life; and because
his policies opened opportunities of profit to some and entailed
loss upon others, they have been debated with an acrimony such as few
programs have endured. About the figure of the brilliant federalist
the myth-makers have industriously woven their tales, distorting the
man into either a demigod or a monster. The individual has been merged
in the system which he created, and later interpretation has been shot
through with partisan feeling; political and economic prejudice has
proved too strong for disinterested estimate. Any rational judgment
of Hamilton is dependent upon an interpretation of the historical
background that determined his career, and in particular of the state
of post-Revolutionary economics; and over such vexing questions
partisans have wrangled interminably. Thus Sumner, in his life of
Hamilton, asserts dogmatically that Federalism was no other than the
forces of law and order at war with the turbulent, anarchistic forces
unloosed by the Revolution, and that the putting down of the scheme
of repudiation was the necessary preliminary to the establishment
of a great nation. In the light of such an interpretation, Hamilton
the far-seeing, courageous and honest master of finance, was the
savior of nationality, the one supreme figure rising above an envious
group of lesser men. But, as has been sufficiently pointed out in
preceding chapters, the historical facts are susceptible of quite other
interpretation; and as our knowledge of the economic struggle then
going on becomes more adequate, the falsity of such an explanation
becomes patent. If, on the other hand, we concede that the crux of the
political problem in 1787 was economic--the struggle waging between
farmer and business groups for control of government--then the position
of Hamilton becomes clear; he was the spokesman of the business
economy. He thought in terms of nationality and espoused the economics
of capitalism, because he discovered in them potentialities congenial
to his imperialistic mind.

The career of Hamilton followed logically from the determining facts
of temperament and experience. He came to New York an alien, without
position or influence, ambitious to make a name and stir in the
world; and in the America of his day there could be little doubt
what doors opened widest to preferment. He made friends easily, and
with his aristocratic tastes he preferred the rich and distinguished
to plebeians. Endowed with charming manners and brilliant parts, he
fascinated all whom he met; before he was of age he was intimate with
all the Whig leaders, civil and military, on Washington’s staff and
elsewhere, lending his brains to the solution of knotty problems,
prodding stupider minds with illuminating suggestions, proving himself
the clearest thinker in whatever group he found himself. It was by
sheer force of intellect that he gained distinction. Singularly
precocious, he matured early; before his twenty-fifth year he seems
to have developed every main principle of his political and economic
philosophy, and thereafter he never hesitated or swerved from his path.
He was tireless in propaganda, urging on the proposed Constitutional
convention, discussing with Robert Morris his favorite project of
a national bank, outlining various systems of funding, advocating
tariffs as an aid to domestic manufacture, and sketching the plan of a
political and economic system under which native commercialism could go
forward. His reputation as an acute and trustworthy financial adviser
was well established with influential men north and south, when the new
government was set up, and Washington turned to him naturally for the
Treasury post, to guide financial policies during the difficult days
immediately ahead. But so able a man could not be restricted within
a single portfolio, and during the larger part of Washington’s two
administrations Hamilton’s was the directing mind and chief influence.
He regarded himself as Prime Minister and rode roughshod over his
colleagues. Major policies such as that of no entangling alliances must
receive his careful scrutiny and approval before they were announced;
and in consequence more credit belongs to Hamilton for the success of
those first administrations than is commonly recognized.

But when we turn from the administrator and statesman to the
creative thinker, there is another story to tell. The quickness of
his perceptions, the largeness of his plans and efficacy of his
methods--his clear brilliancy of understanding and execution--are
enormously impressive; but they cannot conceal certain intellectual
shortcomings. There was a lack of subtlety in the swift working of his
mind, of shades and _nuances_ in the background of his thought, that
implied a lack of depth and richness in his intellectual accumulation.
Something hard, almost brutal lurks in his thought--a note of
intellectual arrogance, of cynical contempt. He was utterly devoid of
sentiment, and without a shred of idealism, unless a certain grandiose
quality in his conceptions be accounted idealism. His absorbing
interest in the rising system of credit and finance, his cool unconcern
for the social consequences of his policies, reveal his weakness. In
spite of his brilliancy Hamilton was circumscribed by the limitations
of the practical man.

In consequence of such limitations Hamilton was not a political
philosopher in the large meaning of the term. In knowledge of history
he does not compare with John Adams; and as an open-minded student of
politics he is immensely inferior to Jefferson. Outside the domain of
the law, his knowledge does not always keep pace with his argument. He
reasons adroitly from given premises, but he rarely pauses to examine
the validity of those premises. The fundamentals of political theory he
seems never to have questioned, and he lays down a major principle with
the easy finality of a dogmatist. Compare his views on any important
political principle with those of the greater thinkers of his time, and
they are likely to prove factional if not reactionary. The two tests
of eighteenth-century liberalism were the doctrine of individualism,
and the doctrine of the minimized state; and Hamilton rejected both:
the former in its larger social bearing, and the latter wholly. He
was not even abreast of seventeenth-century liberalism, for that was
strongly republican, and Hamilton detested republicanism only a little
less than democracy. Harrington and Locke were no masters of his;
much less were Bentham or Priestley or Godwin. He called the French
revolutionary writers “fanatics in political science”; to what extent
he read them does not appear. The thinkers to whom he owed most seem to
have been Hume, from whom he may have derived his cynical psychology,
and Hobbes whose absolute state was so congenial to his temperament.
But political theory he subordinated to economic theory. He was much
interested in economics. With the Physiocratic school and its agrarian
and sociological bias he could have no sympathy, but with the rising
English school that resulted from the development of the industrial
revolution, he found himself in hearty accord. Capitalism with its
credit system, its banks and debt-funding and money manipulation, was
wholly congenial to his masterful temperament. He read Adam Smith with
eagerness and _The Wealth of Nations_ was a source book for many of his
state papers. To create in America an English system of finance, and an
English system of industrialism, seemed to him the surest means to the
great end he had in view; a centralizing capitalism would be more than
a match for a decentralizing agrarianism, and the power of the state
would augment with the increase of liquid wealth.

But granted that he lacked the intellectual qualities of the
philosopher, it does not follow that his significance diminishes. On
the contrary his very independence of contemporary European theory
enlarged his serviceableness to party. He was free to employ his
intelligence on the practical difficulties of a new and unprecedented
situation. English liberalism did not answer the needs of Federalism,
if indeed it could answer the needs of the country at large. The time
had come to decide whether the long movement of decentralization should
go further, and confirm the future government as a loose confederacy
of powerful states, or whether an attempt should be made to check
that movement and establish a counter tendency towards centralized,
organized control. If the former, it meant surrendering the country
to a democratic _laissez faire_, and there was nothing in the history
of political _laissez faire_ as it had developed in America, that
justified the principle to Hamilton. It had culminated in agrarianism
with legislative majorities riding down all obstacles, denying the
validity of any check upon its will, constitutional, legal or ethical.
The property interests of the minority had been rendered insecure.
There had been altogether too much _laissez faire_; what was needed
was sharp control of legislative majorities; the will of the majority
must be held within due metes and bounds. Even in the economic world
the principle of _laissez faire_ no longer satisfied the needs of
the situation. Parliamentary enactments had aided British interests
in their exploitation of America before the war; it was only common
sense for an American government to assist American business. The new
capitalism that was rising stood in need of governmental subsidies.
Business was languishing; infant industries could not compete on
even terms with the powerful British manufacturing interests, long
established and with ample capital. From a realistic contemplation of
these facts Hamilton deduced the guiding principle that has since been
followed, namely, that governmental interference with economic laws is
desirable when it aids business, but intolerable and unsound when it
aims at business regulation or control, or when it assists agriculture
or labor.

Throughout his career Hamilton was surprisingly consistent. His mind
hardened early as it matured early, and he never saw cause to challenge
the principles which he first espoused. He was what a friendly critic
would call a political realist, and an enemy would pronounce a cynic.
With the practical man’s contempt for theorists and idealists, he took
his stand on current fact. He looked to the past for guidance, trusting
to the wisdom of experience; those principles which have worked
satisfactorily heretofore may be expected to work satisfactorily in the
future. Whoever aspires to become a sane political leader must remember
that his business is not to construct Utopias, but to govern men; and
if he would succeed in that difficult undertaking he must be wise in
the knowledge of human nature. At the basis of Hamilton’s political
philosophy was the traditional Tory psychology. Failure to understand
human nature, he believed, was the fatal weakness of all democratic
theorists; they put into men’s breeches altruistic beings fitted only
for a Utopian existence. But when we consider men as they are, we
discover that they are little other than beasts, who if unrestrained
will turn every garden into a pigsty. Everywhere men are impelled by
the primitive lust of aggression, and the political philosopher must
adjust his system to this unhappy fact. He must not suffer the charge
of cynicism to emasculate his philosophy; “the goodness of government
consists in a vigorous execution,” rather than in amiable intentions;
it is the business of the practical man and not of the theorist.

It needs no very extensive reading in Hamilton to discover ample
justification for such an interpretation of his political philosophy;
the evidence lies scattered broadly through his pages. At the
precocious age of seventeen he laid down the thesis, “A vast majority
of mankind is entirely biassed by motives of self-interest”; and as
political systems are determined by the raw material of the mass of
the people, they must be conditioned by such egoism. A year later he
discovered in Hume the central principle of his philosophy:

  Political writers, says a celebrated author, have established it
  as a maxim, that, in contriving any system of government, and
  fixing the several checks and controls of the constitution, _every
  man_ ought to be supposed a _knave_; and to have no other end,
  in all his actions, but _private interest_. By this interest we
  must govern him; and, by means of it, _make him co-operate to
  public good_, notwithstanding his insatiable avarice and ambition.
  Without this, we shall in vain boast of the advantages of _any
  constitution_.[313]

At the age of twenty-seven he reiterated the doctrine, “The safest
reliance of every government, is on men’s interests. This is a
principle of human nature, on which all political speculation, to be
just, must be founded.”[314] Obviously this was not a pose of youthful
cynicism, but a sober judgment confirmed by observation and experience.

Accepting self-interest as the mainspring of human ambition, Hamilton
accepted equally the principle of class domination. From his reading
of history he discovered that the strong overcome the weak, and as
they grasp power they coalesce into a master group. This master group
will dominate, he believed, not only to further its interests, but to
prevent the spread of anarchy which threatens every society split into
factions and at the mercy of rival ambitions. In early days the master
group was a military order, later it became a landed aristocracy, in
modern times it is commercial; but always its power rests on property.
“That power which holds the purse-strings absolutely, must rule,” he
stated unequivocally. The economic masters of society of necessity
become the political masters. It is unthinkable that government should
not reflect the wishes of property, that it should be permanently
hostile to the greater economic interests; such hostility must destroy
it, for no man or group of men will be ruled by those whom they can
buy and sell. And in destroying itself it will give place to another
government, more wisely responsive to the master group; for even a
democratic people soon learns that any government is better than a
condition of anarchy, and a commercial people understands that a
government which serves the interests of men of property, serves the
interests of all, for if capital will not invest how shall labor
find employment? And if the economic masters do not organize society
efficiently, how shall the common people escape ruin?

Such are the fundamental principles which lie at the base of Hamilton’s
philosophy. He was in accord with John Adams and James Madison and
Noah Webster, in asserting the economic basis of government, with
its corollary of the class struggle. He not only accepted the rule
of property as inevitable, but as desirable. As an aristocrat he
deliberately allied himself with the wealthy. That men divide into
the rich and the poor, the wise and the foolish, he regarded as a
commonplace too evident to require argument. The explanation is
to be sought in human nature and human capacities. For the common
people, about whom Jefferson concerned himself with what seemed to
Hamilton sheer demagoguery, he felt only contempt. Their virtues and
capacities he had no faith in. “I am not much attached to the _majesty
of the multitude_,” he said during the debate over the Constitution,
“and waive all pretensions (founded on such conduct) to their
countenance.” His notorious comment--which the American democrat has
never forgiven him, “The people!--the people is a great beast!”--was
characteristically frank. Hamilton was no demagogue and nothing was
plainer to his logic than the proposition that if the people possessed
the capacity to rule, their weight of numbers would give them easy
mastery; whereas their yielding to the domination of the gifted few
proves their incapacity. A wise statesman, therefore, will consider
the people no further than to determine how government may be least
disturbed by their factional discontent, and kept free to pursue a
logical program. Under a republican form good government is difficult
to maintain, but not impossible. The people are easily deceived and
turned aside from their purpose; like children they are diverted by
toys; but if they become unruly they must be punished. Too much is at
stake in government for them to be permitted to muddle policies.

It is sufficiently clear that in tastes and convictions Hamilton
was a high Tory. The past to which he appealed was a Tory past, the
psychology which he accepted was a Tory psychology, the law and
order which he desired was a Tory law and order. His philosophy was
not liked by republican America, and he knew that it was not liked.
Practical business men accepted both his premises and conclusions, but
republicans under the spell of revolutionary idealism, and agrarians
suffering in their pocketbooks, would oppose them vigorously. He was
at pains, therefore, as a practical statesman, to dress his views in
a garb more seemly to plebeian prejudices, and like earlier Tories
he paraded an ethical justification for his Toryism. The current
Federalist dogma of the divine right of justice--_vox justiciae vox
dei_--was at hand to serve his purpose and he made free use of it.
But no ethical gilding could quite conceal a certain ruthlessness of
purpose; in practice justice became synonymous with expediency, and
expediency was curiously like sheer Tory will to power.

In certain of his principles Hamilton was a follower of Hobbes.
His philosophy conducted logically to the leviathan state, highly
centralized, coercive, efficient. But he was no idealist to exalt the
state as the divine repository of authority, an enduring entity apart
from the individual citizen and above him. He regarded the state as
a highly useful instrument, which in the name of law and order would
serve the interests of the powerful, and restrain the turbulence of
the disinherited. For in every government founded on coercion rather
than good will, the perennial unrest of those who are coerced is a
grave menace; in the end the exploited will turn fiercely upon the
exploiters. In such governments, therefore, self-interest requires
that social unrest shall be covered with opprobrium and put down by
the police power; and the sufficient test of a strong state lies in
its ability to protect the privileges of the minority against the
anarchy of the majority. In his eloquent declamation against anarchy
Hamilton was a conspicuous disciple of the law and order school. From
the grave difficulties of post-Revolutionary times with their agrarian
programs, he created a partisan argument for a leviathan state, which
fell upon willing ears; and in the Constitutional convention, which,
more than any other man, he was instrumental in assembling, he was the
outstanding advocate of the coercive state.

In his plan of government presented to the Convention, the principle
of centralized power was carried further than most would go, and his
supporting speeches expressed doctrines that startled certain of his
hearers. He was frankly a monarchist, and he urged the monarchical
principle with Hobbesian logic. “The principle chiefly intended to be
established is this--that there must be a permanent _will_.” “There
ought to be a principle in government capable of resisting the popular
current.”

  Gentlemen say we need to be rescued from the democracy. But
  what [are] the means proposed? A democratic assembly is to be
  checked by a democratic senate, and both these by a democratic
  chief magistrate. The end will not be answered, the means will
  not be equal to the object. It will, therefore, be feeble and
  inefficient.[315]

The only effective way of keeping democratic factionalism within
bounds, Hamilton was convinced, lay in the erection of a powerful
chief magistrate, who “ought to be hereditary, and to have so much
power, that it will not be his interest to risk much to acquire more,”
and who would therefore stand “above corruption.” Failing to secure
the acceptance of the monarchical principle, he devoted himself to
the business of providing all possible checks upon the power of
the democracy. He “acknowledged himself not to think favorably of
republican government; but he addressed his remarks to those who did
think favorably of it, in order to prevail on them to tone their
government as high as possible.”[316] His argument was characteristic:

  All communities divide themselves into the few and the many. The
  first are the rich and well born, the other the mass of the people.
  The voice of the people has been said to be the voice of God; and,
  however generally this maxim has been quoted and believed, it is
  not true to fact. The people are turbulent and changing; they
  seldom judge or determine right. Give, therefore, to the first
  class a distinct, permanent share in the government. They will
  check the unsteadiness of the second; and as they cannot receive
  any advantage by a change, they therefore will ever maintain good
  government. Can a democratic assembly, who annually revolve in the
  mass of the people, be supposed steadily to pursue the public good?
  Nothing but a permanent body can check the imprudence of democracy.
  Their turbulent and uncontrollable disposition requires checks.[317]

The argument scarcely needs refuting today, although curiously enough,
it was rarely questioned by eighteenth-century gentlemen. It was the
stock in trade of the Federalists, nevertheless Hamilton was too acute
a thinker not to see its fallacy. It denied the fundamental premise
of his political philosophy. If men are actuated by self-interest,
how does it come about that this sovereign motive abdicates its rule
among the rich and well born? Is there a magic in property that
regenerates human nature? Do the wealthy betray no desire for greater
power? Do the strong and powerful care more for good government than
for class interests? Hamilton was fond of appealing to the teaching of
experience; but he had read history to little purpose if he believed
such notions. How mercilessly he would have exposed the fallacy in the
mouth of Jefferson! It was a class appeal, and he knew that it was a
class appeal, just as he knew that success knows no ethics. He was
confronted by a situation in practical politics, and in playing ignobly
upon selfish fears he was seeking to force the convention towards the
English model. He had no confidence in the Constitution as finally
adopted, and spoke in contemptuous terms of its weakness; whereas for
the British constitution he had only praise, going so far, according
to Jefferson, as to defend the notorious corruption of parliament on
the ground of expediency: “purge it of its corruption”--Jefferson
reports him as saying--“and give to its popular branch equality of
representation, and it would become an _impracticable_ government;
as it stands at present, with all its supposed defects, it is the
most perfect government which ever existed.”[318] The argument savors
of cynicism, but it is in keeping with his philosophy; the British
constitution owed its excellence to the fact that in the name of the
people it yielded control of the state to the landed aristocracy.

It was as a statesman that the brilliant qualities of Hamilton showed
to fullest advantage. In developing his policies as Secretary of
the Treasury he applied his favorite principle, that government and
property must join in a close working alliance. The new government
would remain weak and ineffective so long as it was hostile to
capital; but let it show itself friendly to capital, and capital
would make haste to uphold the hands of government. Confidence was
necessary to both, and it was a plant of slow growth, sensitive to
cold winds. The key to the problem lay in the public finance, and the
key to a strong system of finance lay in a great national bank. This,
Hamilton’s dearest project, was inspired by the example of the Bank of
England. No other institution would so surely link the great merchants
to government, he pointed out, for by being made partners in the
undertaking they would share both the responsibility and the profits.
It was notorious that during the Revolution men of wealth had forced
down the continental currency for speculative purposes; was it not as
certain that they would support an issue in which they were interested?
The private resources of wealthy citizens would thus become an asset
of government, for the bank would link “the interest of the State in
an intimate connection with those of the rich individuals belonging to
it.” “The men of property in America are enlightened about their own
interest, and would easily be brought to see the advantage of a good
plan.” Hence would arise stability and vigor of government.

Moreover, the bank would be of immense service in the pressing business
of the public debt. In regard to this difficult matter Hamilton was
early convinced that only one solution was possible: all outstanding
obligations, state and national, must be assumed by the Federal
government at face value, and funded. Anything short of that would
amount to repudiation of a lawful contract, entered into in good faith
by the purchaser; and such repudiation would destroy in the minds of
the wealthy the confidence in the integrity of the new government
that was vital to its success. It was true that speculators would reap
great and unearned profits; but the speculators for the most part were
the principal men of property whose support was so essential that any
terms were justifiable, and nothing would bind them so closely to the
government as the knowledge that it would deal generously with them.
It was true also that thousands of small men would lose by such a
transaction; but under any existing social economy the small man was
at a disadvantage, and the present state of affairs was not such as to
justify Utopian measures. To alienate the rich and powerful in order
to conciliate the poor and inconsequential seemed to him sheer folly.
The argument of expediency must prevail over abstract justice; the
government must make terms with those in whose hands lay the success or
failure of the venture.

His report on the public credit, of January 14, 1790, is one of the
significant documents in the history of American finance. It is the
first elaboration by an American statesman of the new system of
capitalization and credit developed in eighteenth-century England,
and it laid a broad foundation for later capitalistic development. To
less daring financiers of the time the public debt was no more than a
heavy obligation to be met; but to Hamilton it offered an opportunity
for revivifying the whole financial life of the nation. Let the debts
be consolidated and capitalized by a proper system of funding, and the
augmented credit would multiply capital, lower the rate of interest,
increase land values, and extend its benefits through all lines of
industry and commerce. It was a bold plan and it encountered bitter
opposition, which was not lessened by the heavy taxation that it called
for. In his tax proposals Hamilton revealed his political philosophy so
nakedly as almost to prove his undoing. His doctrine of the blessing of
a national debt smacked rather too strongly of English Toryism for the
American stomach.

  A national debt, if it be not excessive, will be to us a national
  blessing. It will be a powerful cement to our Union. It will also
  create a necessity for keeping up taxation to a degree which,
  without being oppressive, will be a spur to industry.... It were
  otherwise to be feared our popular maxims would incline us to
  too great parsimony and indulgence. We labor less now than any
  civilized nation of Europe; and a habit of labor in the people, is
  as essential to the health and vigor of their minds and bodies, as
  it is conducive to the welfare of the State.[319]

A further struggle was encountered over the proposals of an internal
revenue and a tariff. In his advocacy of the former Hamilton
encountered the vigorous opposition of the backcountry. The total
lack of adequate means of transportation rendered the problem of a
grain market a chronic difficulty to the frontier farmers. The most
convenient solution lay in distilling, and so whisky had become the
chief commodity of the farmer that was transportable and brought
a cash price. In placing a tax upon distilled liquors, therefore,
Hamilton struck so directly at the economic interests of thousands of
backwoodsmen, as to bring a rebellion upon the new administration. He
knew what he was doing, but he calculated that it was safer to incur
the enmity of farmers than of financiers; nevertheless the fierceness
of the opposition surprised him, and aroused all the ruthlessness that
lay in the background of his nature. He called for the strong arm
of the military and when the rising was put down, he was angered at
Washington’s leniency in refusing to hang the convicted leaders. In
his advocacy of a tariff he was on safer ground, for he was proposing
a solution of the difficult situation confronting the manufacturers.
Something must be done to revive industry so long stagnant. The old
colonial machinery had been destroyed and new machinery must be
provided. Industrial independence must follow political independence;
and the easiest way lay in providing a tariff barrier behind which
the infant industries of America might grow and become sufficient for
domestic needs.

In his notable report on manufactures, submitted on December 5, 1791,
Hamilton showed his characteristic intelligence in his grasp of the
principles of the industrial revolution. Certainly no other man in
America saw so clearly the significance of the change that was taking
place in English industrialism, and what tremendous reservoirs of
wealth the new order laid open to the country that tapped them. The
productive possibilities that lay in the division of labor, factory
organization, the substitution of the machine for the tool, appealed to
his materialistic imagination, and he threw himself heart and soul into
the cause of industrial development in America. He accepted frankly the
principle of exploitation. He was convinced that the interests of the
manufacturers were one with the national interests, and he proposed to
put the paternal power of the government behind them. With the larger
social effects--the consequences to the working classes, congestion of
population, the certainty of a labor problem--he concerned himself no
more than did contemporary English statesmen. He was contemptuous of
Jefferson’s concern over such things. He had no Physiocratic leanings
towards agriculture; material greatness alone appealed to him; and he
contemplated with satisfaction the increase in national wealth that
would accrue from levying toll upon the weak and helpless.

  Besides this advantage of occasional employment to classes having
  different occupations, there is another, of a nature allied to
  it, and of a similar tendency. This is the employment of persons
  who would otherwise be idle, and in many cases, a burthen on the
  community, either from bias of temper, habit, infirmity of body,
  or some other cause, indisposing or disqualifying them for the
  toils of the country. It is worthy of particular remark, that,
  in general, women and children are rendered more useful, and the
  latter more early useful, by manufacturing establishments, than
  they would otherwise be. Of the number of persons employed in
  the cotton manufactories of Great Britain, it is computed that
  four-sevenths, nearly, are women and children; of whom the greatest
  proportion are children, and many of them of a tender age.[320]

If the material power and splendor of the state be the great end of
statesmanship--as Hamilton believed--no just complaint can be lodged
against such a policy; but if the well-being of the individual citizen
be the chief end--as Jefferson maintained--a very different judgment
must be returned.

Although the fame of Hamilton has been most closely associated with
the principle of constitutional centralization, his truer significance
is to be found in his relation to the early developments of our modern
capitalistic order. In his understanding of credit finance and the
factory economy, he grasped the meaning of the economic revolution
which was to transform America from an agrarian to an industrial
country; and in urging the government to further such development, he
blazed the path that America has since followed. “A very great man,”
Woodrow Wilson has called him, “but not a great American.” In the
larger historical meaning of the term, in its democratic implications,
that judgment is true; but in the light of our industrial history,
with its corporate development and governmental subsidies, it does not
seem so true. As the creative organizer of a political state answering
the needs of a capitalistic order--a state destined to grow stronger
as imperialistic ambitions mount--he seems the most modern and the
most American of our eighteenth-century leaders, one to whom our
industrialism owes a very great debt, but from whom our democratic
liberalism has received nothing.


II • John Adams • Realist

Midway between Hamilton and Jefferson stands John Adams, the most
painstaking student of government and the most widely read in political
history, of his generation of Americans. The noble art of government
was a lifelong passion with him--the sublimest subject, in his opinion,
which a free citizen could study. Solid, pragmatic, unimaginative, he
was an admirable representative of the later eighteenth century with
its vigorous understanding, its distrust of idealisms, its contempt for
social theory. He was the political counterpart of Dr. Johnson. To a
generation sniveling over the sorrows of life and seeking panaceas in
Rousseau sentimentalisms, the English Tory proffered the consolation of
the realist. Things are bad enough, heaven knows; poverty, injustice,
disease, death, are evils which no optimism can shut its eyes to. But
what can be done? The malady of human nature is a disease beyond the
reach of romantic plasters. No quack remedies will cure ills that
lie too deep for laws or kings--they only aggravate the trouble.
Be sensible therefore. Endure like men what cannot be cured. Stop
sniveling and make the best of things as they are.

The analogy between these two vigorous exponents of common sense is
too obvious to miss. For years the chief business of John Adams was
to bring home to Americans the lesson in realism which Samuel Johnson
was urging upon his countrymen. The mischief of romantic idealisms was
spreading widely in America, disseminated by propagandists like Tom
Paine and theorists like Jefferson; there was high need that the people
be brought back to sober reality. This duty he took upon himself. He
was an uncompromising realist who refused to be duped by fine dreams or
humanitarian panaceas; he was much given to throwing cold water on the
hope of social regeneration through political agencies. And the reward
which he gained for his voluntary labors was a personal unpopularity
beyond that of any other statesman of the time. He was charged
with apostasy from his earlier democratic faith, and the charge had
sufficient foundation, unfortunately, to make it credible if one wished
to believe it.

During the revolutionary struggle he had been a member of the left
wing; during the early struggles under the Constitution he was a member
of the right wing. The young man had been a stalwart defender of human
rights, the old man was a stalwart defender of property rights; and
this shift of position was fatal to his reputation with the rising
democratic party. The French Revolution marked the critical turning
point in his intellectual development. As a politician he was well-nigh
ruined by it; but as a political thinker he owed it much. Before that
vast upheaval came to challenge his somewhat conventional mind, he
was a hard-working lawyer-politician, with a liking for legalistic
constitutional theory; but as the Revolution went forward, he was
forced into uncompromising reaction. While ardent young Americans
were becoming pro-French, he became pro-British; while they were
accepting the new leveling principles, he searched history to prove
how inevitable are social distinctions and economic classes; while
they looked hopefully forward to a democratic future, he gathered his
materials for an interpretation of political forces that revealed
aristocracy as the dominant factor in every society. Both Adams and his
critics were products of the French upheaval, but facing in different
directions; naturally, the antagonism between them became sharp and
bitter.

The severest critic cannot deny to John Adams excellent qualities
of mind and heart. A sound lawyer, a capable statesman, a vigorous
thinker and courageous debater, he fought his way from obscurity
to high position and many honors, and in every responsibility he
acquitted himself in a fashion altogether worthy of the notable
Adams posterity. A stubborn intellectual independence and a vigorous
assertiveness were his distinguishing characteristics. He revealed
to the full the Adams trait of going its own way and coming to its
own conclusions. He was never the victim of mob psychology, and he
was never careful of occasion or circumstance in speaking out his
convictions. America has had too few independent minds, and much of
Adams’s unpopularity was the result of his refusal to hunt with the
pack. Unfortunately his admirable qualities were offset by a blundering
tactlessness and a colossal vanity that brought many troubles upon
his head. He loved to be in the public eye and he studied the little
arts of self-advertising. In his youthful diary he set down these
characteristic words: “Reputation ought to be a perpetual subject of
my thoughts, and aim of my behavior. How shall I spread an opinion of
myself as a lawyer of distinguished genius, learning, and virtue?”
Self-confident, domineering, and jealously suspicious--always on the
lookout lest some honor due him should fall to another--he struggled
through a career strewn with animosities and heartburnings that a
nicer tact and a more generous nature would have avoided. He was his
own worst enemy. He did not spare himself in public service, but he
demanded strict payment and was inclined to haggle over the terms; in
consequence his later days were embittered and his fame was less than
he deserved.

Our present concern, however, is with the political scientist and not
with the politician; with the theories of government that occupied so
much of his thought, rather than with the policies of the statesman.
He wrote voluminously, heavily, with no grace of style or savor of
wit, and the long row of his collected writings may well appall the
reader who proposes to make his acquaintance. Ponderous treatises are
supplemented by lesser works and flanked by innumerable letters; his
industry was prodigious and no one will wonder at his exclamation, “My
hand is impatient of the pen and longs to throw it down.” His important
work divides broadly into two main divisions: his contribution to the
colonial debate with England, and his elaborate system of government
formulated during the years of French revolutionary debate. A brief
consideration will suffice for the first, but the second requires more
careful examination.

In his contributions to the colonial debate Adams concerned himself
mainly with questions of constitutional law. He placed little reliance
on the appeal to natural rights, and showed scant respect for “popular
talk and those democratical principles which have done so much mischief
in this country.”[321] The American cause, he believed, should be based
on constitutional principles, but those principles required restatement
in the light of existing fact. They must be rescued from the narrow
interpretation of little Englanders and adapted to meet the pressing
needs of imperial federation. The English people were not all residents
of the British Isles, and a constitutional practice suited to compact
groups in a common environment, was ill adapted to the needs of widely
sundered bodies of British subjects. Into this difficult and momentous
business of imperial federation, Adams plunged earnestly in an endeavor
to chart the unexplored field. That the problem was the gravest then
confronting Englishmen is abundantly evident today; that it received
grossly inadequate consideration on both sides of the Atlantic is
equally clear. In this field John Adams was a pioneer and his work
possesses still some historical interest. This fact, too frequently
overlooked, has been emphasized by a recent student, who has summarized
the final results of Adams’s thinking in the following theses: that the
empire was an association of equals, each with independent legislative
powers; that the British constitution was the fundamental law of the
empire, defining the relationship of the constituent parts; and that it
was the function of the judiciary to disallow a legislative act of any
of the several legislatures which did not comport with the fundamental
law, or which attempted to impose the will of one of the partners in
violation of the fundamental understanding and its guarantee.[322]

Such, in compressed form, was Adams’s elaboration and justification
of the dogma of Otis, that an act against the constitution was void.
In its relation to current English constitutional practice it was
at once revolutionary and reactionary. It implied a double attack
upon parliamentary sovereignty, first in limiting its powers by a
super-parliamentary constitution, and then in subjecting its acts to
judicial review. The final result would be the transfer of sovereignty
from the legislature to the judiciary. The idea had been toyed with
by English lawyers, but never seriously considered; it was alien to
the whole theory and history of parliamentary development. English
landed gentlemen have never been minded to grant the veto power to
the judiciary, but have persistently retained sovereignty in the
legislature. Nevertheless in such early speculation is found the germ
of our later practice, as it finally developed through the decisions of
Chief Justice Marshall.

In the works of his later period, such as _A Defence of the
Constitution of Government of the United States of America_ and
_Discourses on Davila_, Adams emerged from the narrow field of
constitutional law and elaborated a theory of government based on wide
reading and long observation. It was by way of reply to the French
thinkers, and it contributed in large measure to the partisan passions
of the time. Unfortunate circumstances attended the publication of
the works. The _Defence of the Constitution_ appeared at the moment
when newspaper accounts of the absurd dress in which he appeared at
the Court of St. James’s were provoking republican jests; and the
_Discourses on Davila_ came out in the _Gazette of the United States_,
when the country was buzzing about his childish fondness for titles and
ceremonies. It was impolitic for Adams to publish in the _Gazette_,
a virulently Federalistic sheet and anathema to all liberals. His
unpopular theories could not fail to arouse republican antagonism when
set over against such seeming commentary as this:

  _Take away thrones and crowns from among men and there will
  soon be an end of all dominion and justice._ There must be some
  adventitious properties infused into the government to give it
  energy and spirit, or the selfish, turbulent passions of men can
  never be controlled. This has occasioned that artificial splendor
  and dignity that are to be found in the courts of many nations. The
  people of the United States may probably be induced to regard and
  obey the laws without requiring the experiment of courts and titled
  monarchs. In proportion as we become populous and wealthy must the
  tone of the government be strengthened.[323]

The unfortunate effect of _Davila_ upon a highly wrought public opinion
Adams himself records: “the rage and fury of the Jacobinical journals
against these discourses, increased as they proceeded, intimidated the
printer, John Fenno, and convinced me, that to proceed would do more
hurt than good. I therefore broke off abruptly.”[324] But the mischief
to his reputation had been done; henceforth Adams was popularly
regarded as anti-republican. Debating the nature of aristocracy in the
New York Constitutional Convention, one of the speakers said, “I would
refer the gentleman for a definition of it to the Hon. John Adams, one
of our natural aristocrats.” Madison went so far as to charge that he
was secretly a monarchist. The charge was absurd, as any examination of
his political theory will convince. “It is a fixed principle with me,”
he wrote to Samuel Adams in 1790, “that all good government is and must
be republican.” But that he advocated a system of government hostile to
agrarianism, that he was bitterly antagonistic to French Jacobinism
and all its works, is apparent to the most casual reader. He was a
realist of the seventeenth-century school of English republicanism,
attacking what he regarded as the delirium of democracy, appealing to
experience in answer to abstract theory.

Adams erected his political system upon what he called “self-evident
truths.” He went to the root of the matter and directed his inquiry
into the validity of the humanitarian psychology which asserted that
men are good by nature, and may be trusted to deal justly with their
fellows. He appealed to the whole unhappy record of past misrule to
disprove the thesis. Instead of discovering in the average man a
kindly, rational being--as Jefferson professed to discover--Adams
found quite the contrary; and he summoned a host of historians and
philosophers to witness that Machiavelli was right in his contention
that “those who have written on civil government lay it down as a
first principle ... that whoever would found a state, and make proper
laws for the government of it, must presume that all men are bad by
nature; that they will not fail to show that natural depravity of heart
whenever they have a fair opportunity.”[325] In further substantiation
of this fact he examined the history of governments past and present,
and he found everywhere testimony to the truth that the mass of men are
naturally indolent, selfish, given to luxury, shortsighted, jealous,
tending to faction and all mischievous intrigue. Never does he find
them given to virtue, choosing wisdom, seeking justice. They cannot
endure that others should be superior in virtue, or rank, or power;
but driven by ambition they strive to pull down their superiors in
order themselves to rise. The men in any society who possess sufficient
virtue to set justice above self-interest, are few and count for little
in the scale against the selfish many.[326]

This Calvinistic doctrine that “human nature is not fit to be
trusted,” and that “men are never good but through necessity,” being
accepted--and John Adams was as clearly satisfied of its truth as
“of any demonstration of Euclid”--he proceeded to translate it
into political terms, and examine the bearing of it upon systems
of government. At once a second fallacy of the humanitarian school
emerged--men are impelled not by ideals but by needs, not by reason,
as Godwin argued, but by the desire for goods. In a social state the
natural selfishness of human nature impels to economic aggression.
Underneath the turbulent unrest which threatens every government is
economic ambition. This is the rock on which all schemes of social
justice founder--a rock which every sound political thinker will chart
and recognize as a danger reef. Economics and biology provide the major
social drives. “That the first want of every man is his dinner and the
second want his girl were truths well known ... long before the great
philosopher Malthus arose to think he enlightened the world by his
discovery.”[327] The supposed liberty of a democratic state proves in
practice to be no other than anarchy, running swiftly into license and
ending in tyranny. All human societies are rooted in exploitation, the
bitter fruit of which is domestic warfare.

The universal social state is one of ruthless class struggle, wherein
the strong conquer the weak--this is the third deduction from the
premises which Adams laid down. It cannot be otherwise, he argued, from
the natural inequality of men. The rude mass being shiftless, ignorant,
spendthrift, they are at the mercy of the strong, ambitious, and
capable, who exploit them freely. Hence in every society emerges the
division between patricians and plebeians, developing into caste as the
social order grows complex. The self-interest of the patricians teaches
them the need of class solidarity, and with intelligent solidarity the
few easily seize control of the state and use it to their ends. Hence
arises an aristocracy or oligarchy, which maintains its power through
control of the economic resources of society. Control of property means
control of men; for sovereignty inheres in economics. In presence of
this historical fact it is foolish to declaim about natural rights;
there are no rights except such as are won either by property or the
sword.

That there should long exist a society without a property aristocracy
Adams regarded as inconceivable. The French democrats with their
talk of equality and fraternity were mischievous visionaries. “Every
democracy ... has an aristocracy in it as distinct as that of Rome,
France, England.” In older societies the aristocracy maintained
supremacy through possession of the land. In America the vast extent
of territory and the wide diffusion of landholding presented the most
favorable opportunity in history for democratic development if such
were possible; nevertheless the evidences of an aristocracy developing
here were too patent to miss. The abundance of economic resources,
Adams pointed out, was an invitation to gigantic exploitation, the
logical outcome of which must be the emergence of a master group,
richer and more powerful than the world has ever known. The power of
economic appeal was nullified in America by no special providence.

  Paper wealth has been a source of aristocracy in this country,
  as well as landed wealth, with a vengeance. Witness the immense
  fortunes made _per saltum_ by aristocratical speculations, both in
  land and paper.... But, sir, land and paper are not the only source
  of aristocracy. There are master shipwrights, housewrights, masons,
  &c. &c., who have each of them from twenty to a hundred families
  in their employment, and can carry a posse to the polls when they
  will. These are not only aristocrats, but a species of feudal
  barons....

  Should a planter in Virginia sell his _clarissimum et
  illustrissimum et celeberricum locum_ with his thousand negroes,
  to a merchant, would not the merchant gain the aristocratical
  influence which the planter lost by his transfer? Run down, sir,
  through all the ranks of society ... from the first planter and the
  first merchant to the hog driver, the whiskey dram-seller, or the
  Scottish peddler, and consider, whether the alienation of lands,
  wharves, stores, pike stock, or even lottery tickets, does not
  transfer the aristocracy as well as the property.[328]

Believe--as John Adams believed regarding the funding operations--that
“paper wealth is the madness of the many for the profit of the
few,”[329] it is nevertheless a modern illustration of the old truth
that the few do profit from the madness of the many, and by reason of
such profit set themselves up as masters. If then the historian cannot
escape the conclusion that political systems and social classes rest
upon economic foundations, this fundamental fact must preside over
the speculations of the political philosopher. Democracy is out of
the question, even if it were desirable. The great and sole object
of political science must be the preservation of liberty--the right
of every individual to life, freedom, property, in an aristocratic
society--and the frustration of the universal drive of self-interest
which leads on the one hand to tyranny, and on the other to anarchy.
Between these two poles of tyranny and anarchy, of oligarchy and
democracy, every society oscillates; to prevent such oscillation and
discover some mean between the extremes must be the business of the
political philosopher. The pregnant fallacy of the French school,
Adams insisted, lay in its doctrines of equality and fraternity. The
meanest underling does not desire equality; men kiss the feet above
them and trample on the fingers beneath. That the people love a lord
is a sign of their abundant folly. Should the democrats abolish the
principle of hereditary rank by law, it would still remain in fact; for
the property basis on which it rests is transmitted legally from father
to son, and each successive generation gains an adventitious advantage
from its substantial heritage as well as from the historical splendor
of the family name. On this rock every attempt at a democracy has
foundered.

  If these words are true, no well ordered commonwealth ever existed;
  for we read of none without a nobility, no, not one, that I can
  recollect, without a hereditary nobility; ... It would be an
  improvement in the affairs of society, probably, if the hereditary
  legal descent could be avoided; and this experiment the Americans
  have tried. But in this case a nobility must and will exist,
  though without the name, as really as in countries where it is
  hereditary.[330]

The mortal weakness of democracy, Adams agreed with Madison and the
Federalists generally, lay in faction, a disease which in the nature of
the case he regarded as incurable. The use of party power other than
justly was factional, and because the mass of men do not set justice
above present interest, the unbridled rule of the majority drives
straight towards mass tyranny. Despoiled by the superior ability of the
aristocracy, the exploited plebeians fight back blindly; and where the
constitution of government permits them to band together in a political
party, they override the rights of the minority as ruthlessly as the
latter before had denied the rights of the majority. Aristocratic
exploitation leads to democratic leveling; and the resultant anarchy is
but prelude to the rise of another aristocracy to repeat the unhappy
process.

  The passions and desires of the majority of the representatives
  being in their nature insatiable and unlimited by any thing within
  their own breasts, and having nothing to control them without, will
  crave more and more indulgence, and, as they have the power, they
  will have the gratification.[331]

  If you give more than a share in the sovereignty to the democrats,
  that is, if you give them the command or preponderance in the
  sovereignty, that is, the legislature, they will vote all property
  out of the hands of you aristocrats, and if they let you escape
  with your lives, it will be more humanity, consideration, and
  generosity than any triumphant democracy ever displayed since the
  creation. And what will follow? The aristocracy among the democrats
  will take your places, and treat their fellows as severely and
  sternly as you have treated them.[332]

The end of every democratic experiment, Adams pointed out, has been the
man on horseback. So inevitably does democracy culminate in despotism,
that “in reality, the word democracy signifies nothing more nor less
than a nation of people without any government at all, and before any
constitution is instituted.”[333] “Democracy never has been and never
can be so desirable as aristocracy or monarchy, but while it lasts,
is more bloody than either. Remember, democracy never lasts long. It
soon wastes, exhausts, and murders itself. There never was a democracy
that did not commit suicide.” “The proposition that the people are
the best keepers of their own liberties is not true. They are the
worst conceivable, they are no keepers at all; they can neither judge,
act, think, or will, as a political body. Individuals have conquered
themselves; nations and large bodies never.”[334]

Having thus examined the major doctrines of the French democratic
school, namely, that men are good by nature, that the social end
is liberty, equality, fraternity, and that social well-being will
result from an appeal to reason, Adams had cleared the problem of
what he regarded as misconceptions, and was ready to lay out a
system of government which should demonstrate his skill in political
architecture. The determining factor in laying down the main lines was
sufficiently clear. Since property lies at the root of the problem
of government, the business of devising a just and stable system of
government resolves itself into the question, What shall be done about
property? As an orthodox Whig Adams found part of his answer ready
to hand. With Locke he believed that property rights are sacred, and
that it is a chief business of government to protect private property
against unjust expropriation. The security of property may be taken as
the measure of the stability of government. “The moment the idea is
admitted into society, that property is not as sacred as the laws of
God, and that there is not a force of law and public justice to protect
it, anarchy and tyranny commence.”[335] “The very name of a republic
implies, that the property of the people should be represented in
the legislature, and decide the rule of justice,” he argued, quoting
Cicero.[336] Moreover, the futility of any other arrangement was
axiomatic in his philosophy. If property is not granted representation,
it will usurp it; if attacked, it will know how to defend itself; and
the end will be the setting up of an oligarchy on the ruins of the
republic. But if Adams agreed with Hamilton that the state should
deal tenderly with the rights and interests of property, he refused
to go with the latter in his sole concern for the wealthy. Greater
property interests must be held in due balance with the smaller, for
if unchecked the strong will drive on to ruthless exploitation of the
weak, and society will be endangered from the top as in a democracy it
is endangered from the bottom. It was this desire for a mean between
oligarchy or monarchy on the one hand, and democracy on the other, that
determined his choice of a republican form of government.

The difficult problem of property-power in the state, Adams was
convinced, could be solved justly and permanently only by a judicious
system of balanced interests. Subjected, as every government must be,
to a persistent stress of rival interests, it must be constructed with
calculated nicety, or the structure would fall of its own weight;
and the sole principle, he believed, is that of the Gothic arch--the
principle of thrust and counter-thrust. Provide in such manner that the
selfishness of one group in society shall be neutralized by the counter
selfishness of other groups, let the buttress support the arch at its
weakest point, and upon such an equilibrium of counterforces great
vaults and noble towers may be erected. It is the apotheosis of the
system of checks and balances.

  It is agreed that “the end of all government is the good and ease
  of the people, in a secure enjoyment of their rights, without
  oppression”; but it must be remembered, that the rich are _people_
  as well as the poor; that they have rights as well as others; that
  they have as clear and as sacred a right to their large property
  as others have to theirs which is smaller; that oppression to them
  is as possible and as wicked as to others. The rich, therefore,
  ought to have an effectual barrier in the constitution against
  being robbed, plundered, and murdered, as well as the poor; and
  this can never be without an independent senate. The poor should
  have a bulwark against the same dangers and oppressions; and this
  can never be without a house of representatives of the people. But
  neither the rich nor the poor can be defended by their respective
  guardians in the constitution, without an executive power, vested
  with a negative, equal to either, to hold the balance even between
  them, and decide when they cannot agree.[337]

Such in brief was the master principle of that system of mixed
government which John Adams advocated so persistently in the teeth
of the popular demand for a simpler, more responsive form. It based
itself frankly upon the dogma of the class struggle; it provided each
class--as he recognized them in his simple social analysis--with a
legislative arm with which to defend itself; and it set as arbiter
between them an executive, carefully selected, who was supposed to
represent that abstract _tertium quid_, the public. The keynote is
struck in a line from Pope set on the title-page of the _Defence_--“All
Nature’s difference keeps all Nature’s peace.” That Adams greatly
admired his handiwork is beyond doubt; that he was intellectually
honest with himself is very likely true; but that there is a note of
disingenuousness, a failure to take into account his pronounced bias
towards property interest, is certain. There was ample ground for the
popular dislike of his theory. This is not the place to enter upon an
examination of the system of checks and balances, nor to insist that
any such system becomes in practice an impossibility. It is more to
the point to remark upon certain fallacies in his theory which Adams
himself must have seen if his mind had been quite free from bias.

Adams’s intelligent analysis of social forces should have saved him
from the major fallacy of the doctrine of checks and balances. In
imposing the doctrine of a separation of powers upon the doctrine of
property power, he effectively denied the validity of the latter.
Assuming for the sake of the argument that the Senate will represent
property, what reason justified the assumption that the House would
represent the small men, or that the President would speak for the
whole? If property is sovereign, as Adams maintained--“Harrington
has shown that power always follows property. This I believe to be
as infallible a maxim in politics, as that action and reaction are
equal, is in mechanics”[338]--will it not rule the House equally with
the Senate? above all, will it not control so important an officer as
the President? The theory that the President represents an abstract
public is a disingenuous political fiction; in the light of Adams’s
theory of economic determinism it is a gross absurdity. Moreover, Adams
invalidated his entire system by refusing to provide the necessary
machinery by which the House could represent the small man. In denying
manhood suffrage, he eliminated the proletarian and the renter from
the political equation, and left them without political power; in his
definition the small man was the freeholder, the representative of
the middle class. The House, therefore, equally with the Senate, was
the mouthpiece of property interests; the former more likely to be
representative of land, the latter of capital.

Where did Adams get the major ideas of his political philosophy?[339]
An omnivorous reader, he gathered from many sources, and his memory was
a well-stocked storehouse of fact and theory. As a young man he was
disciple of Locke and the natural-rights school, but as he grew older
he abandoned the natural-rights theory. His interpretation of human
nature he took over from Machiavelli, Hobbes and Hume, discovering in
their psychology of self-interest and emulation--often mean but many
times admirable--a conception in harmony with the Calvinism of his
early training. He owed much to Bolingbroke, whom he read five times,
but to James Harrington, the Commonwealth intellectual, he turned with
a zest of discovery so great that he may not unjustly be called one
of Harrington’s disciples. From the _Oceana_ he drew so abundantly
that the most casual student of political theory must remark his
indebtedness. Many of the major doctrines of Adams, which by dint of
iteration have become associated with his name, were taken straight
out of Harrington: such as the doctrine of a natural aristocracy; the
economic basis of sovereignty, discovered in the close relation of
property to power; the necessity of effecting a balance between rival
interests, with the ideal state rendered static by a nice balance of
governmental machinery; the conception of government by laws and not
by men; and finally, the historical method of approach, the cautious
appeal to past experience. Since Harrington’s time many of these
ideas had been restated: the defense of property rights by Locke; the
principle of the separation of powers and the historical method by
Montesquieu; the psychology of emulation by Hume and Robert Wallace,
the latter of whom is another Adams in his thesis, “Lust of power
sets man against his neighbor to the profit of the rich.” But in spite
of these later reinterpretations and his own additions, John Adams
remained essentially a seventeenth-century republican, preferring with
Milton the rule of the aristocracy to that of plebeians, and hating
all Jacobin radicalisms as the spawn of a dangerous romanticism that
disregarded the plain teachings of history and the admonitions of
common sense.

Though Adams was fiercely assailed as an advocate of class government,
he was far less hostile to agrarianism than was Hamilton. He was no
believer in unchecked government by wealth. His honest realism taught
him the sophistry of Hamilton’s assumption that gentlemen of property
are equally gentlemen of principle, and that wealth voluntarily
abdicates selfish interest. He feared the aggressions of the rich as
much as the turbulence of the poor. The bulk of his property was in
land, and his sympathies were enlisted on the side of a law-abiding
agrarianism, rather than on the side of a speculative capitalism.[340]
He would put down vigorously all such leveling as was implied in
Shays’s program, and the repudiations of Rhode Island; but he would not
permit the powerful to exploit the poor through the instrumentality
of government. This may explain in part his hostility to Hamilton and
his partial sympathy with Jefferson. He stood between the two rival
economies, arguing for a system of government that should be neither
agrarian nor capitalistic, but should maintain a static mean; and
in consequence he pleased nobody. His four years in the presidency
disrupted the Federalist party, and prepared the way for the triumph
of Jefferson. Though tactless and blundering in dealing with trimming
politicians, he was an honest and courageous man, and his many sterling
qualities merit a larger recognition than has been accorded them by a
grudging posterity. In spite of his dogmatisms and inconsistencies he
remains the most notable political thinker--with the possible exception
of John C. Calhoun--among American statesmen.


Footnotes

[313] _Works_, Vol. II, p. 51.

[314] _Ibid._, p. 298.

[315] Brief of speech submitting his plan of Constitution, in _Works_,
Vol. II, p. 415.

[316] _Elliot’s Debates_, Vol. V, p. 244.

[317] _Ibid._, Vol. I, p. 422.

[318] _Works of Jefferson_, Ford edition, Vol. I, p. 165.

[319] _Works_, Vol. I, p. 257.

[320] _Works_, Vol. III, pp. 207-208.

[321] “Autobiography,” in _Works_, Vol. II, p. 310.

[322] R. G. Adams, _Political Ideas of the American Revolution_,
Trinity College Press, 1922, pp. 92-93.

[323] _Gazette of the United States_, March, 1790; quoted in Forman,
“The Political Activities of Philip Freneau,” in _Johns Hopkins Studies
in History and Political Science_, XX, Nos. 9-10.

[324] _Works_, Vol. VI, p. 272, note.

[325] _Works_, Vol. IV, p. 408.

[326] See “Defence of the Constitution, etc.,” in _Works_, Vol. VI, pp.
9, 57, 97.

[327] Letter to John Taylor, in _Works_, Vol. VI, p. 516.

[328] _Ibid._, pp. 508-509.

[329] _Ibid._, p. 508.

[330] “Defence of the Constitution, etc.,” in _Works_, Vol. VI, pp.
124-125.

[331] _Ibid._, p. 64.

[332] “Letter to John Taylor,” in _Works_, Vol. VI, p. 516.

[333] _Works_, Vol. VI, p. 211.

[334] See “Defence of the Constitution, etc.,” and in particular Vol.
IV of _Works_.

[335] “Defence of the Constitution, etc.,” in _Works_, Vol. VI, p. 9.

[336] _Works_, Vol. IV, p. 295.

[337] “A Defence of the Constitution, etc.,” in _Works_, Vol. VI, p. 65.

[338] _Works_, Vol. IX, p. 376.

[339] For a detailed examination of the sources of his philosophy, see
the excellent discussion in C. M. Walsh, _The Political Science of John
Adams_, Chapters XV, XVI.

[340] See Beard, _The Economic Origins of Jeffersonian Democracy_, p.
317.




Part Two: Political Democracy Gets Under Way • 1787-1800




