Chapter III.




Chapter IV • Adventures in Belles Lettres


I • Old Charleston

In the year 1825 the little city of Charleston, with its fourteen
thousand whites and more than fourteen thousand blacks, was perhaps the
most delightful spot in America. The Mecca of plantation fashion and
the capital of plantation politics, it prided itself on its genial and
distinguished society. It was the last stronghold in America of the
older pride of aristocracy. The tone of society still remained pretty
much what it had been before the schism of ’76. Social lines were rigid
and an old-fashioned conservatism of temper marked the upper class.
Despite the large admixture of French Huguenot blood the manners and
prejudices of the aristocracy retained the pronounced British cast
that came down from pre-Revolutionary times, and if Dr. Johnson could
have stepped from the Fleet Street of 1780 to the Charleston of 1825
he would have felt almost at home. “We are decidedly more English than
any other city of the United States,” said Hugh Legaré, whose love of
the English character was second only to his love of Charleston. It was
a gay world with its country squires and their horses and racing, its
Madeira drinking, its promenades and dancing and assemblies; one to win
the affection of all who liked lighthearted ways.

But underneath this gay life was a more serious Charleston, which in
certain of its aspects was not unlike Boston. From both the Huguenot
and Scotch-Irish strains came a sobering Puritanism that gave a serious
cast to thoughtful natures and disciplined them in a strict morality.
Calhoun was far more Puritan than Fisher Ames, and Hugh Legaré than
Edward Everett. Life was likely to be a serious business to these
southern Puritans, filled with weighty responsibilities, to be lived,
like Milton’s, as ever in the great Taskmaster’s eye. Aristocrat though
he was, young Hugh Legaré was no gay cavalier treading the primrose
path, but as serious-minded as any Roundhead. Victorian in manners, he
would have found the bluff speech of the old revolutionary, General
Charles Cotesworth Pinckney--“more pregnant with meaning than prudish
in dress”--somewhat too “salt” for refined ears. It was this note of
Puritanism that marked the finest characters in Charleston and gave its
tone to society; but it was a Puritanism of conduct rather than dogma.
Charleston gentlemen were of the English church, and their Puritanism,
unwarped by Calvinism, assumed a moral rather than a theological cast.

The lawyer came to assume the position of intellectual leadership
taken by the minister in New England. A profound respect for law
dominated the Charleston mind. Blackstone was the Charleston Bible,
and the lawyer who was master of dignified oratory was looked upon
with high regard. The aristocracy opened its doors to young James
Louis Petigru, an Irish-Huguenot lawyer with his own way to make, but
it closed them tightly against young Gilmore Simms, apprentice to an
apothecary and unread in the classics. Ambitious youths therefore
turned to the law as a congenial career, for there reputations lay,
and political influence. A pronounced cult of the law, and regard for
orderly procedure, went hand in hand with the old English respect for
individual rights. Charleston gentlemen could not be coerced, even by
their own politicians, and Legaré was bitter against the Nullifiers
because the spirit of dictation was “alien to our old habitudes, to the
gentle courage, the courteous hostility, the mild and merciful justice,
the proud submission to _law_ and respect for right, which once
distinguished our low country society from and above all other American
society” (_Writings_, Vol. I, p. 211).

Politically Charleston was of the old Federalist tradition, as that
Federalism was embodied in the picturesque figure of General Pinckney.
Outside the narrow circle of the aristocracy, Federalism had long since
given way to a democratic faith with its background of states-rights
Jeffersonianism; but it lingered amongst the gentry and provided the
nucleus of the later Union party. Grayson tells a story of Petigru
that suggests the bitterness of the back-country democracy towards the
old Federalism. The latter one day was being abused by a swamp-sucker
“who lavished on him all the foul epithets and appellations he could
remember or invent, of which rogue and scoundrel were among the most
moderate.” At last he hit upon a term of reproach “which at that day
comprised everything hateful--he called him a ‘damned Federal,’” and
was promptly knocked down for the insult (William J. Grayson, _James
Louis Petigru_, pp. 83-84). But the Charleston vintage of Federalism
was little more than a stout conservatism that idealized the Union
and preached the sufficiency and sacredness of the law. It was social
rather than political or economic--the assertion of the prescriptive
right of gentlemen to govern the state. Jeffersonianism never took
possession of the first circles of Charleston as it did in Virginia,
and French revolutionary philosophy found there an uncongenial soil.
The profound conservatism of the aristocracy is sufficiently expressed
in a comment of Hugh Legaré--“The politics of the immortal Jefferson!
Pish!” (_Writings_, Vol. I, p. 207.) Physiocratic agrarianism found
few advocates amongst Carolina gentlemen. The Charleston mind was
political and legal rather than economic in its interests, and as a
commercial port Charleston was more sympathetic with capitalism than
with agrarianism. Its politics, in which it found much diversion, it
preferred highly seasoned, and when Nullification divided the state
into hostile camps, the Nullifiers and Unionists brought Charleston
to the verge of civil war. Respect for law and the amenities vanished
before the hot demands of partisanship.

The culture of Charleston was as conservatively old-fashioned as
its politics. Such a renaissance as it enjoyed before the Civil War
wrought its destruction was delayed by its rejection of French romantic
thought until the beginning of the thirties, and synchronized with the
renaissance of New England. When the romantic spirit appeared about
1825, it was primarily English, of the school of Tom Moore. There had
never been any literature in Charleston worthy of the name, except
such as had come from London, bound in calfskin and tooled morocco.
Those who affected a love of letters were still enamored of the heroic
couplet and the Addisonian essay. Not until he went to Brussels in
1832 did Legaré, the most brilliant southern linguist, take up the
study of German. The classics still dominated education, and literary
taste inclined to a mingling of wit and sentiment. Young and Ossian
and Mrs. Radcliffe held honored places on Charleston bookshelves. The
young poets were deep in Byron, and Sir Walter was in high repute.
But Wordsworth and Shelley and Keats were scarcely mentioned, and
Carlyle could not hope to gain a hearing. Nevertheless by the year
1828 the example of the _North American Review_ proved so stimulating
an incentive that the scholarship of Charleston collaborated to
establish the _Southern Review_, which ran a sober course for four
years, providing a medium for learned articles on law, letters and
politics. It was a serious venture that concerned itself little with
_belles lettres_, but the intellectual resources were inadequate, and
on Legaré’s departure for Europe _The Review_ came to an end. Later,
Gilmore Simms labored to the same purpose, but even his enormous
energy was insufficient to sustain a magazine esteemed worthy of
southern genius, and the work languished. Facile writers were fewer in
Charleston than in Boston.

But despite any shortcomings in the way of letters, to members of its
polite circles Charleston was the most delightful of American cities,
and its society the most distinguished. “I have never, since I could
form an opinion on such matters,” wrote Legaré from Brussels, where
he mingled with the most cultivated society, “doubted of the immense
superiority of Carolina society over all others on that continent, and
now feel it more than ever” (_Writings_, Vol. I, p. 218). It was a
common opinion of southern gentlemen, who, with their English notions
of a landed aristocracy, believed that “fixed landed property is of
the essence of civil society, properly so called.” It embodied the
planter ideal of a social capital, uncorrupted by a vulgar plutocracy.
Its highways ran out to the plantations; the free citizen of the Greek
democracy drew his wealth from the soil; the slave labored while the
master rode to and fro from the city. Law and politics were regarded
as respectable vocations for sons of gentlemen, but the ideal life was
acknowledged to be that of the planter, with his three thousand acres,
his three hundred negroes, his ricks of rice and bales of tobacco and
cotton. The profits that came from the law were certain to be invested
in land, and the young attorney dreamed of retiring in middle life to a
well-stocked plantation. To become a member of the ruling squirearchy
was an ambition that filled and satisfied the Charleston imagination.


II • William Crafts • Charleston Wit

The slightness of literary achievement in the Charleston of 1825 is
sufficiently attested by the considerable local fame that rewarded the
efforts of the volatile William Crafts. Born in Charleston in 1789,
the son of a well-to-do Yankee father and a southern mother, he was
sent to Harvard to complete his education, distinguished himself in the
classics and in declamation, achieved a gownsman’s fame for the brisk
informality of a Latin oration, and carried back to Charleston a great
reputation as a wit and scholar. He went into the law but burnt too few
candles at the shrine of Blackstone; was seized with political ambition
and proposed to make a great name for himself as a statesman, but his
politics were not agreeable to his constituents and his career failed
to arrive. He was a graceful orator in the florid southern style, an
agreeable fellow with a pleasant wit, who loved society, dabbled in
prose and verse, but proved to be unstable. He spread too much canvas
to the uncertain winds and his unballasted bark came to grief. He died
at the age of thirty-seven, leaving his writings to be gathered up and
published by his family--a miscellany that brought down upon it the
severe judgment of Hugh Legaré.

William Crafts was a transplanted Bostonian who essayed to domesticate
Harvard culture among the polite circles of Charleston. As an
undergraduate he admired the graceful preaching of Buckminster and the
acrid eloquence of Fisher Ames. The latter he seems to have adopted as
his political godfather, and from him he accepted a decadent Federalism
that got him into trouble when later he entered politics. But the chief
model on whom he shaped his life seems to have been Robert Treat Paine,
in the declining sun of whose fame the young Harvard undergraduate
warmed himself. With a less pregnant wit, a less trenchant prose style,
a less masculine oratory, he succeeded in becoming a smaller edition of
a petty master. The parallelism in the lives of the two apostles of wit
is striking. They were both dabblers, but Crafts possessed less skill
and dabbled less felicitously. They both broke with the rigid decorum
of their circles, but Paine achieved a more tragic shipwreck. They both
marked the last ebbing of the eighteenth century before the wit ideal
was submerged by the incoming tide of romanticism, and the reputations
of both have been forgotten.

In Crafts’ case, certainly, no injustice has been done. Such literary
wealth as he displayed would seem notable only in an indigent society.
His prose is vapid and feeble in the essay, and stilted and artificial
in the oration. His verse is insignificant in quantity--two formal
poems and a handful of occasional pieces--and wanting in distinction
of phrase or imagery. It is the work of a graceful imitator of doubtful
models. He wrote at the moment when the long supremacy of Pope was
yielding to the popularity of Moore, and his verse wavered between
the old loyalty and the new love. _Sullivan’s Island_, a carefully
elaborated descriptive poem, applies the structure and method of
_Windsor Forest_ to a local theme, following the original so closely as
to imitate the detail. His skill in the grand manner may be judged by a
single passage that phrases feebly what Pope had done vigorously:

  When cooler gales foretell departing day,
  The plaintive curlew homeward wings his way--
  Now stoops, then soars, and fearing danger nigh,
  To guardian heaven pours forth its piteous cry.
  Alas! in vain. The fowler’s fond reply,
  Still deemed its own, but tells it where to die.

_The Raciad_ is less crudely imitative. It is a brisk and rather
amusing account of the outpouring of Charleston society to the races,
the great event of the year in the gay southern capital. It is done
with some sprightliness, it is an amiable historical document, but it
is not important. When Crafts died in 1826 Charleston had done little
in the way of creative literature, but the stirring of the waters was
beginning. The following year a young apothecary just admitted to the
bar published a volume entitled _Lyrical and Other Poems_, first fruits
of the colossal labors of Gilmore Simms. In 1828 Hugh Legaré got _The
Southern Review_ on its feet, a substantial magazine that aspired to be
the mouthpiece of southern culture. With the beginning of the thirties
the Charleston renaissance was under way.


III • Hugh Swinton Legaré • Charleston Intellectual

A far solider nature than the ebullient Crafts was Hugh Swinton Legaré.
Of distinguished social position, the most cultivated mind in the South
before the Civil War, and one of the most cultivated in America, he was
an embodiment of the serious Charleston that served as counterweight
to the gayer. In Legaré the moral earnestness of the South came to its
most attractive expression. The repository of two streams of ethical
idealism, he was as Puritan as Calhoun. Natively aristocratic,
with a high sense of personal integrity and civic responsibility, a
profound student of law and letters, with the Charleston parochialism
brushed away by wide travel and intimate acquaintance with old-world
civilizations and classical cultures, he represented the excellent
seriousness that came to flower on the Carolina plantation as well as
in the New England meetinghouse. Southern Puritanism might be less
ungainly than that of Massachusetts, but it was equally introspective,
given to melancholy; and Hugh Legaré found his life as serious an
affair, and as laborious, as any New England Calvinist discovered his
to be. It is no holiday business to serve righteousness; wisdom does
not flower in the primrose path of dalliance; and this Charleston
gentleman emerged from a prolonged and arduous self-discipline as
complete a Puritan as Theodore Parker.

Descended in the fifth generation from a Huguenot ancestor who settled
in Charleston about 1695, he was French in name and by cherished family
tradition, but in little else. Through successive intermarriages,
the original French strain was pretty much diluted by the Scotch and
English, and few Gallic traits came down to him. In temperament and
sympathies he was the child of his mother, Mary Swinton, of Scotch
Covenanter blood. The native seriousness that came to him by right
of inheritance was intensified by fate. Inoculated for the smallpox
in his fourth year, the poison lingered in his system, keeping him
sickly for years and permanently stunting the lower half of his body.
Thus set apart from active life, he turned to books and entered upon
the career of a scholar. At the time of his death in 1842, at the
age of forty-five, he was perhaps the best linguist and the most
widely read man in America. A mature student of the classics, he
was intimately acquainted with French, Spanish, Italian and German,
and had added Romaic as a help to his Greek. This may seem a meager
list in comparison with Theodore Parker’s nineteen languages, but
the substantial acquisitions he gathered from the several bodies of
literature were far from meager.

Yet immense as were those acquisitions they were only supplementary to
his professional studies. The Charleston Puritan gave to the study of
law the same intensity that the Boston Puritan gave to theology. Not
content with a three years’ reading course in a law office, he went to
Europe to pursue his studies more comprehensively. At the University
of Edinburgh he plunged into an investigation of the Roman and Civil
Law, which henceforth was to be his major intellectual interest.
He found in the continental systems, he believed, a body of legal
principles more comprehensive and philosophical than the English Common
Law, and the ambition grew upon him to ingraft certain features of the
Civil Law upon American practice. After two years’ intense study he
came home, engaged in active practice of his profession, and ten years
later, at the age of thirty-five, was appointed _chargé d’affaires_ at
Brussels, where he spent four rich years. His diplomatic and social
life was subordinated to his studies, into which he threw himself
with the keenest zest, enlarging his knowledge of modern letters and
adding to his encyclopedic knowledge of legal systems. In 1841 he was
appointed Attorney-General of the United States in the cabinet of
President Tyler, and upon Webster’s retirement was given the additional
portfolio of Secretary of State _ad interim_. While on a visit to
Boston with President Tyler to assist in the Bunker Hill Monument
celebration, he was taken suddenly ill and died at the home of his
friend Professor Ticknor.

The man thus prematurely cut down was a nature of vast solidity.
Profoundly serious, inclined to the blackest melancholy, as pessimistic
as Fisher Ames, with no leaven of humor, no romance, no careless
idling, he was a hard taskmaster to his days. He toiled prodigiously at
his self-appointed tasks. His standards were severe, whether in letters
or law or politics or morals. As a critic he dealt with substantial
subjects: _The Constitutional History of Greece_; _The Origin,
History and Influence of Roman Legislation_; _Early Spanish Ballads_;
_Jeremy Bentham and the Utilitarians_; _Lord Byron’s Character and
Writings_--solid dissertations done with German thoroughness--reviews
of huge compass that provided opportunity for independent treatises.
As a lawyer he was rather a philosophical historian than a special
pleader. He was far more given to exploring the labyrinths of ancient
codes than to arguing cases. His legal erudition appalls the layman.
He had sat at the feet of black-letter philosophers; he had been
instructed by sages long since forgotten. His mind was an ample
storehouse of archaic legal maxims. He delighted in the crabbed law
Latin--its sententious phrases worn to the quick, the residuum and
repository of the wisdom bequeathed by past generations. Richer in
poetry than any verses of Byron were the Latin words _habeas corpus_
to one who, like this scholar, understood how packed they were with
English history, how rich in suggestion to all who love English
freedom. From this immense erudition came his love for old books and
venerable authorities. Blackstone he looked upon as a modern--“a
gentleman’s law book, clear, but not deep”; and the wisdom of my Lord
Coke seemed to him not so mellow as that drawn from the more capacious
vats of earlier days. He quoted Grotius and Vattel and Pufendorf and
Bourlamaqui more readily than the South Carolina Digest, and the names
of Papinian and Ulpian and Modestinus and Voet and Cujacius, of the
_Corpus Alaricianum_, of the Justinian, Gregorian, Hermogenian, and
Theodosian codes, slipped familiarly from his pen. How many outlandish
authorities were contained in the huge inkwell on his desk it is
idle to conjecture. Probably not three men in America comprehended
the significance of half the references that he offered for the
consideration of his fellow lawyers, or were competent to question his
deductions. Even the learned Judge Story and Chancellor Kent seem mere
dabblers in comparison with this philosophical historian.

Such learning must inevitably mold one’s thinking in kindred fields,
and he came naturally to espouse what for want of an exacter term
may be called the Common Law theory of politics. It is a conception
of law as an organic growth, the result of man’s laborious search
for a rational freedom in the social body, the single and avowed
end of which is justice. It has taken form not by the decrees of
legislatures, but by decisions of the judiciary, tested and reëxamined
and reargued generation after generation; built up code by code through
slow evolution, the wisdom of the past serving as counselor to the
present; continuously expanding its jurisdiction from the community
to the nation, and from the nation to a world society; the one
guarantee of a sober and rational progress. Theorists and philosophers
come and go; revolutions succeed and fail; foolish statutes and
temporary constitutions have their day; but the organic body of the
law survives all surface change, building into the fabric of society
what experience proves to be good, sloughing off what experience has
outgrown--the tempered rule of social justice; the exact measure of
every civilization compared with which the majority will is a crude and
inadequate makeshift.

From such a conception it follows that government is little more than
ancillary to the law, and political principles are sound in the measure
that they are founded on legal principles. Thus by following the musty
path of jurisprudence Legaré arrived at the same goal that John Cotton
had reached two hundred years before--the apotheosis of magistracy.
With the older Puritan he could assert, _Scripturae plenitudinem
adoro_. The sufficiency of the law to social justice was axiomatic in
his thinking. But the scriptures which he adored were the words of
the judges, whose decisions were above the authority of legislator
or governor and little concerned with a transient majority will. The
old theocrat had set up his theocracy; the modern lexolater would set
up his lexocracy; but the end was pretty much the same. Very likely
Legaré, like the present-day lexolater, would deny the conclusion, yet
it was implicit in his premises, and his scorn of political theory was
sufficient proof. Practical politics he regarded as rather a trumpery
business that achieves no solid results.[408] The political philosopher
he was profoundly suspicious of. The flood of speculation let loose
upon the world by the revolutions of the seventeenth and eighteenth
centuries seemed to him to have invited disaster, and the political
classics of those revolutions he cared little for. He distrusted the
“era of illumination” that sacrificed use and wont to abstract theory.
“We have not too much faith in the ‘march of intellect,’” he remarked
dryly, “and would not ... pitch our anticipations in too high a key”
(_ibid._, Vol. II, p. 264). But his greatest contempt he reserved for
the intellectual revolutionaries--“hair-brained metaphysicians and
empirical demagogues” (_ibid._, Vol. I, p. 216), who would upset the
nice balance of the law. To this matter he returned again and again,
with the scorn of the legal mind for ambitious political systems.
“Innovators or Revolutionists, who go only for an imaginary abstract
rectitude and symmetry of government,” he said, “are always dangerous,
and sometimes the greatest curse with which heaven in its wrath can
visit an offending people” (_ibid._, Vol. II, p. 286).

  I have no faith at all in speculative politics. A theorist in
  government is as dangerous as a theorist in medicine, or in
  agriculture, and for precisely the same reasons--the subjects
  are too complicated and too obscure for simple and decisive
  experiments. I go for undisputed results in the long run. (_Ibid._,
  Vol. I, p. 303.)

  Man begins a revolution, but its issues are with God alone. The
  voluntary revolutions of man have always been abrupt, violent and
  for the worse: so that the wisdom of antiquity laid it down, as a
  maxim, that every fundamental change in the State must needs be
  bloody and deadly. (_Ibid._, Vol. II, p. 297.)

This inherent conservatism of the legal mind explains Legaré’s
intellectual sympathy with Federalism and his contempt for Jefferson.
The latter to him was the prince of demagogues, and his ink was vitriol
when he wrote of him, as thus in one of his letters: “The immortal
sayings and doings of the holy father in democracy--the servant of the
servants of Demos (whose nose of wax he knew better than anybody how to
shape to his own convenience,)--the infallible, though ever-changing,
St. Thomas of _Canting_-bury. And here, you may be sure, I _cross_
myself devoutly and cry out, with an all-fervent benediction to that
canonized worthy, _pax tecum_ (pronounced, you know, _Scottice, pox
tacum_)” (_Writings_, Vol. I, p. 208). Modern political theories seemed
to him mere upstart doctrines compared with the venerable principles of
the law, and he came to look with suspicion on all political liberalism
not sponsored by lawyers and supported by briefs. A passionate lover
of liberty, he was as distrustful of democracy as John Adams, and
his condemnation was as frank--“that scene of wild impulse, and
tyrannical misrule--a pure democracy” (_ibid._, Vol. II, p. 271). No
state, Beverley Tucker pointed out, was so little democratic as South
Carolina, and Legaré shared the common Charleston distrust of it. As he
watched England and France during the tumultuous thirties, and saw the
struggle over Nullification at home, his concern for the future became
acute and his pessimism as black as Fisher Ames’. In a letter from
Brussels, in the year 1833, shortly after the passage of the English
Reform Bill, he wrote:

  Mankind have too little sense to maintain, for any length of time,
  a well-tempered democracy, and a great deal too much to bear an
  unlimited one--the most dreadful form of “State sovereignty,”
  beyond all doubt, in which the descendants of the father of the
  first murderer have ever given loose to their ruffian instinct
  of violence and oppression. If they have a moderate policy of
  the kind, which happens (as all complicated machines will) to be
  occasionally a little out of order, their only idea of a remedy
  is to pull it down, and along with it every thing that makes a
  civil society worthy of its name. Who could ever have dreamed
  that the law of brute force which now crushes Europe ... should
  be deliberately adopted in America, instead of the really sublime
  institutions of a federal jurisdiction, (fallible, of course, but
  generally right) and that this relapse into downright barbarism
  should be vaunted, by the most enlightened men in the Southern
  States, as a _grand_ improvement and the only thing wanting to
  make our government as perfect as we have been swearing it was all
  along. (_Ibid._, Vol. I, p. 210.)

Back of this ingrained conservatism was a tender Puritan conscience
that must twist his legal studies to ideal ends. After all it was no
other than a juridical romanticism that Hugh Legaré discovered in the
bottom of his scholar’s cup. As medieval as Sir Walter, he sought his
romance in old law-courts rather than in feudal castles, in black-robed
advocates rather than in knights and ladies; and he persuaded himself
that those old litigations, preserved in scraps of Latin and law
French, were dramatic episodes in the ceaseless battle for human
rights, whereof the single objective was justice. Slowly, stone upon
stone, the lawyers were erecting an impregnable citadel, within which
justice kept her inviolable court. It is a pleasant fiction still
believed in by lawyers of the old school, and to Legaré in his study
it bore the very semblance of truth. He had read too many law books;
he had speculated too little on politics; immersed in his codes, he
had forgotten to inquire into the hidden springs of sovereignty.
In his contempt for practical politics he had neglected to study
even the primer of economic determinism. To the economic historian,
Legaré’s boundless faith in the sufficiency of legal processes is
incomprehensible. A few lessons from the wiser Jefferson would have
taught him much that he needed to know concerning the economic sources
of power. In his attitude towards the law Jefferson was a suspicious
realist. He had no faith in legal codes that had grown up under
monarchical and aristocratic systems, and he put no trust in government
by lawyers. He could not understand how the Common Law, interpreted
by the Tory Blackstone, and applied by Federalist lawyers, should
serve the needs of a democracy. Democratic America, he was convinced,
must create a new democratic law, and hold its judiciary in strict
subjection to its will; to surrender sovereignty to an aristocracy of
the bench would mean the abdication of democracy. But Legaré refused
to go to school to Jefferson. He clung to his romantic conception of
the law with the same passionate conviction that Calhoun clung to
his romantic dream of a Greek democracy; and with the ebbing of the
romantic tide they were both left stranded.

But if Legaré was unsympathetic towards the new political theory
that came from the French intellectuals, and frankly hostile to the
new political practice that came in with the Jacksonians, he warmly
approved the new economics that came with the Industrial Revolution. In
his whole-hearted acceptance of Adam Smith he seems not a Carolinian
at all, but an English liberal of the Cobden-Bright school. He adopted
the principle of _laissez faire_, the gospel of progress, the attitude
of optimism. He accepted the theory of the beneficence of commerce as
a universal civilizing agency, and he looked forward confidently to an
eventual parliament of man, a future federation of the world. Commerce
in the end must outlaw war, and peace with freedom would spread the
blessings of civilization to the ends of the earth.[409]

A convincing object-lesson in the sufficiency of the principle of
_laissez faire_, he discovered in the amazing progress of America. The
mainspring of that progress he found in economic freedom--freedom “from
those undue restraints and that impertinent interference of government
in the interests properly belonging to individuals.” “I know,” he said,
“that the cardinal spring and source of our success is freedom--freedom
of thought, freedom of speech, freedom of action, freedom of commerce”
(_Writings_, Vol. I, p. 306). The greatest of these was free trade
between the states. His travels in England and the contrast between
English progress and continental backwardness confirmed him in this
belief. “The doctrine of Free Trade,” he asserted, “is a great
fundamental doctrine of civilization. The world must come to it at
last, if the visions of improvement in which we love to indulge are
ever to be realized” (_ibid._, Vol. I, p. 272). He went further and
accepted the Industrial Revolution with its division of labor as a
necessary agency of social amelioration. “It is evidently in the order
of nature, and we must take it with all its good and all its evils
together.” In forecasting the effect of that revolution he was troubled
by no fears.

  Sir, it is a favorite phrase of those who boast of what is called
  “the march of intellect,” that things are thus changed because
  the “schoolmaster is abroad.” But I tell you that something far
  more effective than the schoolmaster, a mightier than Solomon, is
  abroad. It is the +STEAM-ENGINE+--in its twofold capacity of a
  means of production and a means of transport--the most powerful
  instrument by far of pacification and commerce, and therefore of
  improvement and happiness that the world has ever seen; which,
  while it increases capital, and multiplies beyond all imagination
  the products of industry, brings the most distant people into
  contact with one another ... effaces all peculiarities of national
  character, and promises, at no distant period, to make the whole
  Christian world, at least, one great family....

  A people well clad and well housed will be sure to provide
  themselves with all the other comforts of life; and it is the
  diffusion of these comforts, and the growing taste for them, among
  all classes of society in Europe--it is the desire of riches as
  it is commonly called, that is gradually putting an end to the
  destructive and bloody game of war, and reserving all the resources
  hitherto wasted by it, for enterprises of industry and commerce,
  prosecuted with the fiery spirit which once vented itself in scenes
  of peril and carnage. (_Ibid._, Vol. I, pp. 285-286.)

Remembering how dependent were southern cotton interests on English
industrialism and commerce, one can understand Legaré’s acceptance
of _laissez faire_ economics. His idealism, his local pride, his
romanticism, were all enlisted in its behalf, and he painted in glowing
colors. But his frank advocacy of capitalism is harder to understand,
except perhaps on the ground that Charleston was a considerable
shipping port and his clients were engaged in commerce. In the bitter
dispute with Jackson over the Bank, Legaré adopted northern views on
national finance. Although nominally a Democrat, he had never been an
agrarian, and he went with Webster and Clay against the subtreasury
scheme and a metallic currency. His thoughtful speech on _The Spirit of
the Sub-Treasury_, delivered in 1837, was thoroughgoing Whig doctrine,
asserting the excellence of the modern banking system and extolling the
economic fruitfulness of credit. He repudiated every principle of John
Taylor; denied every dogma of agrarian economics; and eulogized the
English financial system as the germinal source of English greatness.
Applying the principle of credit to American conditions, he discovered
the secret of American expansion in the principle of speculative
borrowing, and expanded his doctrine of economic freedom by asserting
that freedom to borrow was a necessary preliminary to freedom to work.
“A people have been enriched by debt,” he argued, overlooking the
possible fallacy of a _post hoc ergo propter hoc_, “and ‘by owing,
owe not.’” As he contemplated the amazing progress of the nation, his
lyric enthusiasm becomes prologue to a somewhat lame conclusion that
enthrones the banker as the fairy godmother of the hardy pioneer.

  There is a grandeur and a majesty in this irresistible onward
  march of a race, created, as I believe, and elected to possess and
  people a continent.... We may become so much accustomed to such
  things that they shall make as little impression upon our minds as
  the glories of the Heavens above us; but, looking on them, lately,
  as with the eyes of the stranger, I felt, what a recent English
  traveller is said to have remarked, that far from being without
  poetry, as some have vainly alleged, our whole country is one
  great poem. Sir, it is so; and if there be a man that can think of
  what is doing, in all parts of this most blessed of all lands, to
  embellish and advance it, who can contemplate that living mass of
  intelligence, activity and improvement as it rolls on, in its sure
  and steady progress, to the uttermost extremities of the west; who
  can see scenes of savage desolation transformed, almost with the
  suddenness of enchantment, into those of fruitfulness and beauty;
  crowned with flourishing cities, filled with the noblest of all
  populations; if there be a man, I say, that can witness all this
  passing under his very eyes, without feeling his heart beat high,
  and his imagination warmed and transported by it, be sure, sir,
  that the raptures of song exist not for him....

  But of this rational, diffusive liberty, among a people so
  intelligent as ours, the credit system is the natural fruit, the
  inseparable companion, the necessary means and instrument. It is
  part and parcel of our existence. Who ever heard of +CREDIT+ in
  a despotism, or an anarchy? It implies _confidence_--confidence
  in yourself, confidence in your neighbor, confidence in your
  government, confidence in the administration of the laws,
  confidence, in a word, in your destiny, and your fortune, in the
  destinies and the fortunes of the country to which you belong;
  as, for instance, in the case of a great national debt. It is the
  fruit, I say, of all that is most precious in civilized life, and
  to quarrel with it is to be ungrateful to God for some of the
  greatest blessings he has vouchsafed to man. (_Writings_, Vol. I,
  pp. 306-307.)

Such ebullient rhetoric fits the mouth of the politician rather than
the scholar, and such careless logic comes oddly from a southern
intellectual. In his ignorance of the economics of John Taylor, Legaré
was unprovided with principles to reply to his own arguments, and
unaware of the lameness of his confident conclusions. But though he
might glow with optimism as he contemplated the westward expansion, for
the future of the South and of his own beloved state he was deep in
pessimism. From the first he had dissented vigorously from the program
of Nullification. An ardent Union man, he believed with his friend
James Petigru that secession meant ruin for South Carolina. Calhoun
seemed to him a monomaniac, consumed by a single idea. He feared the
hot passion of the states-rights party and he was troubled over
slavery. His travels abroad had acquainted him with European views on
the subject; he watched the spread of English humanitarianism and he
had come to recognize the institution as an anachronism. It seemed to
him impossible for the South to withstand much longer the augmenting
pressure of civilized opinion. He could justify slavery in his own eyes
both by ancient law--_servitus est constitutio juris gentium_--and by
comparison of the condition of the negro with that of the English wage
worker. The ideal of a Greek democracy was vastly congenial to his
aristocratic temperament, but he knew that it was a romantic dream, and
he was oppressed by the shadow of impending ruin. Writing from Brussels
on April 8, 1833, he concluded an anxious letter thus:

  It ends in my not knowing what to think, except that dangers are
  around and above and below and within our poor little State,--which
  may God preserve us from! I ask of heaven only that the little
  circle I am intimate with in Charleston should be kept together
  while I live,--in health, harmony and competence; and that, on my
  return, I may myself be enabled to enjoy the same happiness, in my
  intercourse with it, with which I have been hitherto blessed. _We_
  are (I am quite sure) the _last_ of the _race_ of South-Carolina;
  I see nothing before us but decay and downfall,--but on that very
  account, I cherish its precious relics the more.... Yet my heart
  sinks within me often when I think of what may too soon be, and I
  say, in those touching words, “Why should not my countenance be
  sad, when the city, the place of my fathers’ sepulchres, lieth
  waste, and her gates are burnt with fire.” (_Writings_, Vol. I, p.
  215.)

Thus like old John Winthrop two hundred years before, this descendant
of southern Pilgrims, this Charleston lawyer and intellectual, found
the words of the Hebrew Scriptures rising to his lips in moments of
deep emotion. In spite of travel and many books and ripe culture and
catholic sympathies, Hugh Legaré remained Puritan at heart, sorely
puzzled with life, the burden of his days heavy upon him, walking
soberly in the way of duty. North or south, the Puritan was still
Puritan, whether he were Theodore Parker, the Boston radical, or Hugh
Swinton Legaré, the Charleston conservative.


IV • William Gilmore Simms • Charleston Romancer

From the background of old Charleston emerged, about the year 1825,
the figure of Gilmore Simms, lately a drug clerk but now come to the
dignity of admission to the bar; a tall, vigorous young fellow, with
little formal schooling, no Latin or Greek, without land or slaves, but
heavily involved in Byronic odes and like unprofitable investments;
a social nobody soon to be married at the age of twenty to a girl of
no better station than his own, who offered himself as candidate for
the poet laureateship of the South. A somewhat presumptuous proceeding
on the part of a plebeian quite outside the cultivated circle of the
Petigrus and Grimkés and Hugers and Legarés, who were the accepted
custodians of Charleston culture and who did not take kindly to
ambitious newcomers. They regarded literature as a polite art that
could flourish only in polite circles, and they turned a cold shoulder
upon a young man whose ways suggested the Carolina buckra.

After all these years one may well cherish a grudge against the amiable
little city for its shabby treatment of Gilmore Simms. The most richly
endowed of any son she ever gave birth to, he was snubbed for years
by the social oligarchy and suffered keenly from the ostracism. His
extreme parochialism made him the more sensitive to the slight. An
ardent Southerner, loyal to all the Carolinian totems and taboos, he
accepted the Charleston judgment in literature and politics as the very
law and the prophets. He loved the soil of South Carolina, he loved the
people and the way of life, and he was steeped as no other Carolinian
in local history and tradition. He could perceive no shortcomings
in a society he warmly admired, and he accepted the Charleston
provincialisms as the lover accepts the mole on his mistress’ cheek.
The more Charleston snubbed him, the more admirable he professed
to believe was an aristocracy that so jealously guarded its fine
exclusiveness. His lifelong ambition was to receive recognition from
his native city, and when after the death of his first wife and his
marriage to the daughter of a prosperous planter, he gained admission
into the ranks of the lesser gentry, he eagerly made common cause
with them. He accepted the Carolinian standards and conventions; he
advocated social caste: he honored the southern gentleman as God’s best
handiwork; he unconsciously reflected an aristocratic arrogance towards
all social inferiors. He abandoned the Jeffersonian philosophy of his
youth and adopted the revised gospel of Calhoun. He became, in short,
a Carolina Fire Eater. He set up as a militant defender of slavery and
collaborated with other eminent Carolinians to develop the pro-slavery
argument.[410] He could have escaped the subtle compulsions of the
southern system only by emptying his mind of his dearest prejudices,
and this he had neither the will nor the wish to do. And so in spite
of the fact that his every instinct was democratic, and every natural
impulse generous and manly, he fought the battles of the peculiar
institution as stoutly as if he had been born to his three hundred
slaves; and he suffered in consequence the loss of pretty nearly
everything, including his art. After his death, his friend Paul Hayne
wrote of him: “Simms’s genius _never had fair play!_ Circumstances
hampered him!” The judgment is just. Parochial Charleston brought about
his literary undoing.

In taste and temperament Simms was a pronounced realist, but his
career took shape from a generation given to every romantic excess.
His genius, in consequence, was always at cross purposes with the
popular taste. His realism turned naturally to low-life adventure;
his upper-class romance became stilted and posturing, and his love
of action degenerated into swashbuckling. That he survived such
mishaps at all, suggests the enormous vitality of the man. If there
had only been a little more of the intellectual in him, if he could
have detached himself as an artist from the immediate and present,
he might have risen superior to his unfortunate environment. But he
was constitutionally incapable of aloofness, and hence incapable of
criticism. To analyze, compare and judge was impossible to so ardent a
nature. He must be partisan to a people and a cause, rather than to his
art. The South that he loved was romantic, and he would appeal to the
world as a Southerner. He wore his sectional prejudices as the southern
politician wears his rumpled Prince Albert coat, broad-brimmed hat and
black string tie. He never realized what a clutter of useless luggage
he carried into his study. It is a pity that he constricted himself to
the shell of an outworn order, instead of realizing that social orders
and institutions are significant to the novelist only as he stands
apart from them, observing their ways and considering their interplay
in the lives of men and women. It was a major loss to American letters
that he should not have striven to be an artist first, and a southern
romantic only at a later and more convenient season. If he had served
his art more jealously, if he had learned from Poe to refuse the
demands of inconsequential things, he would have viewed his beloved
Charleston with keener eyes and portrayed it more adequately.

But he would not serve his art alone. Unhappily he conceived that
he owed an imperative duty to his native commonwealth, and in
fulfillment of that duty he frittered away his enormous vitality in
delivering patriotic orations and occasional addresses, serving in
the Legislature, pottering over politics, lecturing upon literature,
founding and editing magazines and essaying to bring culture to
Charleston by fiery impetuosity of appeal. He struggled as few other
Americans have done to further the cause of letters in a desperate
environment; but creative literature could neither be cajoled nor
coerced to take up an abode in the indolent little city, and Simms wore
himself out in a fruitless undertaking. Our literature has suffered
few greater losses than this wasting of the genius of Gilmore Simms
in trumpery fields that belong to the literary dray horse. It was the
inevitable outcome of the conflict between the creative artist and the
citizen of South Carolina.

Little as he is known to later readers Simms is by far the most virile
and interesting figure of the Old South. He was built on a generous
plan. He was endowed with a rich and prodigal nature, vigorous,
spontaneous, creative. There was in him much of Whitman’s largeness
and coarseness, much of his delight in the good things of earth. He
wrote with extraordinary gusto, and his fine strong face suggests that
he lived with equal gusto. As a professional man of letters he turned
out an incredible amount of work, by ordinary two tales a year--solid
works of five hundred pages each--together with poems and plays and
pot-boiling stuff to tax the capacity of two or three hack writers. He
poured out his material copiously, lavishly, with overrunning measure.
His stories flow as generously as his Jamaica rum. He is a veritable
geyser of invention, an abundant sea of salty speech. He has no sense
of restraint; he does not stop to prune the tangle of his imagination;
he refuses to strip the plot of extraneous incident to hasten its
action. He is as episodic as Dickens at his worst, piling up action
and multiplying threads till the story bogs down. The major plot is
always struggling from hummock to hummock in the endless swamp where
his characters slip in and out, rarely getting to firm ground, yet
never quite submerged. Prodigal of adventure and loving action, clumsy
as the natural man when confronted with sentiment, he is an American
Fielding with a dash of Smollett. He is at ease only out of doors, in
the fields and swamps and highways; there his speech becomes racy, and
there the rich poetry of his nature, which somehow rarely got into his
verse, comes to abundant and spontaneous expression. When he enters the
drawing-room his stilted language betrays his lack of ease. He writes
with his pen and not with his heart. The plantation tradition has him
in its grip and his fine ladies and gentlemen are done up with much
literary starch. But let him come upon a happy-go-lucky blackguard
and he loves him as Fielding would have loved him. The amusing scene
in which Lieutenant Porgy heaves a pot of hot hominy in the face of a
Scotch dragoon is quite evidently reminiscent of Parson Adams’ recourse
to a dish of hog’s blood in a certain tavern brawl.[411] Like Fielding
also is his criterion of morality. A frank and generous nature is his
infallible test of worth, and if his patriotism led him to bestow a
large share of generosity on the patriots, and a correspondingly meager
share on the Loyalists and British, he was but exercising an ancient
prerogative of the romancer.

Contemporary romanticism engrafted on a nature fundamentally realistic
developed a pronounced strain in his work which, for lack of an exacter
word, we may call picaresque. This comes out at its worst in the crude
border tales of _Richard Hurdis_ and _Border Beagles_, stories marked
by the coarseness of the eighteenth century, backwoods versions of
_Jonathan Wild_. At its best it created a goodly company of blackguards
that are an asset to American literature. Simms dearly loved a rogue,
and the more picturesque the latter’s knavery the more he loved him. A
gentleman villain turns to a thing of wood in his hands, but a low-born
rascal he creates out of living flesh and blood. A surprising number
of low figures, both rogues and honest men, enliven his cluttered
pages, individual, racy, often poetic. Realistic in speech and action,
they are men of special gifts, nimble of wit and rich in imagination,
sometimes fallen to base uses and sometimes ennobled by affection for
their superiors. Thumbscrew, Supple Jack Bannister, and Joe Ballou, the
partisan scouts; Isaac Muggs, mine host of the Black Riders; Goggle
the half-breed; Hell Fire Dick of Tophet, the blackguard converted by
_Pilgrim’s Progress_; Sam Bostwick the Squatter--these are admirable
figures, done with inimitable spirit, the choicest collection of
homespun in American literature. They impart life and drama to Simms’s
tales. Remove them, and his romances are only a welter of stilted
language and starchy situations. The scene, for example, between Jack
Bannister and Isaac Muggs, in which the latter is converted to true
republican principles by appeal to a backwoods ordeal by battle, is
magnificent in its broad humor, and it is a pity that Simms did not
give freer rein to his genius for such work. It is incomprehensible
that a man who could put into the mouth of Thumbscrew such language as
the following could have stooped to scribble the love scenes between
Ernest Mellichampe and Janet Berkeley:

  When it so happens that the things a man’s got to love gits fewer
  and smaller, they gits more valuable, Airnest, in his sight; for
  he knows mighty well, if he loses them, that he’s jist like an old
  bird that comes back to the tree when the blossoms and the flowers
  have all dropped off, and are rotting under it. It’s mighty nigh to
  winter in his heart then, Airnest--mighty nigh--and the sooner he
  begins to look out a place to sleep in, the wiser man you may take
  him to be. (_Mellichampe_, Chapter IX.)

But Simms was too inveterately episodical to construct a pretty plot,
and too careless in his generous southern hospitality to discriminate
between guests at his board. He throws a huge miscellany on the table
from which each may choose what pleases his taste.

Here again romanticism did him an evil turn. Southern taste was too
aristocratic to like coarse fare. Gentlemen must dine like gentlemen
even though black rascals served as waiters. Common fellows were well
enough in the background, but they must not presume to crowd their
betters from the table. In such matters Simms was constrained to follow
the orthodox literary tradition. From Shakespeare to Scott the notion
prevailed that legitimate romance must be conceived of as a flitch of
bacon, the lean of vulgarity alternating with the fat of gentility.
Hence Simms was forced to keep a weather eye on the popular taste
lest it be offended by too free an offering of the low. His negroes,
such as Scipio and Bram and Benny Bowlegs, are more worth while than
their masters, and his swamp-suckers are done with more gusto than
the officers; but when the plot demands the appearance of the gentry
he sends his black-bottle rapscallions about their business. Except
in occasional instances, as in the case of old Colonel Sinclair,
the Carolinian baron--a testy old gentleman done in the best gouty
manner--Simms does the “quality” badly and the canny reader soon learns
to skip the genteel passages in order to visit with Lieutenant Porgy or
follow the adventures of Hell Fire Dick or Supple Jack Bannister. There
is ample fare at his generous board, but one must pick and choose.

The critics have made quite too much of the Gothic extravagancies
that mar so many of his pages. It is true that Simms was a generous
purveyor of “blood-pudding” romance with its gory exploitation of
crime and mystery. Nothing can excuse or extenuate such folly in
the abstract; but it is easily comprehensible. It was a part of the
price which the professional man of letters had to pay as caterer to
a provincial reading public. After the surprising success of _Guy
Rivers_, Simms deliberately tested the taste of his readers by sending
forth _Richard Hurdis_ under a pen name; and the equal success of the
latter convinced him that American readers liked such fare. He had a
living to make; the market was limited, and he resolved to give the
public what it wanted. This accounts for his major sins. An enormous
number of chapters, together with whole volumes such as _Charlemont_
and _Beauchampe_--preposterous accounts of a notorious murder case in
Kentucky--deserve no better fate than the rubbish heap. They are in no
sense literature; yet unfortunately the very great powers of Simms are
too commonly measured by such trash, instead of by his Revolutionary
tales.

Simms was a loving student of older English literature and drew much
of his water from excellent wells. A happy instinct led him back to
the robust time of Elizabeth and those masculine playwrights whose
ample natures were so like his own. Shakespeare may be reckoned his
particular master--especially the prose of Shakespeare with its
Cheapside colloquialisms and racy idiomatic rhythms. No better training
school could be desired, and his loving apprenticeship to the older
vernacular serves to explain the source of Simms’s greatest literary
virtue. From long familiarity with the Elizabethans he derived his
mastery of English idiom that sets him widely apart from most other
contemporary Americans. In easy outpouring of picturesque speech, of
the lithe and muscular idiom of the older literature, he was without
a rival in his generation. Many an old Elizabethan phrase lingered
in the southern backwoods, and many an indigenous turn of speech had
sprung from homely new-world experience. All such Simms seized upon
with the relish of a gourmand, stirring them into the great pot from
which he ladled such generous spoonfuls. Later critics have been
singularly obtuse in their failure to do justice to his rich linguistic
equipment. Quite too much comment has been devoted to his careless
slips in rhetorical construction, and quite too little to his command
of masculine English prose. It is absurd to couple him with Cooper in
sinning against good writing. They are as unlike as two men could well
be. Simms is incomparably the greater master of racy prose, as he is
much the richer nature. The only contemporary indeed who approaches him
is Melville in _Moby Dick_. He is careless and slovenly enough in all
conscience; when he goes on a rampage he mouths his lines like any town
crier. But though he keeps a sharp eye on the groundlings, though he is
often preposterous, he is rarely wooden, never feeble.

The Elizabethan influence comes out strikingly in the character of
Lieutenant Porgy, the spoilt child of his imagination, who runs through
the Revolutionary romances as a sort of comic chorus. Despite Professor
Trent’s opinion to the contrary, Porgy is a South Carolinian Falstaff,
quite evidently done with a close eye to the original. He is a very
mountain of a fellow, with huge paunch and spindling shanks from too
much sitting at the table and in the saddle--the most amusing and
substantial comic character in our early fiction. As a South Carolina
gentleman, Porgy of course was no liar or coward or woman cheater. In
battle he is an avalanche of patriotic valor, and in his deference to
the weak and dependent, in his free-handed generosity that encumbers
him with penniless hangers-on, he is model of southern chivalry. But
in the far greater matters of the belly, he is strikingly Falstaffian.
He is not so much a valiant trencherman, as an artist in food and
drink. He lived to eat and he ate to speculate on the virtues of a
good dinner. “He took philosophy with him to the table, and grew wise
over his wine” (_Woodcraft_, Chapter XVIII). He is an epicure in
words, a gourmand of wit. The copious stream of his speech runs on in
an endless flow, sometimes roily but never stagnant. A pat aphorism
or a picturesque phrase is as succulent to him as Carolina terrapin.
When philosophy fails he stoops to horseplay, but his practical jokes
are carried off with theatrical splendor, with colossal assurance.
Like Falstaff he is fond of practicing his wit on his followers. His
Bardolph is a certain Geordie Dennison, the swamp poet of the troop;
and Porgy honors him as one artist honors the craft of another.

But the most satisfying comradeship lies between Porgy and Black Tom,
fellow practitioners of the gentle art of cookery, sworn liegemen to
roasts and soups and stews. Together they make the swamp commissariat
bloom like a Covent Garden market. They are master foragers untroubled
by an overnice conscience. “Do as much stealing in an honest way as
you can,” the lieutenant remarks to Tom. “D--n the patriotism that
can’t eat stolen fruit!” At a pinch the native resources of the swamp
are boldly commandeered. The creative masterpiece of the valiant Porgy
was a notable banquet which he proffered General Greene and his staff
in their swamp quarters. His infinite resourcefulness in this great
affair, his huge inventiveness, elevate the dinner to the rank of a
culinary epic. The swamp frogs that he speared by moonlight, and the
young alligators that he took by subtle stratagem, were transmogrified
into delectable dishes served to his guests under the alluring names
of _alerta_ and _lagarta_.[412] The scene is done with a gusto that
only the worshiper of fleshpots could achieve. Simms delighted in
Porgy because he was himself something of a Porgy. There is good fare
for those who sit at table with the fat humorist of _The Forayers_;
the ready talk does not lack the salt of wit. The later Porgy of
_Woodcraft_ scarcely comes up to the earlier. His debts weigh too
heavily on his spirits for the easy play of his fancy; he is less
redoubtable as a wooer than as a warrior; nevertheless there is
excellent humor to be enjoyed at Glen Eberle, and some extraordinary
pranks.

The two major themes with which his romances deal, as has been
often pointed out, are the frontier and the Revolution; but the
intimate connection between them has not been so commonly remarked.
In much of his better work the two themes blend into one. The
conditions of civil war in the South thrust into sharp relief the
cultural and psychological frontier that clung to the outskirts of
the plantations--the ragged edges of a society that kept the poor
whites submerged and bred a numerous progeny of coarse and primitive
creatures, little better than social outcasts. Not the least of the
curses of slavery--as Helper pointed out--was its blighting effect
on the less prosperous whites who environed every plantation with
its special frontier. With his strong bias towards realism Simms
refused to romanticize what was inherently unlovely. Like Baldwin
in his _Flush Times of Mississippi and Alabama_, he discovered an
ample supply of blackguards and sharpers in the no man’s land beyond
the settlements. The log cabins of the swamp country harbored their
motley crew in no wise different from their fellows of the farther
frontier along the Mississippi; and these precious rascals he drags
from their lurking-places to exhibit in the light of day. The frontier
in consequence is rarely absent from his stories, and it is this
picaresque interpretation that sets him so sharply off from Cooper.
A recent student, in commenting on the contrast between the frontier
of Cooper and Simms, suggests that “perhaps the earlier frontier had
been intrinsically more dignified than that which Simms had observed;
perhaps the difference is that Cooper’s had lain deeper under the
softening shadow of the past” (Van Doren, _The American Novel_, p.
65). But this is quite to miss the point, both of Cooper and Simms.
The real explanation is to be sought in the different interpretations
of the romantic and the realist. Cooper’s frontier existed only in his
imagination. When he came face to face with the reality, as in the
case of old Aaron Thousandacres and his lawless brood, he hated it
too frankly to portray it justly. The stern Puritan squatter and his
fiercer wife are magnificent caricatures, drawn to serve a partisan
purpose. They provide a romantic contrast to the honest Chainbearer,
spokesman of the psychology of the settlements; but set beside Simon
Suggs, master of the frontier technic of easy money, as depicted by
Joseph Baldwin, they are as romantic as Cooper’s Indians.

The picaresque note is frankly emphasized in Simms’ Revolutionary
tales. All the swamp-suckers and rapscallions found their heaven-sent
opportunity in the disorders of civil war. No realist could write about
the Revolution in South Carolina without noting the flocks of buzzards
gathering to fall upon the carrion. War is not a heroic thing in
these stirring pages. It invites debauchery and encourages brutality.
Blackguards put a black stain on military glory. In the preface to _The
Scout_, Simms remarks:

  To burn and slay were not the simple performances of this reckless
  period and ravaged country. To burn in wantonness and to murder
  in cold blood, and by the cruellest tortures, were the familiar
  achievements of the time: ... The face of the country was overrun
  by outlaws. Detached bands of ruffians, formed upon the frontiers
  of Georgia, and in the wilds of Florida--refugees from all the
  colonies--availed themselves of the absence of civil authority to
  effect a lodgment in the swamps, the forests, and the mountains.
  These, mounted on swift horses, traversed the state with the wind;
  now here, now there; one moment operating on the Savannah, the next
  on the Peedee; sometimes descending within sight of the smokes of
  the metropolis; and anon, building their own fires on the lofty
  summits of the Appalachian ridge.

Now and then in his pages war flashes out in romantic or heroic
episodes, but for the most part it is mean and degrading, a thing to
be hated. Simms loved action too keenly not to make the most of the
countless onsets and forays, the ambushing of Hessians and the cutting
off of wagon trains; he found in them material for many a brisk page
and stirring adventure; but in the end it is the brutality of it all,
the unhappy loosing of evil passions, that gives him most concern. It
was a hard world, and the soft-hearted Jack Bannister, speaking with
the tongue of Simms, could find comfort only in stoicism. “A man ought
not to be too soft about the heart, in a world like this, so full of
rascals that need the knockings of a hard and heavy hand.”

It is this strong seasoning of the picaresque, perhaps, that accounts
for the neglect that has befallen the work of Simms. Many blackguards
and generous potations of Jamaica rum consorted ill with the genteel
tradition in letters that grew up in the days following the Civil
War; and romantic memories of a lost cause threw an idyllic haze over
earlier times. The Revolutionary War lay too far in the past for a
generation suffering from a great tragedy to concern itself with, and
the vivid and vital work of Simms scarcely outlived its creator. The
Revolutionary tales have been largely forgotten, and from his abundant
work only _The Yemassee_ has survived in popular affection, and this
partly from the vogue of Cooper. The winnowing has been severe and
scarcely just. The best of Simms is not in _The Yemassee_, but in those
stirring tales of Marion’s men who carried on a bushwhacking campaign
under the hot sun of the dog days. _The Partisan_ and _The Forayers_
and _Woodcraft_ deserve a better fate than has befallen them. The ghost
of Cooper does not haunt their pages to challenge comparison, as it
does _The Yemassee_, and bring into question their relative merits.
There Simms is at home, in the swamps and fields and villages, with men
whose ways he knew and loved, and his generous nature followed its own
impulses.

But in dealing with the Indians he entered a domain preëmpted by the
romantic, and his picaresque realism suffered a disastrous rivalry.
Like Robert Montgomery Bird’s _Nick of the Woods, The Yemassee_
is heavily marked by the frontier psychology. It was unfortunate,
perhaps, that Simms did not follow Cooper’s example and plunge into
the wilderness, leaving behind him the squatter and settler with their
sordid prose. Instead, his Indians are encompassed by a dark background
of civilization, and their tragic destiny is poignantly dramatized in
the fate of young Occonestoga, besotted with the white man’s rum, and
doomed to a destruction far less poetic than befalls Uncas fighting
his hereditary foes. Nevertheless a wealth of romantic material is
crowded into the volume, enough to serve Cooper for half a dozen tales.
In simplifying his plots to the uncomplicated problem of flight and
pursuit, the latter gains in dramatic swiftness of movement, but he
loses in abundance of accompanying action--the sense of cross purposes
and many-sided activities, which _The Yemassee_ so richly suggests.
The latter is an elaborately carved and heavily freighted Spanish bark
that is left far astern by the trim Yankee clipper ship; yet its cargo
of the gold of the Indies is far richer. It is the familiar story of
southern prodigality and wastefulness--an exuberant nature pouring out
its wealth in spendthrift fashion, and failing to achieve the greater
results attained by a simpler nature held in closer restraint. After
all it is idle to compare Cooper and Simms, and even more futile to
catalogue the latter as a disciple of the Cooper school. Simms was
far too rich in his own right to live as a dependent on anyone, and
certainly far too original to be an imitator. Nature was lavish in
her gifts to him, and as if his fame as a story-teller is less than
Cooper’s, the debit must be charged against his unfortunate environment.

The later years of Simms were utterly devastated by the unhappy war,
in which, as was to be expected, he was a stalwart and uncompromising
partisan. His native commonwealth that had long treated him shabbily,
sacrificed him in the end to her folly. It was his own fault of course,
but how could one warped by the pervasive southern provincialism hope
to escape? Scratch a Carolinian of the Calhoun school and you find a
Fire Eater. In this respect Simms was not different from the McDuffies
and Hamiltons from whom he took his cue--gentlemen whom, because they
were politically prominent, he regarded as socially intelligent. That
a man of such native powers as Simms should have taken seriously
the Charleston politicians--blown up like a pig’s bladder after
butchering; that he should himself have aspired to become another such
bladder--these are sobering facts to remind us that the man of letters
is very likely to be a child outside his study walls. What was wrong
with Simms that he read the signs of the times so badly? This, that
he lived in a world of unreality, of social and economic romanticism,
that was forever benumbing his strong instinct for reality. His
father-in-law owned seventy slaves; his neighbors and acquaintances
owned slaves; all South Carolina gentlemen owned slaves; and in
judging this matter of slavery Gilmore Simms went unquestioningly with
his little world. He who had drunk of the rich wine of Elizabethan
culture came at last to drink himself under the table with his drafts
of Charleston Jamaica. The dream of a Greek civilization based on
black slavery was discovered in the bottom of the cup of southern
romanticism. And Simms emptied his bottle with the rest. Charleston,
no doubt, has paid a sufficiently heavy price for her too copious
potations, but she can never atone for the undoing of her greatest
son--for the foolish intoxication that befuddled the generous mind of
Gilmore Simms. The loss is not Charleston’s alone; it is a loss to our
common American literature. There is food for thought in the words of
the epitaph which he composed for himself: “Here lies one who, after a
reasonably long life, distinguished chiefly by unceasing labors, has
left all his better works undone.” Juster words could not have been
written, nor more tragic.


Footnotes

[408] See _Writings_, Vol. II, p. 104.

[409] See “The Arbitrament of National Disputes,” in _Writings_, Vol.
I, pp. 355-357.

[410] See above, page 102.

[411] See _Katherine Walton_, Chapter XLI.

[412] See _The Forayers_, Chapters XLIII-XLVI.




Part Three: The Romance of the West




