Chapter II • The Mather Dynasty


I

For one who is not a loving student of the unamiable bickerings that
clutter the records of early New England, and who does not read them
by the gentle light of filial loyalty, it would seem presumptuous to
venture into the thorny fields tilled by the Mathers. He is certain to
get well scratched, and not at all certain to return with any fruit
gathered. The rancors of dead partisanships beset him on every side,
and the gossip of old wives’ tales fills his ears. He will encounter
many a slanderous hearsay, and the authentic documents to which he
would naturally turn are often inaccessible, and always inhospitable.
The countless tracts, for the most part inconsequential, that issued
in an unbroken stream from the tireless Mather pens, consuming all the
italics in the printer’s case, constitute a veritable _cheval-de-frise_
to protect their authors’ literary reputations from any Philistine
attack; and behind that bristling barricade they have long bidden
defiance to casual invasion. Only a siege can reduce their stronghold
and bring them forth into the clear light of day.

Two generations of Harvard scholarship have essayed the undertaking,
but there is still wanting the detached critic who will set the
Mathers against an adequate historical background, and appraise them
objectively in relation to their times. The Harvard contributions are
excellent in their way, but a consciousness of dealing with Harvard
worthies would seem to have laid the writers under certain inhibitions.
Exposition too easily slides into apologetics. The latest study[96] is
a somewhat meticulous defense. It is an extraordinarily painstaking
document, that has added to our knowledge of Increase Mather’s life and
work, but it was unhappily conceived in the dark of the moon, a season
congenial to strange quirks of fancy. Some tangle it has cleared away,
but fresh obstacles have been added by the intrusion of a thesis to be
defended. In consequence, the interpretation of motives is colored by
special pleading, and the very necessary inquiry into the sources of
those virulent antagonisms that sprang up full-armed in the minister’s
every footprint is put aside as ungermane to a biography. It is an
unfortunate assumption for it puts aside much that is crucial. The
rehabilitation becomes too easy and complete. It proves too much. It
would have us believe that in spite of all the smoke that gathered
about Increase Mather’s militant pilgrimage through life, there was
never any fire of his kindling; that in spite of all the puddles
through which the priestly politician splashed to reach his ends, no
spot or stain ever smutched his gown. The contention may be sound, but
it puts credulity to the strain, and unless one has something of a
Mather stomach for marvels, one is likely to indulge in the luxury of
doubt.


II

The Mathers were a singularly provocative family, capable, ambitious,
certain to have a finger in every pie baking in the theocratic oven.
From the emigrant Richard with the great voice, chief architect of the
Cambridge Platform, to the provincial Cotton, the family combativeness
and love of publicity put their marks on New England history. Of the
three generations, certainly Increase Mather was the most generously
endowed with capacity for leadership; an able man, practical and
assertive, liking to be in the forefront of affairs, not wanting his
light hidden under a bushel. An arch-conservative, he justified his
ways to his conscience by the excellence of the heritage he strove
to conserve. A formalist, he satisfied his intellectual curiosity by
extolling the sufficiency of the creed of the fathers. He closed the
windows of his mind against the winds of new doctrine, and bounded
the fields of speculative inquiry by orthodox fences. He was of the
succession of John Cotton rather than Thomas Hooker, a priestly
theocrat, though never a shuffler like Cotton, less troubled by free
inquiry, less by the intellectual. All his life he was inhibited
from bold speculation by his personal loyalties and interests. As
a beneficiary of things as they were, certain to lose in prestige
and power with any relaxing of the theocracy, it would be asking
too much of human nature to expect him to question the sufficiency
of the established system of which he was the most distinguished
representative. Not to have approved it would have been to repudiate
his habitual way of thinking, his deepest prejudices, his strongest
convictions. He had been molded and shaped by the theocracy; it was
the very marrow of his bones; as well demand that pig iron turn molten
again after it comes from the matrix. The ore of which he was fashioned
was excellent, but once molded it was rigid; there would be no return
to fluidity. And so determined by every impact of environment, by every
appeal of loyalty, and by a very natural ambition, Increase Mather
became a stout upholder of the traditional order, a staunch old Puritan
Tory of the theocratic line. How could any promptings of liberalism
find nourishment in such a mind?[97] Why should one expect to find in
the works of such a man the seeds of new systems of thought or more
generous institutions? He was the outstanding figure of the theocracy
in the days of its overthrow, but intellectually he was not worthy to
unloose the shoe-strings of Roger Williams.

In his professional capacity, Increase Mather was the priest rather
than the theologian, a pastor of the flock, an expounder of the
creed, rather than a seeker after new light. As a minister his mind
was circumscribed by the thinking of John Calvin. He learned nothing
from Luther, and was bitterly hostile to those phases of Independency
that embodied the more generous Lutheran principles. No man was by
temperament better fitted to embrace the coercive spirit of the Genevan
discipline. Strong-willed and ascetic, he discovered in discipline
the chief end for which the children of Adam are created. A profound
admirer of the close-knit Genevan system, he was a Presbyterian in
spirit, a man after Calvin’s own heart, who clung to the old coercions
in an age that was seeking to throw them off. If he counseled
innovation it was in the way of strengthening ministerial authority,
never in the way of liberalizing either creed or practice. It was the
Congregationalism of the Cambridge Platform, and not that of early
Plymouth, that he upheld; and to strengthen that order he turned
earnestly to the practical work of Presbyterianizing. He was the prime
mover in summoning the synod of 1679-80, requested by the Court to
consider amongst other things what “may appeare necessary for the
preventing schismes, haeresies, prophaneness, & the establishment of
the churches in one faith & order of the gospell,”[98] and the chief
suggestions of the body, of which he was the conspicuous leader, were
a return to a stricter discipline, and a strengthening of the passage
in the Savoy Confession of faith--adopted by the synod--by borrowings
from the Westminster Confession, which “more positively set forth the
authority of the state in doctrinal questions.”[99]

In 1691, while in London, Mather had been active in the work of uniting
the Presbyterian and Congregational churches of England, under articles
that would seem to have been more Presbyterian than Congregational;
and in 1705, following the curiously spiteful controversy over the
Brattle Street Church he joined vigorously in the proposed work of
rejuvenating the New England system by engrafting further shoots
from the Presbyterian stock. One of these grafts from the London,
agreement--the principle of licensing ministerial candidates by the
association of ministers, thereby effectively preventing the intrusion
of undesired members--established itself on the Congregational system;
but another--the principle of associational control of the several
churches--was blighted by the attack of John Wise.[100] What this
desired consolidation of power in the hands of the ministers implied,
is suggested by the terms of the Cambridge Platform, which asserted
that “the work & duty of the people is expressed in the phrase of
obeying their Elders,” and that they may not “speak in church, before
they have leave from the elders: nor continue so doing, when they
require silence, nor may they oppose nor contradict the judgment or
sentence of the Elders, without sufficient & weighty cause.”[101]
Recalling that the elders of a church had been reduced in number to the
single minister, one may perhaps venture to suggest that a man ardently
working to strengthen the hands of the ministerial oligarchy by further
Presbyterianizing was no friend to Separatist-Congregationalism, nor
one in whom the spirit of humility would work any lessening of the
authority of the Lord’s stewards.[102]

In his conception of toleration Mather followed naturally in the
footsteps of John Cotton. He would tolerate all views that were not
in error, but his criteria of truth were so far from catholic as to
lead him into constant and vehement attack upon other sects. As a
responsible leader he was careful to clothe his attacks with generous
professions; but he never stepped forward to uphold the right of
free thought, or to dissuade his brethren from heresy-baiting. His
biographer is greatly impressed by the minister’s professions, and
takes them at somewhat more than face value, forgetting the ancient
saying that by the fruits of men’s lives they shall be known. Casuistry
is useful for purposes of defense, and a skillful apologist can explain
away much; but the spirit of toleration revealed in the following
passages was certainly no child of liberalism:

  The “Anabaptists” had given trouble in New England. They had
  installed as minister a man excommunicated from the Congregational
  church, and, when their meeting-house was closed to them, they
  persisted in assembling publicly before its barred doors rather
  than worship unmolested in a private house. To Mather these were
  attacks upon the true faith, and manifest disturbances of the
  civil peace. Naturally there is some acidity in his strictures
  on the “blasted Error” of “Antipedobaptism.”... He denounces
  Baptists roundly enough, points to their kinship with the turbulent
  Anabaptists in Europe, and writes: “Are they not generally of a bad
  Spirit? Bitter enemies to the Lords most eminent Servants? yea,
  to the faithfull Ambassadors, spitting the cruel venome of Asps
  against them.”

He then concludes: “Nor is the modern reader likely to disagree”
with the apology by President Oakes, who wrote in an introduction to
Mather’s screed:

  It is sufficiently known to those that know the Author, that he is
  none of the Ishmaels of the times, that have their hand against
  every man and love to be taking a Dog by the Ears ... or to be
  dabling in the waters of strife.... They that know his Doctrine
  and manner of life, cannot but know that the life of his Spirit
  is in the things of practical Divinity, and the great Design of
  his ministry is to promote the power and practice of piety in the
  greatest instances.... I dare undertake ... his design ... is not
  to traduce ... those that are otherwise minded, or expose them to
  severities & sufferings on the bare account of their opinion.[103]

From these curious passages the unsympathetic realist is likely to draw
the conclusions that the spirit of mutual admiration came to early
birth in New England, and that it makes a vast difference whose ox
is gored. Something of the same casuistry is employed to explain away
Increase Mather’s unhappy part in the witchcraft mess.[104] The whole
matter is involved and rendered difficult by guilty consciences and the
need to save reputations, and perhaps the facts are not to be got at;
yet it is only another instance to show how quickly candor flies out
at the window when a Mather comes in at the door. One may make much or
little of the son’s statement that Increase grew more tolerant in his
later years; it would seem at best to have been only the difference
between black and dark gray. A dominating man does not take kindly to
differences of counsel. Increase Mather was a stout upholder of the law
and order in the shaping of which he had a hand, but he looked with no
friendly eye on the architects of a different order; and the bitterness
of his later years was the natural consequence of a strong, proud,
ambitious man, thwarted in his dearest projects.

If he contributed nothing to a more liberal theology or church
organization, it is idle to expect him to have contributed to political
speculation. As a leader of the theocracy he meddled much in practical
politics, but it would seem that he was quite unread in the political
philosophers and wholly ignorant of major principles. The great English
liberals of Commonwealth times and later left him untouched. He bought
and read many books, but almost none of a political nature.[105]
Hobbes, Harrington, Sidney, Milton, Filmer, Locke, were as much out
of his intellectual ken as were the speculations of Roger Williams.
Interest in political theory had ceased in Massachusetts with the
banishment of the great Independent, and the principles of liberal
thinkers like Harrington and Milton would have awakened little sympathy
in so stalwart a theocrat as Increase Mather. He was a practical
man, an administrator and mentor, a stern _castigator morum_ to the
commonwealth, and as a college president he had been trained in a
school little notable for its sympathetic consideration of the views
of subordinates. He got on ill with his Harvard tutors, and one of the
unseemliest squabbles of his later years grew out of the bitterness
sowed between a “strong” administrator and his teaching staff.[106] A
man accounted less pious, concerned with ends more patently worldly,
might well be reckoned dictatorial and domineering; but Puritan
righteousness, perhaps, is not to be judged by profane standards, nor
the same severity of judgment applied to politicians laboring in the
theocratic vineyard, that is applied to the common breed.

Perhaps the happiest years of Increase Mather’s arduous life were those
spent in London as agent of the theocratic party to secure such terms
as he could for the settlement of New England. It was a congenial task
and a congenial field. His love of diplomacy and his fondness for
England were both gratified. He mingled there on terms of equality with
the intellectual leaders of English Nonconformity, and matched his wit
with men high in station. He proved himself a skillful manager, but
the threads were too tangled for any Puritan diplomat to smoothe out,
and he fell short of his hopes. The terms of the charter as finally
drafted satisfied few of the Boston theocrats, and his nomination of
Sir William Phipps for Governor was certainly ill-judged. Sir William
had been converted to the true faith by Increase himself and was
reckoned by him a chosen vessel of the Lord; but he turned out to be no
better than a cracked pot, and with the coming of Dudley the political
influence of Increase Mather was finally broken. He was maneuvered
out of his position as president of Harvard and later suffered the
mortification of seeing the post fall into the hands of Leverett, the
old tutor now become an influential politician, with whom he had been
bitterly at outs. “Doubtless there is not any government in the world,”
he wrote, “that has been laid under greater obligations by a greater
man than this government has been by me. Nevertheless I have received
more discouragement in the work of the Lord, by those in government,
than by all the men in the world besides. Let not my children put too
much confidence in men.”[107] It is not pleasant to be ousted from
one’s position by politicians, and if one is certain that the slight
intended for the servant falls on the Master, it is scarcely to be
borne. If waves of black pessimism swept over him in those unhappy
later years when his ambitions were hopelessly frustrated, there was
provocation enough. He had outlived his age and the ablest of the
native-born theocrats had become a byword and a mocking amongst the
profane of Boston.

Not a great man, as the world reckons greatness, Increase Mather
may scarcely be accounted a great Puritan. As a theologian he was
wanting in speculative vigor, and as a pastor he was wanting in
self-denying love. It is not necessary to set him over against Roger
Williams or Jonathan Edwards or William Ellery Channing, to reveal his
intellectual and spiritual shortcomings. One has only to place him
beside so rugged and honest a Puritan as Samuel Hopkins, who in true
Christian humility, utterly regardless of his own fame, gave his life
to theology and the care of the poor and the outcast, to realize how
conventional a soul was Increase Mather, how incurious intellectually,
how ambitious and self-seeking. Men loved Samuel Hopkins even though
they might vigorously reject his doctrine, as they loved Roger Williams
and Ellery Channing; but few seem to have loved Increase Mather. One
might respect his abilities, but he was too austerely forbidding to
like, too overbearing to awaken the spirit of good will. Ideas in
the abstract held no interest for him. His biographer has happily
recalled Mather’s forgotten interest in scientific inquiry, and for
this slight relief from the intolerable drab of his life-story one
may be grateful. Yet one must not build too high on an insubstantial
foundation. In the England that Mather loved, and toward which
he was strongly drawn--hoping that opportunity would offer for a
pulpit there--pottering over natural philosophy had become a mark
of distinction, and a man so envious of repute would have wished to
approve himself to those whom he admired. Though he lived in Boston he
would not have it thought that he was provincial.

Of the miscellaneous literary output that flowed from his pen in
an abundant stream, little need be said. It is of concern only to
minute historians of the local. That he was master of an excellent
prose style, clear and straightforward, is sufficiently evident; if
his matter had been so good, his legitimate fame would have been far
greater. The work on which his reputation largely rests is _An Essay
for the Recording of Illustrious Providences_, printed at Boston and
London in 1684, and twice reissued in the nineteenth century under the
title _Remarkable Providences_. It is an amusing book of old wives’
tales, not singular at all for the times, but characteristic rather;
an expression of the naïveté that crops out in Winthrop’s _History
of New England_, and other writings of the emigrant generation, but
now become a fashion amongst the lesser lights of the Royal Academy
and English Nonconformists. It suited to a nicety the Mather love
of marvels, and Increase constituted himself a generous repository
of all the chimney-corner tales of the countryside. To call such a
book “a scientific and historical recording of phenomena observed
in New England,” as his biographer has done, is to gall the back
of a thesis with hard riding.[108] In one chapter only does Mather
suggest the spirit of scientific inquiry; four out of the twelve deal
with witchcraft and kindred topics; and the rest are made up of such
instances of divine providence as great fish jumping out of the sea
into the boats of starving sailors adrift, of the freaks played by
lightning and tornadoes, and of God’s punishments on wicked Quakers.
At the time it was a harmless enough book, but in the light of after
developments it was scarcely so harmless. The emphasis laid upon
witchcraft was an unfortunate, if unconsidered, influence in preparing
the psychology of New England for the Salem outbreak, and the minister
later reaped a bitter harvest from it.

“Not many years ago,” he wrote in the preface to _Illustrious
Providences_, “I _lost_ (and that’s an afflictive _loss_ indeed!)
several moneths from study by sickness. Let every God-fearing reader
joyn with me in prayer, that I may be enabled to redeem the time,
and (in all ways wherein I am capable) to serve my generation.” That
Increase Mather sincerely desired to serve his generation according to
his lights, none may deny. His labors were appalling, his reputation
was great, and when he died the light of the old churches went out.
The spirit of Presbyterianism went to its grave in New England, and
not till a hundred years later did the new light--which was no other
than primitive English Independency--shine out in the life and work of
William Ellery Channing. After two centuries Unitarianism recovered
for the Massachusetts churches the spirit of early Separatism that had
been lost since the days of the Cambridge Platform. Channing finally
uprooted the vine that Increase Mather had so laboriously tended.


III

Of the unpopularity that gathered about the name of Mather after the
fall of the theocracy, the larger portion fell to the lot of the son,
the eccentricities of whose character made him peculiarly vulnerable to
attack. In his youth the spoiled child of Boston, in middle life he was
petulant and irritable, inclined to sulk when his will was crossed.
In the career of no other New England Puritan is the inquisitorial
pettiness of the Genevan system of theology and discipline revealed
so disagreeably. The heroic qualities of an earlier age had atrophied
in an atmosphere of formalism, and Boston Calvinism of the year 1690
had become a grotesque caricature of a system that in its vigor had
defied the power of Rome and laid kingdoms at its feet. Embodied in
Cotton Mather it was garrulous, meddlesome, scolding, an echo of dead
voices, a shadow of forgotten realities. The common provincialism had
laid its blight upon it. The horizons of the New England imagination
grew narrow, and Puritan anthropomorphism unconsciously reduced the
God of the Hebrew prophets to the compass of a village priest, clothed
in stock and gown, and endowed with the intellect of a parish beadle.
In the egocentric universe wherein Cotton Mather lived and labored
the cosmos had shrunk to the narrow bounds of a Puritan commonwealth,
whereof Boston was the capital and the prosperity of the North Church
the special and particular object of divine concern. The mind of
Increase Mather had been enlarged by contact with English life; the
mind of the son was dwarfed by a village world.

Cotton Mather is an attractive subject for the psychoanalyst. Intensely
emotional, high-strung and nervous, he was oversexed and overwrought,
subject to ecstatic exaltations and, especially during his celibate
years, given to seeing visions. In the carefully edited _Diary_ which
he left for the edification of his natural and spiritual children, at
the beginning of his twenty-third year, is an apologetic entry--“_Cum
Relego, Scripsisse Pudet!_”--that Professor Wendell has put into
English thus:

  A strange and memorable thing. After outpourings of prayer, with
  the utmost fervor and fasting, there appeared an Angel, whose face
  shone like the noonday sun. His features were as those of a man,
  and beardless; his head was encircled by a splendid tiara; on his
  shoulders were wings; his garments were white and shining; his robe
  reached to his ankles; and about his loins was a belt not unlike
  the girdles of the peoples of the East. And this Angel said that he
  was sent by the Lord Jesus to bear a clear answer to the prayers of
  a certain youth, and to bear back his words in reply. Many things
  this Angel said which it is not fit should be set down here. But
  among other things not to be forgotten he declared that the fate of
  this youth should be to find full expression for what in him was
  best; ... And in particular this Angel spoke of the influence his
  branches should have, and of the books this youth should write and
  publish, not only in America but in Europe. And he added certain
  special prophecies of the great works this youth should do for
  the Church of Christ in the revolutions that are now at hand.
  Lord Jesus! What is the meaning of this marvel? From the wiles of
  the Devil, I beseech thee, deliver and defend Thy most unworthy
  servant.[109]

The passage throws a good deal of light on the psychology of Cotton
Mather. Such visions were clearly the result of abnormal stimuli,
acting on a neurotic temperament. From both sides of his family he
inherited a tense nervous system that was aggravated by precocity and
an unnatural regimen. The inevitable result was a hothouse plant of
Puritan forcing. His religious exaltation flowered from the root of
egoism. His vanity was cosmic. He esteemed himself a beacon set on
a hill, a divine torch which the very hand of God had lighted. The
success or failure of God’s plan for New England, he believed, rested
on his shoulders; and with such heavy responsibilities devolved upon
him he was driven, hot-haste, by the prick of urgency. The king’s
business requireth haste. The work of the Lord cannot wait upon
sluggards. “O then _To work_ as fast as you can,” he wrote in _The
Magnalia_, “and of soul-work and church-work as much as ever you can.
Say to all _Hindrances_ ... ‘You’ll excuse me if I ask you to be short
with me, for my work is great and my time is but little.’” And so with
an amazing activity that was little short of neurosis, he gave himself
over to the great business of managing the affairs of New England in
accordance with God’s will.

In undertaking so difficult a job, he frequently came into conflict
with other interpreters of God’s plan for New England, and partisan
venom gathered about him wherever he passed. Tact was never a Mather
virtue, and Cotton made two enemies to his father’s one. His quarrels
trod on each other’s heels, and a downright vindictiveness breathes
through his private records of them. He railed at whoever disagreed
with him, and imputed silly or malignant motives. The pages of his
diary are filled with epithets that he flung privately at his enemies;
one marvels that so many in the little town of Boston could be singled
out as “strangely and fiercely possessed of the Devil.” Robert Calef,
whose _More Wonders of the Invisible World_ was an inconvenient reply
to his _Wonders of the Invisible World_, was set down as “a very
wicked sort of a Sadducee in this Town, raking together a crue of
Libels ... an abominable Bundle of Lies, written on purpose, with a
Quil under a special Energy and Management of Satan, to damnify my
precious Opportunities of Glorifying my Lord Jesus Christ.”[110] When
an anti-Mather group of Cambridge men set up the Brattle Street Church,
and invited Benjamin Colman, who had received Presbyterian ordination
in England, by way of reply to the Mather group, to become their
pastor, Cotton wrote in his diary:

  A Company of Head-strong Men in the Town, the cheef of whom, are
  full of malignity to the Holy Waye of our Churches, have built in
  this Town, another Meeting-house. To delude many better-meaning Men
  in their own Company, and the Churches in the Neighbourhood, they
  past a Vote ... that they would not vary from the Practice of these
  Churches, except in one little Particular.... But a young Man, born
  and bred here, and hence gone for England, is now returned hither,
  at their Invitation, equip’d with an _Ordination_, to qualify him,
  for all that is intended.

On his “returning and arriving here, these fallacious People” gave
themselves over, in short, to “Their violent and impetuous Lusts,
to carry on the Apostasy,” and Cotton Mather prayed God to make
him an instrument to defeat the “Designs that Satan may have in
the Enterprise.”[111] Similar passages of extravagant abuse of men
so wicked as to disagree with him flowed from his pen in copious
abundance. Although he constantly prayed that his daily life might
be “a trembling walk with God,” he was clearly a difficult fellow to
get on with; and in the opinion of many he was justly described by a
contemporary, as a “malecontent priest,” consumed with an “Hereditary
rancour” that made him “everlastingly opposite” to every will but his
own.

The diary of Cotton Mather is a treasure-trove to the abnormal
psychologist. The thing would be inconceivable if the record were not
in print. What a crooked and diseased mind lay back of those eyes that
were forever spying out occasions to magnify self! He grovels in proud
self-abasement. He distorts the most obvious reality. His mind is
clogged with the strangest miscellany of truth and marvel. He labors
to acquire the possessions of a scholar, but he listens to old wives’
tales with greedy avidity. In all his mental processes the solidest
fact falls into fantastic perspective. He was earnest to do good, he
labored to put into effect hundreds of “Good devices,” but he walked
always in his own shadow. His egoism blots out charity and even the
divine mercy. Consider his account of an “execution sermon” preached
to a nameless girl condemned for killing her natural child, and the
light it throws on both minister and congregation:

  The Execution of the miserable Malefactor, was ordered for to have
  been the last Week, upon the Lecture of another. I wondred then
  what would become of my _Particular_ Faith, of her condition being
  so ordered in the Providence of God, that it should furnish me,
  with a _special Opportunity_ to glorify Him. While I was entirely
  resigning to the wisdome of Heaven all such Matters, the Judges,
  wholly without my seeking, altered and allow’d her Execution to
  fall on the Day of _my Lecture_. The _General Court_ then sitting,
  ordered the Lecture to bee held in a larger and a stronger House,
  than that _old_ one, where ’tis usually kept. For my own part, I
  was weak, and faint, and spent; but I humbly gave myself up to the
  _Spirit_ of my Heavenly Lord and Hee assured mee, that Hee would
  send His good Angel to strengthen mee. The greatest Assembly, ever
  in this Countrey preach’d unto, was now come together; It may bee
  four or five thousand Souls. I could not gett unto the _Pulpit_,
  but by climbing over _Pues_ and _Heads_: and there the Spirit of my
  dearest Lord came upon mee. I preached with a more than ordinary
  Assistance, and enlarged, and uttered the most awakening Things,
  for near two hours together. My Strength and Voice failed not; but
  when it was near failing, a silent Look to Heaven strangely renew’d
  it. In the whole I found Prayer answered and Hope exceeded, and
  Faith encouraged, and the Lord using _mee_, the vilest in all that
  great Assembly, to glorify Him. Oh! what shall I render to the
  Lord![112]

Straightway thereafter, he rendered the Lord another characteristic
service. No sooner was the girl hanged--for whose safekeeping no good
angel seems to have been available after the minister had bespoken
his--than he hastened to the printer to arrange for printing the
sermon, and “annexed thereunto, an History of Criminals executed in
this Land, and effectually, an Account of their dying Speeches, and
of my own Discourses with them in their last Hours.... I entitled the
Book, +PILLARS OF SALT+.” Clearly this was the time to peddle his
wares, when all Boston was talking of the great event; and with a
nose for publicity as keen as Defoe’s, he flung together a jumble of
material, and trusted to its timeliness to sell. Some such origin, no
doubt, accounts for a good many of the small library of titles that
bore his name, an output that seems to have justified the angelic
prophecy of “the books this youth should write and publish.” With a
very lust for printer’s ink, he padded his bibliography like a college
professor seeking promotion; but in spite of all the prayers poured
out in behalf of them, they would seem for the most part to have been
little more than tuppenny tracts, stuffed with a sodden morality, that
not even an angel could make literature of.

Holding so strong a conviction of apostleship, Cotton Mather would
certainly play the politician, and quite as certainly blunder and go
wrong. Far more than his father he was a bookman, who believed that
all knowledge was shut up between pigskin covers. He was as lacking in
worldly wisdom as a child, and in his ecstatic contemplation of the
marvels wrought by God in primitive New England he never discovered
that that older world had passed away. Another age was rising, with
other ideals than ecclesiastical, which the three thousand books in his
library told him nothing about. He was an anachronism in his own day.
Living in an earlier age, when the hierarchy was in its prime, he would
have been carried far on the tide of theocratic prestige; a generation
later, when lay-power had definitely superseded clerical, he would have
taken his place as a stout defender of Tory ways. But at the moment
when a critical realignment of parties was under way in Massachusetts;
when the villagers were becoming democratized and the gentry toryized;
when even the clergy were dividing--Cotton Mather was a general without
an army. He was a primitive Puritan in a Boston that was fast becoming
Yankee, and his love for the theocracy grew stronger with every defeat.

The judgment of after times finds little in his political activities
to approve and much to condemn. After all allowances are made the fact
remains that he was a leader of reaction; and no protestations can
obscure the motive of personal ambition. His own prestige was involved
with that of the theocracy. It was due to the traditional authority
of the ministry that he enjoyed the distinction of being a “Person,
whom the Eye and the Talk of the People is very much upon,” and any
lessening of that authority would hurt him cruelly in his vanity. This
remains the sufficient explanation of his varied political activities
in the course of which he trimmed his sails to different winds. He
first essayed a frontal attack on the secular power, but suffering a
personal slight, he shifted and struck in the dark at an exposed flank;
and finally, receiving only further mortification, he made overtures of
peace and found his way back to the tables of the great. It was against
the administration of the wily and unscrupulous Dudley that he waged
his bitterest warfare. Failing to make headway by open hostility, he
seized upon a current trade scandal, poured out his grievances in an
anonymous pamphlet sent to London to be published, and awaited the
result. It was a slashing attack, done in the tone of a lover of the
ancient rights and privileges of New England, and it must have cut
Dudley to the quick. A quotation or two will suffice to reveal the
nature of the charges:

  But, when the President [Dudley] was pleased, out of an Active
  and Passive Principle, to tell our Countreymen, in open Council,
  _That the People in_ New-England _were all Slaves; and that the_
  only _Difference between Them and Slaves, was their not being_
  Bought _and Sold: And that they must not think the Privileges_ of
  Englishmen _would follow them to the end of the World_. I say,
  when the People heard this, they lookt upon themselves in a manner
  Lost....

  All the People here are Bought and Sold, betwixt the Governour and
  his son Paul....

  This is the _Third Time_ that he has been Trusted with Power from
  the _Crown_ in _America_, and he has constantly Abus’d it, to the
  Dishonour of the Government, and almost Ruin of the People he was
  sent to Govern.[113]

There was enough truth in the charges to make them serious, but the
spleen was quite too evident. The author was at once discovered and
Cotton Mather suffered a vigorous counter-attack that damaged a
reputation already undermined. Perhaps even worse was the social slight
put upon him by those in government. What it cost him to be left out of
the invitations of the great he reveals in the _Diary_:

  2 _d._ 7m. [September] Friday. [1709] The other Ministers of the
  Neighbourhood, are this Day feasting with our wicked Governour;
  I have, by my provoking Plainness and Freedom, in telling this
  _Ahab_ of his wickedness, procured myself to be left out of his
  Invitations. I rejoiced in my Liberty from the Temptations, with
  which they were encumbred, while they were _eating of his Dainties_
  and durst not reprove him. And, considering the Power and Malice of
  my Enemies, I thought it proper of me, to be this day Fasting, in
  Secret, before the Lord.

Ten years later there is a different story to tell. The minister has
left the opposition bench and gone over to the government. A note in
Sewall’s diary tells the tale:

  March, 12. [1718/19] Dr. Cotton Mather prays again [in Council],
  Preaches the Lecture from Prov. 29: 18. no Vision. [_Where there is
  no vision, the people perish: but he that keepeth the law, happy is
  he._] The Govr., Lt. Govr., Mr. Dudley, Mr. Belcher press’d hard
  that there might be an order of the Govr. and Council to print it.
  Col. Tailor, Clark, Davenport, Sewall and others opposed it. For
  my part, the Dr. spake so much of his visions of Convulsion and
  Mutiny, mentioning our being a dependent Government, and the Danger
  of Parliamentary Resentments: that I was afraid the printing of it
  might be an Invitation to the Parliament to take away our Charter.
  Govr. would have it put to the vote: but when he saw how hardly it
  went, caused the Secretary to break off in the midst.[114]

Here is a party alignment that tells its own story, and it needs
no very lively imagination to fill out the meager note and reënact
the little drama. The minister, eager to make overtures of peace,
falls into the Tory note, talks about mob-rule and the sinfulness
of popular unrest, calls upon authority to maintain law and order,
and hints at the expediency of preserving due colonial subservience
in view of possible resentments on the part of certain great men in
England. Sewall, as a “true New-England man,” squirms somewhat under
the implications, but the little group of Tories are loud in praise.
Such a sermon, from so eminent a servant of God, would aid wonderfully
in strengthening the spirit of loyalty to the crown, and it must be
printed and circulated amongst the people. But the opposition proved
too spirited, and the manuscript was not dispatched to the printer, no
doubt to Cotton Mather’s chagrin.

It was easy for so reactionary a nature to slide over into the Tory.
There was not a grain of liberalism in his make-up. His antipathy to
all popular movements was deep-rooted, for he knew no other political
philosophy than that of the obsolete theocracy in which he had grown
up. He was a bourgeois soul who loved respectability and was jealous
of his social position; no fraternizing with the poor and outcast for
him, no profitless excursions into the realms of Utopian justice.
Though he might play to popular prejudices to serve his political ends,
he had scant regard for popular rights. The highest privilege of the
New England people, he believed, was the privilege of being ruled by
the godly. His real attitude towards the plain people is revealed in a
note by his son, that refers to the days following the overturn of the
Andros government:

  Upon Discoursing with him of the Affairs he has told me that he
  always pressed _Peace_ and _Love_ and _Submission_ unto a legal
  Government, tho’ he suffered from some tumultuous People, by doing
  so; and upon the whole, has asserted unto me his _Innocency_ and
  freedom from all known Iniquity in that time, but declared his
  Resolution, from the View he had of the fickle Humors of the
  Populace, that he would chuse to be concern’d with them as little
  as possible for the future.[115]

As he grew older and the shadow of failure fell across his life,
his bitterness towards a people that had rejected his admonitions
is revealed on many a page of his diary. It was a “silly people,” a
“foolish people,” “insignificant lice”--“The cursed clamour of a people
strangely and fiercely possessed of the Devil”--“My aged father laies
to heart the withdrawal of a vain, proud, foolish people from him in
his age”--“It is the Hour of ... Darkness on this Despicable Town.”
He could not easily forgive those who had wounded his love of power
and lust of adulation, and he was too aloof from the daily life of
men to understand the political and social movements of the times,
too self-centered to understand his fellow villagers. He possessed
none of the sympathetic friendliness that made Samuel Sewall a natural
confidant to every one in trouble. He loved the people when they
honored and obeyed him, but when they hearkened to other counsels he
would fall to scolding like a fishwife. Doubtless he was sincere in
thinking he would gladly die to save his people from their sins, but he
had no mind to neighbor with them or humor their wicked love of power.
He immured himself so closely within the walls of the old theocratic
temple that he never took the trouble to examine the groundsills, and
when the rotten timbers gave way and the structure came tumbling about
his ears, he was caught unprepared and went down in its ruins.

Happily most of the printed output of Cotton Mather has fallen
into the oblivion it deserved. It is barren of ideas, and marred
by pedantic mannerisms that submerge the frequent felicities of
phrase--old-fashioned on the day it came from the press. “In his
_Style_, indeed,” wrote his friend Thomas Prince, “he was something
singular, and not so agreeable to the Gust of the Age. But like his
_manner of speaking_, it was very _emphatical_.” Yet he possessed
very considerable gifts and under happier circumstances he might have
had a notable literary career; but he was the victim of a provincial
environment. He was the most widely read man of his generation in
America, and one of the few who followed sympathetically the current
scientific movement in England. Like old Increase he dabbled in
science; he was proud of his membership in the Royal Society, to which
he forwarded his characteristic _Curiosa Americana_--a hodgepodge of
those marvels in which his generation delighted. It was from an English
source that he got the idea of inoculation for smallpox, which he urged
upon Boston so insistently that a war of scurrilous pamphlets broke
out. He made use of the method in his own family, incurring thereby
much stupid abuse and at least one attack of violence. It was an
intelligent and courageous experiment, that is not to be forgotten in
casting up the accounts of Cotton Mather.

Of his major works two only call for brief consideration: the
celebrated _Magnalia Christi Americana; or, The Ecclesiastical History
of New England_; and the less known _Wonders of the Invisible World_.
The latter is suggestive for the light it throws on the psychology of
the witchcraft mania. The fantastic devil-fear, which bit so deeply
into the imagination of Puritan New England, has already been commented
on. In that common seventeenth-century delusion, Cotton Mather not only
ran with the mob, but he came near to outdistancing the most credulous.
His speech and writings dripped with devil-talk. The grotesqueries that
marked the current marvel-tales crop out nakedly in his writings. “I
have set myself,” he wrote in the _Diary_, “to countermine the whole
_Plot_ of the Devil, against New-England, in every branch of it, as far
as one of my _darkness_ can comprehend such a _Work_ of Darkness.” His
conviction of the malignant activities of Satan was so vivid, that in
delivering a carefully prepared sermon on the _Wiles of the Divil_, he
was fain, he tells us, to pause and lift up his eyes and cry “unto the
Lord Jesus Christ, that he would rate off Satan,” who “all the Time of
my Prayer before the Lecture” had “horribly buffeted me”--by indicting
on the fasting priest certain qualms of the stomach. How tremendous he
conceived to be the battle over a human soul, he describes thus:

  The _Wilderness_ through which we are passing to the Promised Land
  is all over fill’d with Fiery flying serpents. But, blessed be
  God, none of them have hitherto so fastned upon us as to confound
  us utterly! All our way to Heaven lies by _Dens of Lions_ and the
  _Mounts of Leopards_; there are incredible Droves of Devils in
  our way.... We are poor travellers in a world which is as well the
  Devil’s Field, as the Devil’s _Gaol_; a world in which every Nook
  whereof, the Devil is encamped with _Bands of Robbers_ to pester
  all that have their Faces looking Zionward.[116]

In the light of Mather’s logic, “That there is a _Devil_, is a thing
Doubted by none but such as are under the influence of the Devil,” and
“God indeed has the _Devil_ in a _Chain_, but has horribly lengthened
out the Chain,” his private comment on the work--“that reviled
book”--becomes comprehensible.

The _Magnalia_ is a far more important work, the repository of a vast
miscellany of information concerning early New England that his pious
zeal saved from oblivion. It is the _magnum opus_ of the Massachusetts
theocracy, the best and sincerest work that Cotton Mather did. The
theme with which it deals, and about which he accumulates marvels and
special providences together with historical facts, was the thing
which next to his own fame lay nearest his heart--the glory of that
theocracy which men whom he accounted foolish and wicked were seeking
to destroy. The purpose of the book has nowhere been better stated than
by Professor Wendell:

  Its true motive was to excite so enthusiastic a sympathy with the
  ideals of the Puritan fathers that, whatever fate might befall
  the civil government, their ancestral seminary of learning should
  remain true to its colours.... The time was come, Cotton Mather
  thought, when the history of these three generations might be
  critically examined; if this examination should result in showing
  that there had lived in New England an unprecedented proportion
  of men and women and children whose earthly existence had given
  signs that they were among the elect, then his book might go far to
  prove that the pristine policy of New England had been especially
  favoured of the Lord. For surely the Lord would choose His elect
  most eagerly in places where life was conducted most according to
  His will.[117]

When old Increase was near the end of his many years, a friend wrote
to ask if he were still in the land of the living. “No, Tell him I
am going to it,” he said to his son; “this Poor World is the land of
the Dying.” The bitter words were sober truth. The New England of the
dreams of Increase and Cotton Mather was sick to death from morbid
introspection and ascetic inhibitions; no lancet or purge known to
the Puritan pharmacopeia could save it. Though father and son walked
the streets of Boston at noonday, they were only twilight figures,
communing with ghosts, building with shadows. They were not unlike
a certain mad woman that Sewall tells of, who went crying about the
town, “My child is dead within me.” The child of Cotton Mather’s hopes
had long been dead within him, only he could not bring himself to
acknowledge it. The fruit of the vine planted by the fathers was still
sweet to him, and when other men complained of its bitterness, and fell
to gathering from other vines, he could only rail at their perversity.
He would not believe that the grapes were indeed bitter and the vine
blighted; that the old vineyard must be re-plowed and planted to fresh
stock. All his life he had set marvels above realities and in the end
his wonder-working providence failed him. Prayers could not bring back
a dead past; passionate conjurations could not strike the living waters
from the cold granite of Puritan formalism. A New England flagellant,
a Puritan Brother of the Cross, he sought comfort in fasts and vigils
and spiritual castigations, and--it is pleasant to learn--in ways far
more natural and wholesome. Incredible as it may seem, the following
record is authentic, and it falls like a shaft of warm sunshine across
the path of the morbid priest: “Augt, 15. [1716].... Now about Dr.
C. Mather Fishing in Spy-pond, falls into the Water, the boat being
ticklish, but receives no hurt.”[118] The restless minister who had
fished overmuch in troubled waters, sometimes, it would appear,
ventured for perch in Spy Pond.


Footnotes

[96] Kenneth B. Murdock, _Increase Mather_, 1925.

[97] Compare Murdock, _Increase Mather_, pp. 394-395.

[98] Quoted in W. Walker, _A History of Congregational Churches, etc._,
p. 187.

[99] _Ibid._, p. 190. His biographer has overlooked the significance of
this. See Murdock, _Increase Mather_, p. 151.

[100] His biographer has somewhat slurred his account of the
“Proposals.” See p. 282. But his justification is worth noting: “If the
original brand of Puritan piety was worth saving, and Mather believed
it was, an oligarchic church government was the only means of securing
it in an age when men were inclined to change their religious ideas as
they changed their thought on other affairs.”

[101] W. Walker, _A History of the Congregational Churches, etc._, p.
205.

[102] Compare Murdock, _Increase Mather_, pp. 361-363.

[103] Murdock, _Increase Mather_, pp. 138-139.

[104] See pp. 294-295, where he seeks unsuccessfully to refute the
position taken by J. T. Adams.

[105] See Murdock, _Increase Mather_, pp. 125-127.

[106] “The Brattle-Street Church Controversy,” for which see _ibid._,
pp. 258 ff.

[107] _Ibid._, pp. 373-4, note.

[108] _Ibid._, p. 170.

[109] _Cotton Mather, Puritan Priest_, p. 64.

[110] _Diary_, Vol. I, p. 271.

[111] _Ibid._, pp. 325-326.

[112] _Diary_, Vol. I, p. 279.

[113] _A Memorial of the Present Deplorable State of New-England ...
by the Male-Administration of their Present Governour, Joseph Dudley,
Esq., and his Son Paul_, London, 1707, in _Massachusetts Historical
Society Collections_, Fifth Series, Vol. VI.

[114] Vol. II, p. 214.

[115] Wendell, _Cotton Mather, etc._, p. 82.

[116] _Wonders of the Invisible World_, p. 63.

[117] _Literary History of America_, pp. 48-49.

[118] Sewall, _Diary_, Vol. III, p. 98.




