Chapter IV • The Older Plantation Mind


I • Plantation Backgrounds

The literary renaissance of Virginia began in the late twenties when
the English romantic movement reached the quiet plantations. Till
then the Virginia mind had lingered pleasantly in the twilight of the
liberal eighteenth century, following ways of thought it had learned
of revolutionary France, and writing with a leisurely finish it had
learned of Augustan England. In that older Virginia dignified sentiment
was accepted as the hall-mark of breeding--a sentiment somewhat ornate
and consciously elegant, that recognized its obligations to a strict
morality, and laid its nosegay at the feet of the pure and beautiful
and good. When the Virginian essayed somewhat infrequently to commit
his thoughts to paper, he wrote as an old-fashioned gentleman,
conscious of his social responsibility, consulting classic standards
of taste, and embellishing his sentences with bits of choice Latin.
But after the year 1830 sentiment gave place to romance, and dignity
to exuberance of fancy. A new generation, trained in the school of Sir
Walter Scott, fell to the pleasant task of portraying the familiar
plantation life in glowing colors and investing it with romantic charm.

The plantation tradition, it will be remembered, first took shape in
the Old Dominion and assumed its salient features at the hands of
Virginia romantics. Its development was contemporary with the New
England transcendental movement, and in origin and spirit it was
as native to Virginia as the philosophy of idealism was native to
Massachusetts. Inspired by an over-seas romanticism, it accepted the
materials it found at hand and transmuted the easy-going plantation
life into enduring romance. The work was begun by Kennedy in his
idyllic _Swallow Barn_. The picture thus slightly sketched was given
stronger colors by Caruthers, and received completer form from John
Esten Cooke. From their hands Thomas Nelson Page took his materials
to refashion to suit the taste of a later day. No realism added its
sobering touches to the romantic picture thus early drawn, and none has
since been added. A golden light still lingers upon the old plantation.
Memories are still too dear to the Virginian to suffer any lessening
of the reputed splendors of _ante bellum_ days. The tragedy of a lost
cause has woven itself into the older romance and endowed the tradition
with an added sanction. It has long since spread beyond the confines of
Virginia and become a national possession. North as well as South is
so firmly convinced of its authenticity that realism has never had the
temerity to meddle with it.[400]

It was a romanticizing age, and in Virginia congenial materials were
ready to hand. The distinction of a plantation aristocracy set in the
midst of a bucolic republican society, with its genial hospitality,
its individuality, its sharp contrasts of whites and blacks, its
clutter of cabins for background to the pillared mansion, its wide
neighborhood interests, its outdoor life, its patriarchal spirit, was
a distinction that no romantic could overlook, the most individual and
native picturesque in all America. Life on the plantation was uncramped
by the drab routine and skimpy meanness of the New England farm; it was
unsoiled by the coarseness and vulgarity of the frontier; it had none
of the sordidness of the middle-class town. It might be wasteful, but
it was good material for literature; and hence the Virginia romantic
had no need to seek the picturesque in England and Spain, as Irving
had done. He had only to pick and choose from the familiar stuff lying
all about him, emphasizing the agreeable, overlooking the unpleasant,
fashioning his figures and action to suit the ideal of a golden age
of plantation society. Yet the result, it must be confessed, is not
wholly adequate. Virginia has suffered gravely from the want of a sober
realism. It is not so much that the worst did not get into the romantic
tradition--shortcomings in Virginia life which even Wirt hints at--as
that the best did not get in. The plantation master of the romantics
falls grossly short of the reality that Virginia provided. The simple
dignity of John Taylor, the ingrained Puritanism of Lee and Jackson,
the catholic culture and fine integrity of George Wythe, have been
left out of the tradition. The Virginian created by the romantics is
absurdly inferior to such men, who by any standard were as admirable a
group of gentlemen as America has ever bred. A little honest realism
would have corrected the picture, to the advantage of the Old Dominion.

At the time when the romantics were beginning their work of
constructing the plantation tradition the intellectual renaissance
of Virginia was passing. With the fading of the French influence
after 1820 came increasing isolation and a conscious sectionalism.
Intellectual discipline and catholic tastes became rarer. Virginia
had no share in the revolutionary enthusiasms of the Utopian thirties
and forties, when New England expected the Promised Land to appear at
the next turn in the road; it received no stimulus from the expansive
systems of thought that were setting all Europe in ferment. The new
Germany seems to have made no impression on the Virginia mind, neither
its philosophical idealism nor its provocative higher criticism.
The new interest in social speculation and experiment that arose in
Massachusetts with the beginnings of industrialism awakened no response
in Virginia. Plantation society was static, and social speculation was
unwelcome. The theories of Comte, of Fourier, of Owen were unknown;
Utopian experiments were untried. If Virginia escaped the curse of
industrialism it lacked the intellectual stimulus that came to New
England with the rise of the textile mills. Social unrest bred no
protests against the plantation order. The revolutionary mood was gone,
and after 1820 the stimulus to intellectual life grew weaker. English
romanticism as exemplified in the work of Scott and Tom Moore was the
single foreign influence that spread amongst the plantations, and the
new literature accepted the cult of the picturesque romantic. With the
passing of the great age of Virginia the tradition of her greatness
remained to be gathered up and preserved.


II • William Wirt

To Virginia gentlemen of the old school it must have seemed a bit
ironical that William Wirt should have come to be accepted as the
literary representative of the Old Dominion in the days of John
Randolph of Roanoke. Born in Maryland in 1772 of Swiss parentage,
Wirt belonged to Virginia only by adoption, and although on terms of
intimacy with the plantation gentry he embodied few of the traits that
went to the making of the plantation tradition. In temperament he was
far removed from the easy-going planter. A certain canny thrift marked
him, a pronounced desire to rise in the world and cut a distinguished
figure. He was careful to make a good investment of his talents,
attentive to profitable undertakings, whether in law or eloquence or
speculation. His mature life ran a singularly prosperous and dignified
course. He gathered property and reputation and office, and in every
position he acquitted himself honorably. To do less than well in any
undertaking he would have accounted a stain upon his reputation. In
every company he made himself liked. There was none of the aggressive
individualism of John Randolph, in wait for an opportunity to send
home a shaft of rankling wit, but always a studious concern to please.
He was troubled that anyone should think his criticism severe in _The
British Spy_, and he hesitated long before publishing his _Patrick
Henry_ for fear offense would be taken at the few blemishes he
discovered in his hero. An honest man and a capable, sterling after
his kind but not notably intellectual, not creative, he owed his
advancement to very practical qualities: an engaging personality and
genial wit, a knack at formal oratory, a graceful pen, a persevering
pursuit of his profession, the cultivation of desirable friendships.
An excellent lawyer, he never turned aside from the law to meddle with
politics; yet he was on good terms with the politicians, and he reached
the top of his ambition by appointment to the Attorney-Generalship of
the United States, a post which he held for upwards of twelve years.

In training and culture Wirt was of the sound eighteenth-century
tradition. He was bred in the classics, English literature, and the
common law. When he set up in his profession his library consisted
of Blackstone, _Don Quixote_, and _Tristram Shandy_. His literary
taste was formed by the later writers of the eighteenth century, by
Gray, Hervey, Young, Ossian, Burke, Sterne, rather than by Pope and
Dryden. In _The British Spy_ he praises Bacon highly and lavishes
commendation upon Addison, regretting that the _Spectator_ “should be
thrown by, and almost entirely forgotten, while the gilded blasphemies
of infidels, and the ‘noontide trances’ of pernicious theorists, are
hailed with rapture, and echoed around the world” (_Letter X_). Yet the
determining influence in his own writings, it is clear, came from the
sentimentalists and from Burke. From the former he caught the note of
polite emotion, and from the latter the strain of sonorous eloquence.
His well-bred sensibilities were constantly in the service of his pen
or tongue, to lend pathos to an affecting bit of description or to
transport his hearers by a melting appeal. A look, a gesture, a pose,
was nicely calculated to bring sympathetic tears to the eyes of his
auditors. To touch the emotions he considered the triumph of art,
and to conduct through the emotions to a sound morality, its sole
justification.

As a member of the Virginia bar Wirt took pride in the tradition
of sober culture that had grown up amongst its distinguished
practitioners. The members of that bar were gentlemen as well as
lawyers, who would rather go wrong in their legal authorities than in
their classical embellishments; they were orators as well, careful of
their diction and meticulous in rounding a period. In these excellent
qualities Wirt early distinguished himself. He had read more than
most, and apposite quotations from the classics came easily to his
pen to grace the pellucid flow of his English. One of the signal
triumphs of his life was when in an elaborate legal argument before
the Supreme Court at Washington, he retorted a passage of the _Aeneid_
upon his opponent, to provide a text for a burst of the exuberant
rhetoric that so delighted his generation (_The British Spy_, 1855, pp.
88-90). His love of ornate speech seems to us curiously old-fashioned,
yet it was the manner of the times, and he gave himself to it with
enthusiasm--_vivo gurgite exundans_, as he would have chosen to
say. The chief interest of his life was oratory, and how skillful a
practitioner he was adjudged by his own generation is revealed in the
comment of a contemporary who often admired “the blaze of his reasoning
and declamation”:

  The march of his mind is direct to its object, the evolutions by
  which he attains it, are so new and beautiful, and apparently
  necessary to the occasion, that your admiration is kept alive, your
  fancy delighted, and your judgment convinced, through every stage
  of the process.... There is no weak point in his array, no chink
  in the whole line of his extended works. Then the sweet melody
  of voice, the beautiful decorations of fancy, the easy play of
  a powerful reason, by which all this is accomplished, amaze and
  delight. His pathos is natural and impressive; there is a pastoral
  simplicity and tenderness in his pictures of distress, when he
  describes female innocence, helplessness, and beauty, which the
  husband on whom she smiled should have guarded from even the winds
  of heaven which might visit it too roughly, “shivering at midnight
  on the winter banks of the Ohio, and mingling her tears with the
  torrent, which froze as they fell;” it is not a theatrical trick,
  to move a fleeting pity, but a deep and impressive appeal to the
  dignified charities of our nature. (_Ibid._, pp. 84-85.)

Wirt’s literary reputation rests chiefly upon _The British Spy_
and _Sketches of the Life and Character of Patrick Henry_, both of
which may be characterized in the admirable phrase above quoted,
as studies in “the dignified charities of our nature.” The former
was done hastily at the age of thirty, the latter was toiled over
for years and appeared when he was forty-five. They were received
with vast approval and set him quite in the front rank of American
literary fame. Yet the contemporary popularity of _The British Spy_
is inexplicable to us today. It is astonishing that so slight a thing
should have achieved so great a reputation, and it suggests the depths
of literary poverty in which the Virginia of 1803 was sunk. The work
is a miscellany--hodgepodge perhaps is a juster term--of character
sketches, geology, description, rhapsody, moralizing, with the faintest
suggestion of criticism. The sketch which achieved the greatest
celebrity, the description of the blind preacher (_Letter VII_,
pp. 195-202), is elaborately artificial and sentimental, done from
Sterne. The sketches of contemporary politicians, and in particular
that of Jefferson, contributed much to current appeal, and the casual
criticism aroused a mild remonstrance. There is a certain grace of
style after the late eighteenth-century manner, abundant sentiment and
little wit. Perhaps the happiest touch is the title; only a British
spy could discover material for criticism in the excellent life and
ideal institutions of Virginia, or insinuate that the commonwealth was
lacking in public spirit--that its roads were as bad as its schools,
and that the “one object throughout the state” was “to grow rich.” But
it was a very moral spy who was troubled that “the noxious weed of
infidelity had struck a deep, a fatal root, and spread its pestilential
branches far around”; and who lamented that “our eccentric and fanciful
countryman, Godwin, had contributed not a little to water and cherish
this pernicious exotic” (_Letter VII_, p. 203).

The demands made upon the dignified charities of our nature Wirt found
more insistent when he came to write the life of Patrick Henry. He was
troubled by his materials, as well as by the want of them. He complains
repeatedly in his letters of the difficulties of the task. There were
blemishes in the character of his god, spots that marred his divinity;
yet how to clean them away and not spoil the natural appearance was a
problem. He could not tell Virginians that Patrick Henry in his old
age was grasping and vain, that he changed his politics as he grew
rich. The idea was too repugnant to his own good nature, and to the
taste of the times. The age was sentimental and romantic even in its
eulogy. It took seriously the motto, _de mortuis nil nisi bonum_; it
was patriotically engaged in making a myth out of the figures and
events of the Revolution; and sober truth is not to be expected from
the stately biographies that emerged from this period of excessive
patriotism. The writers were too much in awe of their subjects, too
much concerned to present them in full dress with wig and cloak and
sword, and see to it that they acted a proper part. It was in this
attitude that Wirt first approached his theme, but failing to achieve
the desired result, he turned the work into eulogy of Henry’s oratory.
This was the most congenial of tasks to one so deeply interested in the
art of the orator. The fragmentary records that had come down were a
challenge to his inventiveness, and he set himself to recreate the lost
speeches, from scanty notes. How admirably he succeeded is shown in
the celebrated “give me liberty, or give me death” speech, that became
at once an American classic. One could forgive him much for such a
masterpiece.

The leaders of that older Virginia society were lawyers rather than
planters, and Wirt’s excursions into the field of _belles lettres_
were only pleasant outings from the court-room. His intellectual
interests were narrow. Though bred in an atmosphere of politics, he
cared nothing for political theory, was wholly unread in the political
classics, and untouched by the flood of social speculation that came
with the French Revolution. He drifted politically with the stream
of his generation, taking color from the changing waters. Brought
up a Jeffersonian Republican, he remained curiously ignorant of the
economic and political philosophy of agrarianism. He was little given
to abstract speculation on the rights of man, and was never partisan
to a cause. He was a genial embodiment of those colorless times when
the enthusiasms of eighteenth-century liberalism were dead and the
romanticisms of nineteenth-century exploitation were not yet risen,
known in the history books as the era of good feeling. Fundamentally
conservative and somewhat conventional, he would not look with approval
upon the new men and new ways that came in with the western democracy.
Upon the accession of Jackson he went over to the Whig party. He
supported Clay, yet for some reason, perhaps a harmless vanity, he
accepted a nomination for the presidency by the Anti-Masons in 1832
and went down before the hosts of the Jacksonians. Two years later his
blameless life was brought to a close. A kindly and honorable gentleman
of old-fashioned tastes, with a culture founded in Blackstone,
embellished by Addison and Sterne, and given a classic dignity by Livy,
he filled the measure of the excellencies as they were understood in
the Old Dominion in the days before romance had created the plantation
tradition.


III • Nathaniel Beverley Tucker • A Virginia Fire Eater

In striking contrast to the amiable Attorney-General was another
Virginia lawyer and judge who ventured into literature and whose one
important novel created a mighty stir in its day. Beverley Tucker
was twelve years younger than Wirt. Half brother of John Randolph of
Roanoke, for some years on the bench in Missouri, and long professor
of law at William and Mary College, he was a well-known figure in the
Old Dominion, and his vigorous speech was much applauded at conventions
where southern gentlemen met to talk over their grievances. In him
were richly embodied all the picturesque parochialisms that plantation
life encouraged. He was so completely and exclusively Virginian as
to deserve the epithet “Virginianissimus.” He never traveled, never
compared diverse civilizations, never questioned the excellence of
that in which he had been bred. His loyalty to his native commonwealth
was a consuming jealousy for its honor, and he tucked the horizons
of Virginia about him like a Hudson’s Bay blanket and defied the
cold winds of the North. Beyond Mason and Dixon’s line lay a foreign
country, and he judged all foreign countries by their size and color
on his wall map. He was the arch-romantic of his generation and his
_Partisan Leader_ is the repository of the curious political and
economic romanticisms of the ardent southern mind.

Over his after-dinner bottle of Madeira, Beverley Tucker may well
have been the raciest and most delightful of companions. Like Samuel
Johnson, he found his pleasure in a mind well stocked with robust
prejudices and a wit to phrase them tellingly. He never spared his
epithets nor hesitated to damn an opponent. Like Fisher Ames, he
coddled an aggravated case of political spleen and luxuriated in
a picturesque pessimism. The clouds hung low over his mind, and
the future of Virginia appeared as black to him as the future of
Massachusetts appeared desperate to the Boston Federalist. His
pessimism no doubt was a solace to his old age and provided a sauce
for his dinner. Temperamentally he was curiously like the New England
Jeremiah. He followed Calhoun with the unreasoning and passionate
conviction with which Fisher Ames followed Hamilton. He foresaw a
future laid waste by the ravenings of democracy, and like Ames he
took pleasure in sketching the dark picture. It would be no fault of
his if the easy-going planters remained indifferent to the political
monster that in the guise of Jacksonian democracy had made his den
at Washington and was preparing to devour the liberties of sovereign
commonwealths. He would make haste, while the shadows of those
liberties remained, to arouse Virginia to its peril before the jaws
closed upon it.

It was to this end that he wrote _The Partisan Leader_, an obvious
attempt to dramatize the political philosophy of Calhoun and breathe
into it a war psychology. Its single purpose was to popularize the
doctrine of secession and encourage Virginia to act upon it. The
book was printed at Washington by the notorious Duff Green, who had
quitted Jackson and gone over to Calhoun, and appeared under the pen
name of Edward William Sidney. Written in the last years of Jackson’s
second term, it prophesied Van Buren’s succession and his setting up a
dictatorship. The beginning of the action is projected thirteen years
into the future. Van Buren is assumed to be in his third term and is
seeking election a fourth time. He is in secure and insolent possession
of “the presidential throne.” He has surrounded himself with a horde
of democratic sycophants; his political machine is well oiled and the
army and navy are at his bidding. Virginia has been split asunder by
factions. Mercenaries in Van Buren’s pay occupy the public stations,
and supported by Federal bayonets they carry things with a high hand.
The lower South, under the leadership of South Carolina, has already
seceded, and freed from the exploitation of northern tariffs is
economically rejuvenated. The Virginia patriots are biding their time,
working under cover and making detailed plans to carry the commonwealth
over to the new Confederacy when the hour shall strike. The hand of
fate is no other than economic pressure. The free South has provided
an eloquent object lesson to Virginia planters. By reason of a trade
treaty with England, by the terms of which each country exports to
the other its natural wares unvexed by artificial restrictions--an
industrial economy and an agricultural mutually benefiting by the
exchange--the cotton and tobacco growers to the south of Virginia are
enjoying a prosperity unshared by the exploited planters of the Old
Dominion. When economic depression shall have finally opened the eyes
of Virginians to the folly of a federal union that sacrifices southern
interests to fatten northern manufacturers, the commonwealth must drop
into the lap of the Confederacy like a ripe persimmon. In the meantime
a mysterious Mr. B.--presumably Calhoun--moves adroitly behind the
scenes, shaping matters for the great event--a super-statesman, a man
of godlike sagacity and divine benevolence, a heroic embodiment of all
the magnanimous southern virtues, compared with whom Webster and Clay
are common political mercenaries and Jackson a paltry charlatan.

It is a romantically extravagant book, quite the absurdest in the
library of the old South. It possesses no savor of humor or pleasantry
of satire. Tucker was too deadly in earnest to play with his theme. He
had so long and bitterly brooded over the supposed wrongs of Virginia
that he had lost all sense of proportion. He lacks a cool skill in
dissection; he has not learned the gentlemanly art of flaying his
victim; he defends Virginia with a matchlock instead of a rapier.
Gilmore Simms credited him with one of the most finished prose styles
of the day, and a very recent critic remarks that “no other American
of the time wrote with such classical restraint and pride as Tucker”
(_Cambridge History of American Literature_, Vol. I, p. 312). But there
is little evidence of such mastery in _The Partisan Leader_. It is the
work of an unpracticed writer, with a command of rhetoric to furnish
forth a southern stump-speaker, but quite inadequate to the needs of
a competent novelist. Compared with Simms or Kennedy he is a mere
bungler. His characters are as wooden as Cooper’s females, and his plot
is grossly distorted by his polemics. The drama sags under the weight
of the sacred cause. There is inadvertent comedy in the picture of Van
Buren as the man on horseback--the sleek, well-groomed politician of
history rises somewhat inadequately to the rôle. In comparison with
Kennedy’s _Quodlibet_ his attack upon Jackson is only caricature.
Beverley Tucker was a patriotic Virginian whose craftsmanship proved
inadequate to the serious business in hand.

The backgrounds of his thought are clearly Jeffersonian. His prejudices
run strongly for eighteenth-century _laissez faire_. He is a confirmed
agrarian and his hatred of industrialism amounts to an obsession. He
will have nothing to do with protective tariffs that lay a tax upon
the planter to aid the manufacturer. In his advocacy of political
decentralization he is a disciple of Calhoun, but more pessimistic
than his master. Southern interests can be adequately protected, he
is convinced, only by a jealous insistence on the sovereign powers
of Virginia, and so long as Virginia remains within the centralizing
federal Union those sovereign powers will suffer a subtle diminution.
The simple-minded and magnanimous southern planter was no match in
the political game with unscrupulous and ambitious Northerners. But
in certain significant aspects of his political philosophy, Beverley
Tucker broke with the Jeffersonian tradition. Two current developments
had quite destroyed his faith in the democracy of Jefferson. The
rise of Jacksonianism had seated the rabble in power, and the spread
of Abolitionism was threatening to infect that triumphant rabble
with its poison. The very life of Virginia was at the mercy of a
hostile democracy, and to protect themselves and their slaves from
the encroachments of a democratized federal government seemed to him
the urgent business of the southern planters. Unless a move were made
speedily it would be too late, for the power of the northern democracy
was fast outstripping the confederate power of the South.

Tucker’s intense prejudices color every judgment, and in consequence
his misunderstanding of the North was colossal. He imagined a
profit-mongering clown whom he dubbed Yankee, and solemnly assured
himself that it was an authentic likeness. The Abolitionist was a
Yankee with an added Puritan malignancy. In his defense of slavery
Tucker has corrected the sentimental mistake of Jefferson in assuming
the extinction of slavery to be desirable, but he professes an equally
humanitarian spirit. His benevolence toward the negro is so warmly
generous that one is ready to weep at the sad fate of the faithful
slave who is in danger of being turned out into the cold world by the
wicked Abolitionists. The loyal attachment between master and servant,
he argues, is too finely generous to be understood by the mercenary
North. The Yankees “have not the qualities which would enable them to
comprehend the negro character. Their calculating selfishness can never
understand his disinterested devotion. Their artificial benevolence is
no interpreter of the unsophisticated heart.... They know no more of
the feelings of our slaves, than their fathers could comprehend of the
loyalty of the gallant cavaliers from whom we spring; and for the same
reason. The generous and self-renouncing must ever be a riddle to the
selfish” (p. 205, edition of 1861). Hence it is the clear duty of the
magnanimous planter to keep his generous and self-renouncing slaves out
of the clutches of the selfish Abolitionists.

Something of the ardency of Beverley Tucker’s convictions is revealed
in certain fragments of his letters to Gilmore Simms, to whom he
poured out his heart in uncensored words, and whose magazine, _The
Southern Quarterly Review_, he made use of to further the cause. In
those letters he writes himself down a frank and whole-hearted Tory.
There is an inveterate and ingrained aristocracy of temperament that
will not mince words when it comes to dealing with democracy. In his
comment on the growing democratic spirit he is virulent. He has lost
all hope for Virginia in the year of grace 1851. “She is sunk in the
slough of democracy, which has no sense of honor, no foresight, and is
never valiant but against its own instruments” (W. P. Trent, _William
Gilmore Simms_, p. 186). Georgia is in an even worse way. His spleen
at the commonwealth of Stephens and Toombs--“filled as that State is
with Yankee traders”--spits out venom: “She has been bought, and her
price is in the pockets of those she trusted.” He quotes sardonically
the comment of a Georgia senator: “The State of Georgia is a damned
rascal. I bought and sold her, and will buy her and sell her again
when I please” (_ibid._, p. 182). His only hope is in South Carolina,
and he pleads with Simms for decisive action. Calhoun’s kingdom is
singularly blessed, for no base democracy there sullies the purity of
manly councils. As early as 1820 Tucker had come to realize that the
Union was a curse to the South. “I vowed then, and I have repeated
the vow, _de die in diem_, that I will never give rest to my eyes nor
slumber to my eyelids until it is shattered into fragments.... Time
was when I might have been less desperate, because I could have sought
refuge under some emperor or king. But all such refuges are broken up,
and there is now no escape from the many-headed despotism of numbers,
but by a strong and bold stand on the banks of the Potomac.... If we
will not _have_ slaves, we must _be_ slaves.” He then makes his great
appeal:

  And what are our democracies but mobs? South Carolina alone can
  act, because she is the only State in which the gentleman retains
  his place and influence, and in which the statesman has not been
  degraded from his post. You are fast coming to that hopeless and
  irreclaimable condition; and then all hope of action is gone. Work
  now.... The twilight is already upon you, and hence I fear you will
  not act even _now_. And if not now--never, never, never! (_Ibid._,
  p. 187.)

It was not granted to Beverley Tucker to know what harvests were to be
gathered from his sowings. He did not live to see the fields of his
beloved commonwealth drenched in the blood that he had done more than
his share to let. In that bitter struggle it is certain that he would
have borne his part valiantly. He had sown to the wind, and he would
have welcomed the whirlwind. But the outcome must have broken his proud
heart, and it is well that he was not spared to see his hopes turn to
ashes in his mouth.


Footnotes

[400] For an excellent study, see Francis Pendleton Gaines, _The
Southern Plantation_, 1925.




