Chapter V • Some Contributions of New England


It was the good fortune of New York to draw to the bustling city some
of the best and most vigorous minds of New England. If the sons of
Yankees flocked thither, the sons of Puritans came likewise, and the
contributions of these latter to the idealism of a society rather too
fond of material progress must not be overlooked. The literature of
New York in particular was heavily indebted to New England. One need
only run over a list of writers who came from New England to realize
how great was its total contribution to the production of the New York
group. Bryant and Halleck and Willis and Greeley and Beecher and Curtis
and Tuckerman and Parke Benjamin and Stedman and Stoddard and even, in
a sense, Melville, were products of that more serious-minded world that
was to create transcendentalism and issue in strange projects of social
reform; they were men who would easily share the ethical enthusiasm of
their Puritan fellows, and create a literature concerned with other
than aesthetic values. Not all of them were Puritan in ideals; Halleck
and Willis quite evidently not; nevertheless the severe idealism of
their work sets it apart from the productions of the Knickerbocker
school. Perhaps not above, but certainly apart; and this unlikeness
calls for some special consideration. Over against Irving and Paulding
and Cooper may be set Bryant and Greeley and Melville, and the sharp
contrast between them will serve to differentiate the native mind of
New York from that of New England.


I • William Cullen Bryant • Puritan Liberal

For upwards of half a century now too much of Bryant has been
obscured by the brightness of his early fame. Since his death a
serious injustice has been done him by the critics, who have dwelt
too exclusively on his work in the field of verse to the neglect of
other work in fields perhaps quite as significant. The journalist
has been forgotten in the poet, the later democrat who spoke for
American liberalism has been displaced by the youthful versifier who
described American scenery. For this our bellettristic historians, who
are impatient of any incursions into matter of fact, are to blame.
Yet to ignore so much of Bryant results in underestimating him, and
this serves to explain the thin and shadowy quality of his present
reputation. He was a much larger man and more significant than the
critics have made him out to be. His active and many-sided life is very
inadequately expressed in the slender volume of his verse, excellent
as much of that is. The journalist and critic who for fifty years sat
in judgment on matters political and economic as well as cultural,
who reflected in the _Evening Post_ a refinement of taste and dignity
of character before unequaled in American journalism, was of service
to America quite apart from his contribution to our incipient poetry.
He was the father of nineteenth-century American journalism as well
as the father of nineteenth-century American poetry. In the columns
of the _Evening Post_ the best liberalism of the times found a place,
inspired and guided by Bryant’s clear intelligence. The lucidity of his
comment and the keenness of his humanitarian criticism set the editor
apart from shriller contemporaries, and made him a power for sanity in
a scurrilous generation. But with his death the evanescent character of
even the highest journalism asserted itself, and with the fading of his
journalistic reputation the earlier Bryant of _Thanatopsis_ shouldered
aside the Bryant of the _Evening Post_, and an unconscious distortion
of his career began, a distortion made easier by the fact that no
outstanding work of the later period remained to restore the balance.
In this he is like Jefferson. He is scattered piecemeal through his
occasional writings as the latter through his letters, and the task of
piecing him together and visualizing his work as a whole has not yet
been done.

It will not prove an easy task. The narrow but real genius of Bryant
is peculiarly elusive. His was essentially a self-pollenizing nature
that needed few contacts with other minds. He lived within himself,
little swayed by modes of thought, slowly maturing the native fruit of
his speculation. The very tenacity and persistence of his intellectual
life, the rigid integrity of his thinking, suggest the confidence of
one who drew his nourishment from within, whose life was an organic
growth. It is impossible to mistake his origins. The roots go down
to deep substrata of Puritan seriousness and Puritan austerity, and
the fruits which they nourish--somewhat scanty it may be but of firm
texture and good keeping qualities--possess the slightly acrid flavor
of old Puritan orchards where the care of the husbandman is pitted
against harsh seasons and a meager soil. There is no pagan luxuriance,
no riot of color or scent. The ethical idealism of New England is
given stately form if not rendered altogether lovely; the passion for
righteousness is held in restraint but it retains much of its tempered
acidity. Happily there was little of the schools in Bryant, and nothing
of the intellectual play-boy. His early life in the Berkshire hills, on
his father’s farm, as student at Williams College for a few months, and
as a country lawyer, threw him upon his own intellectual resources and
made possible a normal unfolding of his mind. He was fortunately spared
a much-coveted life at Yale, where the narrow classicism and ungenerous
dogmatisms could have done him little good. From Timothy Dwight the
young Bryant could have got little to enrich his mind, and he might
have got some disastrous checks. Left to himself he appropriated such
nourishment as fell in his way and went forward on the path of a sober
liberalism.

That he went forward at all is sufficient testimony to his native
integrity of character. In 1825 when he removed to New York, the
intellectual renaissance of Boston was just at the beginning, and in
his new environment he never quite kept pace with the transcendental
enthusiasms that so stimulated the New England radicals. At Great
Barrington where he had been growing more discontented with his
“shabby” profession of the law, he discovered little to encourage
an independent liberalism. Bred up in an environment of intolerant
Federalism and an equally intolerant Calvinism, he had much to outgrow
and little to feed on. Few innovating ideas penetrated to the Berkshire
hills where he was brooding on life and poetry, and the training of
his youth was strong upon him. As a mere boy he had expostulated
with President Jefferson in shrill heroic couplets, declaiming on
the latter’s reputed moral lapses and inviting him to resign his
high office. He had summoned Napoleon to the bar of Cummington
respectability and adjudged him guilty of high crimes against humanity;
but such rhetorical outbursts were only echoes of a narrow world he
was soon to outgrow. The blight of the tie-wig school of Fisher Ames
did not fasten itself deeply on him, and by the time he had reached his
twenties he was moving towards the twin goals towards which liberal
New England was moving--the Unitarianism of Channing and the democracy
of Jefferson. It was far more difficult for a Berkshire man to think
his way through to such revolutionary goals than for a Concord; yet
the unschooled Bryant who had never visited Boston till he went there
in his twenty-seventh year to read a poem before the Phi Beta Kappa
society at Harvard had already outstripped the Cambridge scholastics
in the great work of setting his mind free. The stages through which
he passed cannot easily be traced, but the fact of his decisive break
with the dogmas of his youthful world is plain enough. During the last
years at Great Barrington he put himself upon a course of reading and
thinking, and from that provocative experience emerged the Bryant that
we know. Calvinism and Federalism he put away, and he went up to New
York completely new-outfitted in a fashion he never afterwards saw
reason to change. In politics and religion, as in poetry, he was a man
of few ideas, but those ideas were creative, and determined all his
thinking.

For this change that was unconsciously preparing him for his later work
on the _Evening Post_, Bryant owed something to his father, who had
turned moderate Unitarian, but very much more to the Berkshire family
of Sedgwicks, one of whom, Catherine M. Sedgwick, was just beginning
her modest career as a “lady novelist;” another, Henry M. Sedgwick,
was at the head of the New York bar, wealthy and liberal-minded; and
a third, Theodore Sedgwick, Jr., was a trusted adviser on legal and
economic matters, on whose pen Bryant came to rely in a difficult
situation. Theodore Sedgwick seems to have been a liberal of the
English school of Bright and Cobden, a confirmed free trader, and he
induced Bryant to undertake a course of reading in political economy.
During the years 1822 to 1824 the young man turned away from poetry and
law to study Adam Smith, Thornton, and Ricardo, together with a number
of pamphlets that issued from the Parliamentary debates over free trade
in 1820. The adventure proved stimulating and definitely determined
his attitude towards men and measures at a moment when American ideas
were in a state of flux. It was therefore as an English liberal that he
judged Jackson and Clay and Webster, and as an English liberal that he
weighed the Utopian programs of Greeley and Brisbane and Ripley. There
is no evidence that he read the works of the French romantics, although
the major ideas of Rousseau came to him in the guise of Unitarianism;
and this aloofness from the social enthusiasm of French thought, this
failure to sympathize with the idealism of the new sociology, may
perhaps be accounted his greatest intellectual shortcoming. Rousseau
and Godwin and Mary Wollstonecraft could have taught him much that
he needed to know, could have warmed his cool blood and awakened his
Puritan sense of justice to the wrongs of an exploitative order. A dash
of Utopian enthusiasm would have made him a better poet and a better
editor; but lacking that he found himself sometimes out of sympathy
with men and women whom he should have understood better. A liberal
might smile at the measureless zeal of Fanny Wright and Robert D. Owen;
might dislike the militancy of the Abolitionists; he might well counsel
moderation; but he should not add his shaft to the flight sent against
them. But unfortunately Bryant too often distrusted those who outran
him, and would rather attack than restrain them.[426]

As an English liberal it was inevitable that Bryant should turn
Democrat and support Jackson against Clay and Adams; and an ardent
Democrat he remained till the re-alignment over the slavery question
turned him into a free-soiler. He early supported Lincoln for the
Republican nomination--the more easily because members of his family
had removed to Illinois and there followed the career of Lincoln
sympathetically--and he accepted the Republican faith till the open
alliance of the party with post-war capitalism aroused his opposition
and weakened his allegiance. Democrat though he was in conviction
and sympathy, Bryant was never a Jeffersonian, perhaps not even a
Jacksonian, but rather an anti-Whig, who measured the new America of
the industrial revolution and capitalistic finance by the yardstick of
eighteenth-century liberalism. As a disciple of Adam Smith, believing
in the sufficiency of _laissez faire_, he looked askance at an
engrossing political state that enlisted its sovereign powers on the
side of the longest purses, and he viewed with scorn the mercenaries
of the bench and Senate who defended the new citadels of capitalism.
In spite of his augmenting wealth he remained a simple countryman
at heart, never a city man, never liking the ways of Wall Street,
concerned with other things than money-making. If he had supplemented
Adam Smith with Du Pont de Nemours he might easily have followed
Jefferson into a Physiocratic agrarianism; if he had been bred in the
frontier West he might have discovered more sympathy for a coonskin
equalitarianism with its engrossing majority will. As it was, he
occupied a middle ground between Jefferson and Jackson, an economic
individualist who refused to conceive of the political state as a fat
cow to be milked by whoever could lay hands on her. He wanted no share
of the milk for himself and he saw no reason why others should have
any. He turned his back on all middle-class temptations, refusing to
speculate, not grasping at unearned increment, believing that America
had a nobler destiny in store than could be measured by exploitation.
An old-fashioned liberal, he set himself resolutely against the
exploitative spirit that was clamoring for internal improvements, a
protective tariff, speculative profits. The bitter struggle over the
Bank and the American System, in which he was drawn to Jackson by
principle as well as by admiration for his courage, laid the emphasis
in his mind on financial and industrial problems and made him the
outstanding journalistic opponent of Henry Clay. From first to last
Bryant was anti-Whig.

There were times, to be sure, when he went further than that;
times when his ingrained liberalism threw off its cool restraint
and flamed up in dangerously disturbant fashion. In the depths of
his Puritan nature was a quick sense of justice that might uncover
strange potentialities; and associated as he was in the intimacies
of daily work with two of the most radical spirits in New York,
William Leggett and Parke Godwin, he could not remain untouched by
their social enthusiasms. The former was a man of immense vitality
and boundless sympathies, to whom social justice was a religion. A
left-wing equalitarian democrat, Leggett hated all tariffs, subsidies,
monopolies, credit manipulation, everything that the new capitalism
represented. His sympathies were enlisted on the side of the new
proletarian movement, and with the zeal of a knight-errant he greeted
every opportunity to do battle for the cause. A home-made radical,
created out of the native economics of the industrial revolution, he
has been called by a late historical writer “one of the most sincere
and brilliant apostles of democracy that America has ever known.” His
political leaders in the _Evening Post_ aroused the admiration of such
different men as Whittier and Walt Whitman, and were “perhaps the most
potent force in shaping the ideas of democracy” held by the latter
(Allan Nevins, _The Evening Post, etc._, p. 141). His son-in-law,
Godwin, on the other hand, was a radical of the imported school,
an ardent disciple of Fourier, deeply concerned with communistic
experiments at Brook Farm and elsewhere, and an assistant editor
of _The Harbinger_, the mouthpiece of Brook Farm after it passed
from transcendental to Fourierist control. His _Democracy, Pacific
and Constructive_, was accounted by Horace Greeley the best of the
contemporary studies of collectivism. Less militant than Leggett, his
radicalism ebbed with the years and growing prosperity, but it sufficed
to instruct Bryant in the elements of the current Utopian philosophies.

With such associates the older man was led somewhat unwillingly into
the thick of social struggle and his mind shifted unconsciously to
the left. The movement of Locofocoism in particular absorbed Leggett
and drew Bryant after him. Set on foot by a combination of reforming
economists opposed to banks, paper money, and monopolies, and the
rising proletarian movement then beginning its long struggle to
unionize the city workers, Locofocoism represented the extreme left
wing of democratic equalitarianism, the avowed objective of which
was to take government out of the hands of bankers and lodge it in
the hands of the producers. It was one of the first native attempts
at conscious class alignment between capital and labor. “What
distinguishes the present from every other struggle in which the human
race has been engaged,” wrote Fanny Wright, “is that the present is
evidently, openly and acknowledgedly a war of class.... It is the
ridden people of the earth who are struggling to overthrow the ‘booted
and spurred riders’ whose legitimate title to work and starve will
no longer pass current” (quoted by Fox, _Aristocracy in the Politics
of New York_, p. 396). How the democratic radicalism of Leggett was
received by conservative New York is thus described by the historian of
the _Evening Post_:

  He was charged [says Nevins] with Utopianism, agrarianism,
  Fanny-Wrightism, Jacobinism, and Jack Cade-ism. His writings were
  said to set class against class, and to threaten the nation with
  anarchy. Gov. William M. Marcy called Leggett a “knave.” The
  advance of the Locofoco movement was likened to the great fire
  and the great cholera plague of these years. When Chief Justice
  Marshall died in the summer of 1835, Leggett unsparingly assailed
  him and Hamilton as men who had tried “to change the character of
  the government from popular to monarchical,” and to destroy “the
  great principle of human liberty.”... Ex-Mayor Philip Hone was
  handed that editorial on the Albany steamboat by Charles King, and
  dropped the journal with the vehement ejaculation, “Infamous!”
  “This is absolutely a species of impiety for which I want words to
  express my abhorrence,” he entered in his diary. (Allan Nevins,
  _The Evening Post, etc._, p. 152.)

The enthusiasm of Leggett sometimes carried further than the more
tempered liberalism of Bryant could follow. He shared Leggett’s
distrust of Marshall and Hamilton, but he seems to have been only a
moderate supporter of Locofoco principles. The paper had been brought
close upon financial breakers by its attack on the money-interests. The
working classes read it eagerly, but their indorsement could not make
good the loss of advertising and patronage by the wealthy; yet even
in such straits Bryant remained true to his liberalism and joined his
associates in upholding the proletarian cause. The labor union movement
had aroused the wrath of the employers and the courts were appealed to
to suppress it. In May, 1836, “twenty-one journeymen tailors who had
formed a union were indicted for a conspiracy injurious to trade and
commerce,” and after a trial the presiding judge charged the jury to
bring in a verdict of guilty. Bryant at once attacked the judge in the
_Evening Post_:

  We do not admit, until we have further examined the question, that
  the law is as laid down by the Judge; but if it be, the sooner
  such a tyrannical and wicked law is abrogated the better.... The
  idea that arrangements and combinations for certain rates of wages
  are injurious to trade and commerce, is as absurd as the idea that
  the current prices of the markets, which are always the result
  of understandings and combinations, are injurious. (_Ibid._, pp.
  164-165.)

When the tailors were heavily fined by the court Bryant returned to
the attack. He again pointed out the fatuousness of the legal logic
by showing how the very price current was a similar evidence of
conspiracy, and then appealed to a sense of common fairness:

  Can anything be imagined more abhorrent to every sentiment of
  generosity and justice, than the law which arms the rich with the
  legal right to fix, by assize, the wages of the poor? If this is
  not slavery, we have forgotten its definition. Strike the right of
  associating for the sale of labor from the privileges of a freeman,
  and you may as well bind him to a master, or ascribe him to the
  soil. (_Ibid._, p. 165.)

From defending the rights of free labor to defending the rights of free
speech, was an easy step. When James G. Birney’s Abolitionist press
was suppressed by a Cincinnati mob, Bryant spoke out vigorously. “So
far as we are concerned, we are resolved that this despotism shall
neither be submitted to nor encouraged.... We are resolved that the
subject of slavery shall be, as it ever has been, as free a subject
for discussion, and argument, and declamation, as the difference
between whiggism and democracy, or the difference between Arminians
and Calvinists” (_ibid._, p. 171). And when Elijah P. Lovejoy was
murdered and his press thrown into the river, Bryant replied to those
who believed that the Abolitionists had got their deserts: “Whether
they erred or not in their opinions, they did not err in the conviction
of their right, as citizens of a democratic State, to express them;
nor did they err in defending their rights with an obstinacy that
yielded only to death” (_ibid._, pp. 171-172). From the defense of free
speech Bryant went forward to the defense of free soil, and in 1848 he
bolted Lewis Cass, the Democratic nominee, and joined the “Barnburner”
movement that nominated Martin Van Buren. The terse pronouncement of
the convention, indeed, might well be taken as an epitome and summary
of Bryant’s lifelong liberalism--“We inscribe on our banner Free Soil,
Free Speech, Free Labor, and Free Men.”

A trenchant critic of the rising capitalism, delighting in exposing
the fallacies of the new economics and in pricking the bladders of
political reputations--suggesting, for example, that it was scarcely
god-like of the great Webster to accept a purse of $65,000 from his
high tariff friends--Bryant was perhaps the most distinguished of the
liberals created by the revolutions that were enthroning the middle
class in power. The simplicity of his _laissez-faire_ philosophy, like
his admiration for “Old Bullion” Benton--whom he rated one of the
greatest statesmen of the times--may seem somewhat old-fashioned today;
but his ingrained democracy, his sturdy defense of the rights of free
men, his championship of unpopular causes, his tolerance and fairness
and keen sense of justice, ought not to seem old-fashioned. He may not
have been a great poet, but he was a great American.


II • Horace Greeley • Yankee Radical

Horace Greeley has suffered far more disastrously than Bryant the
common fate of journalists, yet his place in nineteenth-century America
was too important and his influence on current democratic ideals
too great, to be carelessly ignored. A Yankee radical transported
to New York, he was the spokesman of the common sense and practical
intelligence of the plain people of the North, seeking to understand
the revolutionary upheaval then going forward, and bring it if possible
to some issue in elementary justice. Far from being the visionary he
was so often accounted, he was the most practical of men, accepting
fact and seeking to square theory with reality; as ready to adopt
new social machinery as the mill-owner to adopt a new invention. If
there were social maladjustments, why should they not be set right?
The patent confusions of the times seemed to him a challenge to the
common intelligence. If civilization meant anything it ought to mean a
generous life for the producing mass, and with the abundant resources
of America the common well-being would never lie in jeopardy if simple
justice prevailed. America had not yet fulfilled its promise; it had
not yet become the haven for the poor and outcast its potential means
allowed; nor with its growing cities where poverty found a congenial
home, and its patrimony of raw lands flung to speculators, was it
likely to become so unless greater ingenuity were applied to the
problem. The industrial revolution was driving western civilization
into uncharted seas; clearly, it was only common sense to take bearings
and lay as fair a course as possible. To accomplish this Greeley was
ready to entertain any promising suggestion. Intellectually curious,
he had the wit to understand that the older agrarian America was being
destroyed by forces that could not be stopped; they could only be
guided. His eyes were wide open to what was taking place. He foresaw
certain consequences implicit in the industrial revolution that his
fellows were blind to. If it brought material advancement and the
multiplication of conveniences--things excellent in themselves--it
brought as well a sinister exploitation of the producers, as England
with her Manchester slums had learned to her sorrow. If America were
driving straight toward such dead-seas of wretchedness, surely only a
conscienceless fool would refuse to help trim the sails.

No more admirable Yankee than Horace Greeley ever went West to make his
fortune. With his Yankee capacity for hard work, his daring enterprise,
his vigorous independence, he embodied an extremely sensitive social
conscience, keen sympathy for those who do the work of the world,
and a transparent honesty of mind and purpose. Bred up in the narrow
poverty of the Vermont hills, remote from the culture of Boston and
Cambridge, he retained the angularities that marked his frontier
origin. His ungainly and shabby exterior was the outward, visible
sign of a niggardly youth; yet underneath the uncouth exterior was
as warm a heart as ever beat in Yankee bosom. His early life was a
bitter struggle, aggravated by the succession of economic depressions
that from 1819 to 1838 repeatedly brought hardship upon the country.
Cradled thus in the anxieties attending the transition from an agrarian
to a capitalistic order, nurtured in the harassing uncertainties that
followed the break-up of the old static economy, he longed for a more
rational social system, unsoiled by the heart-breaking wreckages that
drifted into the new slums, unembittered by the lonely tragedies that
laid a blight on the frontier. He believed that the honest worker,
whether in the factory or on the farm, deserved a better fate than
commonly fell to his lot. It was a scandal that poverty should dog his
footsteps in a land potentially so rich as America; that those who did
the necessary work of society should find themselves reduced to the
status of the slave, whether black or white; and he early determined to
explore the reasons why the workingman received so small an increment
of the augmenting wealth of the industrial revolution. His struggles
to gain a foothold in New York set him upon thinking, and before he
was thirty he began those speculations on ways and means of returning
to the producer a fair reward for his work, that were to occupy his
mind to the last. The farmer and the wage-earner he took to his heart,
and the furtherance of their well-being--despite the persistent and
vindictive opposition he encountered--became a major objective of _The
Tribune_.

Greeley’s mind was as homespun as his clothes, and he never quite
outgrew certain Vermont parochialisms that retarded his intellectual
development. The environment in which he was bred was staunchly
Federalist-Whig, marked by the exuberantly nationalistic spirit that
sprang from the War of 1812; and the seeds of his national economy
were sown in those years when to become nationally self-sufficient
was the great ideal of America. It was natural for him to accept the
leadership of Clay, whom he idolized, and to look to the Federal
government for an adequate policy of internal improvements and national
development. “We Vermonters were all Protectionists,” he said in
his _Recollections_. In 1828 the village of Poultney, where he was
serving his apprenticeship, gave 334 votes for John Quincy Adams
and only four for Jackson. Starting with this back-country faith in
a benevolent paternalism, Greeley early began his speculations on
an ideal national economy; and the conclusion to which he came, and
which he never saw reason to question later, was that government
must impose an intelligent wardship upon economic forces, that, left
to themselves, tend always to the anarchy of individualism. He had
suffered in his own person from the inadequacy and uncertainty of the
financial and industrial machinery of the times; he was impatient of
all purposeless floundering; the more he read the more rational it
seemed that statesmanship must be judged by its intelligent concern to
lessen the social waste and reduce the social friction. _Laissez faire_
he pronounced a “suicidal” policy; it was an invitation to anarchy; it
had impoverished India, and must impoverish America. From a critical
study of the teachings of the Manchester school he came to two major
conclusions: that agriculture and manufacturing are complementary
industries, and the closer they are drawn together the better for the
nation; and that a wide national economy can result only from investing
the state with adequate regulatory powers. Hence his approval of Clay’s
American System. The judicious intervention of government by means of a
protective tariff to foster the “infant industries,” would secure them
a domestic market that would--he allowed himself to hope--be regulated
by domestic competition, would do away with the waste represented by
transportation charges, and would return to the farmer an increase in
price represented by those charges. In his opinion, however, protection
was a temporary expedient, necessary only until American industries
should get on their legs. “Protection is the shortest way to get free
trade,” he said in 1851 (_The Tribune_, January 23).

Greeley was never the tool of capitalistic interests that such an
argument might seem to imply. All his mature life he persistently
fought the aggressions of capitalism; yet in this crucial matter
of protection his influence was thrown powerfully on its side, and
the ingenious argument he expounded was at once taken over by the
industrialists and used with telling effect. What particular turn he
gave to the older Whig statement, adapting it to the prejudices of a
more democratic electorate, a present-day economist has thus summarized:

  The protective tariff, favored by the Whigs, was something
  different in his hands. The tariff arguments of his boyhood had
  been capitalistic arguments. Protect capital, their spokesman said,
  because wages are too high in this country. Eventually wages will
  come towards the European level and we shall not need protection.
  Greeley revised this plea; protect the wage earner, he said, in
  order that he may rise from this present condition of slavery. The
  only way to protect him against the foreign pauper is to protect
  the price of his product. But since capital owns and sells his
  product, we must needs protect capital. We know right well, he
  says, that a protective tariff cannot redress all wrongs.... The
  extent of its power to benefit the laborer is limited by the force
  and pressure of domestic competition, for which Political Economy
  has as yet devised no remedy. (John R. Commons, “Horace Greeley
  and the Working Class Origins of the Republican Party,” _Political
  Science Quarterly_, Vol. XXIV, pp. 468-488.)

The argument for protection has been little improved since it came
from Greeley’s hands in the late forties and early fifties.[427]
Nor, it must be added, has political economy devised the remedy for
the evils of competition, that Greeley was concerned about, unless
monopolistic control be regarded as such. Considering his extraordinary
influence with the mass of farmers north and west, it must be accounted
a calamity to agrarian prospects that _The Tribune_--a paper that
Professor Commons characterized as “the first and only great vehicle
this country has known for the ideas and experiments of constructive
democracy”--should have thrown its influence on the side of artificial
industrial expansion. That the mind of the northern farmer became so
deeply inoculated with protectionist views, and has since persistently
remained so, was due to Horace Greeley far more than to any other man.

The irony of it becomes apparent when the deeper spirit of Greeley’s
life is probed. Though he called himself a Whig, he was in all
fundamental interests and conceptions a Jeffersonian, seeking in the
spirit of the great Virginian to fashion a new philosophy to suit
the new times, more like him in free speculation than any other
northern thinker of the day. It needed years for him to throw off
the Federalist-Whig prepossessions of his youth, and work back to
Jeffersonian fundamentals; but in the end he did work back, and in the
end--always excepting this one matter of protection with its corollary
of state paternalism--he came by his own path to the major conclusions
Jefferson had reached a half century before. He was a spokesman of the
older America seeking a way out of the confusions the middle class
was bringing on the later America. In his social-mindedness that
set justice above exploitation; in his readiness to change existing
institutions in order to achieve justice; in his strong preference for
an agrarian order as more wholesome than an industrial; in his trust in
the good will of the plain people and faith in the local democracies;
in his acceptance of the principle of states rights that during the
struggle over slavery led him to advocate that the South be suffered
to depart in peace:--in such conceptions he was a Neo-Jeffersonian,
seeking to adapt the old principles to the needs of a different order.
Greeley had never read the works of the French Physiocrats; he was
unacquainted with their doctrine of the _produit net_; very likely he
would not have accepted their teachings to the extent that Jefferson
did. Nevertheless from his own experience he had come to agree with
them in the exaltation of agriculture over other forms of labor, as he
had come to agree with them in their social-mindedness. Greeley may be
accounted a stepson, at least, of the old French school.

That for so long a time he should have turned aside from the path
of Jeffersonianism to immerse himself in Utopian speculations and
adventures may appear strange; and yet for so eager and hopeful a
temperament it was the most natural thing in the world. It marked a
step in the speculations through which he passed in pursuit of that
remedy for domestic competition which the political economists had
not provided. He was twenty-nine when Albert Brisbane’s _The Social
Destiny of Mankind_ appeared in 1840, and on October 21, 1841, the
first comment on Fourier socialism was printed in _The Tribune_,
then only six months old. Thereafter for years _The Tribune_ was the
chief organ for the spread of collectivistic principles in the United
States, Brisbane expounding Fourierism in the fifties, and Karl Marx
contributing a weekly letter on European movements in the sixties,
while lesser men contributed freely according to their special Utopian
lights. With all this Greeley was in profound sympathy. Much of the
theory he did not agree with; many of the plans and specifications
seemed to him ill conceived; but convinced of the gross evils of
civilization he welcomed free speculation as promising the only hope
for their cure. Like Jefferson and William Ellery Channing, he put
his trust in the unshackled mind, for like them he believed in the
essential excellence of human nature when unperverted by vicious
institutions.

It was this romantic faith that induced him to invest heavily in time,
thought and money, in the Fourieristic foundations of the forties,
the North American Phalanx in particular offering an opportunity for
experiment on a considerable scale. In his deep concern over the
selfishness of the competitive struggle, he was willing to turn from
the bankrupt political economists to consider the plans of the “social
architects.” From Plato down those architects had been engaged on plans
of ideal commonwealths, wherein the principle of brotherhood should
supersede the principle of competition, and he believed the time had
come when the great experiment might be tried with some reasonable hope
of success. If the principle of collectivism could be successfully
substituted for a chaotic individualism, the solution of the ancient
problem of social injustice might be in a way to be achieved. This in
itself, he believed, “would do for domestic competition what protection
would do for foreign competition” (John R. Commons, _Horace Greeley,
etc._). When associationism failed, Greeley turned his thoughts eagerly
to coöperation as a promising means of eliminating the waste of the
middleman and destroying the wage system.[428] Somehow the middleman
must be got rid of, he believed, if labor were to reap an adequate
reward from its work. If one method did not achieve the result, another
must be tried. To leave off seeking a solution was to acknowledge that
society must remain a pigsty, with the strongest hogs appropriating the
swill.

Such persistent venturing into Utopian experiment made Greeley the
laughing-stock of more practical men who accepted the acquisitive
instinct as the voice of God and were busily engaged in exploitation
for their individual advantage; more important, it reveals how tenuous
were the ties that held him to the Whiggery he still professed.
Stalwart Whigs of the Webster school, middle-class bankers and
industrialists, grew impatient with such pestilent heresies as exuded
from _The Tribune_, and denied that Greeley was a Whig. In 1847 _The
Courier and Enquirer_ angrily protested:

  There can be no peace in the Whig ranks while the old New York
  Tribune is continued to be called Whig.... The _principles_ of the
  Whig party are well defined; they are _conservative_ and inculcate
  a regard for the laws and support of all established institutions
  of the country. They eschew _radicalism_ in every form; they
  sustain the constitution and the laws; they foster a spirit of
  _patriotism_.... The better way for the Tribune would be at once
  to admit that it is only Whig on the subject of the Tariff ...
  and then devote itself to the advocacy of Anti-Rent, Abolition,
  Fourierite, and Vote Yourself a Farm doctrines. (_The Weekly
  Tribune_, August 21, 1847; quoted in Commons, _Horace Greeley,
  etc._, p. 473.)

The real animus of the middle-class dislike of Greeley is to be sought
in his active championship of the great exploited classes, the farmer
and wage-earner. He was always sowing the seeds of discontent amongst
them. The betterment of their condition, he believed, was fundamental
to any sound social progress. He was convinced that their well-being
was interrelated; that whatever affected the one must affect the other.
If the city proletariat were prosperous, the farmer’s produce sold at
better prices; and if the farmers were prosperous, the country would
draw off the surplus labor from the towns and thereby sustain the wage
scale. The key to the situation, he came to believe, lay in the land
situation. The application of science to farm processes was a necessary
preliminary to agrarian improvement, and he put the great influence
of _The Tribune_ behind the movement for scientific instruction in
crop handling. But far more fundamental and immediate was the need of
a drastic change in the Federal laws governing land sales. Believing
that the wild lands of the West were a natural refuge for those who
fled from the exploitation of the factory, he was concerned that those
lands should be made available to the poorest settler. Greeley very
well knew that the ruthless exploitation of the English proletariat was
an inevitable consequence of the enclosure movement. Dispossessed of
their land and lacking means to emigrate, the peasant had been thrown
like sheep to the industrial wolves. Sunk in a hopeless wage-slavery,
the Manchester factory-hand was an object-lesson in the fate that
awaits the landless, too striking for a shrewd observer like Greeley to
miss; and his agrarian program was proof that he had taken Goldsmith’s
warning to heart:

  Ill fares the land, to hastening ills a prey,
  Where wealth accumulates and men decay.

The freeholder, whatever the hardships of his lot, was still a free man
and a free citizen, no fodder to fling to a huge-bellied industrialism.

To keep him thus free and independent, Greeley put himself vigorously
into the great agrarian movement of the forties and fifties--the
movement to democratize the national land policy that eventuated in
the Homestead Act of 1862. The conception of the strategic usefulness
of the western lands as a refuge for the city proletariat he derived
from George Henry Evans, who in 1828 had established _The Working Man’s
Advocate_, was active in organization work with the mechanics of New
York City, and contributed to the cause numerous pamphlets, one of
which, issued in 1844, was entitled _Vote Yourself a Farm_. The pioneer
work had been well done when, in 1845, Greeley joined the movement,
accepted the arguments, and thenceforth was tireless in spreading the
doctrine. The principle on which he should work he laid down in _The
Tribune_:

  The freedom of the public lands to actual settlers and the
  limitation of future acquisitions of land to some reasonable
  amount, are ... measures which seem to us vitally necessary to the
  ultimate emancipation from thraldom and misery. What is mainly
  wanted is that each man should have an assured chance to earn and
  then an assurance of the just fruits of his labors. (Quoted in
  Commons, _Horace Greeley, etc._, p. 482.)

To accomplish this result Greeley introduced into Congress the first
Homestead bill, according to the proposed terms of which any _bona
fide_ settler might file on one hundred and sixty acres of public
land, to be paid for within seven years at the rate of $1.25 an acre;
all public lands not thus filed on by actual settlers were to be
listed at $5.00 an acre.[429] Greeley’s bill was aimed directly at
the old scandal of favoring wealthy speculators at the expense of the
small man, a scandal that ran far back into the past. The traditional
argument had been that the government could not go into the retail land
business, but should sell in great blocks to responsible men who should
in turn put settlers on the land. The policy had bred huge corruption,
it had aroused bitter opposition, and had roiled the politics of
more than one state holding western lands. In the early years of the
century the province of Maine had repudiated Massachusetts Federalism
and turned to the Republican party by reason of discontent with the
old system[430] and the fierce Anti-Rent riots in New York State were
of recent occurrence. It was against this policy of favoritism that
Greeley protested, thereby bringing on his head sharp criticism from
the respectable class, who declaimed bitterly against the demagoguery
of a man who openly advocated a “vote yourself a farm” policy. To pay
a middleman’s price for public land, after that land had been wheedled
from Congress in the dark of the moon, seemed to many gentlemen the
only honest and patriotic way; but Greeley was unconvinced by such
reasoning, and his concern over the problem became acute when the
railroads began to appropriate huge tracts of the public domain. The
policy of subsidizing them thus seemed to him wasteful and vicious; it
ran directly counter to his fundamental principle of limitation of land
holdings; it was repeating on a vast scale the ominous landlordism of
the past.

  Man has a _natural right_ to produce and acquire property [he
  wrote], and therefore, I condemn a system of Land Monopoly, which
  robs the producer of one-half to seven-eighths of the fruits of his
  toil; and often dooms him to absolute starvation on the soil which
  he has faithfully and effectively tilled! The right of owning land
  is one thing: the right to own thousands and even millions of acres
  of land is another. The problem is learning to distinguish the one
  from the other. (_The Tribune_, April 24, 1849.)

“Settle the lands compactly and railroads will be constructed through
them rapidly and abundantly,” he said later. “The grants do essentially
interfere with the true policy of granting lands in limited allotment
to actual settlers” (_ibid._, March 16, 1852). His proposed policy was
far-sighted and socially just, but it was repudiated by a speculative
middle class that would not have its unearned increment curtailed by
visionaries.

Thoughtful as was Greeley’s concern for the farmer, his concern for the
city worker was even greater. The wretchedness of the New York slums
was daily under his eye, and his honest heart was troubled at what he
saw. That he should have sympathized with the emerging labor movement
was inevitable; his conscience dictated his stand, but his eager mind
drove him to intelligent inquiry and vigorous support. He was the first
American of wide reputation and influence to give serious consideration
to the effects on the working class of the industrial revolution with
its gospel of exploitation. The exploitation of natural resources
was well enough; but the exploitation of human life was a different
matter. A material prosperity based on social injustice, a civilization
founded on slavery, he would have none of. That this great matter of
slavery was inadequately understood and too narrowly interpreted by the
Abolitionists, he was early convinced. He agreed with William Grayson
and the southern apologists, that slavery existed in New York as well
as in Charleston. “The worker of the Nineteenth Century,” he said in
_The Emancipation of Labor_, “stands a sad and care-worn man”; in
America as well as in Europe he is falling into “that train of thought
which is beginning to encircle the globe, and of which the burden may
be freely rendered thus--‘_Why should those by whose toil ALL comforts
and luxuries are produced or made available enjoy so scanty a share
of them?_’” If Theodore Parker could have lived a few years longer he
must have shared Greeley’s concern; but amongst the Abolitionists only
Wendell Phillips joined with him in espousing the cause of the working
class. Others held aloof. When appealed to in the middle-seventies to
aid the labor movement, William Lloyd Garrison denied the existence of
wage-slavery in America, and indignantly declined to take part in the
proletarian agitation.[431]

Greeley’s views would be reckoned advanced even today; before the
Civil War they were regarded as incendiary, calculated to awaken class
prejudice in a country where, as all patriotic Americans knew, classes
did not exist. What, for example, could simple-minded Abolitionists
make of a letter he wrote declining to attend an anti-slavery
convention in Cincinnati in 1845?

  You will readily understand that, if I regard your enterprise with
  less absorbing interest than you do, it is not that I deem Slavery
  a less but a greater evil. If I am less troubled concerning the
  Slavery prevalent in Charleston and New-Orleans, it is because
  I see so much Slavery in New-York, which appears to claim my
  first efforts.... [I would not] undertake to say that the Slavery
  of the South is not more hideous in kind and degree than that
  which prevails at the North. The fact that it is more flagrant
  and palpable renders opposition to it comparatively easy and its
  speedy downfall certain. But how can I devote myself to a crusade
  against distant servitude, when I discern its essence pervading my
  immediate community and neighborhood?

  _I understand by Slavery, that condition in which one human being
  exists mainly as a convenience for other human beings_--in which
  the time, the exertions, the faculties of a part of the Human
  Family are made to subserve, not their own development, physical,
  intellectual, and moral, but the comfort, advantage, or caprices of
  others.... In short, wherever service is rendered from one human
  being to another ... where the relation ... is one not of affection
  and reciprocal good offices, but of authority, social ascendency
  and power over subsistence on the one hand, and of necessity,
  servility, and degradation on the other--there, in my view, is
  Slavery. (“Slavery at Home,” in _Hints toward Reforms_.)

Here is a definition that may well be considered Utopian; but however
transcendental his general conception, Greeley was far too practical to
pursue abstractions. Having diagnosed the common disease that infects
all modern civilization, he was willing to use remedies that came to
hand. Before 1845 he opposed labor legislation, on the ground that the
evil was social; but later he supported the movement to limit the legal
working day by statute. More and more, however, he came to believe
that any lasting betterment must come from effective organization of
the workers; that the salvation of labor lay in its own hands; and the
great end towards which he looked was coöperation. The stumbling-block
that stood in the way of coöperative effort was the common distrust and
suspicion that poisoned the minds of working men; until they emptied
their hearts of that evil, the path that labor must follow would be
flinty and its life meager and hard.

An incorrigible idealist, clearly, was this Yankee plebeian whom Cooper
believed a vulgarian, Godkin held in contempt, and Bryant turned his
back on and would not speak to--a strange, child-like figure, with
his round moon-face, eyes blinking through spectacles and a fringe
of whiskers that invited the pencil of the cartoonist--yet carrying
the sorrows of the world in his heart and vexing his soul with all
the problems of society; an idealist who in the most sordid place in
America, and after years of fruitless experiment, could still stand
before his fellow Americans and thus sum up his social philosophy--“the
avocations of Life, and the usages and structure of Society, the
relations of Power to Humility, of Wealth to Poverty, of served to
servant, must all be fused in the crucible of Human Brotherhood, and
whatever abides not the test, rejected” (_Hints toward Reforms_, p.
400). In this faith--foolish it may be accounted by practical men, and
futile, but certainly not mean, not ignoble--Horace Greeley lived and
worked; to it he gave such strength and powers as were his, and he died
at sixty-one of a broken heart. He foolishly wished to be President,
but the American electorate that read his paper refused its votes, and
his hopes were destroyed by the careless many who were untroubled about
industrial pigstys.


III • Herman Melville • Pessimist

Set down beside the austere Bryant and the plebeian Greeley, Herman
Melville seems grotesquely out of company; and yet such proximities may
suggest, better perhaps than words, an explanation of the futility of
his dreams and the irony of the bitter penance of his days. Lifelong
he was lacerated by the coldly moral in his environment, and harassed
by the crudely practical; and without forcing the comparison, one may
feel that Bryant and Greeley embodied in nobler form the twin forces
that seized upon his bold and rich nature, and bound it to the rocks to
be fed on by eagles. Like Jacob he wrestled all night with an angel,
yet got no blessing from the touched thigh. Instead, his free spirit
was tormented and his adventurous heart seared with fire. Far more
truly than of De Quincey might one say of Melville: _Eccovi_, this
little child has been in hell! All the powers of darkness fought over
him, all the devils plagued him. They drove him down into the gloom of
his tormented soul, and if they did not conquer, they left him maimed
and stricken. The golden dreams of transcendental faith, that buoyed
up Emerson and gave hope to Thoreau, turned to ashes in his mouth;
the white gleams of mysticism that now and then lighted up his path
died out and left him in darkness. Life could not meet the demands he
made on it, certainly not life in America in the eighteen-fifties; the
malady lay deeper than Greeley thought--it lay in the futility of life
itself; and so after pursuing his vain dreams to the ends of the seas,
the rebellious transcendentalist withdrew within himself while awaiting
annihilation. There is no other tragedy in American letters comparable
to the tragedy of Herman Melville. Bryant’s melancholy is only the
gentle pensiveness of twilight compared to the midnight of his
pessimism. Hawthorne’s gloom is no more than the skeptical questioning
of life by a nature that knew no fierce storms; Poe’s is only the
atrabilious wretchedness of a dipsomaniac.

In the presence of a nature so tempestuous and fiercely honest, it
is a rash critic who will dogmatize. There is no simple clue to his
mystery, no common pass-key to unlock his mind. Raymond Weaver in
his brilliantly creative study has perhaps done all that the critic
can to light up the darkness, and later commentators can only follow
in his footsteps. In so far as a simple explanation may suffice, the
biographer finds it in certain frustrations that curdled the milk of
his romance and turned it sour. Like Mark Twain in later years, he
recoiled savagely from the smug conventions of society; but when he
spoke out his views--instead of discreetly locking them up in his
safe--and found himself fiercely assailed for unorthodoxy, he bade the
world go to the devil and would have nothing more to do with its praise
or blame. A proud sensitive nature, he took the world’s contumely _au
tragique_, and suffered it to mortify him. Or perhaps he was more
like James Branch Cabell than Mark Twain. An arch romantic, he vainly
sought to erect his romantic dreams as a defense against reality, and
suffered disaster. In love with the ideal, and pursuing it in a wild
adventure into the South Seas--his magic realm of Poictesme--yet “not
so much bound to any haven ahead as rushing from all havens astern,”
he found there only disenchantment. Seeking his satisfactions in love
of mother and wife, he came upon utter disillusion. The austerely prim
and coldly correct Maria Gansevoort, to whom his boyish heart yielded
itself passionately, was clearly no woman to satisfy his need of
intelligent sympathy, and he fled moodily from the pale negations of
a stifling environment. Even the finely loyal Elizabeth Shaw whom he
married seems only to have completed his disillusion, and he withdrew
into his study, and falling into “Plato’s honied head,” like Tashtego
into the whale’s head, “sweetly,” or wretchedly, “perished there.” It
is the plague of the idealizing mind that is forever comparing a wife
in her morning kimono with the Helen of his dreams. It is the curse of
possession that plays havoc with romance; and because Melville’s dreams
were passionately beautiful, because he made heavy demands on life, his
disillusion was bitter. And so like Felix Kennaston in Cabell’s _Cream
of the Jest_, and like Shelley in _Epipsychidion_, Melville fashioned
his dream-figure to love. The elusive figure of Yillah in _Mardi_,
whom he loves and loses and seeks, in a madly grotesque and satirical
pursuit through all the civilizations of his land of Poictesme, is so
suggestive of Cabell’s _Domnei_, that it perhaps may be accounted the
latter’s prototype.

Remembering the mingled strains of Melville’s ancestry, the critic
is tempted to discover in his New England blood the source of his
transcendental visions. Yet the influence is not easy to trace. Half
Dutch and half Yankee, he certainly got his vigorous physique and hot
temper from the former. His maternal grandfather, Major General Peter
Gansevoort, was a huge bulk of a man who achieved high distinction in
the Revolutionary War, and whose traditional prowess filled the boy’s
heart with pride. His mother, Maria Gansevoort, whom the son closely
resembled in physique, was crossed in blood with that of the Van
Rensselaers, the Ten Broecks, the Van Schaicks--the proudest families
of the old Dutch _régime_--and was deeply imbued with the distinction
of her patroon ancestry--“a cold, proud woman, arrogant in the sense
of her name, her blood, and the affluence of her forebears” (Weaver,
_Herman Melville_, p. 34). His debt to the New England strain is not so
easily appraised. His paternal grandfather, Major Thomas Melville of
Boston, a graduate of Princeton and wealthy in his own name and through
his wife Priscilla Scollay, was not without his flashes of enthusiasm
in early life, taking part with Joseph Story’s father in the Boston
Tea Party. But his incipient radicalism was soon washed out of him; he
turned rigidly conservative, and to his death in 1832 he lingered in
the twilight of the eighteenth century. As Federal naval officer of the
port of Boston, he was a familiar figure in his cocked hat and knee
breeches; and it was of him that Holmes wrote the verses, _The Last
Leaf_.

He was of Scotch descent, and Melville’s father traced the family
line back to the thirteenth century, Herman Melville being twentieth
in direct descent from Sir Richard Melvill, who in 1296 was forced
to swear allegiance to Edward I of England. The blood seems to have
run somewhat thin in Allan Melville, a conventional, pragmatic soul,
who after making five trips to Europe, at the age of thirty-two,
having carefully weighed the advantages, fixed his affections on Maria
Gansevoort whom he met at Albany, and wooed with more propriety than
passion. He entered business in New York city as an importer of French
goods; but hard times descended on “the greatest universal mart in
the world,” and in 1832, when Herman was thirteen, Allan Melville
died leaving Maria Gansevoort and her eight children pretty nearly
penniless. The struggle with poverty set its mark on the cold, proud
woman whose ambitions centered about the success of affluence; and it
left a mark of quite another sort on the son who was soon to measure
her ideals with devastatingly critical eyes. The ways of mother and son
were at the parting.

The volcanic passions pent up in Herman Melville’s heart, the ardent
imagination that sent him forth on long quests and brought him home
empty-handed, can scarcely be traced to any source in Maria Gansevoort
or Allan Melville. A strange, incomprehensible child he seemed to his
mother, and strange and incomprehensible he remained in the eyes of
the family--an ugly duckling of another breed than theirs. A bitter
sense of aloofness and alienation from the intimacies of family
sympathy seems early to have taken possession of him, and he felt
himself quietly thrust out of the circle of respectable contacts.
Melville’s writings are filled with thinly veiled autobiography, and
it is a careless reader who does not see in _Pierre_ and _Moby Dick_
confessions as frank as Rousseau’s. “Call me Ishmael,” is the opening
injunction of the latter, and the book closes with a glimpse of “the
devious cruising _Rachel_, that in retracing search after her missing
children, only found another orphan” (Weaver, _Herman Melville_, p.
62). An Ishmael Melville unhappily conceived himself to be, an outcast
and wanderer on the earth because man is an outcast and wanderer,
to whom Nirvana is the only comfort and hope; and when he returned
disillusioned from the South Seas, when he found no home by his own
fireside, when he discovered his transcendental craftsmanship driving
on the rocks of economic necessity, when the public rejected his
mystical dreams and he was inexorably “damned by dollars,” he perforce
turned in upon his own broodings and sought solace in Plato. Driven by
need from his hill farm in the Berkshires, he buried himself in the
“Babylonish brick-kiln of New York,” to pass long years pottering about
the customhouse. It was the vast futility of life as he experienced it,
that sent him to his study to find there such compensation as he might.

The stages in Melville’s progress towards Nirvana are sufficiently
marked by the four books, _Typee_, _Mardi_, _Moby Dick_, and _Pierre_.
The first is his answer to the French romantic Utopia of man in a
state of nature. That the rankling wounds in man’s heart are poisoned,
if not originally inflicted, by social institutions, he was partly
convinced, and he felt a lively concern lest western civilization
should bring its futile restlessness to the simple island people.
The kindliness and simplicity of life in the valley of Typee, the
compensating virtues of the unsophisticated primitive, he found
lovable; but as the unhappy heir of centuries of Christian conscience,
as a child of Hebraic ideals of righteousness, he could not eradicate
the deep roots of ethical unrest. With Fayaway it was different.
“Civilization had given her no veils; Christianity had given her
no compunctions. She was neither a mystery nor a sin” (_ibid._, p.
260). But he could not become a simple child of nature had he wanted
to. He could never find his Nirvana in mere sensuousness; he could
not sink into the mud of animal existence. Even while he bathed in
the languorous calm of Typee, floating idly with Fayaway on the
stream of being, his heart was beyond the narrow hills, and a cosmic
nostalgia seized upon him. That chapter of his life ended in futility,
and so he made his way back once more to the familiar places, with
expectation still undaunted. Certain of his experiences on that return
journey he has recorded in _White Jacket_, the story of his cruise
on a man-of-war; and how near it brought him to oblivion is told in
the episode of the threatened flogging before the mast, when fate
intervened to save Melville from flinging himself overboard, carrying
with him the brutal captain of the _Neversink_.

Amidst the constrictions of the old world to which he had come back, a
fresh vision of happiness opened to him in his love for Elizabeth Shaw,
and he made a desperate plunge into marriage. The post-thalamion of
that thwarted romance was _Mardi_--a far-ranging “pilgrimage for a lost
glamour,” “a quest after some total and undivined possession of that
holy and mysterious joy that touched Melville during the period of his
courtship” (_ibid._, p. 279). _Mardi_ is a vast welter of satire and
idealism, formless and wild, which in turn was no more than prologue
to _Moby Dick_. This colossal book, fierce as _Gulliver_, broad as
Rabelais, with its _saeva indignatio_ that laughs as it rends life, is
the great confession of his defeat. “It is good to laugh,” he says in
_Mardi_, “though the laugh be hollow. Women sob, and are rid of their
grief; men laugh and retain it. Ha! ha! how demoniacs shout; how all
skeletons grin; we all die with a rattle. Humor, thy laugh is divine.”
And the conclusion to which the philosopher comes is this: “Beatitude
there is none. And your only Mardian happiness is but exemption from
great woes--no more. Great Love is sad; and heaven is Love. Sadness
makes the silence throughout the realms of space; sadness is universal
and eternal” (_ibid._, p. 279).

After _Moby Dick_, what remained but to put the external world of
experience aside and turn in upon his own thwarted hopes to analyze
them? _Pierre, or the Ambiguities_ is his spiritual autobiography,
the confession of a stricken soul. In the inconsequential matter of
plot, a story of incest and murder and suicide, in its deeper purpose,
it is a wild fierce tale of mortal passions, that traces the _élan_
of mystical idealism to the buried depths of procreative instinct.
It is the last bewildering attempt to understand the sources of the
dream that had ridden him, and it is discovered in the passionate
struggles of Enceladus, titanic offspring of the incestuous union
between Heaven and Earth, to regain the kingdom from which he has been
thrust. In _Mardi_ the search for Yillah had been carried on under the
watchful eye of Hautia, the temptress, whom “his whole heart abhorred,”
yet to whom at last he went in her bower of Flozella-a-Nina--“The
Last-Verse-of-the-Song”; for in “some mysterious way seemed Hautia and
Yillah connected.” In _Pierre_ Hautia reappears as Isabel, likewise
a child of Heaven and Earth, who is set over against Lucy--the pure
daughter of Heaven alone; and this dark Isabel robed in the midnight
of her hair, by appealing unconsciously to Pierre’s noblest impulses,
draws him from the safe orbit of the Gansevoort moralities, and makes
of him “the fool of Truth, the fool of Virtue, the fool of Fate.”
Isabel is wild, unquestioning, mysterious passion, untouched by any
Hebraisms; and this half-sister of his blood, this lovely embodiment of
his star-crossed dreams, drives him unwittingly to destruction. Pierre
learns at last that the vision brings poison in its kisses, for the
divine in the heart of Enceladus is mingled with the clay of earth. The
dream is man’s final ironical curse; Yillah and Hautia and Lucy and
Isabel--changing embodiments of the same mystical idealism--bring death
to their lovers--this is the conclusion of _Pierre_, a conclusion that
Mr. Cabell would not take kindly to. It was a black and bitter book,
like _Moby Dick_ “broiled in hell-fire,” to fling at an easy-going
public that cherished its Gansevoort conventions. With its fierce
disillusions _Pierre_ is the apogee and Nirvana of the spiritual
romanticisms of the day.

That Melville was the spiritual child of Jean Jacques, that the
consuming nostalgia he suffered from was mortal, the most casual
acquaintance with his passionate rebellions should make clear; and
that his pessimism was a natural end and outcome of his transcendental
speculations, once those speculations had come to intimate contact with
life, is perhaps equally clear. Transcendentalism in Concord village
and at Walden pond, was one thing. Emerson’s infrequent anger at the
folly of men was soothed by the perfect art with which he phrased it,
and never seriously ruffled his temperamental placidity. Thoreau’s
mystical communings were with the young god Pan; he was too wise to
seek to domesticate a woodland nymph, and he was fortunate in escaping
the dun twilight that gathers about the slow years of physical decay.
But transcendentalism in the forecastle of the whaler _Acushnet_,
transcendentalism that drove fiercely into the blood-red sunsets of
dwarfing seas, transcendentalism in the hot and passionate heart of
a man whose vast dreams outran his feet--this was something very
different from the gentle mysticism of cooler natures and unembittered
hearts where no Promethean fires were raging.

For Herman Melville, amidst the nameless obscenities of an alien
environment, to keep his faith in the goodness of life strong and
sweet, would have needed the boundless charity and simple paganism
of Walt Whitman. But unfortunately for his peace of mind, though he
might immerse himself in Plato, Melville was no Greek; he was Hebraic
rather, out of Ecclesiastes, and Solomon and Jesus. “Away,” he cries
in _Pierre_, “ye chattering apes of a sophomorean Spinoza and Plato,
who once did all but delude me that the night was day, and pain only a
tickle. Explain this darkness, exorcise this devil, ye cannot. Tell me
not, thou inconceivable coxcomb of a Goethe, that the universe cannot
spare thee and thy immortality.... Already the universe gets on without
thee.... Thou wert but the pretentious, heartless part of a man. Lo!
I hold thee in this hand, and thou art crushed in it like an egg from
which the meat hath been sucked” (Chapter XXII--3). From the lips of
the ancient Preacher he had learned that all is vanity--even Pan. “The
truest of men was the Man of Sorrows,” he says, “and the truest of all
books is Solomon’s, and Ecclesiastes is the fine hammered steel of
woe. All is vanity. +ALL+.... He who ... calls Cowper, Young, Pascal,
Rousseau, poor devils all of sick men; and throughout a care-free
lifetime swears by Rabelais as passing wise, and therefore jolly;--not
that man is fitted to sit down on tombstones, and break the green damp
mould with unfathomably wondrous Solomon” (Weaver, _Herman Melville_,
pp. 151-152). After _Pierre_ came _Clarel_--years later--in which the
theological doubts and religious unrest that mark the poetry of Arnold
and Clough in England came to expression in a world that was untouched
by them.[432] The abyss that lay between Melville and America had
become deeper and wider.

Like all the transcendentalists Melville was a democrat, but his
democracy sprang rather from his sympathies than from his philosophy.
It was a democracy learned rather from Ecclesiastes than from Emerson;
it sprang from his pessimism rather than from any transcendental faith
in the divinity of man. He knew only too well how weak and foolish
are the children of Adam; but in presence of the common fate to which
the indifferent years hurry us, how stupid and callous are the social
distinctions that society erects! Why should not life be a leveler, as
well as death? His experience before the mast had taught him sympathy
for the common man; he regarded quizzically the ways of the exploiting
few and the sufferings of the exploited many; and he smiled ironically
at the neat little classification that divides the human animal into
sinners and saints. He was as comprehensive a democrat as Whitman, of
the same all-embracing school that denied the common social and ethical
categories of excellence; but alienated from his fellows, not drawn to
them as Whitman was. It was not a sense of social aloofness that held
him apart, but the isolation of loneliness. “When you see or hear of
my ruthless democracy on all sides,” he wrote to Hawthorne, “you may
possibly feel a touch of a shrink, or something of that sort. It is but
nature to be shy of a mortal who boldly declares that a thief in jail
is as honorable a personage as Gen. George Washington.... It seems an
inconsistency to assert unconditioned democracy in all things, and yet
confess a dislike to all mankind--in the mass. But not so” (_ibid._,
pp. 320-321). He then goes on: “But truth is the silliest thing under
the sun,” and does not deign to explain. “Believe me,” he says of
_Pierre_, “you will pronounce Pierre a thoroughgoing Democrat in time;
perhaps a little too Radical altogether to your fancy” (_ibid._, p. 37).

Such a man would not so much turn critic as embody criticism. His
life--even more than Emerson’s--laid upon America, was a yardstick to
measure the shortcomings of a professed civilization. Cooper was a
critic whom America could understand, and America hated him for his
unpleasant frankness. Melville it could not understand, and it turned
away and ignored him. Perhaps it was well enough that his generation
could not comprehend his devastating speculations, and called him mad;
or it would have cried out to crucify this maligner of all the tribal
fetishes. He would level every barrier against the unpleasant that his
age was erecting. He outran Thoreau in contempt for current material
ideals. To turn scornfully away from the triumphs of his fellows--from
the fruits of the industrial revolution and the romantic gospel of
progress--this was incomprehensible blasphemy! Yet what had Herman
Melville in common with middle-class America? Its hopes and fears were
not his. He was troubled about life, and not about things. He was not
concerned about politics or the political state. He was not concerned
with trade, or money-getting, or romantic imperialisms. He was not even
greatly concerned with political democracy, although in his time he had
been as hot a republican as the best of them. The shoddy democracy of
his time made his gorge rise; and to this shoddy democracy that shrilly
proclaimed its excellence he paid his respects in words that suggest
Lowell’s _Cathedral_, but with a depth of significance that Lowell was
incapable of. In the poem _Clarel_, into which Melville crowded so much
of his later speculations, he comments thus:

  This world clean fails me: still I yearn....

  This side the dark and hollow bound
  Lies there no unexplored rich ground?
  _Some other world_: well, there’s the New--
  Ah, joyless and ironic too!

  Ay, Democracy
  Lops, lops; and where’s her planted bed?
  The future, what is that to her
  Who vaunts she’s no inheritor?
  ’Tis in her mouth, not in her heart.
  The past she spurns, though ’tis the past
  From which she gets her saving part--
  That Good which lets her evil last.

  Behold her whom the panders crown,
  Harlot on horseback, riding down
  The very Ephesians who acclaim
  This great Diana of ill fame!
  Arch strumpet of an impious age,
  Upstart from ranker villeinage:
  Asia shall stop her at the least
  That old inertness of the East....

  But in the New World things make haste:
  Not only things, the _state_ lives fast--
  Fast breed the pregnant eggs and shells,
  The slumberous combustibles,
  Sure to explode. ’Twill come, ’twill come!
  One demagogue can trouble much:
  How of a hundred thousand such?...

  Indeed, those germs one now may view:
  Myriads playing pigmy parts--
  Debased into equality:
  Dead level of rank commonplace:
  An Anglo-Saxon China, see,
  May on your vast plains shame the race
  In the Dark Ages of Democracy....

  Your arts advance in faith’s decay:
  You are but drilling the new Hun
  Whose growl even now can some dismay;
  Vindictive in his heart of hearts.
  He schools him in your mines and marts
  A skilled destroyer....

  Old ballads sing
  Fair Christian children crucified
  By impious Jews: you’ve heard the thing:
  Yes, fable; but there’s truth hard by:
  How many Hughs of Lincoln, say,
  Does Mammon, in his mills, to-day,
  Crook, if he does not crucify?

  The impieties of ‘Progress’ speak;
  What say _these_, in effect to God?
  ‘How profits it? And who art Thou
  That we should serve Thee? Of Thy ways
  No knowledge we desire; _new_ ways
  We have found out, and better. Go--
  Depart from us!’ And if He do?
  Is aught betwixt us and the hells?...

For Herman Melville, at least, the barriers betwixt him and the hells
had long been gone, and only Nirvana awaited him.


Footnotes

[426] See his satire on Fanny Wright in _The Evening Post_, January 29,
1829, quoted by Allan Nevins, _The Evening Post, etc._, pp. 126-127.

[427] For his statement, see “Labor’s Political Economy,” in _Hints
toward Reforms_.

[428] See “The Organization of Labor,” in _Hints toward Reforms_.

[429] See Charles Sotheran, _Horace Greeley_, p. 255.

[430] See William A. Robinson, _Jeffersonian Democracy in New England_,
pp. 43-45.

[431] Garrison, _Life of Garrison_, Vol. IV, p. 248.

[432] See Weaver, p. 365.




Book Three • The Mind of New England


The New England renaissance was tardy in appearing and of brief
duration, yet in the few years of its extraordinary vigor it imparted
a stimulus to American life that its historians have not greatly
exaggerated. We are now far enough from it to see that it was the last
flowering of a tree that was dying at the roots, but in the tumultuous
thirties it seemed to be a new birth of the native New England mind,
opening on new worlds and great adventures. Though its prophecies might
be little heeded at its own fireside, and unheard in the vast stretches
of the West where men were clearing and building after quite different
plans than the Concord architects were drawing, its significance in the
development of American idealism--the ethical imprint it stamped on
American culture--endured long after it had spent its force. It was the
last and in certain aspects the most brilliant of the several attempts
to domesticate in America the romantic thought of revolutionary Europe;
and with its passing, civilization in this western world fell into the
hands of another breed of men to fashion as they saw fit.

The revolutions in thought that lie between the eighteenth century
with its aristocratic rationalism that conceived of human nature as
evil, and the nineteenth century with its middle-class economics that
conceived of human nature as acquisitive, are more clearly defined
in New England and more sharply differentiated, than elsewhere in
America. The flood of romantic speculation with its humanitarian
emphasis on the potential excellence of man and the equality of human
rights, that in Europe had diffused itself widely, in Massachusetts
flowed into narrow channels prepared by Puritan discipline, and swept
away habits of thought that had dominated New England for two hundred
years. The intensity of the Puritan nature, once it embraced the new
conceptions, imparted to them an intellectual and emotional unity that
serves to explain the creativeness of the New England renaissance, as
it serves to explain its failure to spread widely beyond the confines
of Massachusetts. Appearing a generation later than in Virginia, it
drew its inspiration more largely from Germany than from France; it was
intellectual and ethical rather than political and economic; and in
consequence it held little in common with the Physiocratic agrarianism
of Jefferson. The latter was sufficiently native to American economics
to appeal to the common man from Maine to Georgia; the former was
native only to New England Puritanism. Its idealism appealed only to
rare souls, disciplined by speculation and trained in ethical values,
men of strong character and fine distinction who counted for much more
than numbers.

After all it is the ethical note that marks the Puritan. That New
England has run so different a course from other parts of America has
been due chiefly to its desire to serve God even though it might be
serving self. Its material life has always been plentifully seasoned
with the salt of religion. It sat under the teachings of an austere
ethics, as it lived under the compulsions of a narrow economics; and
the result was the development of a middle class distinct from that of
the West where the desire to get on was less hampered by the desire
to get to heaven. The outstanding social figures in early New England
were the minister and the merchant; and these twin authorities--joined
after the Revolution by the rising profession of the law--ruled in
patriarchal fashion the inarticulate mass of the yeomanry. From these
traditional leaders the policy of New England received a twofold bent:
a bent to the ethical and a bent to the practical. The two have rarely
fused in a harmonious and fruitful life, but for the most part have
dwelt side by side under a covenant of noninterference, the character
of current social ideals taking its impress from one or the other as
it gained a temporary ascendency. In the three hundred years of New
England history the minister has enjoyed two periods of intellectual
ascendency: the first during the early days of the theocracy, when
the commonwealth was ruled by the laws of God and John Calvin; and
the second, between the years 1830 and 1850, when John Calvin was
finally put aside and New England was in the way of being remodeled in
accordance with the plans of God alone. Between these brief periods of
ethical enthusiasm lies the main history of New England, a history that
counts for little in our intellectual and aesthetic development, but
that meant much and ill to the cramped minds of her sons.

This long stretch, arid and unlovely, was dominated wholly by the
merchant. Its parsimonious thrift, relieved by few generous impulses,
was hostile to all change and to the romance that is bred of change.
There was no rapid inflow of settlers to bring fresh energy and
expansion. The exuberant growth of other parts of America was never
shared by rural New England, and in consequence the harvest of
unearned increment was rarely reaped from her sterile acres. Except
in the shipping towns there was little economic development. On its
secluded little farms New England was living a narrow parochial life,
cooping up its mind in a rigid theological system and disciplining its
character by a self-denying ordinance. Public affairs were managed
by the squire, for the minister was too busy defending John Calvin
against the Arminians to have a care for much except morality and
dogma. The renaissance became of necessity, therefore, a movement of
liberalism--a vehement protest against the torpor of the dogmatist
whose mind was shut up in a dead system. It was a sudden reawakening
of the ethical passion of Puritanism that had slept for two centuries;
a vision of a new heaven and a new earth that it proposed to take by
storm. It proposed to rid the mind of New England of its decadent
loyalties--the nightmare dreams of Calvinism that debased human
nature, and the counting-house dreams of Federalism that conceived of
man as an exploitative animal. It had discovered anew the beauty of
righteousness, and in the name of righteousness it proposed to throw
off the old tyrannies and create a society wherein the mind should be
free and the soul enjoy its religion. The battle against Calvinism was
only preliminary to greater battles which constituted the intellectual
revolution that marked the renaissance.

It was the New England minister, and the spiritual heirs of the
minister--a group of intellectuals and reformers more notable than
New England had before bred--that gave to the movement its pronounced
ethical quality. It was freedom for individual righteousness that they
sought; not freedom for intellectual epicureanism, for romance, for
aesthetic or pagan beauty. The transcendentalists and reformers had
little time to amuse themselves with such things. They were too eager
for the coming of the kingdom to dawdle over fiction or patronize the
playhouse. They had been bred from their youth up on printer’s ink;
they came of a race that had long respected the printed page. Literary
men by inheritance, they esteemed themselves stewards of a great
cause. In rejecting their fathers’ hell they became the more zealous
to make a heaven of this world; and although the more practical Yankee
was skeptical of their plans and would not suffer them to turn Boston
into a transcendental Utopia, they succeeded in making such a stir as
New England had never before known. For a brief time, at least, liberal
ideas found a welcome in homes where they had hitherto been strangers;
for a brief time the intellectual and not the merchant dominated New
England.




Part One: the Twilight of Federalism




