Chapter III • Liberalism and the Social Conscience


I • The Social Mind

Unitarianism was generous in its bequests to New England, and amongst
its contributions to a nobler life not the least valuable was its warm
social sympathy. Channing’s tender social conscience sprang directly
from his humanitarian religion. Not from the hard old Calvinism did
he get this fine flower of a humane life, but from the new French
philosophy. Not from bounding his ethics by the Decalogue, or hating
sin more than he loved generosity, did he break the hard shell of
Puritan righteousness; but by metamorphosing the sinner into a child
of God and sharing with him the divine promise. Other-mindedness came
naturally to a religion established in a God of love. The social
conscience could not remain indifferent to injustice visited upon
the children of a common Father. Yet other-mindedness was a virtue
practiced too little in Calvinist New England. That old world had been
more concerned with hopes of individual salvation, with propitiating
an angry God, than with its present obligations to its neighbors.
Hard doctrine--which the old Puritan loved--was likely to make hard
characters, and an ascetic society was likely to breed close-fisted
natures. The conscience was tender in New England, but it was tender
chiefly as the guardian and monitor of the Ten Commandments; it gave
itself too little concern about the new commandment which Jesus
laid upon his disciples. It disciplined men and women in personal
righteousness, it created self-reliant characters, it scrutinized
narrowly the neighborhood conduct; but its social issues were likely
to be mean and petty. The righteousness of which it professed to be
guardian and monitor too often fell far short of generous manly stature.

From this hardness of the old religion came the hardness of the social
conscience. When the Yankee was driven by brutal fact to admit that
he was his brother’s keeper, he usually took care to get a few honest
pennies out of his brother’s board and lodging. The village poor
were provided for by farming out, as the taxes were farmed out. The
town meeting haggled narrowly over the terms, and substantial deacons
underbid each other. Though the price might be low, some profit might
still be got from the pauper’s keep. It was a cold, hard, unsympathetic
world for the social unfortunate, whether pauper, debtor, or idiot;
and it was harsh as well to the children of all but the wealthy.
The hours of toil were long, and the public schools about which the
historians have bragged rather too loudly, were poor affairs, starved
by the common niggardliness, ill taught and ill provided. The academies
and colleges that professed to keep the torch of learning aflame were
largely perquisites of the gentry. It is beside the point to assert
that public schools existed in New England long before Virginia had
any, and that poor boys stinted and starved their way through Harvard
and Yale. Well known as such facts are, they do not testify to a high
social sense in a people supposed to have been tender of conscience.
The Calvinist was taught to fear God rather than to love him. It was a
strong man’s business to save one’s soul and make a decent living; and
in the social code of New England the weakling must take his chance.

There was helpful neighborliness of course in old New England, and
much honest kindliness. Some of the hardest of dogmatic Calvinists
were the most considerate and gentlest of men. Old Samuel Hopkins of
slave-running Newport was a generous soul who preached the gospel of
love to one’s fellows, and practiced the virtues of apostleship to
the poor and outcast. He denounced the slave trade to parishioners
who knew all the inlets of the West African coast, and got himself
well disliked. His congregation preferred his hard theology to his
inconvenient humanitarianism, and kept him poor all his days. The
dogmatic Timothy Dwight scathingly attacked slavery in his _Greenfield
Hill_, denounced the injustice done the negro, and even protested
against the extension of capital punishment. Yet for all such protests
the common conscience was untouched. The Yankee was always standing
in the way of the Puritan’s righteousness. Respectability was founded
on property, and respectability was mightier in New England than even
John Calvin. It was the brutal debtor laws that brought on Shays’s
Rebellion, which Federalist church members put down and denied the
grievances. It was no tender conscience that extinguished slavery
in Massachusetts, for long after it became unprofitable there the
Yankee skipper was still in the slave trade. Dignified Tory Row on
what is now Brattle Street, Cambridge, was built by gentlemen who
drew their wealth from West Indian slave plantations.[448] William
Lloyd Garrison’s offense in Baltimore, for which he was thrown into
jail, lay in publishing the name of a Massachusetts shipmaster from
Newburyport--Garrison’s native town--who was engaged in the coastwise
slave traffic.[449] In the year 1830 there were somewhat more than a
hundred Abolition Societies in the United States, not one of which was
in New England; and in the first number of the _Liberator_ Garrison
wrote, probably without exaggeration, that he found “contempt more
bitter, opposition more active, detraction more relentless, prejudice
more stubborn, and apathy more frozen,” in New England, “than among
slave owners themselves.”[450] The old Puritan conscience might be
tender, but it refused pretty steadily to take on any larger job than
Sabbath-keeping and dogma-saving. It was inquisitorial rather than
humanitarian, and the sins which it hunted down were theological rather
than social.

The bridge between this older world and the later was thrown across by
Unitarianism. With its shift of emphasis from a God of wrath to a God
of love came the entering wedge that was to split away the egoism of
the old theology--its thralldom to the conception of personal sin--and
lay bare an inner core of altruism. It was another sort of conscience
that Unitarianism discovered, a conscience that welcomed the new social
thought of romantic Europe, and applying it to the facts of life in
America created the new humanitarianism which bit so deeply into the
New England of the forties. From this movement the intractable nature
of the Yankee held him back, but the Puritan speedily transformed the
hard theological conscience into a tender social conscience, that
bewildered the conventional morality with its sweeping program of
reform.

The awakening of the new spirit may perhaps be held to date from the
growing opposition to war that was an aftermath of the Napoleonic
period with its huge debts and vast social suffering. The inhumanity
of war profoundly impressed thoughtful minds that had come under the
influence of the sociological movement, and when Channing in 1812
preached his first anti-war sermon the new humanitarian spirit found
expression. In his espousal of pacifism Channing was following in the
footsteps of the social revolutionaries of the preceding century.
He fell short of Tom Paine in analysis of the economic and dynastic
sources of war, and in appreciation of its social consequences;
nevertheless his denunciation was significant of a changing social
attitude. From this early attack to the rise of the Garrisonian
Non-Resistance Society of the late thirties and early forties, the
spread of the pacifist movement was rapid. Transcendentalism was
eloquently anti-militaristic, and Emerson, Alcott and Parker were
outspoken in denunciation of the war spirit. To the war against war
soon was added the war against drink, and with the establishment in
Boston in 1826 of the _National Philanthropist_, under the patronage
of the “Massachusetts Society for the Suppression of Intemperance”--a
paper of which Garrison was editor for a few months--began the long
agitation for the suppression of the liquor traffic. From such feeble
beginnings the ardor of reform grew and spread swiftly, enlarging its
program to embrace anti-slavery, woman’s rights,[451] prison reform,
repeal of the harsh debtor laws, vegetarianism, associationism, until
it caught the contagion of the perfectionist and transcendental
movements and issued in a comprehensive program of universal reform.
The golden age of New England was quite as much the golden age of the
New England conscience as of the New England mind.


II

The fame of transcendentalism has too much obscured the contemporary
movement of perfectionism, a movement which marked the extreme
expression of the new conscience, the most revolutionary of its
aspirations, the apotheosis of ethical radicalism. Its want of literary
skill narrowed its appeal and the archaic quality of its enthusiasm
lessened its following; yet in spirit it was native to Puritan
idealism, and it enlisted the active sympathy of many of the finer
souls of New England. How greatly reform was furthered by the movement
of perfectionism is not easily determined, but it is clear that its
influence permeated much of the revolutionary activity of the times.
Scratch an ardent Abolitionist and you were likely to find a potential
perfectionist.

The doctrine was first elaborated by John Humphrey Noyes, a young
Vermont mystic, who, under the influence of the revivalist excitement
of the early thirties, elaborated a social creed that reëmbodied much
of the teaching of the extreme left wing of English Commonwealth
thought. Noyes was a primitive religious nature, with the tenderest
of consciences, vastly troubled over current materialisms; and his
speculations reveal a curious throw-back to early English Puritanism.
He was a Yankee Fifth Monarchy man. Two hundred years of Yankee
experience slipped from his mind, and he walked and talked with the old
millennial spirits, the Diggers and Levelers of Commonwealth times. A
devout Scripturist, he took literally the injunction of Matthew, “Be ye
therefore perfect, even as your Father which is in Heaven is perfect.”
A primitive Christian, he proposed to re-order society with the naïve
simplicity of the apostle Eliot. In his mystical speculations, social,
political, and religious radicalisms were stirred in a common pot and
simmered down to what may be called spiritual anarchism. Noyes was a
Yankee “root and branch” man, a single-minded apostle of “thorough.”
He would not strain at gnats and swallow camels, but he rejected the
camels first and then proposed to get rid of the gnats. In 1834 he
established a small monthly paper called the _Perfectionist_, which was
very probably as revolutionary a sheet as was ever printed in America.
He made converts, including Garrison, Edmund Quincy, son of Josiah
Quincy, the Grimké sisters, Henry C. Wright and other Abolitionists,
and made an increasing stir in the world, to the great concern of
respectable folk who swallowed their camels without a grimace.

Some notion of the main doctrines of this seventeenth-century creed may
be gained from a letter of Noyes to Garrison, written in 1837, from
which the following is taken:

  I have subscribed my name to an instrument similar to the
  Declaration of ’76, renouncing all allegiance to the government
  of the United States, and asserting the title of Jesus Christ to
  the throne of the World.... When I wish to form a conception of
  the government of the United States ... I picture to myself a
  bloated, swaggering libertine, trampling on the Bible--its own
  Constitution--its treaties with the Indians--the petitions of
  its citizens.... I have renounced active co-operation with the
  oppressor on whose territories I live; now I would find a way to
  put an end to his oppression. But he is manifestly a reprobate:
  reproof and instruction only aggravate his sins. I cannot attempt
  to reform him, because I am forbidden to “cast pearls before
  swine.” I must therefore either consent to remain a slave till
  God removes the tyrant, or I must commence war upon him, by a
  declaration of independence and other weapons suitable to the
  character of a son of God.

He then lays down seven reasons for choosing to make war upon the
state, amongst which are the following:

  1. As a believer in the Bible I know that the territory of the
  United States belongs to God, and is promised ... to Jesus Christ
  and his followers....

  6. The Son of God has manifestly, to me, chosen this country
  for the theatre of such an assault--a country which, by its
  boasting hypocrisy, has become the laughing-stock of the world,
  and by its lawlessness has fully proved the incapacity of man
  for self-government. _My hope of the millennium begins where Dr.
  Beecher’s expires_--viz., +AT THE OVERTHROW OF THIS NATION+.

  I have stated to you only ... the principal things which God has
  urged upon me by his Spirit, and by which he has moved me to
  nominate Jesus Christ for the Presidency, not only of the United
  States, but of the world. Is it not high time for abolitionists to
  abandon a government whose President has declared war upon them? I
  cannot but think that many of them hear the same great voice out
  of heaven which has waked me, saying, “Come out of her, my people,
  that ye be not partakers of her sins and of her plagues.”... Allow
  me to suggest that you will set Anti-slavery in the sunshine only
  by making it tributary to Holiness; and you will most assuredly
  throw it into the shade ... if you suffer it to occupy the ground,
  in your mind or in others, which ought to be occupied by +UNIVERSAL
  EMANCIPATION FROM SIN+. All the abhorrence which now falls upon
  slavery, intemperance, lewdness, and every other specific vice,
  will in due time be gathered into one volume of victorious wrath
  against _unbelief_. I wait for that time as for the day of
  battle ... I counsel you, and the people that are with you, if
  you love the post of honour--the forefront of the hottest battle
  of righteousness--to set your face towards _perfect_ holiness.
  (Garrison, _William Lloyd Garrison_, Vol. II, pp. 145-148.)

This curious appeal brought forth its fruit in a Peace Convention,
held in 1838, which published a Declaration of Sentiments[452] that
was quite as extraordinary a pronouncement--one that serves to explain
the utter bewilderment of prosaic souls at the strange progeny of
the times. It was only one of many strange conventions, marked by an
ebullient faith of which Emerson remarked, “The core of the comet
did not seem to be much, but the whole air was full of splendors”
(_Journals_, Vol. VII, p. 5), and on which Josiah Quincy commented,
“Such a mass of free mind as was brought together I have never seen
before in any one assembly.... There was much talent and a great deal
of _soul_.” Men who take their Biblical teachings literally are likely
to be curious fellows. Righteousness may prove a potent drink for
them that love it, begetting its own particular intemperance; and a
conscience that has slipped its leash of the practical will run many a
mad chase. If it followed its logic this perfectionism must make short
shrift of political parties, of loyalty to government, of the political
state itself, and set up instead a social order in which familiar
things would be topsy-turvy, with the just sitting in high places
and the rich and great of earth brought low; and this is precisely
what Noyes did in the Oneida Community--the most successful of the
contemporary ventures in communism--of which he was the founder. In
spite of his taste for the wine of new vintages Emerson was somewhat
taken aback at certain of its ebullitions, and when the sabbatarian
Chardon Street Convention in 1840 gathered together the choicest
repositories of New England holiness, he shook his head dubiously. His
humorous catalogue of the miscellaneous enthusiasts suggests more than
a spice of criticism.

  Madmen, madwomen, men with beards, Dunkers, Muggletonians,
  Come-outers, Groaners, Agrarians, Seventh-Day Baptists, Quakers,
  Abolitionists, Calvinists, Unitarians, and Philosophers,--all came
  successively to the top, and seized their moment, if not their
  hour, wherein to chide, or pray, or preach, or protest. (“The
  Chardon Street Convention,” in _Works_, Vol. X, p. 374.)

And even the catholic-minded Edmund Quincy, who was one of the callers
of the Convention, confessed that “It was the most singular collection
of strange specimens of humanity that was ever assembled.” The wine of
perfectionism was in high ferment in New England in 1840.

It was a curious anachronism in the midst of the industrial
revolution--this revival of the religious Utopianism of 1650, this
April renaissance of the faith of a dead _saeculum theologicum_. It
was in no sense a by-product of transcendentalism--no lunacy fringe
of metaphysical speculation. It owed nothing to French romanticism or
German idealism, not in origin at least. It was far more primitive and
native, and its affinities run back to Roger Williams and the Fifth
Monarchy millennialism, rather than to Rousseau and Kant and Jacobi. It
was a breaking through of the submerged New England spirituality, a
volcanic release from sterile conformity; and it summoned the awakening
soul to go forth and conquer the world for righteousness. Millennialism
is the prophetic hope of a primitive faith. To its disciples it is
certain of fulfillment because God’s promises are certain; but to
practical minds, unconvinced that Biblical phrases are authentic divine
contracts, any expectation of the speedy coming of the Kingdom of God
seems grotesque. The millennial enthusiast is a fair butt of ridicule,
and the perfectionists came in for a large share. It was Lowell who
leveled at the militant godliness of the new sects the wittiest attack.
Forgetting his English history he found himself puzzled, and being
puzzled he allowed himself to become ill-natured. His clever sentences
explode smartly about his subject, but there is no light in them.[453]


III

Upon another venture in Utopianism, and one far better known, the years
have laid a pleasant, idyllic haze, softening the prosaic outlines and
clothing them with romance. Brook Farm has been singularly fortunate
in the posthumous fame that has dealt with it so tenderly as to
transmute it into poetry. By virtue of the light reflected upon it by
the transcendental illumination and the literary skill it commanded,
the little communal settlement at West Roxbury has come to be regarded
as a homely Yankee pastoral, a sort of May Day adventure in brown
holland tunics, an inspiring quest of the ideal amongst furrows and
manures. It is a social poem fashioned out of Yankee homespun. No
hint of rude social leveling is associated with its aims; even its
communism suggests no stigma. Of the dozens of communistic experiments
which marked the first half of the nineteenth century in America,
few were native in origin or ventured upon in New England. They were
mostly undertaken by old-world groups, chiefly German, who sought cheap
land and a free environment for primitive religious experiments. But
Brook Farm was true Yankee, using the familiar dialect to clothe its
unfamiliar thoughts, and escaping the prejudice that confronts the
uncouth and alien; and in consequence the vagaries that all New England
once laughed at have become enshrined as a cherished New England
possession.

Perfectionism and Brook Farm embodied diverse phases of the
renaissance and made appeal to different temperaments. Fellow-ship
founded on common ownership and communal labor was an ideal that
left the religious mystic cold, whereas the anarchistic holiness of
perfectionism seemed to the Brook Farmers grotesque. Present economic
maladjustment appeared to the latter the fundamental problem of the
times. They were deeply concerned for the future that must emerge
from the chaotic individualism of the present. Unless society were
brought back to a wiser understanding of values, they foresaw only
chaos; and so in a small way they set about a great experiment.
Brook Farm grew out of the impact of the industrial revolution upon
the social conscience of New England. Industrialism and social
speculation were contemporary developments. The first cotton mill in
New England was established at Lawrence in 1822, and the following
year the Merrimac Mills were established in the newly founded city of
Lowell. By absorbing the vast Irish immigration the factory system
brought increasing wealth to Beacon Street homes, but it brought other
consequences in its train which Beacon Street carelessly overlooked.
How those consequences affected more sensitive and intelligent
minds--men like William Henry Channing, Theodore Parker and George
Ripley--is suggested by their eager talk of mutualism, association,
coöperation, as potential cures for the growing evils of competition,
discussions never before heard in New England. Describing the state
of mind of the Boston group of social thinkers, John Weiss offers the
following explanation:

  A mutualism to secure culture and material welfare was consistently
  desired by those who believed in a community of the sources of
  moral and spiritual welfare. The social evils which result from
  the struggles of competitive labour seemed to outweigh all its
  benefits. Modern civilization was thought to be the culmination
  of isolated selfishness, madly struggling from bread to luxury
  and refined delights, which the strongest and least scrupulous
  only could acquire. Prisons and punishments were the defences of
  this artificial system, to repress instincts that were moral till
  they become illegal. Hospitals and benevolent institutions were
  also mere defences to absorb as much misery as possible ere it
  became malicious, to get the social gangrene reduced to limits.
  The providential impulses of the human being were forced to act in
  subversive ways and directions, when they might all be harmonized
  by their own inherent laws, and the blessing of mutualism succeed
  to the bane of antagonism. Each man ought to be the guarantee
  to all men against disorder; the carefully adjusted elements of
  a selfishness which threatens continually to blow the social
  fabric to atoms, would become not only innoxious but salutary in
  its proper combination; and a new civilization might arise in
  fair proportion from the serial development and movement of all
  possible human tendencies. Then all men and women might labor and
  be happy; all might earn with a minimum of toil a competence of
  culture. Property would be the ally of the whole instead of the
  oppressor of the many; and crime would disappear, because the
  instincts would no longer have motives to be criminal. (_Life and
  Correspondence of Theodore Parker_, Vol. I, pp. 106-107.)

The transcendental basis of such social speculation is evident enough.
The new social thought was transcendental thought. A common belief
in the excellence of human instincts drew these idealists together;
but when it came to the vexing problem of reconciling individualism
and mutualism, creating an economic fellowship out of electric
personalities, the more ardent transcendentalists took fright and
prudently kept without the gates of Brook Farm. Organization seemed
to them the fatal poison in the bottom of the cup. When a community
was planned in Massachusetts in 1841, by liberal Christians of the
Universalist sect, a writer in the _Dial_ subjected the proposal to
sharp criticism:

  A true community can be founded on nothing short of faith in the
  universal man, as he comes from the hands of the Creator, with
  no law over his liberty but the eternal ideas that lie at the
  foundation of his being.... The final cause of human society is the
  unfolding of the individual man, into every form of perfection,
  without let or hindrance, according to the inward nature of each.
  (Quoted by Frothingham in _Transcendentalism, etc._, p. 157.)

Such a view is anarchistic rather than collectivistic, and as embodied
in Alcott’s Fruitlands, it may be regarded as the transcendental type
of Utopia. Towards all systems of socialism the transcendentalists
were instinctively hostile, as implying an industrial regimentation;
and in planning Brook Farm, Ripley rejected industrialism and reduced
regimentation to a minimum. With the agrarian background of Brook Farm
the transcendentalists were in hearty sympathy, quite oblivious of the
fact that agrarianism could offer no solution for industrialism; but
they balked at the principle of task allotment as a hindrance to the
unfolding of individual differences. Upon the later introduction of
the Fourier Phalanx their doubts grew into certainty, and they lost
their faith in the experiment. Of all the transcendentalists William
Henry Channing was clearly the most confirmed associationist, except
perhaps Ripley; to the end of his life he remained a socialist, active
in collectivistic movements and clinging fondly to his memory of Brook
Farm as a “great college of social students.” But few of his fellow
transcendentalists shared his faith.

This growing skepticism of organization is clearly shown in the
comments of Emerson’s _Journals_. In October, 1840, he set down his
first reaction to the plan as follows:

  Yesterday George and Sophia Ripley, Margaret Fuller and Alcott
  discussed here the Social Plans. I wish to be convinced, to be
  thawed, to be made nobly mad by the kindlings before my eye of
  a new dawn of human piety. But this scheme was arithmetic and
  comfort; this was a hint borrowed from the Tremont House and United
  States Hotel; a rage in our poverty and politics to live rich and
  gentlemanlike, an anchor to leeward against a change of weather; a
  prudent forecast on the probable issue of the great questions of
  Pauperism and Poverty. And not once could I be inflamed, but sat
  aloof and thoughtless; my voice faltered and fell. It was not the
  cave of persecution which is the palace of spiritual power, but
  only a room in the Astor House hired for the Transcendentalists. I
  do not wish to remove from my present prison to a prison a little
  larger. I wish to break all prisons. I have not yet conquered
  my own house. It irks and repents me. Shall I raise the siege
  of this hencoop, and march baffled away to a pretended siege of
  Babylon? It seems to me that so to do were to dodge the problem I
  am set to solve, and to hide my impotency in the thick of a crowd.
  (_Journals_, Vol. V, pp. 473-474.)

In January, 1844, noting the spontaneity of life at Brook Farm, he drew
the conclusion “that in the arrangements at Brook Farm, as out of them,
it is the person, not the communist, that avails” (_ibid._, Vol. VI,
p. 492). With the introduction of Fourierist organization he became
sharply critical. Neither in Fourier nor in Owen did he see any hope.

  Fourier learned from him [Owen] all the truth he had, and the rest
  of his system was imagination, and the imagination of a banker. The
  Owen and Fourier plans bring no _a priori_ convictions. They are
  come at merely by counting and arithmetic. All the fine _aperçus_
  are for individualism. The Spartan broth, the hermit’s cell,
  the lonely farmer’s life are poetic; but the Phalanstery, the
  “Self-supporting Village,” are culinary and mean. (_Ibid._, Vol.
  VIII, pp. 134, 135.)

And a few days later he gave his final judgment, “Dear heart, take
it sadly home to thee, that there will and can be no coöperation”--a
judgment that explains the clever phrase with which he demolished Brook
Farm, “It is the Age of Reason in a patty-pan.”

The transcendentalist with his Puritan conscience could understand and
sympathize with the perfectionist zeal for universal righteousness;
but collectivistic systems of economy seemed alien and a community of
goods uncongenial to his Yankee individualism. Albert Brisbane, the
American apostle of Fourierism, might bring George Ripley, the least
individualistic and most prosaic of the transcendental group, to his
views of organization; but he got on badly with the others who were
quite too fluid to take a mechanical set. In consequence it was not at
Brook Farm but at the North American Phalanx that the French system
found its fairest experiment and met with its solidest success.


IV

With the awakening interest in social problems the conscience of New
England could not longer remain indifferent to slavery. The incoming
of French humanitarianism, the spread of idealistic sociology under
the teachings of Unitarianism, above all the stimulus of English
Abolitionism that provided argument and example in the freeing of
slaves in the British West Indies, wore away the indifferentism
that had calloused the mind of New England; and with the decay of
her provincial particularism the conscience of New England slowly
roused itself. The arrogance of the slave party nowhere else stirred
such deep resentment. Southern steel, striking the flinty Yankee
character, threw off sparks that would fire whatever combustible stuff
lay near; and such combustible stuff was provided in plenty by the
Utopian enthusiasts who gathered in conventions, each with a plan
of universal reform in his waistcoat pocket. Little conflagrations
were started in many an obscure Yankee soul, and the noise of the
crackling spread over New England, to the anger of the South and the
vast concern of respectable Boston merchants. Sooner or later Abolition
sentiment was bound to make a tremendous stir amongst the children of
Puritanism; and when that time came it was bound to arouse tremendous
antagonism amongst the sons of Yankees. The dominant commercial
group would not tolerate a movement that was certain to alienate its
southern customers. A mighty collision between the conscience and the
self-interest of New England was inevitable; and in that collision of
flinty characters, arguments were likely to be countered with blows.

The New England Abolitionists, men and women, were an extraordinarily
interesting group. They were good fighters, outspoken and tenacious of
opinion, unsparing in attack, refusing to be browbeaten, resilient
and tough as seasoned hickory. In them the Yankee Tory met his match;
against them coercion and intimidation, all the usual Tory weapons,
failed as earlier they had failed with the primitive Quakers. They
were daily charged with being social incendiaries. The commercial
newspapers thundered against them as atheists, Sabbath-breakers,
socialists, anarchists; the absurdest myths were given circulation;
the public mind was skillfully poisoned against them. Yet as a matter
of sober historical fact, they were the kindliest of men, with
generous sympathies and disinterested motives. No blackguard was ever
an Abolitionist--no ward-heeler, or mob-inciter, or purse-patriot;
all such convenient tools of power were found amongst the baiters
and mobsters in the commercial opposition. John Brown was the only
direct-action Abolitionist and what befell him is well known among men.
There was no money to be made, no place of honor or power to be got by
espousing Abolitionism, but only self-sacrifice and social ostracism.
Ambitious men, self-seekers, went with the dispensers of social
favors. It was the remnant in Israel that gathered to the cause, few
in numbers but the best New England had. And what an excellent company
they were: Garrison, Samuel J. May, Edmund Quincy, Jonathan Sewall,
Theodore Parker, Lydia Maria Child, Mrs. Chapman, Wendell Phillips,
Thomas Wentworth Higginson, Whittier, Henry Ward Beecher, Sumner,
Maria White and the young Lowell--such a fighting phalanx as the New
England conscience had never before mustered, nor has since. To them
were gathered heroic souls from other states: Arthur and Lewis Tappan
and Gerrit Smith from New York, James Birney from Kentucky, Lucretia
Mott from Philadelphia, the Grimké sisters from South Carolina. Harriet
Martineau, who knew the group intimately, has left on record her
judgment of them: “A just survey of the whole world can leave little
doubt,” she wrote in 1838, “that the abolitionists of the United States
are the greatest people now living and moving in it” (Carpenter, _John
Greenleaf Whittier_, p. 107). They gave New England and the country no
peace. From their persistent agitation came the Emigrant Aid Society,
Sharp’s rifles, and the bloody struggle in Kansas; and from it came the
temporary overwhelming of the Tory minority in Massachusetts. For a few
brief years New England threw off the stifling grip of the commercial
mind and was the home of American humanitarianism.


Footnotes

[448] See T. W. Higginson, _Old Cambridge_, p. 149.

[449] See Garrison, _William Lloyd Garrison_, Vol. I, Chapter VI. The
court held that it was libelous to seek to bring into disrepute an
action that was legal.

[450] Quoted by S. E. Morison in _Harrison Grey Otis_, Vol. II, p. 263.

[451] This was an outgrowth of the anti-slavery movement and emerged
from the conservative opposition to women’s appearing on the abolition
platform. The reply of the Quakeress, Angelina Grimké, to Elizabeth
Beecher’s _Essay on Slavery and Abolitionism, with reference to the
Duty of American Females_, in 1837, marks the definite beginning of the
movement. See Garrison, _William Lloyd Garrison_, Vol. II, pp. 133-134.

[452] Written by Garrison; see _ibid._, Vol. II, pp. 230-234.

[453] See the essay on Thoreau.




