Chapter III • Henry Thoreau • Transcendental Economist


“Wisdom crieth in the streets and no man regardeth her”; yet “she
teacheth temperance and forethought, justice and fortitude; than which
men can have in their life nothing more profitable.”

The single business of Henry Thoreau, during forty-odd years of
eager activity, was to discover an economy calculated to provide a
satisfying life. His one concern, that gave to his ramblings in Concord
fields a value as of high adventure, was to explore the true meaning
of wealth. Honest, fearless, curiously inquisitive--a masterless
man who would give no hostages to fortune--he proved his right to
be called a philosopher by seeking wisdom as a daily counselor and
friend, and following such paths only as wisdom suggested. Out of his
own experience, tested in the clear light of the Greeks, he wrote a
transcendental declaration of independence that may be taken as the
final word of the Concord school touching the great issues of practical
living. _Walden_ is the handbook of an economy that endeavors to refute
Adam Smith and transform the round of daily life into something nobler
than a mean gospel of plus and minus.

It was the common opinion of his neighbors that Henry Thoreau was a
queer fellow who had somehow got all his values topsy-turvy. And yet
the more thoughtfully one considers him, the more doubtful it appears
whether the queerness lay with him or with his critics. Unfortunately
a wholly honest and original man is so rare as to fall under common
suspicion. To the inmates of Bedlam a sane man will appear queer. In a
society of serfs a masterless man will be accounted an outlaw. To the
Concord farmers Thoreau appeared strange only because he applied in
his daily life a truth they assented to on the Sabbath. The principle
that life is more than the meat and the body than raiment was familiar
enough to the Sunday doctrines of Concord; but that a man should
seriously apply it on week-days; that he should propose to regulate his
mid-week activities by the economy of the Sermon on the Mount, passed
the comprehension of practical Yankees who followed quite another
economy. It was Thoreau’s conduct that perplexed them, rather than his
philosophy.

From first to last that conduct was serenely logical. To this disciple
of the ancient wisdom, Sabbath and week-day were one, and in seeking
to square his daily life with the ancient precept, Thoreau became the
arch-rebel of his group, the most individual amongst the “lunatic
fringe” of the transcendental movement, the one who escapes elusively
from the grip of an adjective. He slips out of all phrases devised
to imprison him. “A bachelor of nature,” Emerson, with his gift for
cryptic phrase, called him; “poet-naturalist,” Ellery Channing who
knew him intimately, chose to call him. “I am a poet, a mystic, and a
transcendentalist,” Thoreau said of himself, disregarding his nature
writings. Yet none of these phrases, true as they are, quite adequately
sums him up. At the risk of committing a fresh futility, one may
perhaps suggest that he was a Greek turned transcendental economist.
His life seems to have been a persistent experiment in values. A
philosopher of the open air who kept his mind clear and his nerves
robust by daily contact with wind and weather; a mystic who pried
curiously into the meaning of nature and was familiar with Hellenic
and Oriental systems of thought; a Yankee, skilled in various homely
crafts, yet rather interested in proving for himself what things were
excellent and taking nothing on hearsay--Thoreau’s chief business
would seem to have been with life itself, and how it might best be
lived by Henry Thoreau; how a rational being, in short, might enjoy
the faculties God has given him, following the higher economy and not
enslaving himself to the lower, so that when he came to die he might
honestly say, I have lived.

Amongst the members of the transcendental school Thoreau was the one
Concord man, born and bred there, literally of the soil and loving
the things of the soil. His tireless rovings were commonly bounded
by the familiar Concord horizons. His life had taken deep root in
the Concord fields, and he refused to join the restless multitude
of the _déracinés_, who seek novel experiences in a succession of
transplantings. No English peasant ever clung to the home-acres with
more loving tenacity. He was a countryman in instinct, distrusting the
great city twenty miles away that disseminated its virus through the
outlying villages and farms. The city was wedded to the economy of
industrialism and exploitation. But as a child of Jean Jacques, Thoreau
chose to believe that the road to heaven ran through the fields and
not over the cobblestones of Boston; he discovered an honest integrity
of character oftener in the country than in Lowell mills, yet none
too often there. It was easier to be free there, yet even in Concord
village the herd mind was always laying springes to catch the unwary;
and Thoreau would not be caught. He was poet and philosopher as well as
countryman, and he weighed his own life and the life of his neighbors
in the scales of Hellenic thought. He was surveyor of broader fields
than his neighbor’s wood-lot; was acquainted with other mysteries than
the mystery of pencil-making. He desired other ends than those his
shopkeeping, farm-tending neighbors served; he would not be encumbered
as they were. He could not carry such gross impedimenta in his pack
and be a free man; the pack was too heavy; and he proceeded to lighten
it with a thoroughness that startled Concord. He “signed off” from
Dr. Ripley’s church; with Alcott, he refused to pay his poll tax: he
severed his allegiance to the Commonwealth of Massachusetts and the
Federal government; he rid himself of all concern at what Concord
thought of his ways; he spoke out his honest convictions in the village
Lyceum--convictions about John Brown and slavery and Massachusetts’
part in sending negroes back to their masters--quite careless of the
disapproval of Judge Hoar and other Concord dignitaries. Such a man had
never before walked the village streets, and the spectacle filled his
neighbors with amazement.

With so much useless luggage got rid of, Thoreau was ready to set
about the high business of living. To outward appearance a somewhat
angular Yankee, practical and capable, he was at heart a Greek, with
the delight in the simple round of the seasons and a responsiveness
to natural beauty that belonged to the older civilization. Brought
up under the “pale negations” of Dr. Ripley’s theology, he emerged a
pagan. He was the most widely read in Greek literature of the Concord
transcendentalists; had translated _Prometheus Bound_, and much of
Pindar; and was completely at home in the clear Greek atmosphere. Who
but a Hellenist could utter such words as these which serve as his
apology for the Walden experiment?

  I went to the woods because I wished to live deliberately, to front
  only the essential facts of life, and to see if I could learn what
  it had to teach, and not, when I came to die, discover that I
  had not lived. I did not wish to live what was not life, living
  is so dear; nor did I wish to practice resignation, unless it was
  quite necessary. I wanted to live deep and suck out all the marrow
  of life, to live so sturdily and Spartan-like as to put to rout
  all that was not life, to cut a broad swath and shave close, to
  drive life into a corner, and reduce it to its lowest terms, and,
  if it proved to be mean, why then to get the whole and genuine
  meanness of it, and publish its meanness to the world; or if it
  were sublime, to know it by experience, and be able to give a true
  account of it in my next excursion. (_Walden_, “What I Lived For.”)

To seek Pan in a tired world and recover joys that have long been
forgotten is a business that only a romantic will engage in; yet
Thoreau set out on the quest with a clear-eyed purpose:

  ... My Good Genius seemed to say,--Go fish and hunt far and wide
  day by day,--farther and wider,--and rest thee by many brooks
  and hearth-sides without misgiving. Remember thy Creator in the
  days of thy youth. Rise free from care before the dawn, and seek
  adventures. Let the noon find thee by other lakes, and the night
  over-take thee everywhere at home. There are no larger fields
  than these, no worthier games than may here be played. Grow wild
  according to thy nature, like those sedges and brakes, which will
  never become English hay. Let the thunder rumble; what if it
  threaten ruin to farmer’s crops? that is not its errand to thee.
  Take shelter under the cloud, while they flee to carts and sheds.
  Let not to get a living by thy trade, but thy sport. Enjoy the
  land, but own it not. Through want of enterprise and faith men are
  where they are, buying and selling, and spending their lives like
  serfs. (_Ibid._, “Baker Farm.”)

  If the day and the night are such that you greet them with joy, and
  life emits a fragrance like flowers and sweet-scented herbs, is
  more elastic, more starry, more immortal,--that is your success.
  All nature is your congratulation, and you have cause momentarily
  to bless yourself.... The true harvest of my daily life is somewhat
  as intangible and indiscernible as the tints of morning or evening.
  It is a little star-dust caught, a segment of the rainbow which I
  have clutched. (_Ibid._, “Higher Laws.”)

To save one’s soul has always been accounted in New England a matter
worthy of a man’s best effort, and Thoreau’s days were given over to
it with a single-heartedness without parallel even in New England.
The Puritan, he believed, had suffered his high spiritual mission
to be sacrificed to the economic; he would recover that mission by
sacrificing the economic to the spiritual; but he would interpret
the spiritual as a Hellenist rather than a Hebraist. The Christian
other-worldliness seemed to him unduly regardless of the loveliness of
this world. “Christianity,” he says in the _Week_, “only hopes. It has
hung its harp on the willows, and cannot sing a song in a strange land.
It has dreamed a sad dream, and does not yet welcome the morning with
joy.”

  I am not sure but I should betake myself in extremities to the
  liberal divinities of Greece, rather than to my country’s God....
  In my Pantheon, Pan still reigns in his pristine glory, with his
  ruddy face, his flowing beard, and his shaggy body, his pipe and
  his crook, his nymph Echo, and his chosen daughter Iambe; for the
  great God Pan is not dead, as was rumored. Perhaps of all the gods
  of New England and of ancient Greece, I am most constant at his
  shrine. (_The Week_, “Sunday.”)

His extraordinarily frank evaluation of the New Testament, and
of Calvinistic New England that had too long chewed the cud of
conscience--“they did not know when to swallow their cud, and their
lives of course yielded no milk”--is the work of a pagan from whom all
creeds slip easily. Few more searching sermons have been preached in
Massachusetts than the sermon that composed itself as Thoreau’s boat
floated down the Concord River, past the Billerica meeting-house where
the honest villagers were worshiping the God of New England--a sermon
that with fine irony summons minister and congregation to consider the
deeper teachings of their sacred book.

  I know of no book that has so few readers. There is none so truly
  strange, and heretical, and unpopular. To Christians, no less than
  Greeks and Jews, it is foolishness and a stumbling-block. There
  are, indeed, severe things in it which no man should read aloud but
  once. “Seek first the kingdom of heaven.”--“Lay not up for yourself
  treasures on earth.”--“If thou wilt be perfect, go and sell that
  thou hast, and give to the poor, and thou shalt have treasure in
  heaven.”--“For what is a man profited, if he shall gain the whole
  world, and lose his own soul? or what shall a man give in exchange
  for his soul?”--Think of this, Yankees!... Think of repeating these
  things to a New England audience! thirdly, fourthly, fifteenthly,
  till there are three barrels of sermons! Who, without cant, can
  read them aloud? Who, without cant, can hear them, and not go out
  of the meeting-house? They never _were_ read, they never _were_
  heard. Let but one of these sentences be rightly read from any
  pulpit in the land, and there would not be left one stone of that
  meeting-house upon another.

  ... When one enters a village, the church, not only really but
  from association, is the ugliest-looking building in it, because
  it is the one in which human nature stoops the lowest and is
  most disgraced. Certainly, such temples as these shall ere long
  cease to deform the landscape.... Really, there is no infidelity,
  now-a-days, so great as that which prays, and keeps the Sabbath,
  and rebuilds the churches. (_The Week_, “Sunday.”)

As Thoreau understood the problem of economics there were three
possible solutions open to him: to exploit himself, to exploit his
fellows, or to reduce the problem to its lowest denominator. The
first was quite impossible--to imprison oneself in a treadmill when
the morning called to great adventure, to burden oneself with useless
fardels when the pack must be kept light, was the folly of a slave
mind. He had observed his neighbors closely and found little good in
their way of self-exploitation.

  I have travelled a good deal in Concord; and everywhere, in shops,
  and offices, and field, the inhabitants have appeared to me to be
  doing penance in a thousand remarkable ways.... How many a poor
  immortal soul have I met well-nigh crushed and smothered under its
  load, creeping down the road of life, pushing before it a barn
  seventy-five feet by forty, its Augean stables never cleansed,
  and one hundred acres of land, tillage, mowing, pasture and
  wood-lot.... The better part of the man is soon ploughed into the
  soil for compost. (_Walden_, “Economy.”)

To exploit one’s fellows seemed to Thoreau’s sensitive social
conscience an even grosser infidelity. The leisure of a slave driver,
got by imprisoning his fellows in a treadmill, was an ignoble leisure
from which came the empty vulgarity of modern life. “If I devote myself
to other pursuits and contemplations,” he said, “I must first see, at
least, that I do not pursue them sitting upon another man’s shoulders.
I must get off him first, that he may pursue his contemplations, too.”
Freedom with abstinence seemed to him better than serfdom with material
well-being, for he was only giving up the lesser to enjoy the greater,
as was the privilege of the philosopher.

  To be a philosopher is not merely to have subtle thoughts, nor
  even to found a school, but so to love wisdom as to live according
  to its dictates, a life of simplicity, independence, magnanimity,
  and trust. It is to solve some of the problems of life, not only
  theoretically, but practically.... When he has obtained those
  things which are necessary to life, there is another alternative
  than to obtain the superfluities; and that is, to adventure on life
  now, his vacation from humbler toil having commenced. (_Walden_,
  “Economy.”)

It was the reply of the arch-individualist to the tyrannous
complexities of society, and it set him apart even in the world of
transcendentalism. Other members of the group professed to have found
a better way out of the dilemma--the way of Brook Farm and Fruitland;
a richer life was to be achieved not by espousing poverty but by
coöperation. But Thoreau could not adopt the coöperative solution; he
must either accept society as it was or remove. Convinced that it was
not worth accepting--that one made a foolish bargain in selling oneself
to it--he was content to remove to Walden Pond. “I came into this
world,” he said, “not chiefly to make this a good place to live in,
but to live in it, be it good or bad.” “I desire to speak impartially
on this point, and as one not interested in the success or failure of
the present economical and social arrangement.” He did not advocate
that other men should build cabins and live isolated. He had no wish
to dogmatize concerning the best mode of living--each must settle that
matter for himself. But that a satisfying life should be lived, that
the fox should somehow get free even though he left his tail in the
trap, he was vitally concerned about. “The youth may build or plant or
sail, only let him not be hindered from doing that which he tells me he
would like to do.” Let him at least rid himself of the false gospel of
creature comforts, which men pay too high a price for.

The story of Thoreau’s emancipation from the lower economics is the one
romance of his life, and _Walden_ is his great book. More restrained
than the _Week_ and lacking the exuberant beauty of the latter--its
noble talk and scathing criticism--it is “informed by a more explicit
unifying philosophy.” It is a book in praise of life rather than of
Nature, a record of calculating economies that studied saving in order
to spend more largely. But it is a book of social criticism as well, in
spite of its explicit denial of such a purpose, and in its speculations
much of Carlyle and Ruskin and William Morris crops out. In considering
the true nature of economy he concluded, with Ruskin, that “the cost
of a thing is the amount of what I will call life which is required to
be exchanged for it, immediately or in the long run.” Conceive of life
as cheap, a poor thing to be exploited, and the factory system becomes
the logical economic order; but conceive of it as dear, and the common
happiness the great objective of society, and quite another sort of
industrialism will emerge. Thoreau did not look with approval on the
rising city of Lowell, with its multiplying spindles and increasing
proletariat, and he did not understand why Americans should boast of
a system that provided vulgar leisure for the masters at the cost of
serfdom for the workers.

  Where is this division of labor to end? [he asks] and what object
  does it finally serve? I cannot believe that our factory system is
  the best mode by which men may get clothing. The condition of the
  operatives is becoming every day more like that of the English;
  and it cannot be wondered at, since, as far as I have heard or
  observed, the principal object is, not that mankind may be well and
  honestly clad, but, unquestionably, that the corporations may be
  enriched. (_Walden_, “Economy.”)

The whole middle-class philosophy of exploitation was hateful to him,
the middleman equally with the manufacturer. “Trade curses everything
it touches; and though you trade in messages from heaven, the whole
curse of trade attaches to the business.” Men have been deceived by a
false economy--lured by the bog lights away from the open fields to
flounder in the miasmic marshes. While Ruskin was still pottering over
Turner, Thoreau was elaborating in _Walden_ the text: The only wealth
is life.

In other bits _Walden_ is curiously like _Hopes and Fears for Art_,
and the drift of the whole is one with the revolutionary teachings of
Morris, that the abiding satisfactions are those which spring from free
creative work. This Yankee Greek had learned that it is a beautiful
life back of the tool that creates beauty, and that if the work of our
hands is ugly, it is because our liver are mean and sordid, affording
no outlet for the free creative spirit. In New England, Puritan and
Yankee alike had conspired against beauty, and the gods had taken
revenge by clothing life in drab.

  Before we can adorn our houses with beautiful objects the walls
  must be stripped, and beautiful housekeeping and beautiful
  living be laid for a foundation: now, a taste for the beautiful
  is most cultivated out of doors, where there is no house and no
  housekeeping.

  What of architectural beauty I now see, I know has gradually grown
  from within outward, out of the necessities and character of the
  indweller, who is the only builder,--out of some unconscious
  truthfulness, and nobleness, without ever a thought for the
  appearance; and whatever additional beauty of this kind is destined
  to be produced will be preceded by a like unconscious beauty of
  life. The most interesting dwellings in this country, as the
  painter knows, are the most unpretending, humble log huts and
  cottages of the poor commonly; it is the life of the inhabitants
  whose shells they are, and not any peculiarity in their surfaces
  merely, which makes them _picturesque_; and equally interesting
  will be the citizen’s suburban box, when his life shall be as
  simple and as agreeable to the imagination, and there is no
  straining after effect in the style of his dwelling. (_Walden_,
  “Economy.”)

Thoreau needed only to have lived in a world that honored craftsmanship
to have opened fully the vein of gold that Morris dug his philosophy
from; he had the instinct of the craftsman but not his training. His
turning from the workshop to the fields, hearing no call in the humdrum
village economy to develop a beautiful craftsmanship, was an implied
criticism of the common sterility of labor in every-day Concord; yet
the honest sincerity of his nature led him to the conclusion that lies
at the heart of the philosophy of the great English craftsman:

  None have so pleasant a time as they who in earnest seek to earn
  their bread. It is true actually as it is true really; it is true
  materially as it is true spiritually, that they who seek honestly
  and sincerely, with all their hearts and lives and strength, to
  earn their bread, do earn it, and it is sure to be very sweet to
  them.

  In short, I am convinced, both by faith and experience, that to
  maintain one’s self on this earth is not a hardship but a pastime,
  if we will live simply and wisely; as the pursuits of the simpler
  nations are still the sports of the more artificial. It is not
  necessary that a man should earn his living by the sweat of his
  brow, unless he sweats easier than I do. (_Walden_, “Economy.”)

At Walden Pond and on the Merrimac River Thoreau’s mind was serene as
the open spaces; but this Greek serenity was rudely disturbed when he
returned to Concord village and found his neighbors drilling for the
Mexican War, and when authority in the person of the constable came
to him with the demand that he pay a due share to the public funds.
The war to him was a hateful thing, stupid and unjust, waged for the
extension of the obscene system of negro slavery; and Thoreau was
brought sharply to consider his relations to the political state that
presumed to demand his allegiance, willing or unwilling, to its acts.
Under the stress of such an emergency the transcendentalist was driven
to examine the whole theory of the relation of the individual to the
state. He was not political-minded; he had concerned himself little
with political theory; he would gladly let the government alone if
government would let him alone; he was even prepared to make excuses
for government. But he would not compromise with his conscience; and
when the state applied the principle of coercion, he applied the
counter principle of passive resistance. It was while he was domiciled
in Walden cabin that the hand of the law seized him and thrust him
into Concord jail. He went with the constable quietly, but there was
a dangerous contempt in his heart. It seemed absurd that a man could
not go to the cobbler’s for a pair of mended boots, but he must be
interfered with by a neighbor playing the rôle of constable. Constable,
jailer, the magistrate on the bench, all the elaborate machinery of
the law, Thoreau contemplated quizzically and judged his neighbors
fools to have exchanged their freedom for such masquerades. Those who
got anything from such instruments--lawyers and propertied men--might
think well of them, but they were a mere impertinence to Thoreau who
wanted to go huckleberrying. When they let him out he went quietly
after his berries, and discovered there was “no state in sight among
the berry bushes.” “I saw,” he remarked casually, “that the state was
half-witted, that it was as timid as a lone woman with her silver
spoons, and that it did not know its friends from its foes, and I lost
all my remaining respect for it and pitied it.”

But Thoreau was not done with the comedy. It set him upon thinking,
and the result was the essay, _Civil Disobedience_. Taken by itself
alone, it is a somewhat astonishing performance. This Yankee
transcendentalist quite evidently has turned philosophical anarchist.
But read in the light of Emerson’s _Journals_, or in the light of
Godwin’s _Political Justice_, it is easily comprehensible. It is no
more than transcendental individualism translated into politics, with
all comfortable compromises swept away. Its sources run straight back
to eighteenth-century liberalism with its doctrine of the minimized
state--a state that must lose its coercive sovereignty in the measure
that the laws of society function freely. Very likely Thoreau had never
read Godwin, yet his political philosophy was implicit in _Political
Justice_. In Godwin’s thinking the problem of man in society is the
problem of a voluntary adjustment of the individual to the state; and
it is only by establishing economics and politics on morality, that
political justice is possible. The moral law is the fundamental law,
superior to statutes and constitutions; and to it the citizen is bound
to render allegiance. “The object of the present state of society is
to multiply labor,” asserted Godwin; “in another state it will be to
simplify it.” “The only adequate apology of government is necessity.”
“Government however reformed” is “little capable of affording solid
benefit to mankind.” “Give us equality and justice but no constitution.
Suffer us to follow without restraint the dictates of our own judgment,
and to change our forms of social order as fast as we improve the
dictates of our own judgment.” “The pretense of collective wisdom is
the most palpable of all impostures.” “The true reason why the mass of
mankind has so often been the dupe of knaves, has been the mysterious
and complicated nature of the social system. Once annihilate the
quackery of government, and the most homespun understanding will be
prepared to scorn the artifices of the state juggler that would mislead
him.”

By his own path Thoreau came to identical conclusions. There is
little in _Civil Disobedience_ that is not in _Political Justice_. To
neither thinker is there an abstract state, society or nation--only
individuals; and to both, the fundamental law is the law of morality.
Political expediency and the law of morality frequently clash, and
in such event it is the duty of the individual citizen to follow the
higher law. Thoreau went even further, and asserted the doctrine of
individual compact, which in turn implied the doctrine of individual
nullification; no government, he said, can have any “pure right over my
person or property but what I concede to it.”

  I heartily accept the motto,--“That government is best which
  governs least”; and I should like to see it acted up to more
  rapidly and systematically. Carried out, it finally amounts to
  this, which also I believe,--“That government is best which governs
  not at all”; and when men are prepared for it, that will be the
  kind of government which they will have. Government is at best but
  an expedient; but most governments are usually, and all governments
  are sometimes, inexpedient.

  A government in which the majority rule in all cases cannot
  be based on justice.... We should be men first and subjects
  afterwards. It is not desirable to cultivate a respect for the law,
  so much as for the right.... How does it become a man to behave
  toward this American government today? I answer, that he cannot
  without disgrace be associated with it. I cannot for an instant
  recognize that political organization as _my_ government which
  is the _slave’s_ government also.... There is but little virtue
  in the action of masses of men.... It is not a man’s duty, as a
  matter of course, to devote himself to the eradication of any,
  even the most enormous wrong; he may still properly have other
  concerns to engage him; but it is his duty, at least, to wash his
  hands of it, and, if he gives it no thought longer, not to give it
  practically his support. If I devote myself to other pursuits and
  contemplations, I must first see, at least, that I do not pursue
  them sitting upon another man’s shoulders. I must get off him
  first, that he may pursue his contemplations too.... If the law is
  of such a nature that it requires you to be an agent of injustice
  to another, then, I say, break the law. Let your life be a counter
  friction to stop the machine.... As for adopting the ways which
  the state has provided for remedying the evil, I know not of such
  ways. They take too much time, and a man’s life will be gone....
  Some are petitioning the State to dissolve the Union.... Why do
  they not dissolve it themselves,--the union between themselves and
  the state,--and refuse to pay their quota into its treasury?[458]
  (_Works_, Vol. X, pp. 131-170.)

“Let your life be a counter friction to stop the machine”--in this
doctrine of individual syndicalism Thoreau’s conception of the relation
of the citizen to the state is tersely summed up. In so far as he
was a democrat it was of the transcendental school, rather than the
Jacksonian. He would be governed by the majority no more than by the
minority. The scorn of a fine ethical mind for practical government by
politicians could scarcely be more tellingly phrased than in the bit of
verse he tucks into _Civil Disobedience_:

  A drab of state, a cloth-o’-silver slut,
  To have her train borne up, and her soul trail in the dirt.

Such a man quite evidently would go for Nullification as fiercely as
Garrison. Even though he might wash his hands of society, the cries of
those who suffered injustice followed him, and when the Fugitive Slave
Law passed, it robbed him of his peace, destroying his pleasure in
wonted things. The slave hunters were in Boston streets, and justice
in the person of Commissioner Loring was sending Anthony Burns back to
slavery. As he contemplated the spectacle his wrath against a coercive
government flamed up. “My thoughts are murder to the state,” he
complained bitterly, “and involuntarily go plotting against her.”

  I would remind my countrymen that they are to be men first, and
  Americans only at a late and convenient hour.... I hear a good deal
  said about trampling this law under foot. Why, one need not go out
  of his way to do that. This law rises not to the level of the head
  or the reason; its natural habitat is in the dirt. It was born and
  bred, and has its life, only in the dust and mire, on a level with
  the feet; and he who walks with freedom, and does not with Hindoo
  mercy avoid treading on every venomous reptile, will inevitably
  tread on it, and so trample it under foot,--and Webster, its
  maker, like the dirt-bug and its ball. (“Slavery in Massachusetts,”
  in _Works_, Vol. X.)

  The law will never make men free; it is men who have got to make
  the law free. They are the lovers of law and order who observe the
  law when the government breaks it.

Thoreau was a stern judge, and he held his age in low esteem. His
Concord neighbors seemed to him poor fellows with too little spirit to
be free men; they were the raw material of standing armies, militia,
jailors, constables, and the _posse comitatus_. And then one day into
the field of his vision came a plain Yankee, primitive and heroic,
John Brown of Ossawatomie. In the contemplation of his life and death
Thoreau felt a shock of new faith run like an electric current through
his veins. The age was no longer dead to him, for it had bred a man.
“I rejoice that I live in this age,” he exclaimed, “that I am his
contemporary.” He had found his hero--not in past times as Carlyle and
Emerson had done, but in the present and among his own Yankee kind. He
had talked with John Brown in Concord and recognized him as a primitive
idealist of rugged mold, a stern moralist who set justice above the
law. That this man should be so grossly misunderstood by lesser men, so
foully slandered, filled him with sorrow and with wrath also. “When a
noble deed is done, who is likely to appreciate it? They who are noble
themselves. I was not surprised that certain of my neighbors spoke of
John Brown as an ordinary felon, for who are they? They have either
much flesh, or much office, or much coarseness of some kind” (“The
Last Days of John Brown,” in _Works_, Vol. X, p. 241). His trial and
conviction Thoreau regarded as a judgment, not on John Brown, but upon
America; the lawyers and editors and politicians who judged him were
only convicting themselves.

  His company was small indeed, because few could be found worthy to
  pass muster. Each one who there laid down his life for the poor
  and oppressed was a picked man, culled out of many thousands, if
  not millions; apparently a man of principle, of rare courage, and
  devoted humanity; ready to sacrifice his life at any moment for
  the benefit of his fellow-man. It may be doubted if there were so
  many more their equals in these respects in all the country,--I
  speak of his followers only,--for their leader, no doubt, scoured
  the land far and wide, seeking to swell his troop. These alone were
  ready to step between the oppressor and the oppressed. Surely they
  were the very best men you could select to be hung. That was the
  best compliment this country could pay them. They were ripe for her
  gallows. She has tried a long time, she has hung a good many, but
  never found the right one before.

  I do not believe in lawyers, in that mode of attacking or defending
  a man, because you descend to meet the judge on his own ground,
  and, in cases of the highest importance, it is of no consequence
  whether a man breaks a human law or not. Let lawyers decide trivial
  cases. Business men may arrange that among themselves. If they were
  the interpreters of the everlasting laws which rightfully bind man,
  that would be another thing. A counterfeiting law-factory, standing
  half in a slave land and half in a free! What kind of laws for free
  men can you expect from that? (“A Plea for Captain John Brown,” in
  _Works_, Vol. X, p. 197.)

In Thoreau the eighteenth-century philosophy of individualism, the
potent liberalisms let loose on the world by Jean Jacques, came to
fullest expression in New England. He was the completest embodiment of
the _laissez-faire_ reaction against a regimented social order, the
severest critic of the lower economics that frustrate the dreams of
human freedom. He was fortunate in dying before the age of exploitation
had choked his river with its weeds; fortunate in not foreseeing how
remote is that future of free men on which his hopes were fixed:

  The life in us is like the water in the river. It may rise this
  year higher than man has ever known it, and flood the parched
  uplands; even this may be the eventful year, which will drown out
  all the muskrats ... such is the character of that morrow which
  mere lapse of time can never make to dawn. The light which puts out
  our eyes is darkness to us. There is more day to dawn. The sun is
  but a morning-star. (_Walden._)

With the dawning of that day perhaps men will sit once more at the feet
of the ancient wisdom and fashion their lives upon the principle that
the soul is more than the meat and the body than raiment. Perhaps they
may even shape for themselves new heroes--“above and after all, the Man
of the Age, come to be called workingman.” He and his deeds are looked
down upon in our time--“It is obvious that none yet speaks to his
condition, for the speaker is not yet in his condition.” “Literature
speaks how much still to the past, how little to the future; how much
to the East, how little to the West” (“Thomas Carlyle and his Works,”
in _Works_, Vol. X, p. 118). One of the great names in American
literature is the name of Henry Thoreau. Yet only after sixty years is
he slowly coming into his own.


Footnotes

[458] Compare the following entry in his _Journal_ under date of March
26, 1842: “I must confess I have felt mean enough when asked how I was
to act on society, what errand I had to mankind. Undoubtedly I did
not feel mean without a reason, and yet my loitering is not without
defense. I would fain communicate the wealth of my life to men,
would really give them what is most precious in my gift.... I know
no riches I would keep back. I have no private good unless it be my
peculiar ability to serve the public.... This is the only individual
property.... It is hard to be a good citizen of the world in any great
sense, but if we do render no interest or increase to mankind out
of that talent God gave us, we can at least preserve the principal
unimpaired.”




