Chapter IV • The Beginnings of Criticism


For many thoughtful Americans the welter of frontier individualism was
a severe trial to their faith in American institutions. An ambitious
industrialism colliding with a shambling Jacksonian democracy was
forecasting consequences to government and to society that intelligent
men could not shut their eyes to. The America of Fisk and Gould, of
Boss Tweed and the _Crédit Mobilier_ scandal, was far from satisfying
the requirements of any rational civilization. After a hundred years
to have come to such heroes, to have bogged down in such filth, was an
outcome to the great experiment that one could not contemplate with
pride. It was no time to be silent. No people was ever saved by dumb
preachers. The present generation was answerable for the new evils that
were springing from the graves of the old, and intelligent Americans
must not lose their heads in the thick of the common hurly-burly. So
amidst the ruck and clamor of the times a tiny note of criticism was
lifted up, timid and uncertain at first, but growing more confident and
more strident as the decade grew older. It was not searching criticism.
Sooner or later it was pretty certain to run into a blind alley of
moral indignation, overlooking the major issues and leaving the vital
factors of the problem unconsidered. Yet such as it was--shallow and
feeble enough often to excite wonder in a later generation--it marks
the rise of a spirit of skepticism towards the blowsy doctrine of
manifest destiny that since the fifties had been blowing about the land.

The determining factors in the situation confronting criticism were
political and economic, and the immediate problem that pressed for
solution was the problem whether an undisciplined people, wedded to
an old-fashioned agrarian democracy, could cope with an ambitious
industrialism that was quite cynically buying and selling the political
state. To deal with that problem most of the critics were singularly
ill equipped. Two generations of constitutional debate, seasoned with
a dash of equalitarian dogma, had left them intellectually lean and
impoverished. They had forgotten the sober realism of the eighteenth
century that never overlooked the intimate ties between economics
and politics, and with no anchors down in the plebeian mud they were
likely to drift helplessly in the moral squalls they were always
blowing up. The more distinguished critics--those who commanded the
most serious attention--were in a particularly unfortunate situation,
for not only were they uninstructed idealists with no understanding
of _Realpolitik_, but they had been reared in the classical tradition
and their minds were saturated with a decadent aristocratic culture.
To many of them the present evils of America served only to quicken an
inherited skepticism of democracy. How can society expect to function
adequately, they asked, without capable and honest leadership; and
how can such leadership be hoped for in a rough and tumble democracy
that loves the noisiest demagogue? Of this very considerable group of
belated Federalists James Russell Lowell was the most distinguished
representative. In the middle seventies he had come to believe that
America was suffering from too much democracy, and that competent
government could be had only by working back to the responsible
Federalism of earlier times, with leadership reclaimed by the better
elements of society. To the economics of the problem--the antagonistic
interests of capitalist, proletarian, and farmer, with their struggles
to control the political state--he gave no serious thought, but he
viewed with instinctive suspicion the mounting ambitions of labor and
he foresaw only evil from the bitter unrest of the farmers.

A second very considerable group, of which George William Curtis may
be taken as spokesman, rejected all such antiquated Federalistic hopes
as the foolish dreams of defeatists. They held fast to their faith
in democracy, but they were convinced that more adequate democratic
machinery must be provided. The root of the evil, they had come to
believe, was political and must be sought in the vicious Jacksonian
spoils system. With every change of administration to turn over the
country to hungry partisans to devour, was not democracy but the
negation of democracy? Government would not function satisfactorily
until a trained civil service was provided, and the need of the hour,
they pointed out, was an honest civil service reform. A third group,
very much smaller than the others, of which Edwin Lawrence Godkin was
the spokesman, was inclined to trace the plentiful evils of the times
to an unwise paternalism, asserting that the real source of the common
political scoundrelism was the lauded American System devised by Henry
Clay, as a result of which government was seduced from its proper
business of keeping the peace and was turned into a fairy godmother to
shower gifts on favored interests. The only cure for the evil was to
divorce business and politics and reëstablish in practice the police
theory of government.

In the thinking of all three groups little consideration was given
to the social consequences of the venture on which America had
entered with the vigor of thoughtless youth. Concerning the ultimate
consequences of the collision between a shambling democracy and an
ambitious industrialism, few troubled themselves greatly. To find
those who confronted the problem frankly and realistically, one must
search out obscure men, labor leaders for the most part, or _déclassé_
radicals like Wendell Phillips. The middle-class mind refused to
see what its feet were stumbling over. In consequence the Gilded
Age produced no critics of industrialism comparable to the great
English critics--Carlyle, Kingsley, Ruskin, Morris, Tawney; no social
philosophers like the great continental expounders of proletarian
ideals--Marx, Engels, Bakunin, Sorel; no left-wing economists like
the great French school--Louis Blanc, Bastiat, Proudhon. The genteel
culture of America was no better than bankrupt in presence of brutal
reality, quite unequipped to interpret the sprawling America that was
transforming itself before its eyes into something it hated but did
not understand. The time for searching criticism had not come, and
would not come until the Industrial Revolution had created in America
a proletariat such as swarmed in the English black country and amongst
the hovels of continental cities. Nevertheless such criticism as there
was must be taken into consideration, and for our present purpose it
will suffice to single out three spokesmen--a grizzled warrior of the
earlier renaissance who had the courage to face unpleasant fact, and
two critics who brought to bear on political themes the best culture of
the time. With these may be conveniently grouped certain novelists who
more or less casually suffered their pens to deal with social problems.


I • The New England Conscience and Capitalism--Wendell Phillips

Social criticism was by no means a new thing in America. For half a
century it had filled all ears with its strident clamors, and from it
had issued the motley group of reform movements that had been cheered
or mocked at by thousands. From Channing and Cooper down to Parke
Godwin and Horace Greeley it had been mustering its forces, vivid and
picturesque figures for the most part--men and women like Fanny Wright,
George Henry Evans, and Hinton R. Helper; ardent souls who beyond the
dun horizon discovered a golden morrow that only awaited the rising
of a new sun, and who lectured and wrote and argued till pretty much
all America had caught something of their contagious enthusiasm. In
this work New England came eventually to take the lead, and the golden
forties were a time when in many an obscure Yankee head programs of
reform were fermenting like a vat of malt. But unfortunately an excess
of eagerness wore out the first enthusiasm, and when the shackles had
been loosened from the negro bondmen the militancy of the New England
leadership subsided and the tired New England conscience went on
vacation.

But in these slothful times the conscience of one great New Englander
was not tired, though he gave it no rest while life lasted. Wendell
Phillips was a soldier of Puritan soul who did not lay down his arms
in ’65, but for nearly a score of years warred upon the injustices of
the Gilded Age as he had warred before upon the obscenities of negro
slavery. No sooner was the cause of abolitionism won--a cause to which
he had sacrificed much in ease and the good opinion of Beacon Street,
but from which he had gained more in self-respect and the decent
opinion of mankind--than he turned to whatever new work offered. The
lovers of justice, he knew very well, can indulge themselves in no
vacations, for the devil is on the job day and night, and while the
assailants sleep he is at work repairing any breaches in the walls of
his citadel. When conscience is tired he counts on gaining his greatest
victories.

The love of freedom has always been a dangerous possession in
Massachusetts, given to exploding in unforeseen moments and unexpected
places. No one could have foretold--certainly not he himself--that
Wendell Phillips would put away all his Brahmin loyalties and devote
forty-seven years to an unresting attack on the diverse Toryisms from
which he and his class had hitherto prospered. Son of the first mayor
of the city and a distinguished member of the Boston gentry, he was a
patrician in the fullest Boston sense. All the loyalties of his caste
summoned him to uphold the Brahmin authorities, but something deep
within him, a loyalty to other and higher ideals, held him back. When a
frock-coated mob laid its hands on Garrison to lynch him for abolition
propaganda, he drew back; he refused to follow the Mayor and the
Colonel of his regiment and other gentlemen if they betrayed the Boston
for which their grandfathers had fought. An instinctive love of justice
held him back. A fierce indignation flamed up within him at the wrong
done a citizen of Massachusetts for exercising his natural right of
free speech, and in that wild hour he discovered that he was a child of
’76 with the mentality of a revolutionist. His conscience was aroused
and he proceeded to put it in the safe keeping of Ann Terry Greene,
a brilliant young woman of radical mind, who quickened his sense of
social justice as Maria White was to quicken Lowell’s. There was to
be no backsliding in his case. From the December day in 1837 when he
replied to Attorney-General Austin’s slanders of the Revolutionary
fathers in Faneuil Hall, to the end of a life filled with enormous
labors--a life daily stabbed by Tory hornets, and that at the last is
said to have inspired the remark of Judge Hoar that he did not attend
the funeral of Wendell Phillips but he approved of it[621]--he followed
his conscience into many an unpopular cause and spoke for those for
whom few were willing to speak.

The story of his anti-slavery labors belongs to an earlier time and
need not be recounted here. His devotion to abolitionism equaled
Garrison’s and his services were as great. It is rather the nineteen
years that remained to him after Appomattox that are of present
concern--what later battles he fought and how he bore himself in those
battles. It was a difficult time for Puritan liberalism, face to face
with a new age that had forgotten the old liberalisms. The Grand Army
of Abolitionism had disbanded and new armies of other causes had
not yet been recruited. Garrison and Edmund Quincy and Whittier had
laid aside their arms, and Lowell had long since settled back into a
comfortable Brahminism; the long struggle had left them drained of
their energy. But for Wendell Phillips the battle was not over; it was
unending and he was enlisted for life. At a vast meeting that marked
the formal close of the abolition movement he took leave of his old
associates with these words: “We will not say ‘Farewell,’ but ‘all
hail.’ Welcome, new duties! We sheathe no sword. We only turn the front
of the army upon a new foe.”[622] He had long spoken for prohibition,
woman’s rights, the abolition of capital punishment, and he now joined
heartily with the courageous women engaged in such reform work. But
more provocative business was at hand, and more dangerous--causes
that touched the northern pocketbook as abolitionism had touched the
southern. The banker’s exploitation of the national currency, and the
manufacturer’s exploitation of factory labor--these were issues that a
cautious man who was careful of his good name would not meddle with.
But Wendell Phillips was never cautious and his good name had long
since been flung to the wolves. And so in the evening of his days,
with a courage that took little counsel of expediency, he embarked on
a campaign that had for its ultimate objective the impregnable citadel
of State Street. He would destroy capitalistic exploitation in all its
works. It was as hopeless a battle as King Arthur’s “last, dim, weird
battle of the west,” and entered upon as courageously.

How he came to hold the heretical views on money and labor that he
expounded from the lecture platform cannot easily be traced. Perhaps
they came from the radical fringe that envelops every great social
movement; perhaps they were the inevitable expression of his left-wing
temper. A man who had fought all Tory programs for thirty years must
eventually come to hate the ways of capitalism, and so confirmed a
democrat as Wendell Phillips would be certain to espouse the doctrine
of thorough. One who had passed through the fires of abolition
nullification, who had spoken of the Union as “built i’ the eclipse
and rigged with curses dark,” who had repudiated his citizenship and
equaled Garrison in contempt for a slave-protecting Constitution,
would have pretty well cleared his mind of conventional respect for
capitalistic law and order. He was not impressed by political cant. He
had taken the measure of existing law and order and was casting about
for a juster law and a more generous order.

In these later years, as a program of social reconstruction took shape
in his mind, he was coming to essential agreement with the program of
socialism. With the Marxians he based his thinking upon economics, and
his final objective came to be the substitution of coöperation for the
profit-motive. As ardently as Horace Greeley he asserted the rights
of labor. As early as 1860-1861 he had come to recognize a similarity
in the economic status of the wage-slave and the bond-slave, and in
1865, in a speech on the eight-hour movement, he accepted as true the
southern thesis that in western civilization all labor, whether bond or
wage, was unfree, held in the grip of a master, bought and sold in the
market;[623] and now that the shackles had been struck from the negro,
it remained to strike them from the wage-earner. To turn the negro from
a bond-slave to a wage-slave would be a sorry ending of abolitionism;
but such must be the inevitable outcome, he believed, unless all labor
should win freedom. The question of the hour for Wendell Phillips had
become the question of the relation of labor and capital.

In his thinking on the currency question--a question that became acute
in the seventies--he was soon caught up by the Greenback movement. It
may have been that his contact with Thaddeus Stevens helped to mold
his views on the money question; yet that he should have become a
Greenbacker was foreordained. He had no amiable illusions in regard to
State Street. As a tribune of the people he had long been intimately
acquainted with its ambitions, and he would not turn over the country
to its custodianship. He would have no bankers’ control of the national
currency, to augment or deflate as banking profits dictated. His
democratic sympathies recoiled from a class control of the common
medium of exchange, and in 1875 he offered a drastic solution of the
vexing question that brought down on his head all the wrath of State
Street. His plan provided for three things: the rejection of the
national banknote system; the issue of honest greenbacks, secured by
the wealth of the country, and receivable in payment for all debts
public and private--not dishonest greenbacks like the old, which the
government had repudiated at issue by refusing to accept them in
payment of custom dues; and finally the retirement of interest-bearing
bonds and the return to a cash basis for government business. How
deeply he felt in the notorious matter of credit manipulation is
suggested in the following passage with its echoes of an older America
that looked with suspicion on a consolidating capitalism.

  Three times within a dozen years, [he said] capitalists with their
  knives on the throat of the Government, have compelled it to
  cheat its largest creditor, the people; whose claim, Burke said,
  was the most sacred. First, the pledge that greenbacks should be
  exchangeable with bonds was broken. Secondly, debts originally
  payable in paper ... were made payable in gold. Thirdly, silver was
  demonetized, and gold made the only tender. A thousand millions
  were thus stolen from the people.[624]

At other times he went further. Speaking on the labor question in 1872,
he said:

  I say, let the debts of the country be paid, abolish the banks, and
  let the government lend every Illinois farmer (if he wants it), who
  is now borrowing money at ten per cent., money on the half-value
  of his land at three per cent. The same policy that gave a million
  acres to the Pacific Railroad, because it was a great national
  effort, will allow of our lending Chicago twenty millions of money,
  at three per cent., to rebuild it.[625]

  When we get into power, there is one thing we mean to do. If a
  man owns a single house, we will tax him one hundred dollars. If
  he owns ten houses of like value, we won’t tax him one thousand
  dollars, but two thousand dollars.... We’ll double and treble and
  quintuple and sextuple and increase tenfold the taxes.... We’ll
  crumple up wealth by making it unprofitable to be rich.... You will
  say, “Is that just?” My friends, it is safe. Man is more valuable
  than money. You say, “Then capital will go to Europe.” Good
  heavens, let it go! If other States wish to make themselves vassals
  of wealth, so will not we. We will save a country equal from end
  to end. Land, private property, all sorts of property, shall be so
  dearly taxed that it shall be impossible to be rich; for it is in
  wealth, in incorporated, combining, perpetuated wealth, that the
  danger of labor lies.[626]

The mad wicked ravings of a demagogue, such talk was accounted by
sober financiers of Boston. But it was rather the talk of an honest
equalitarian who understood how incompatible was property rule and
the ideal of equality. The arch-enemy of a worthy civilization,
Wendell Phillips had become convinced, was private capitalism with its
dehumanizing profit-motive. There could be no adequate civilization,
no Christianity, until coöperation had displaced competition, and men
were become equal in economic rights as they were in franchise rights.
At a Labor-Reform Convention held at Worcester on September 4, 1871,
resolutions drafted by him were adopted--resolutions that reveal “just
where Mr. Phillips stood for the last thirteen years of his life.” In
this “full body of faith,” and in two later speeches--_The Foundation
of the Labor Movement_, and _The Labor Question_--the man who called
himself “a Jeffersonian democrat in the darkest hour,” wrote down as
the great objective of the labor party the principle that has long been
accepted as the cardinal plank of the Socialist platform.

  We affirm, as a fundamental principle, that labor, the creator of
  wealth, is entitled to all it creates.

  Affirming this, we avow ourselves willing to accept the final
  results of the operation of a principle so radical,--such as the
  overthrow of the whole profit-making system, the extinction of
  all monopolies, the abolition of privileged classes, universal
  education and fraternity, perfect freedom of exchange, and ... the
  final obliteration of that foul stigma upon our so-called Christian
  civilization--the poverty of the masses.... _Resolved_,--That we
  declare war with the wages system, which demoralizes alike the
  hirer and the hired, cheats both, and enslaves the workingman; war
  with the present system of finance, which robs labor, and gorges
  capital, ... war with these lavish grants of the public lands to
  speculating companies, and whenever in power, we pledge ourselves
  to use every just and legal means to resume all such grants
  heretofore made; war with the system of enriching capitalists by
  the creation and increase of public interest-bearing debts. We
  demand that every facility, and all encouragement, shall be given
  by law to co-operation in all branches of industry and trade,
  and that the same aid be given to co-operative efforts that has
  heretofore been given to railroads and other enterprises....[627]

When he was about to take the platform on another occasion his wife is
reported to have said to him, “Wendell, don’t shilly-shally!” Certainly
in this pronouncement, and in the speeches supporting it, there is no
shilly-shallying. He will have no halfway measures, but goes straight
to the economic core of the problem. Pretty much all of Marxianism is
there, even to the class war. The capitalists had whetted their swords
and he would have labor put its sword likewise to the grindstone. If
the war were cruel, where did labor learn it--“learned it of capital,
learned it of our enemies.” In a world of economic concentration where
caste follows property accumulation he had come to rest his hopes
on the international solidarity of labor. The cause of democratic
justice was committed to the keeping of the workingman, and if he
were defeated in his hopes the future was black indeed. The American
Revolution and the French Revolution had prepared the way gloriously
for a greater event, the revolution of labor. He was not afraid
of revolution. In America he hoped the battle would be fought with
ballots, but if it must come to bullets, so be it. The Paris Commune
met with his heartiest approval: “I have not a word to utter--far be
it from me!--against the grandest declaration of popular indignation
which Paris wrote on the pages of history in fire and blood. I honor
Paris as the vanguard of the Internationals of the world.”[628] And in
the Phi Beta Kappa address, delivered in 1881 before all the assembled
conservatisms of Boston, the old warrior with seventy years upon his
head, went so far as to defend Russian Nihilism.

  Nihilism is the righteous and honorable resistance of a people
  crushed under an iron rule. Nihilism is evidence of life ...
  the last weapon of victims choked and manacled beyond all other
  resistance.... I honor Nihilism, since it redeems human nature from
  the suspicion of being utterly vile, made up only of heartless
  oppressors and contented slaves.... This is the only view an
  American, the child of 1620 and 1776, can take of Nihilism. Any
  other unsettles and perplexes the ethics of our civilization. Born
  within sight of Bunker Hill, in a commonwealth which adopts the
  motto of Algernon Sydney, _sub libertate quietem_ (“accept no peace
  without liberty”); son of Harvard, whose first pledge was “Truth”;
  citizen of a republic based on the claim that no government is
  rightful unless resting on the consent of the people, and which
  assumes to lead in asserting the rights of humanity,--I at least
  can say nothing else and nothing less; no, not if every tile on
  Cambridge roofs were a devil hooting my words![629]

“It was a delightful discourse,” said one gentleman, “but preposterous
from beginning to end.” The doctrine was strange to Harvard
ears--wicked and perverse. And strange and disconcerting also was his
roll-call of great and noble deeds done in America in which Harvard
scholarship had had no part. To an audience of Brahmin scholars it
was not kind to say, “The greatest things have not been done for the
world by its bookmen”; nor this, “It is not the masses who have most
disgraced our political annals. I have seen many mobs ... I never saw
or heard of any but well-dressed mobs, assembled and countenanced, if
not always led in person, by respectability and what called itself
education.”[630] It was a curious scene--that gathering in a Harvard
hall listening to a son of Harvard who had gone to school to other
teachers than those brought up on Brahmin culture. The liberalism of
the forties was speaking to a generation that was concerned about
other things than a just and humane civilization. Wendell Phillips
was hopelessly old-fashioned in America of the Gilded Age--a lone
Puritan in a land of Yankees. He used to speak of himself grimly as
“that Ishmael”; his home, he said, was the sleeping-car and his only
friends the brakeman and the porter. He spent his strength and his
earnings with generous prodigality, and when he died the only treasures
he had laid up were in heaven. He was the last survivor of the great
age of Puritan conscience, and the words he spoke of Theodore Parker
may well stand for his epitaph: “The child of Puritanism is not mere
Calvinism--it is the loyalty to justice which tramples under foot the
wicked laws of its own epoch.”


II • Morality and Politics--George William Curtis

A child of Puritan conscience also was George William Curtis, like
Wendell Phillips sprung from the Puritan gentry, but unlike him wanting
in a passionate Hebraism that sought justice in all the byways and
would not turn aside from pursuing it. A reformer but never a radical,
he was a gentleman who was a lifelong friend of civilization. An
idealist, he refused to serve the gross materialisms that swept so
many of his fellows from the old moorings, but throughout a long and
honorable career he preserved unshaken his early faith in republican
ideals and the way of liberty. As an abolitionist he faced hostile
audiences with admirable poise, and as a civil service reformer he
fought off the attacks of greasy politicians with quiet contempt. A
cultivated gentleman, high-bred if not heroic, was George William
Curtis.

Born in Providence, Rhode Island, of excellent stock, living most of
his life in New York City whither his father had removed to engage in
the banking business, he was brought up in affluence and spent his days
amidst dignified surroundings. Broad-minded and generous, with wide
sympathies and urbane manners, he followed his conscience and weighed
life in the scales of Puritan morality. He was no friend to compromise
or expediency, yet he was content to serve God in the station whereunto
he had been called, declining to turn rebel and become an outcast
and pariah. Endowed with excellent parts, his training was unusually
fortunate. At eighteen with his brother Burrill he went to Brook
Farm, where he spent two profitable years in an atmosphere he found
stimulating. After quitting Brook Farm he passed the better part of
two years at Concord with his brother, living at farmhouses, helping
with the crops, and for a time indulging in an experiment not unlike
Thoreau’s at Walden Pond. Then followed four years overseas--from
1846 to 1850--rambling about the continent, sloughing off the
provincial asceticism of New England, and practicing his pen by means
of letters and diaries. On his return he drifted into journalism,
wrote several volumes of travel essays and social satire, caught the
Lyceum infection, then at its malignant stage, lectured voluminously
to pay off an unfortunate debt, wrote for _Putnam’s Magazine_, became
connected with _Harper’s Weekly_, finally settling into the Easy Chair
of _Harper’s Magazine_, from which comfortable seat for years he sent
forth gracefully pointed comments on manners, society, politics, life,
yet more and more turning to politics as his particular field and
serving as volunteer political mentor and critic to the Gilded Age.

Of his several early ventures into the field of polite letters little
need be said. The work of a high-spirited young man, they were a cross
between Nathaniel Parker Willis and Thackeray with a suggestion of
Disraeli. He took his place naturally as a member of the New York
group of litterateurs who were gaily exploiting the conventional
sentimentalism of the fifties. With its pose of clever sophistication
the New York school could do no good to a serious young writer, and
the pretensions of the new-rich society of the town were a cordial
invitation to go wrong. _Nile Notes of a Howadji_ (1851), written
before the young traveler had caught the current note of social
satire, was a conscious correction of the ascetic Puritanism imbibed
at Concord, and with its frank delight in the sensuousness of the East
it gave offense to the professional bluestockings of the time. But in
_The Potiphar Papers_ (1853) he turned to satirize New York society,
then hastening to transform itself from a staid Knickerbocker world
into a Gold Coast of social climbers. That his treatment of the theme
should have been a slighter edition of Thackeray’s _Vanity Fair_--less
searching and more sentimental--might be guessed even if we did not
know how greatly Curtis loved and admired the English satirist. “He
seems to be the one of all authors who takes life precisely as he finds
it,” he wrote of him. “If he finds it sad, he makes it sad: if gay,
gay. You discover in him the flexible adaptability of Horace, but with
a deep and consuming sadness which the Roman never knew, and which in
the Englishman seems to be almost sentimentality.”[631]

But in spite of their excellent model these sketches do not now seem
so sprightly as they seemed to his fellows on the staff of _Putnam’s
Magazine_. Moralism scented with patchouli is no longer the vogue,
and they have long since been laid away with the hoops and crinoline
of the fifties. His most important venture in polite literature--if
indeed even that deserves the name important--was _Prue and I_ (1856),
written in a golden summer when his pen was dipped into the inkwell of
love and he foresaw the years of his life lengthening out in the most
intimate of companionships. They are charming essays in contentment
that teach the familiar lesson that the only abiding riches are the
riches of mind and character. The old bookkeeper in black coat and
white tie who voyages to the realms of romance while watching from
the Battery outgoing ships, has discovered the vicarious pleasure of
the imagination, and the Aurelia of his dreams is Prue as she was in
her youth, and both are Anna Shaw to whom soon after he was married.
The first three sketches--“Dinner Time,” “My Chateaux,” and “Sea from
the Shore”--are humorous and tender fancies in the graceful Victorian
manner; but “Titbottom’s Spectacles” is Hawthorne-like in the tenuous
play of a grotesquely moralistic fancy, and the succeeding sketches
reveal the exhaustion of the vein. Later he tried his hand at a
novel--_Trumps_--but it refused to turn into anything but a tract and
in the early sixties he settled down in the Easy Chair which he had
first occupied as early as 1853.

Thereafter to his death in 1892 his work followed three diverse lines.
For thirty years he was essayist, orator, and political critic, to a
generation sorely in need of wise and urbane counsel. His audience was
wide and his influence great, and to his work he brought the weight
of his sane and just character. Not a great scholar and not an acute
critic, he was an enlightened and sensitive conscience, and to the bar
of his conscience he summoned the parties and policies of a heedless
and selfish generation. From the Easy Chair he sent forth his genial
comment on matters of current interest, satisfying his love of creative
writing by the grace of his talk, and recognizing his kinship with
the age of Queen Ann by adopting the words of _The Tatler_, “I shall
from time to time Report and Consider all Matters of what Kind soever
that shall occur to me.” But such work at the best is ephemeral, and
ephemeral likewise were the polished pronouncements of the occasional
orator on which far too much time and labor were expended. But New York
City must have its spokesman for formal occasions, and after Bryant’s
death George William Curtis was summoned with increasing frequency.
The rich context of his speeches, elaborated with formal dignity and
embellished with literary allusions, hit to a nicety the taste of a
generation that still delighted in oratory and preferred dignity to
informality. His addresses on Charles Sumner, Wendell Phillips, Bryant,
and Lowell, are excellent examples of a style that is no longer the
fashion. In their polished sentences eulogy is tempered with criticism,
but the criticism is sympathetic and refuses to render judgments that
may strike his hearers as severe. It would be ungracious to intrude
unpleasant facts on dignified occasions.

But his most significant work during these busy years lay in the field
of political criticism, and it was as editor of _Harper’s Weekly_, from
1863 to his death, and as a leader in the movement of civil service
reform, that he made the deepest impress on the age. The _Weekly_,
with Nast as cartoonist, was then at the height of its popularity
and influence, and by means of its editorial page Curtis was able to
marshal a very considerable following for whatever cause or party he
espoused. He had long taken part in practical politics, was active in
caucuses and conventions, was much on the stump and kept his fingers on
party wires. Yet influential as he was--the scholar in politics, as his
own generation loved to say--he was never a serious student of politics
in the broader meaning. He was essentially an English gentleman
politician, with a fine scorn of mean and sordid policies, a warm
love of country but an equally warm love of civilization, devoted to
the cause of liberty, a friend of justice, yet with all his excellent
traits an inadequate political philosopher. Like Lowell’s his horizon
was curiously limited. Abstract political theory did not interest him
and he never critically examined diverse systems of government. Of
economics he was as ignorant as his generation. Again like Lowell the
single standard by which he judged politics was the moral standard, and
in his anxious concern for “good government” he failed to probe deeply
the sources of “bad government.” In presence of the vast corruptions of
the Gilded Age he was as helpless in diagnosing the evil as Lowell or
Norton.

Such helplessness is the more surprising considering what rare
opportunities he had enjoyed for intelligent understanding. During
the impressionable years of youth he daily associated with the most
militant group of intellectual radicals in America and heard the ideas
of Saint-Simon and Fourier and Owen eagerly canvassed. Associationism
as a cure for the evils of competition was the cardinal doctrine of
the Brook Farmists; yet his individualism passed unaffected through
all such discussions. He seems to have sympathized with the skepticism
of Hawthorne rather than the faith of Ripley and Dana. Writing to his
father from Brook Farm he fell into the genial transcendental vein and
gaily poked fun at those who would make the world over.

  No wise man is long a reformer, [he wrote] for Wisdom sees plainly
  that growth is steady, sure, and neither condemns nor rejects what
  is, or has been. Reform is organized distrust. It says to the
  universe fresh from God’s hand, “You are a miserable business; lo!
  I will make you fairer!” and so deputes some Fourier or Robert Owen
  to improve the bungling work of the Creator.[632]

It was as a transcendental optimist that he set out on his travels in
1846. The Europe he visited at the age of twenty was seething with
discontent that was to flame up in the revolutionary year of ’48, yet
though he wandered leisurely through Italy, Hungary, Germany, France,
and was at Paris during the great overturn, the evidence that his
biographer has gathered indicates that he was not deeply affected by
the experience. Unlike his friend Margaret Fuller, who was a passionate
volunteer in the struggle of Mazzini at Rome, or like Dana, who
followed the movement closely as foreign correspondent, he felt none
of the promptings of a revolutionist. A romantic sympathy for Kossuth
is clearly indicated, but his feelings carried him little further
than that. Even in England, seething as it was with the proletarian
unrest that culminated in the great Chartist movement, he came upon
little to quicken his transcendental pulse. It was not till he got
back home and found himself in presence of negro slavery that his
reforming ardor took fire and he proposed to engage in the business of
“organized distrust.” He threw himself into the cause with enthusiasm
and spoke from many an abolition platform. Then came the war and during
those passionate years he was swept unconsciously along the path of
consolidation, emerging from the fire a confirmed Hamiltonian with
transcendental democratic leanings.

  Have you thought [he wrote Charles Eliot Norton in 1864] what a
  vindication this war is of Alexander Hamilton? I wish somebody
  would write his life as it ought to be written, for surely he was
  one of the greatest of our great men, as Jefferson was the least of
  the truly great; or am I wrong? Hamilton was generous and sincere.
  Was Jefferson either?[633]

Such Hamiltonian sympathies suffice to explain some of his votes in the
New York Constitutional Convention of 1867, of which he was a member.
He advocated the appointment of the attorney-general and certain
other state officers, opposed the principle of municipal home rule,
and approved the extension of the authority of the state over local
police systems. With Tammany Hall and Boss Tweed before his eyes it was
perhaps natural that he should have sought in the power of the up-state
voter some external control over the city machine. But in spite of
such obvious leanings towards the Whig branch of the Republican party
Curtis was never a Whig. The transcendentalism he had imbibed at Brook
Farm remained with him to color much of his thinking and restrain him
from an uncritical advocacy of capitalism. He never went over body
and soul to the new gospel of exploitation. He never lent a willing
ear to the seductive appeals of the American System. He early became
a free-trader and throughout his life was opposed to all tariffs and
grants and subsidies. Discovering in the principle of liberty the
cardinal principles of American democracy, he was disposed to accept
a wide application of _laissez faire_; yet when it opened the door to
extortion he was willing to curb an anti-social individualism. When in
the seventies it was proposed by the western farmers that a national
railroad should be built from Chicago to the Atlantic seaboard, Curtis
looked upon the proposal with sympathy as likely to rescue the farmer
from extortionate tolls.[634] Unlike Dana and Godkin, he declined
to grow bitter and lose his head over the economic proposals of the
western agrarians. In the sharp alignment between agrarianism and
capitalism he stood in the main outside both parties, and although
opposed to greenbackism he discussed the question with moderation and
good sense--a rare thing in those blatant times.

But it was political decency rather than capitalistic or agrarian
programs that he was chiefly concerned about. He looked to his
conscience as guide and as editor of _Harper’s Weekly_ he used his
influence to cleanse America of the corruption he abhorred. Week after
week he appealed to the American voter to turn rascals out of office
and put honest men in. The corrupt political machine was the source of
the evil, and the machine had grown powerful through its control of
patronage. There would be vicious government so long as politicians
could create a machine by means of the spoils system. Two remedies, he
believed, were necessary to cure the evil--independent voting and civil
service reform; and to the spread of these two ideas he devoted the
last twenty years of his life, thereby bringing on his head much abuse
and incurring eventually a break with the Republican party.

His troubles began with his proposal of independent voting. To that
party-ridden generation on whom the passions of war had fastened a
tyrannical machine, the scratching of the party ticket seemed no better
than treason. It was a Copperhead device to undo the results of the war
and reëstablish the rebel leaders at Washington, and it needed courage
to advocate it publicly. Curtis put the matter fairly in a speech to
Independent Republicans at New York in 1880:

  The first powerful and conclusive remedy for the tyranny of the
  machine ... is scratching. The word has become a sneer, a taunt,
  a bitter reproach, but the test of the power and effectiveness of
  the remedy is the fury with which it is assailed.... The machine
  denounces scratchers as lustily as Laud denounced the Puritans,
  or George III the rebellious Yankees, or slave-driving Democrats
  Republican woolly heads.... The scratcher is the minute-man of
  politics. He is always in light marching order. He has only to
  consult his own knowledge and conscience, and with one stroke
  his work is done. Fortunately, also, his stroke may be as secret
  as his ballot. Those who do not choose to publish the fact need
  not be known, and may smile serenely at the blind fury of those
  whose plots are quietly foiled. This is the reason of the impotent
  anger with which scratching is assailed. It cannot be reached....
  Scratching is denounced as dishonorable. Oh, no! the secret ballot
  is not dishonorable. The shot of the Middlesex farmer from behind a
  tree was no more dishonorable than the immortal volley from behind
  the breastworks of Bunker Hill.[635]

He then proceeded to lay open what seemed to him the core of the
problem:

  But useful as scratching is as a corrective, it does not strike at
  the heart of the machine, and it is therefore _only_ a corrective
  and not a radical remedy. That remedy can be found only by finding
  the source of the power of the machine, and that source is official
  patronage. It is the command of millions of the public money spent
  in public administration; the control of the vast labyrinth of
  place, with its enormous emoluments; the system which makes the
  whole Civil Service, to the least detail and most significant
  position, the spoils of party victory; which perverts necessary
  party organization into intolerable party despotism. It is upon
  this that the hierarchy of the machine is erected. Strike at this
  system strongly, steadily, persistently, and you shiver the machine
  to pieces.[636]

Seeing his duty clearly, Curtis did not spare himself, but while most
of his fellows were seeking fame or wealth for themselves he gave
his time and strength without stint to the cause, and it was due to
his efforts more than to those of any other man that a reform in
the civil service was eventually brought about. He had to fight his
way against bitter opposition. It was charged that he was seeking
to create in America an undemocratic bureaucracy. His old friend
Charles A. Dana--from whom he had become estranged--was quite frank.
“Above all I do not believe,” he said, “in the establishment in this
country of the German bureaucratic system, with its permanent staff of
office-holders who are not responsible to the people, and whose tenure
of place knows no variation and no end except the end of life.”[637]
But it was the politicians who fought most bitterly, and when to civil
service reform he added the sin of bolting the party, throwing over
Blaine and supporting Cleveland, he was subjected to plentiful insults.
Nevertheless as the leader of the Mugwumps, preaching to a party-ridden
generation the gospel of independency, he did his country a real
service. He could not foresee, of course, how easily the menace of the
independent voter was to be met; how through the control of both party
machines and both nominees by the political bosses the independent
would have only the choice betwixt tweedledum and tweedledee, and in
disgust would largely refrain from voting. But the open and crying
political evils of the Gilded Age he saw clearly, and in seeking to
lessen them he proved himself a useful citizen as well as a cultivated
American.


III • English Liberalism and Politics--Godkin and “The Nation”

The severest critic of the Gilded Age was Edwin Lawrence Godkin,
founder of the _Nation_. More caustic than George William Curtis,
equipped with a complete social philosophy, and armed with perfect
self-assurance, he devoted thirty-five years to the task of instructing
America in the principles of government as those principles were
understood by John Stuart Mill. He was at once an idealist and a
realist, and the intellectual history of the critic is revealed in the
shift from the one to the other. To Godkin the English liberal--who
had studied the American experiment from overseas--as to Karl Schurz
the German liberal, America was the torchbearer of the democratic
faith; and any defection from the cause, any betrayal of that faith,
was a desecration of the temple of liberalism by its own priesthood.
Liberalism, he was persuaded, was the handmaid of civilization; the
hope of any rational progress, rested on the principle of free inquiry
and free endeavor. To Godkin, therefore, and to Schurz and the hundreds
of European liberals who sought refuge here following the _débâcle_ of
the revolutionary hopes of 1848, it was a matter of deep import that
America should remain true to its liberal tradition, trusting freedom,
refusing to repeat the unhappy experience of a Tory Europe. He would
say to America what John Wise had said nearly two centuries before:
“Ye have been called unto liberty, therefore hold your hold, brethren!
Pull up well upon the oars, you have a rich cargo, and I hope ...
day-light and good piloting will secure all.” But he would do more than
that; he would pull an oar himself; and with high hopes, at the age
of twenty-five, he cast in his lot with America to serve the cause in
whatever ways might offer.

Godkin came of an English Protestant strain that for seven centuries
had lived in County Wexford, at the extreme southeastern point of
Ireland. He was neither Scotch like the men of Ulster, nor Irish like
his neighbors of Kilkenny and Wicklow, but as English in blood and
temperament as Jonathan Swift. Educated at Queen’s College, Belfast, he
studied law for a time at Lincoln’s Inn, went through the revolutionary
years of 1848-1851 with their great hopes, and entered the field of
journalism as correspondent for the London _Daily News_ during the
Crimean War. In 1856 he came to America with the intention of entering
the law, but returned to journalism. During the Civil War he was
correspondent for the _Daily News_ of London, laboring to counteract
British Tory opinion that ran strongly pro-South, and marshal the
forces of English liberalism on the side of the North. Three months
after Appomattox he founded the _Nation_ as an organ of criticism,
through the columns of which he proposed to appeal to the intelligence
and the conscience of America in support of the principles of
Victorian liberalism.

For this excellent work of criticism Godkin was provided with a sound
equipment. Endowed with a vigorous intellect, he kept his mind free
from shifting fogs and rarely mistook immediate for ultimate ends.
His training had been in a distinguished tradition. His father was a
Presbyterian minister and journalist, and the strain of robust dissent
that contributed so richly to Victorian liberalism came to him as a
birthright. He was “brought up,” he said, “in the Mill-Grote school of
radicals.” “When I was in college,” he wrote in later years, “I and
the young men of my acquaintance were Liberals, in the English sense.
John Stuart Mill was our prophet, and Grote and Bentham were our daily
food.”[638] Already his heart was overseas; America as it had been
described by de Tocqueville was his “promised land,” the home of a free
democracy on which his hopes for civilization were fixed. His first
book, written at the early age of twenty-two, was a history of the
land Kossuth was striving to set free, and he there defined the word
democrat as he had come to interpret it--the democrats, he said, are
“all those whose hopes and sympathies are not bound up in a party or
class, but look for the welfare and progress of humanity as the goal of
their striving.”[639]

Thus he wrote in the aftermath of the revolutionary years of
1848-1851. But the glowing idealism of the young radical was to suffer
discouragements and setbacks from the experience of later years. One
suspects that his liberalism never possessed the whole of him, never
grew from within out, but was overlaid on a nature fundamentally
aristocratic that at heart preferred Tory to liberal ends. Though as
a young man he spread his canvas to the winds of liberalism, he was
always a little distrustful of the bellying sails and he never quite
liked the crew. There is a curious suggestiveness in his changing
attitude towards England and English society. He had quitted the old
world out of dislike for it, and a dozen years later he declined to go
back except as a “last extremity.” “It would be going back,” he said,
“into an atmosphere that I detest and a social system that I have hated
since I was fourteen years old.”[640] At the bottom of this repugnance
was an obstinate pride. He was ambitious, capable, and sensitive, and
a caste society that refused to open its doors to him he looked upon
as pernicious. To assert that his espousal of democracy was due to
his brusque rejection by a more distinguished mistress, is a severe
judgment, yet it is a judgment that his friend Henry Holt quite frankly
implied.[641]

He had come to America in the hope of getting on in the world. He had
a strong regard for social position. His standards were severe and
his sympathies so narrow as to lay him open to the frequent charge of
snobbery. He would mingle in none but good society, and it was easier
in America than in England to gain entrance to good society. Until he
had made his mark he would not go back; but when as a distinguished
editor he ventured to return, and found himself accepted by the best
people, his hatred for the English social system oozed away, and the
eager delight he experienced in upper-class society was an unconscious
testimony to the value he had set upon a system from which as a young
man he had been excluded. Godkin was too English to make himself
over into an American, too natively aristocratic to be a democrat.
A disciple of John Stuart Mill, he lacked the complete intellectual
integrity of Mill that brushed aside all caste prejudices and personal
ambitions, as he lacked his vast intellectual accumulation. Godkin’s
liberalism was founded on Mill, but it was never quite Mill.

The philosophy to which, as a disciple of the Bentham-Mill-Grote
school, the young Godkin gave his allegiance, was a Utilitarian
adaptation of _laissez faire_--the doctrine that the greatest happiness
of the greatest number is the ultimate social objective, and that such
objective can be attained only through the completest liberty under
the sway of reason and justice. As presented by John Stuart Mill it
was a singularly persuasive philosophy that awakened a response in
every generous mind. Liberty, he insisted, is the thing chiefly to be
desired, for where men are free they will shape social organisms to
their needs. Man is both an economic and a political animal, and the
difficult problem of the political philosopher is to keep the one from
trespassing upon the rights of the other. The economic man, under the
drive of the acquisitive instinct, regards the political state as an
ally in the present business of acquisition; and the political man
looks upon business as subject to strict regulation and control in
the interests of the state. To prevent this meddlesome interference
of each with the other, Mill laid down the principle of liberty in
terms as uncompromising as those of the Physiocrats. The “sole
end,” he asserted, “for which mankind are warranted, individually or
collectively, in interfering with the liberty of action of any of their
number, is self-protection,” and “the only purpose for which power
can be rightfully exercised over any member of a civilized community,
against his will, is to prevent harm to others. His own good, either
physical or moral, is not a sufficient warrant.”[642]

From this excellent school the young Godkin emerged a political
theorist of no mean ability; somewhat too dogmatic, perhaps, a
bit overconfident of the finality of his logic, but with a shrewd
dialectic, quick to separate reality from pretense, severe upon all
flummery and buncombe. That his philosophy was sharply opposed to
the current tendencies of American political life he saw clearly: to
Whiggery with its ambitious paternalisms; to centralization with its
glorification of a Bismarckian state. His thought was erected on a
foundation of _laissez faire_, and he sharply differentiated economics
and politics. As a realist he recognized differences in individual
capacity, but he was keenly suspicious of any attempt on the part
of government to compensate for such differences. Any interference
with natural law, he was convinced, entailed greater evils than
benefits. Economic competition is a struggle between individuals,
and government must content itself with its proper rôle of policeman
to keep the peace. With Mill he refused to recognize the state as a
separate entity. He never confused the personnel of government with
“what is called ‘the state’”; and as he contemplated the honesty and
capacity of the several members who administered government in a given
commonwealth, he was disinclined to entrust them with regulative
powers. Disinterested honesty and capacity, it seemed, too rarely
got into office, governments were too little acquainted with common
morality, to justify hopes of equalizing the inequality of nature by
political means.

To the sound philosophical equipment brought from England Godkin added
a very considerable understanding of American political history. The
ten years spent here before the founding of the _Nation_, had been
employed in getting at home upon the new scene. He had carefully
checked the findings of de Tocqueville and was convinced that the
French critic had gone far astray in his interpretation of the great
American experiment. In his analysis of democratic tendencies he had
fallen into the fallacy of _post hoc ergo propter hoc_, with the
result that he had got the cart before the horse; and in an article
published in the _North American Review_ of January, 1865, Godkin
entered the lists in defense of America against the criticisms of
English Tories founded on such fallacies. In its emphasis on historical
realism “Aristocratic Opinions of Democracy” is a surprisingly modern
study that might almost have been written by one of our younger
historians. It is an interpretation of our political development in
terms of environment, and it traces the rise of democracy to the
leveling influence of decentralization. For a hundred and fifty
years, he pointed out, old-world habits and customs, the spirit of
aristocracy, prevailed in the closely grouped settlements along the
Atlantic seaboard, where physical conditions restrained the tendency
to social disruption; but with the breaking through of the Appalachian
barrier, and the influx of new waves of immigration, the conditions
were prepared for a vast movement of decentralization. It was the
Inland Empire that made possible the democratic revolution in America.
“How was it,” he asks, “that that democratic tide, which within the
last fifty years, has overwhelmed everything, during the previous
hundred and fifty years gave so few signs of rising?” And his reply to
the question antedates Professor Turner’s theory of the frontier by
thirty years:

  If we inquire what are those phenomena of American society which it
  is generally agreed distinguish it from that of older countries,
  we shall find ... that by far the larger number of them may be
  attributed in a great measure to what, for want of a better name,
  we shall call “the frontier life” led by a large proportion of the
  inhabitants, and to the influence of this portion on manners and
  legislation, rather than to political institutions, or even to the
  equality of conditions. In fact, we think that these phenomena,
  and particularly those of them which excite most odium in Europe,
  instead of being the effect of democracy, are partly its cause, and
  that it has been to their agency more than aught else, that the
  democratic tide in America has owed most of its force and violence.

  The agency which, in our opinion, gave democracy its first great
  impulse in the United States, which has promoted its spread ever
  since, and has contributed most powerfully to the production of
  those phenomena in American society which hostile critics set down
  as peculiarly democratic, was neither the origin of the Colonists,
  nor the circumstances under which they came to the country, nor
  their religious belief; but the great change in the distribution of
  the population, which began soon after the Revolution, and which
  continues its operation up to the present time.[643]

Godkin was thirty-four when he entered upon his life work of pouring
a stream of fresh and free thought upon the ways of the Gilded Age.
It was somewhat in the spirit of Matthew Arnold that he interpreted
the function of criticism. “The highest allegiance of every man,” he
wrote Norton in 1865, “is due to liberty and civilization, or rather
civilization and liberty”;[644] and the creed of the _Nation_, which
Godkin unconsciously modified as culture dispossessed liberty in his
affections, may be summed up in the words democracy, individualism,
morality, culture, to the end of a free life in a humane and
well-ordered society. Throughout the Gilded Age this transplanted
English liberal was the high priest of criticism in America. His
caustic intelligence played ironically about the current shibboleths
and fetishes, reducing them to shreds and patches. He could discover
little that was good in the Gilded Age, in its tariffs and land grants,
its _Crédit Mobilier_ and other scandals, its buccaneer plutocracy,
its undisciplined proletarianism, its bitter agrarianism; and he was
prompted to a severity of judgment that easier-going natures thought
harsh. Enemies sprang up in his every footprint; but too much was at
stake, he believed, to temper his criticism to flabby minds, and he
laid about him with what he considered a fine impartiality.

It was a cold plunge into a dirty pool, and a nature less robust would
have scrambled out quickly. His realism was a profound discouragement
to his idealism, and his native aristocracy of temperament closed
his mind to the virtues of certain homely American liberalisms. As
an intellectual he distrusted all Jacksonian frontier freedoms.
The doctrine of liberty did not appear to advantage in the garb of
agrarians and proletarians; Thaddeus Stevens and Terence V. Powderly
were an ungainlier breed of libertarians than Gladstone and Mill; with
such leadership it seemed to Godkin that liberty was running away
with civilization and a smash-up was likely. It was the duty of the
_Nation_, therefore, to arouse the culture of America to its political
obligations, to the end that the custodianship of liberty should be
taken over by the intelligence of America. It proved a discouraging
job, and slowly on the horizon of his mind rose the shadow of the doubt
that had troubled de Tocqueville and Cooper and Fisher Ames--must a
democracy prove a leveling influence that destroys a fine individuality
and a generous social culture? Careless of his trusteeship, was not
the American democrat throwing his heritage to the demagogue and the
spoilsman?

As he watched the scrambling heedlessness of the times his liberalism
oozed away, his democratic faith lost its sanctions, and he slowly
drifted to the right and the dead-sea of pessimism. The mass was too
powerful in America, and the mass was shot through with the spirit of
selfish leveling. The democracy had been distorted by the frontier,
and the sense of responsibility, of individual duty, was well-nigh
atrophied. The vulgar West threw its crudity upon all America. “I do
not like the western type of man,” Godkin confessed to Norton; and to
another friend who praised California, he wrote, “No scenery or climate
I had to share with western people would charm me.” He never spared
his mordant adjectives in commenting privately on all America west of
the Hudson River. In his gloomy later years he found consolation in
Brahmin culture. For years he lived in Cambridge, and in the company
of Lowell and Norton he felt at home. Here were democratic gentlemen
worthy of his ideal. If all America were only like Cambridge his faith
in a cultivated liberalism would be justified. In those years he called
himself “an American of the _vieille roche_,” which being interpreted,
meant a liberal of the Brahmin school.

The immediate problems on which Godkin was called to pass judgment
brought him into the thick of the struggles of the Gilded Age. As
an editor he confronted the bitter antagonisms that sprang from
the rivalries of the farmer, the wage-earner, and the industrial
capitalist. Each group was seeking to enlist government on its side
and use the political state for special and narrow ends. To a disciple
of Mill all such attempts were no better than treason to democracy,
and when such treason was justified by what he considered specious
economic theory Godkin’s hostility was edged with acerbity. All the
trenchant dogmas of his philosophy--his police theory of the state, his
Ricardian _laissez faire_, his individualism--rushed to the attack of
such impudent impostors. With no organized forces at his back he made
war on every major group in America. He essayed to rally the scattered
minority of the intellectuals and overthrow the citadel of economic
power by appeal to reason. It was magnificent but it was scarcely war.
The culture of the Gilded Age was undisciplined, lacking faith and
unnurtured in philosophy, fastidious rather than vigorous--the poorest
of material for shock troops. It applauded every clever thrust of its
captain, but preferred to keep its own hands unsoiled. In consequence,
to the end of his life Godkin was a leader without a following, little
more than a voice crying in the wilderness.

For the rising plutocracy Godkin felt the scorn of a gentleman for the
vulgar new-rich. Its hands were dirty, and it was soiling all American
life. Its gospel of Whiggery, that under pretense of furthering
prosperity had turned Congress into an auction room, was an insult to
his Manchester liberalism. Just as surely as government meddles with
subsidies and tariffs and grants, he pointed out, will it be defiled.
Men are but indifferent honest, and if statesmen are not to become
mere political hucksters they must stand apart from the temptations of
business. The plea for a national economy had brought Congress to the
_Crédit Mobilier_ scandals, and it would breed other scandals so long
as it was heeded. The only cure for Whiggery was to destroy it. In a
scathing leader he early paid his respects to the Whiggish system of
governmental subsidies:

  The remedy is simple. The Government must get out of the
  “protective” business and the “subsidy” business and the
  “improvement” and the “development” business. It must let trade,
  and commerce, and manufactures, and steamboats, and railroads, and
  telegraphs alone. It cannot touch them without breeding corruption.
  We care nothing about the wonderful stories we hear about what can
  be achieved in the way of “promoting industry” by all these canal
  and steamboat and railroad schemes. Were the material prospect
  twice as tempting, the state could not profitably meddle with
  them, because neither it nor any other government in the world
  _can command the virtue necessary to carry them on_. This is not
  a matter of speculation; we know it as a matter of experience. It
  is almost as much as this Government can do to maintain order and
  administer justice. It may one day be able to do a great deal more,
  but not until a great change has occurred in the social condition
  of the country. We have gone far enough, heaven knows, on the road
  of “protection” and “promotion,” and have found at every step that
  it leads straight to the bottomless pit; that for every hundred
  dollars voted by these poor men to whom we pay scanty wages for
  passing bills at Washington, we lessen, and perceptibly lessen, the
  stock of individual honor, of self-respect, and of public spirit,
  of a loyalty to ideals, to which far more than to any triumphs of
  material industry, we must look for continued national greatness.
  We are making money fast enough in all conscience; what needs
  fostering just now is honesty.[645]

Godkin found it exceedingly difficult to foster the austere honesty
that he desired in the body politic, and in his fury at the common
political scoundrelism he came to ascribe much of the virus that was
poisoning America to the party of western agrarians. He was rapidly
drifting to the right and the defense of capitalism, and as the
agrarian platform was slowly built up of successive planks--greenbacks,
free silver, subtreasuries, railway regulation, the income tax--he
turned upon it all the batteries of his wrath. Godkin never understood
the American farmer, but he professed to understand economics and
political science, and the agrarian platform aroused his implacable
hostility. In his frequent discussions of the currency question, a
question that for thirty years was a subject of passionate debate,
he was at some disadvantage. Intellectually he was ill equipped to
deal with it. Although a Ricardian he failed to grasp Ricardo’s
quantitative principle of money or the function of paper currency. As
a gold-standard advocate he accepted the English monetary system as
it was given form by the Parliamentary Bank Act of 1844, and he would
have no tampering with it. To Godkin money was a measure of value,
and a fluctuating standard, implied in the quantitative theory, was
as immoral as a fluctuating yardstick. The use of greenbacks--“rag
money”--he reckoned a scheme by which dishonest debtors might cheat
their creditors.[646] He was forced to regard gold and silver as
commodities, fluctuating in price with supply and demand; but he looked
upon them as possessing a stable natural value that placed them beyond
political manipulation. Any attempt to disturb this natural value by
artificial means he called dishonest.[647] He was almost indecent
in the vehemence of his adjectives applied to the “dishonest money
men.” He called the Greenbackers “communists,”[648] and speaking of
the Grangers, he said, “There is nothing unnatural or deplorable in a
Granger turning from one form of swindle to another.”[649]

By the middle nineties it was hard to distinguish Godkin’s views on
the agrarian program from those of a Wall Street banker. In discussing
free silver he abandoned economic principles and fell to mouthing
like any newspaper writer. The currency question he regarded as a
simple question of public morality. There was only one issue, the
issue between honest and dishonest money. “The demand for free-silver
coinage is a demand for a division of property,”[650] he said in the
early days of the campaign of 1896, and a fortnight later he took
extreme ground:

  ... the bold and wicked scheme of repudiation ... is presented
  without a blush in the platform. Upon this question the campaign
  must be fought. If the party of repudiators cannot be put down, the
  republic cannot be preserved and is not worth preserving.[651]

Such pronouncements bear none of the earmarks of dispassionate
criticism. It may seem severe to suggest that they are the comments of
a very ignorant or shallow critic, blinded by his prejudices; yet it is
true. The equipment of Manchester economics with which he had outfitted
himself in the late forties, was no longer adequate in the nineties;
yet he seems not to have been aware of the fact. The mid-Victorian
still regarded himself as an authority on all economic questions,
although he seems to have done no serious reading in economic theory
for half a century, and was scarcely conscious how far he had drifted
towards the right. The old liberal was fighting the battles of
capitalism with weapons as antiquated as the old cap-and-ball musket.
“The great trouble with all silverites and currency lunatics, North
and South,” he said, “is that, when monetary crises arise, they cannot
be got to go to the right quarter for information”--a comment that one
might retort upon Godkin himself. The intellectual knew far less about
money than “Coin” Harvey, whom he would have laughed at.

The same drift to the right is evident in the pronouncements on the
Populist movement of the times. Writing on “The Kansas Situation,” when
the farmers’ unrest was becoming militant, he remarked:

  Such an unexpected outbreak as this of the last two or three
  years shows at least that it is not only in the cities, where the
  foreign-born swarm, that demagogues may thrive and the doctrine of
  revolution be preached.[652]

The “ravings of the Farmers’ movement” he regarded as no more than a
“vague and visionary discontent,” that was seeking political cures for
its economic ills. The hard times from which the West was suffering
were the result of economic law. It was not the currency or excessive
railway rates that were the cause. The vast extension of railway
systems had brought under cultivation too many acres, and the reduction
of transportation costs would serve only to bring additional acres
under cultivation, thereby increasing competition and forcing prices
still lower. High railway rates were the surest safeguard against
further extension of an industry much overdeveloped; and for state
legislatures to attempt to fix railway tariffs by law--to attempt to
control economic forces by statutes--was sheer folly. In discussing the
celebrated Illinois railway legislation Godkin spoke in defense of the
roads:

  The locomotive is coming in contact with the framework of our
  institutions. In this country of simple government, the most
  powerful centralizing force which civilization has yet produced
  has within the next score years, yet to assume its relation to
  that political machinery which is to control and regulate it....
  The corporations of course contested the validity of the law. If
  the legislature could establish one rate at which they should do
  the work of transportation, it could establish another. They were
  fighting for their lives and property; it was against taxation
  without representation.... An arbitrary power is claimed in the
  supreme legislative body to decide on the reasonable rates of the
  cost of private services. Just as three hundred years ago the price
  of bread and labor was regulated by act of Parliament, so now the
  cost of transportation is to be fixed by a jury of twelve men....
  Thus far, therefore, the results of the Illinois railroad war must
  be regarded as rather portentous than satisfactory.[653]

The “watered-stock hallucination,” that had taken possession of the
agrarian mind and aroused such bitterness, he dismissed with a curious
comment that did no great credit to his intelligence.

  There is ... one difficulty in the way, which is the difficulty
  common to many of the proposed reforms in railroad management--the
  practice alleged has absolutely no existence except in the heated
  brain of the agitators who have imagined it. There are no roads in
  the United States on which any attempt has been made to increase
  the freight earnings in proportion to the watered stock or
  debt.[654]

The passions aroused by the campaign of ’96 swept Godkin from his
moorings and left him adrift. He quickly convinced himself that the
real issue at stake was the moral integrity of the nation. As he
studied the platforms and leaders he found little comfort in either.
For McKinley he had the contempt of the intellectual for a purveyor
of heavy platitudes, and he flayed him in a two-column leader with
his old skill.[655] But for Bryan, the “boy orator of the Platte,” his
dislike passed the bounds of decency; and for the Chicago convention
that put him in nomination--“the roaring mob” with its “Populistic,
anarchistic platform”--his contempt outran his command of invective.

  No such collection of inflammatory and reckless men ever put
  themselves on exhibition in a national convention. Beside them
  the Populists are lamb-like, and the socialists sucking doves.
  The country has watched their mad proceedings with disgust and
  shuddering, only impatient for the coming of November to stamp out
  them and their incendiary doctrines.[656]

To what lengths his overheated brain carried him in those political
dogdays, how starkly reactionary he had become, is suggested by his
comment on the plank in the Democratic platform attacking the scandal
of injunctions:

  This blow at the courts shows how true are the instincts of the
  revolutionaries. They know their most formidable enemies. Judicial
  decisions have again and again drawn the fangs of confiscatory and
  revolutionary legislation, and the courts have come more and more
  to stand as the great bulwarks of property and personal rights.[657]

Godkin’s last years were not happy. The wave of imperialism that swept
over England and America, with its Boer War and Spanish War, brought
him acute concern. The world that he knew was slipping from its
moorings, and he was fearful of the seas into which it was plunging.
The conquest of the Philippines seemed to him a badge of national
degradation. Writing in November, 1899, he said:

  We are dragging wearily in the old way, killing half a dozen
  Filipinos every week, and continually “near the end.” The folly of
  ignorance and rascality we are displaying in the attempt to conquer
  and have “subjects” would disgrace a trades union.[658]

As he watched the tedious process of subjugation he inclined to
attribute to Kipling a large share of the current imperialism. “I think
most of the current jingoism on both sides of the water is due to him,”
he wrote a few weeks later. “He is the poet of the barrack-room cads,”
a “most pernicious, vulgar person”; and his “White Man’s Burden,”
cabled to America and printed on the front pages of the newspapers as
a message to imperialist America, must have rubbed across Godkin’s raw
nerves. The pious cant of Kipling’s imperialism was a bitter cup for a
disillusioned liberal. The Jubilee with its fulsome laudation of “fat,
useless royalty,” was fittingly commemorated by this noisy poet of
imperialism, and Godkin turned away from it all in disgust.

But turn where he might he found no comfort. His old dreams of a free
and enlightened democracy rising in America, were dead. Victorian
liberalism had been laid away in the grave of John Stuart Mill, and
only its ghost was walking in these latter times. Godkin’s last days
were bitter, and the gloom that was settling upon him crept into his
letters. It is a malady common amongst liberals, and how deeply it had
struck in is revealed in such passages as these:

  I am not sanguine about the future of democracy. I think we shall
  have a long period of decline ... and then a recrudescence under
  some other form of society.[659]

  I do not know what the future of our modern civilization is to be.
  But I stumble where I firmly trod.[660]

  Things look very black. I think that while money-making will long
  continue on a great scale, the government will shortly undergo
  great changes which will be presided over not by men of light and
  learning, but by capitalists and adroit politicians.[661]

  I came here fifty years ago with high and fond ideals about
  America.... They are now all shattered, and I have apparently to
  look elsewhere to keep even moderate hopes about the human race
  alive.[662]

The idealist is prone to be exigent in his demands upon civilization.
He marks out a straight path to the goal of his hopes, and takes it
greatly to heart when society chooses to follow other ways to other
ends. Godkin’s mind was keenly critical, but his sympathies were narrow
and his prejudices great. It is well to be a friend to civilization,
but it is foolish to set up as a custodian; for civilization, like
Topsy, will shift for itself. A just and liberal government is an
excellent ideal, but it is one for which few amongst the mass of men
greatly care; and because America chose to follow its own nose, because
it would not become like the America of his dreams, Godkin allowed his
heart to fill with bitterness. It is true that his recompense for long
years of labor was scanty; the Gilded Age was not to be frightened
from its fleshpots by his warnings. But long ago it was said, “Wisdom
crieth in the streets and no man regardeth her,” and why should Godkin
have become discouraged with civilization because certain blackguard
years clove to their blackguardry, instead of mounting to the somewhat
arid heights he pointed out? One must choose at the last between
tolerance and pessimism, and Godkin chose pessimism.

It is difficult today to understand his great influence with cultivated
readers of his generation. In part perhaps it was due to his crisp
assurance. He put things so plumply, he wrote so brilliantly, that his
readers were persuaded he must think as neatly. Yet his trenchant prose
style cannot hide a certain slightness of matter. His later comments
tended to become ever thinner and shriller--not criticism at all, but
the sharp expression of aging prejudice. When he talked about the
tariff he had Mill at his elbow; but when he talked about the agrarian
or the proletarian movements he was little more than a blue-jay
scolding at a world he disliked. Unlike his great master he did not go
forward to meet new times; he did not reinterpret Victorian liberalism
in the light of the lessons taught by the Industrial Revolution; but by
standing still he did liberalism a real disservice.


IV • Fiction Considers the State of the Country

It was only a question of time before the novel would throw off the
inhibitions of the genteel and turn to consider the state of the
country. A changing social order would not fail of reflection in
the pages of fiction, and as the novelists fell to scrutinizing the
familiar scene, comparing the reality with the patriotic professions,
it was certain that the workings of democracy would come in for sharp
criticism. In the last decades of the century the problem novel spread
swiftly, expanding the field of its inquiry, and seeking to understand
the new ways. Making its first essays in the familiar field of the
political, it soon turned to consider the economic problems arising out
of the new industrialism, espousing either capitalism or labor as the
social sympathies of the author might determine. The class passions
of the times found a reflection in its pages, and in consequence the
sociological novel became increasingly a repository of the social ideas
of a perplexed and troubled generation.


1 • The Political Novel

Of the early political novels three are of sufficient interest to
reward attention: _The Gilded Age_ (1873), _Democracy_ (1881), and
_An American Politician_ (1884). The first, written by Mark Twain
in collaboration with Charles Dudley Warner, is a satire of Gilded
Age ways with particular attention to the political corruption of
General Grant’s administration. The fictional disguise is slight.
The actual Washington is presented vividly and familiar figures--Ben
Butler, Oakes Ames, President Grant, Secretary Boutwell--move through
the scene. The central figure, Senator Dillworthy, was modeled upon
Senator Pomeroy of Kansas, who had recently lost a reëlection through
an unlucky exposure of an attempt to bribe the Kansas legislature.
The heroine, Laura Hawkins, is a western lobbyist who in order to put
through a congressional steal under pretense of providing an industrial
school for the freedmen, twists Congressmen about her fingers, turns
adventuress and ends in tragedy. Out of the West comes the spirit of
corruption that the respectable East is unable to withstand, until the
itch of speculation infects the whole country. It is Colonel Sellers
who embodies the slackness of frontier political morals, that in turn
vitiates his political principles. The genial Colonel is quite frankly
a Greenbacker.

  The country is getting along very well, [he said] but our public
  men are too timid. What we want is more money. I’ve told Boutwell
  so. Talk of basing the currency on gold; you might as well base it
  on pork. Gold is only one product. Base it on everything! You’ve
  got to do something for the West. How am I to move my crops? We
  must have improvements. Grant’s got the idea. We want a canal from
  the James River to the Mississippi. Government ought to build
  it.[663]

The analysis is not penetrating. The real sources of political
corruption--the rapacious railway lobbyists that camped in brigades
about the capitol building--are passed over, and attention is
fastened on small steals--the Knobs University bill and the Columbus
River Navigation scheme--that do not touch the real rascals of the
day. The implication is unmistakable that the source of corruption
is the Jacksonian West with its heritage of the spoils spirit. The
Federalistic East is victimized by the rapacities of mid-western
politicians with their religious cant, their talk of the rights of the
people and the greatness of the plain democracy. Senator Dillworthy is
fairly unctuous in his oily Christian spirit, and Brother Balaam is his
fellow. The portraits, one suspects, need not be taken seriously as
pictures of the chief apostles of preëmption and exploitation. To have
sketched the real leaders of the great barbecue might have involved too
many unpleasantries.

_Democracy_, written seven years later, is an inferior book in
every way, less penetrating, less amusing, less creative. To essay
to penetrate the dark places of political jobbery through the eyes
of a society woman, too high-bred to turn lobbyist and inveigle
secrets out of ambitious politicians, is sufficiently absurd, yet not
uncharacteristic of the Henry Adams whose home was a distinguished
salon and who in pottering about the political world of Washington
deceived himself in thinking he had his finger on the web of intrigue.
It is an amazing book for such a man to write. The attitude is that of
the kid-gloved reformer who goes in for civil service reform, and who
views the uncultivated West as the source of all political corruption.
The hero, Senator Silas Ratcliffe of Peoria, Illinois, like Senator
Dillworthy, is a past master in political organization who covers his
dishonesty with religious cant. The economic sources of political
corruption are ignored, and the evil is traced to the principle of
democracy. Whatever political convictions are in the book are expressed
by Representative Gore, a civil service reformer from Massachusetts,
and quite evidently Henry Adams himself; and the conclusion is thus set
forth:

  “Do you yourself think democracy the best government, and universal
  suffrage a success?”

  Mr. Gore saw himself pinned to the wall, and he turned at bay with
  almost the energy of despair:

  “These are matters about which I rarely talk in society.... But
  since you ask for my political creed, you shall have it. I only
  condition that it shall be for you alone, never to be repeated
  or quoted as mine. I believe in democracy. I accept it. I will
  faithfully serve and defend it. I believe in it because it appears
  to me the inevitable consequence of what has gone before it.
  Democracy asserts the fact that the masses are now raised to a
  higher intelligence than formerly. All our civilization aims at
  this mark. We want to do what we can to help it. I myself want to
  see the result. I grant it is an experiment, but it is the only
  direction society can take that is worth its taking; the only
  conception of its duty large enough to satisfy its instincts; the
  only result that is worth an effort or a risk. Every other step
  is backward, and I do not want to repeat the past. I am glad to
  see society grapple with issues in which no one can afford to be
  neutral.”

  “And supposing your experiment fails,” said Mrs. Lee; “suppose
  society destroys itself with universal suffrage, corruption, and
  communism.”

  “... I have faith; not perhaps in the old dogmas, but in the new
  ones.... faith in science; faith in the survival of the fittest.
  Let us be true to our time, Mrs. Lee! If our age is to be beaten,
  let us die in the ranks. If it is to be victorious, let us be first
  to lead the column. Anyway, let us not be skulkers or grumblers.
  There! have I repeated my catechism correctly? You would have it!
  Now oblige me by forgetting it. I should lose my character at home
  if it got out.”[664]

And the conclusion of the matter is thus summed up:

  “I want to go to Egypt,” said Madelaine, still smiling faintly;
  “democracy has shaken my nerves to pieces. Oh, what rest it would
  be to live in the Great Pyramid and look out forever at the polar
  star!”

Not a hint of the Industrial Revolution; not a hint of the sordid
Whiggery that was fouling American politics; not a suggestion of any
creative social philosophy on which to establish an adequate theory of
democracy. A dreary place at best, with no faith in human nature and no
trust in democratic machinery, but only a gentlemanly belief that an
antiquated Federalism may somehow pull this venture in republicanism
out of the bog in which Jacksonianism had mired it. No wonder Henry
Adams would not set his name on the title-page, but left it an orphan
to make its own way in the world. In his life of John Hay, William
Roscoe Thayer has explained the situation thus:

  The Adamses, the Hays, and Clarence King formed an inner circle,
  which somebody named “The Five of Hearts,” and out of this came,
  in 1882, a novel entitled _Democracy_, a strikingly clever satire
  on Washington society. Its authorship was at once attributed to
  them, but one after another denied it. If it was a joint product
  no individual could monopolize the credit; and as it seems to have
  been read chapter by chapter to the group, and discussed by them
  all, it might be said, technically, to be a composite. Clarence
  King is still commonly regarded as its author; and there are many
  supporters of Hay; but I believe that only Mr. Adams possessed the
  substance, and style, and the gift of Voltairean raillery which
  distinguish it.[665]

Mr. Thayer is generous in his praise.

_An American Politician_ is even less consequential as a political
study than _Democracy_. Marion Crawford was a professional romancer
and in this naïve venture into a field little known to him he carried
his complete romantic kit. The political theme is tied about with so
many love strands as almost to strangle it. The hero, John Harrington,
we are assured is a very remarkable man, a Bostonian with a Mayflower
teapot in his family treasures, an idealist of primitive Puritan
intensity. But we must take him upon hearsay. Nothing that he does
or says suggests his greatness. Politically the book is reduced to a
little glimpse of the methods of selecting a United States senator--an
Irish ward boss with twenty votes in his belt, a gentlemanly railway
attorney who handles offal skillfully with a handkerchief at his
nose--set in between two set speeches by the hero. The rest is Newport
and the Back Bay, not quite stupid yet with no distinction. The
romancer does not move easily in an unfamiliar field, and he sends
his hero forth to battle for righteousness with small intellectual
equipment. His speeches are heavily oratorical and his political
philosophy is naïve; it is pretty much George William Curtis, the
sufficiency of civil service reform and the virtues of non-partisanship.

The unreality of the book is furthered by a conception worthy of
Poe--a mysterious council of three that meets in London and directs
political movements in America. We are dimly aware that the council
is both ancient and honorable; that it goes back historically to
post-Revolutionary days and is self-perpetuating; and its uncanny
power has resulted from supreme intelligence supplemented by exact
information gathered during many years. In its secret archives every
public man in America is tagged and docketed; his political and
financial affiliations are set down in detail; and on the basis of this
knowledge the cryptic three send forth instructions that are faithfully
carried out. The danger to America lies in sectionalism--North, South,
and West struggling for supremacy in the national councils; and upon
the three rests the self-imposed responsibility of saving America
from itself. The idea is sufficiently absurd, as the book is absurd.
Crawford was a cosmopolitan who knew little about American political
conditions, and the crisis of the novel is the Hayes-Tilden _impasse_
of 1876. The influence of the novel, one may safely assume, was
negligible.[666]


2 • The Economic Novel

The theme of these earlier novels was politics as revealed by the
Gilded Age; on the other hand _The Bread-winners_ was one of the early
economic novels. Like _Democracy_ it was an outcome of the discussions
of the vivacious trio, John Hay, Clarence King, and Henry Adams.
Written in 1882 by Hay, it was published anonymously in the _Century
Magazine_ from August, 1883, to January, 1884. Hay never publicly
acknowledged the authorship, and it was not until the edition of 1915
appeared with an introductory note by his son, that his name appeared
on the title-page. It achieved a notable success--far beyond that of
_Democracy_; was warmly praised and sharply criticized; was replied to
in other novels; all of which goes to show that it fanned the coals
that were smoldering in the industrial life of the day, threatening
a general conflagration. It was the first recognition on the part of
literature that a class struggle impended in America--a first girding
of the loins of polite letters to put down the menace that looked
out from the underworld of the proletariat; and as such it assumes
importance as an historical document quite beyond its significance as a
work of art.

The motive of _The Bread-winners_ is the defense of property against
the “dangerous classes”; its immediate theme is a satire of labor
unions. In an introductory note to the later edition, Clarence Leonard
Hay explicitly denies this. “_The Bread-winners_,” he says, “is not
directed against organized labor. It is rather a protest against the
disorganization and demoralization of labor by unscrupulous leaders
and politicians who, in the guise of helping the workingman, use his
earnings to enrich themselves.” He then states the theme thus:

  It is a defense of the right of an individual to hold property, and
  a plea for the better protection of that property by law and order.
  Civilization rests upon law, order, and obedience. The agitator
  who preaches that obedience to lawful authority is a sin, and
  patriotism an illusion, is more dangerous to society than the thief
  who breaks in at night and robs the householder.

The editor thinks well of the American workingmen. At heart they are
sound; their motives are honest; but their ignorance of fundamental
economic principles too easily suffers them to fall victim to
unscrupulous demagogues whose only object is their exploitation. To
prevent such “disorganization and demoralization of labor,” which
can bring only suffering and failure upon men ill prepared to endure
them, is therefore the patriotic duty of the educated classes. The
proletariat is groping blindly for leadership; it is stirring uneasily;
if the educated classes do not offer an enlightened leadership, the
laborer will follow low cunning to immoral ends and blind leaders of
the blind will bring irretrievable disaster upon civilization. Selfish
appeal will kindle envy and hate; the rich and prosperous will go down
before brute force; the rights of property will be destroyed; law,
order, and obedience will give place to anarchy.

Such, briefly developed, is Clarence Hay’s exposition of _The
Bread-winners_; and the exposition seems to suggest the social views of
John Hay. He probably had no antipathy to labor unions which are guided
in their policy by “sound economic principles” and right “morality”--as
the capitalist understands such things. But labor unions which follow
their own leaders, which persist in thinking out a proletarian economy,
which are bent on substituting a social morality for a property
morality, which refuse to be led by the “educated classes,” he was
bitterly hostile to. It is the unrest furthered by rebellious labor
unions that he fears, and it is this that gives point and animus to
his satire. That _The Bread-winners_ was conceived in a spirit of
beneficent paternalism towards the proletariat, the present-day reader
will have difficulty in discovering. It is too frank in defense of
vested interests, it looks with too stern a disfavor upon all labor
leaders who refuse to accept the finality of the present industrial
order, it exudes too strong an odor of property-morality, to deceive
an intelligent reader. Read today it is clearly a partisan defense
of economic individualism, an attack upon the rising labor movement,
a grotesque satire smeared with an unctuous morality--and because of
this, a perfect expression of the spirit of upper-class America in
those uneasy eighties with their strikes and lockouts and Haymarket
riots.

The plot of the book is slight--it is the story of the oily
machinations of Ananias Offitt, a professional agitator who lives off
simple honest workmen whom he seduces, organizes a secret Brotherhood
of the Breadwinners, urges on riot and robbery at the time of a great
strike, is checkmated by the hero--a cultivated and elegant clubman by
the name of Captain Arthur Farnham--betrays his tool, and in the end
is murdered by him. Fortunately for the welfare of property interests
there are “honest” workmen, men like Leopold Grosshammer, who rally
to the support of law and order and eventually break the strike. The
love-story is provided with two heroines, and the contrast between them
emphasizes the class line which property draws. The upper-class heroine
is as correct and colorless as Cooper’s Eve Effingham: the lower-class
heroine is as vulgarly handsome and as brazen as “such people” are
supposed to be. A high-school education has spoilt her for the factory
or domestic service, filling her empty head with foolish ambitions, but
it could not make a lady of her.

Hay was in Cleveland at the time of the great strike in 1877, and
he was profoundly disturbed by the experience. Writing to his
father-in-law, he said:

  The prospects of labor and capital both seem gloomy enough.
  The very devil seems to have entered into the lower classes of
  workingmen, and there are plenty of scoundrels to encourage them
  to all lengths.... I am thankful you did not _see_ and _hear_
  what took place during the strikes. You were saved a very painful
  experience of human folly and weakness, as well as crime.[667]

The crying evils of a buccaneer industrialism which lay behind the
strikes, Hay ignored completely. To provide his idyllic background of
contented labor before it is seduced by demagogues, he goes back to
a decadent domestic economy. His “honest and contented workman” is a
carpenter who works for another carpenter--not a factory-hand tending
a machine; and when the demagogue comes with his specious appeal he is
triumphantly refuted.

  “What are we, anyhow?” continued the greasy apostle of labor. “We
  are slaves; we are Roossian scurfs. We work as many hours as our
  owners like; we take what pay they choose to give us; we ask their
  permission to live and breathe.”

  “Oh, that’s a lie,” Sleeny interrupted, with unbroken calmness.
  “Old Saul Matchin and me come to an agreement about time and pay,
  and both of us was suited. Ef he’s got his heel onto me, I don’t
  feel it.”[668]

John Hay was convinced that an “educated leadership” alone could save
American democracy. But unfortunately--despite his great reputation
in diplomacy and statesmanship--his own education seems to have been
faulty. He had lately risen into the exploiting class, and he accepted
the ready-made opinions of that class. His biographer has admirably
stated his position during the days of the strike riots when he was
clarifying his views:

  Those riots of 1877 burnt deep into Colonel Hay’s heart. Like
  the rest of the world, he had theorized on the likelihood of war
  between Capital and Labor; but he had reassured himself by the
  comfortable assumption that under American conditions--equal
  opportunity for all, high wages, equal laws, and the ballot-box--no
  angry laboring class could grow up. The riots blew such vaporing
  away: for they proved that the angry class already existed, that
  the ballot-box instead of weakening strengthened it, and that not
  only the politicians of both parties but also the constituted
  authorities would avoid, as long as possible, grappling with it.

  The event was too large to be dismissed as an outburst of temper:
  it must be accepted as a symptom, a portent. Did it mean that
  a cancer had attacked the body politic and would spread to the
  vital organs? Was Democracy a failure,--Democracy--for more than
  a century the dream of the down-trodden, the ideal of those who
  loved mankind and believed in its perfectibility, the Utopia which
  good men predicted should somehow turn out to be a reality? Hay
  had sung his paean to liberty; Hay had throbbed at the efforts of
  patriots in Spain and in France to overthrow their despots; he had
  even exulted over the signs of democratization in England. Had he
  been the victim of mirage? Was Democracy not the final goal of
  human society, but only a half-way stage between the despotism of
  Autocracy and the despotism of Socialism?

  These questions he could not evade.... But he held, as did many of
  his contemporaries, that the assaults on Property were inspired
  by demagogues who used as their tools the loafers, the criminals,
  the vicious,--Society’s dregs who have been ready at all times to
  rise against laws and government. That you have property is proof
  of industry and foresight on your part or your father’s; that you
  have nothing, is a judgment on your laziness and vices, or on your
  improvidence. The world is a moral world; which it would not be if
  virtue and vice received the same rewards.[669]

John Hay, it must be recalled, had enjoyed a college education through
the aid of relatives, he had been taken under the wing of Lincoln and
become his private secretary, he had been thrust forward by influential
politicians, and finally he had married wealth--were these things
proofs of virtue in a moral world that rewards foresight and punishes
improvidence? Or were they rather the marks of a skillful climber? John
Hay was a charming and cultivated gentleman, but he was also a child of
the Gilded Age, with the materialisms of his generation in his blood.
The young man had been an Abolitionist and a political radical; the old
man was a McKinley conservative whose chief claim to reputation lay
in the “open-door” policy in China. The beginnings of this shift to
conservatism seem to have coincided with his marriage to Miss Stone,
daughter of a Cleveland capitalist whose interests were threatened by
the great strike. He was temperamentally one of John Adams’s “natural
aristocrats,” and having gained entrée into aristocratic circles he
took the coloring of his new environment. A son of the frontier, he
became a man of the world. Prosperity was necessary to him.

Professing a deep attachment to democratic institutions and hatred of
all monarchical principles--in Spain and France--John Hay ceased to
be a Lincoln democrat, and took his place amongst the ruling class,
accepting the principles of the rising plutocracy. _The Bread-winners_
is a dramatization of the Federalistic principle that government
exists for the protection of property. “Remembering the date when _The
Bread-winners_ was written,” says his biographer, “we must regard
it as the first important polemic in American fiction in defense of
Property.”[670] John Hay had become a thoroughgoing Hamiltonian. In
his younger days his sympathies had gone out to radical republicans
everywhere, and he watched the rising tide of liberalism with great
satisfaction. In his first visits to Europe he followed closely the
liberal movements. He was a warm admirer of Castelar, eulogizing him
as one of the heroic figures of modern times. In a lecture in 1869 on
“The Progress of Democracy in Europe” he spoke with the zeal of an
advanced liberal. But soon thereafter the ardor of his zeal lessened.
On later trips to Europe he did not display a like sympathy with
the program of the Social Democrats. As economic unrest crept into
politics, as strikes and boycotts began to disturb his father-in-law’s
business, he discovered less sympathy for revolutionary movements.
Political revolutions sponsored by respectable middle-class leaders,
were one thing; economic revolutions sponsored by the proletariat were
quite another thing. A democracy that breeds more democracy is clearly
dangerous. So much as has already been accomplished is excellent, of
course; but nothing further must be attempted.

There is sound strategy in offensive epithets. And so, taking counsel
of fear, he applied to the current economic unrest the words most
offensive to polite American ears, and called it socialism, anarchism.
Without pausing to weigh the demands of the farmer and the workingman,
with no understanding of the meaning of the great proletarian movement
then going forward in Europe, he appealed in defense of property to the
specter of economic leveling before which every good American of the
eighties recoiled in horror. As early as 1869, speaking of Castelar, he
said: “He has too much sense and integrity to follow the lead of the
Socialist fanatics.”[671] Commenting on the unsettled state of things
in Paris in 1883, he wrote: “The laborers have had the mischief put
into their heads by trade-unions.”[672] As he contemplated the agrarian
unrest of the seventies and later, he discovered in Greenbackism and
Populism only another form of this hateful socialism. It was the work
of agitators who were plain rascals.

He was greatly disturbed in 1875 at the state of politics, “with
half the Republicans and all the Democrats inflationists at heart,
and carrying on a campaign on the bald issue whether the nation
shall be a liar and a thief or not.”[673] And so late as 1900 he
exclaimed petulantly: “This last month of Bryan, roaring out his
desperate appeals to hate and envy, is having its effect on the
dangerous classes. Nothing so monstrous has as yet been seen in
our history.”[674] Unhappily even in free America with its equal
opportunity, and equal laws, there had come to be “dangerous
classes”--rather a good many of them, taking the populistic farmers and
discontented wage-earners into the account--so many, indeed, that John
Hay grew gloomy over the outlook. And the outlook was all the gloomier
because of our form of government; for is not the ultimate test of
our democratic institutions the test of whether they are adequate to
protect the property and “civilization” of the few against the “hate
and envy” of the discontented many?

That _The Bread-winners_ was a dishonest book Hay certainly
could not have been brought to believe; nevertheless a Tory who
covers his Tory purpose with a mantle of democracy can scarcely
be reckoned intellectually sincere. The men of the seventies and
eighties--cultivated and intelligent gentlemen like Godkin and Aldrich
and Hay--were little more than demagogues in their fustian attacks
on agrarian Greenbackers and militant labor unions; they feared and
hated them too much to understand them, and they took advantage of
their social position to cry them down. The “educated leadership” of
the Gilded Age was a somewhat sorry thing; it was ethically bankrupt
while appealing to high moral standards. The best of such leaders were
second-rate men--mediocre minds cramped by a selfish environment,
imbued with no more than a property-consciousness. Of such a world
John Hay in his _Bread-winners_ was a distinguished spokesman and
representative.[675]


3 • The Beginnings of the Sociological Novel

It was in the nineties that the sociological novel expanded into
a great movement that in the next decade and a half was to engulf
pretty much all American fiction and bring it into service to the
social conscience. Such a development was in the nature of things. The
artist would not sit forever in his ivory tower, content to carve his
statuettes while the country without was turmoiled with revolution.
Sooner or later he would venture forth and once he had been caught up
in the swirl his art would take new forms and serve other purposes than
the traditional genteel. Realism was in the air, the realism of Zola
and the Russians, and from such a realism would come in America a more
critical attitude towards the social revolution at work in the land.

It was the city that played havoc with our older fictional methods,
as it played havoc with our traditional social philosophy. America
was late in discovering the import of the huge Babbitt warrens it had
been building with such fierce energy; but slowly the realities of the
economic city rose to challenge the respectability of the romantic
city. It was the discovery of this new lair of business that created
the school of sociological fiction. The older city of literature had
been a polite world wherein ladies and gentlemen drank tea and made
love and talked proper scandal--a pleasant background of clubs and
drawing-rooms, against which moved well-dressed figures. It was an echo
of Thackeray--the world of the West End and Beacon Street and Fifth
Avenue, too well-bred and prosperous to recognize slums or stockyards
or stock-gambling. But with the nineties the old complacency was
disturbed. A note of unrest crept into the current fiction. As the
_protégés_ of Mr. Howells looked out upon their world in search of
reality, they discovered that polite society was being undermined.
Too many social climbers were thrusting themselves forward; too much
vulgarity was displayed by the new-rich. The social primacy of the old
families was being challenged by western pork-packers. Here was a rich
field to harvest. _Le document humain_ was the latest cry of realism,
and so under the inspiration of M. Paul Bourget a new crop of realism
came to fruit--clever studies in feminine psychology--the last word
in contemporary reality. The social climber was analyzed mercilessly,
her shallow and silly ambitions revealed to the least petty maneuver;
her blighting influence upon an idealistic husband or her stimulus
to a money-grabbing mate, is traced shrewdly. Such are Boyesen’s
_Mammon of Unrighteousness_, Robert Grant’s _Unleavened Bread_, and
Edith Wharton’s _House of Mirth_--studies that were symptomatic of a
generation disturbed by the consciousness of a vulgar plutocracy rising
in its midst, and yet ignorant of the nature of the disease.

Nevertheless their vogue was brief. As economic unrest rose more
menacingly upon the horizon of the new century, realism quickly
tired of its Kate Van Schaaks and Selma Whites and Lily Barts, and
turned away to prospect for a richer vein. Psychology was losing its
fascination and social analysis was supplying a new inspiration; M.
Bourget was yielding authority to Émile Zola. Even so whole-hearted a
romantic as Mary Johnston was to turn from tales like _To Have and to
Hold_ to write _Hagar_, a novel of suffrage propaganda. There was to
be not less realism but more. The change may be summarized in the word
_background_. The old individualism had unconsciously insulated its
hero from economic contacts; he moved in a polite environment detached
from the larger play of social forces. An individualism so wanting
in sociological verity could make scant appeal to the new spirit of
sociology. That old world is dead. With the rise of the philosophy
of determinism came another mood. To the realism of environment that
conceived of the individual as a pawn on the chessboard of society,
M. Zola had given the name _naturalism_. It was realism wedded to a
deterministic sociology--the first reaction of a generation awakening
to the subjugating power of the mass, and bent on studying the
resultant phenomena in the clear light of science. The change was no
less than revolutionary. The new school thought in terms of group and
class and movement, rather than in terms of individuals each nursing
his petty hopes and fears. The individual counts for so little in the
enveloping stream of social tendency. Let us have no more shoddy
heroes, foolish little egoisms in an unreal world; but figures of
men and women, encompassed by the great stream, carried along on a
resistless current. If they prove to be little better than puppets the
novelist is not to blame, but society that reduces them to impotency.
So the emerging school abandoned Howells and James and followed Frank
Norris into the camp of the naturalists. Their work might be bad
art--as the critics love to reiterate--but it was the honest voice of a
generation bewildered and adrift.

The discovery of environment led imperceptibly to another
discovery--the economic basis of society; and this in turn led to the
rejection of the polite city of older literature. Once the eyes of the
novelist opened to the significance of the economic, the world of the
spenders became less significant than the world of the makers, the
drones became less interesting than the workers. If a novel were to be
true to American life, it must adjust its perspectives to the facts of
the great American game of money-chasing; it must shift its habitat
from Fifth Avenue to Wall Street, from the club to the factory. So the
business man entered the portals of fiction, no longer the stock figure
in broadcloth and top-hat who discarded business with his dirty collar
in order to shift into respectability; but bringing with him his talk
of deals and squeeze-outs, playing the great game of exploitation at
his mahogany desk--the central, dominating figure in a capitalistic
world. He was subjected to acute analysis--his philosophy, his ethics,
the machine of industrialism he was creating, the intricate system
of exploitation that he had elaborated, the jungle city that was his
lair where he fought his battles. The more acutely he was analyzed
the clearer it became that here was a figure greater than kings or
presidents--a figure that had taken our traditional American life in
his hands and was reshaping it to his ends; and that if realism were
to be true to its ideal it must paint him as he was without detraction
and without glorification. So of necessity the younger novelists turned
from polite society to economics, and fell to dramatizing the life of
the city jungle where business men fought their fierce battles.

The forerunner of the new school was a Norwegian-American, Hjalmar
Hjorth Boyesen. An essayist and philologist, for a number of years
professor of German at Columbia University, Boyesen began publishing
as early as 1874, and thereafter contributed freely to the several
fields of the essay, poetry, and fiction; but it was not until 1891
that he opened the new vein of realism which he worked industriously
the remaining four years of his life, the life brought to a premature
close in 1895. Three novels belong to this last phase of his work: _The
Mammon of Unrighteousness_ (1891), _The Golden Calf_ (1892), and _The
Social Strugglers_ (1893). The books made considerable stir upon their
publication, for they were the nearest approach to the Tolstoian type
of realism which till then had appeared in America. They contain in
germ many of the ideas which the later city realists were to amplify
and develop; but these ideas were still entangled in the mesh of the
current psychological realism and their sociological bearings obscured.
In consequence they largely failed of their purpose, and within a
decade they had fallen into oblivion. They are of interest today
chiefly as historical documents of the early nineties.

In the preface to _The Mammon of Unrighteousness_ Boyesen sets forth
his purpose thus:

  My one endeavor in this book has been to depict persons and
  conditions which are profoundly and typically American. I have
  disregarded all romantic traditions, and simply asked myself in
  every instance, not whether it was amusing but whether it was true
  to the logic of reality--true in color and tone to the American
  sky, the American soil, the American character.

This, very evidently, is the realism of _milieu_--an endeavor to catch
the reality of atmosphere; and as such it is of no great significance.
In his choice of “types,” moreover, he reflected the current taste.
The crude self-made millionaire who dimly conscious of failure founds
a university; the young idealist who fails because he is conscientious
and the young realist who succeeds because he has no scruples against
playing the game; and the aristocratic climber who marries to further
her social ambitions--these are the stock figures of the realism that
was to culminate in Robert Grant’s _Unleavened Bread_, nine years
later. But in the delineation of the character of Horace Larkin--the
hero of a book that does not realize its promise--the note of the
new realism is heard distinctly for the first time. The business
man frankly breaks with the old ethics and erects a new ethics in
conformity with his ambition; and it is the elaboration of the ethics
of the Will to Power that justifies one in regarding _The Mammon of
Unrighteousness_ as a first study in the new city realism.

Horace Larkin, like Herrick’s Van Harrington, is a Nietzschean who
learned his ethics not from the German philosopher, but from the world
of cut-throat business. It is the flower of the competitive system. The
old pretense that business is an uplifting and civilizing agency--that
trade breaks down barriers and carries in its shipments the gospel of
fraternity and good will--is flung out on the scrap heap. Horace Larkin
is no smug hypocrite. He faces the facts frankly; he will not deceive
others any more than himself.

  He was a beast of prey, asserting his right of survival; nothing
  more. If he succumbed to sentiment (and it is far easier to succumb
  to it than to resist it) he would merely be eliminating himself
  from the battle of existence as a potent and considerable force,
  and consigning himself to the rear ranks. And he felt in every
  fibre of his being that he was born for leadership.[676]

  ... nobody has a right to sacrifice himself to anybody else. If he
  does he simply eliminates himself from the struggle for existence,
  proves his unfitness to survive. It is natural for every strong man
  to try to make every other life tributary to his own; but the man
  who consents to make his life tributary to somebody else’s is from
  Nature’s point of view a weak man.... She may allow him to exist
  in a small way; but what is existence without predominance?...
  The man who is in advance of the morality of his age is, for
  practical purposes, a fool. It is no use quarreling with Fate; and
  in the United States the average man is the Fate that rules us and
  determines our place in the world.[677]

  “The majority of our politicians are a low-lived lot, and many of
  them corrupt. But they have the courage to be American--crudely and
  uncompromisingly American--and that is, in my eyes, a virtue which
  is not to be lightly rated.”

  “And may I ask, Mr. Larkin, what do you mean by being American?”

  “Being frankly, ably, enterprisingly plebeian. It is the plebeian
  after all, who shall inherit the earth--”

  “I beg your pardon. According to the Bible it is the meek.”

  “I must differ with the Bible, then; for the meek, in my
  experience, if they inherit anything, never manage to keep it.
  It passes, sooner or later, into the hands of the strong, the
  self-assertive, the grasping. But these, as you will admit, are
  plebeian characteristics. A universally prosperous, comfortable,
  impudent, and enterprising mob--that is the goal toward which
  we are steering; and in my opinion it is a good and desirable
  one.”[678]

This is a note that is to be heard more insistently as the new realism
went further in its probing. Armed with this conviction Horace Larkin
set forth as a conqueror, and it only adds to the dramatic fitness
of things that in his rise he came across a will to power stronger,
cleverer, than his own. Kate Van Schaak climbs upon his back to
rise with him; she buys him with her money and social position, and
having made the deal she realizes on the investment. She is mistress
henceforth, and the Nietzschean smiles at the irony of the situation.

In the third work Boyesen fails to maintain the level of _The Mammon
of Unrighteousness. Social Strugglers_ is simpler, more dramatic,
better told. It carries the reader forward more easily. But it belongs
with such novels of social analysis as Charles Dudley Warner’s _The
Golden House_--mildly critical of the vulgarizing influence of the
new-rich, mildly sympathetic with the slum workers--rather than to the
new realism. The heroine--daughter of a new-rich family that has come
to New York to climb socially--awakens to the realization of parting
ways: one the path of luxury which the four hundred travel, the other
the path of service which leads to the slums and settlement work. It is
a sentimental awakening, not an intellectual, induced by the hero, who
on the fringe of the four hundred is mildly discontented with the ways
of luxury. The vague idealism of the latter has been stirred by the
Toynbee Hall experiment in London, and the persuasiveness of the lover
rather than the conclusions of the thinker carries Maud Bulkley away
from her conventional moorings.

The movement of the book is little clogged with sociological
discussions; there is too little, indeed, to justify the conclusion.
Only once does Philip Warburton lift the curtain upon the idealism
which ostensibly is the determining factor in his life.

  “I frankly confess that I am something of a red. I think the world
  is out of gear, and I can perfectly well conceive of a civilization
  far better than ours, without yet proposing any radical amendment
  to human nature....”

  There was to Maud something so wholly unexpected in this ebullition
  that she scarcely knew what to say. She had never philosophized
  concerning life and its problems; nay, she had never suspected that
  to a person who had money enough, and the access to good society,
  it could present any problems whatever. She knew that some terribly
  disreputable, shaggy, and wild-faced foreigners came here from
  Europe and proposed to turn our admirable civilization upside down;
  but that a gentleman of Warburton’s culture and social standing
  could sympathize with such criminals had never occurred to her as a
  remote possibility....

After this disturbing introduction Warburton proceeds to disclose what
being “a red” means to him in the way of social revolutions:

  “Have you ever heard of a London experiment known as Toynbee Hall?”
  he asked....

  “Yes: it’s a place in the slums, where young men of good family go
  to live; isn’t that it?”

  “Yes; and, do you know, that is to me the most beautiful modern
  instance of a real desire to help the poor and helpless--to lift
  the world to a higher level. It is what I should like to do
  myself--and what I shall hope some day to do....”

  “Then you really think it a misfortune to be rich?” she
  ejaculated....

  “Yes, if wealth entails the loss of human sympathies, as in nine
  cases out of ten it seems to do, I regard it as a misfortune.
  If it means, as in this country it seems to mean, the loss of
  vital contact with humanity, the contraction of one’s mental and
  spiritual horizon, a callous insensibility to social wrongs and
  individual sorrows, a brutal induration in creature comforts and
  mere animal well-being, the loss of that divine discontent and
  noble aspiration which alone makes us human--if it means this
  or any part of it, it is the greatest calamity which can befall
  a man. And it is because Christ foresaw that these were the
  natural effects of great wealth, and the security and ease which
  it engenders, that he declared that it was easier for a camel to
  pass through the eye of a needle than for a rich man to enter the
  kingdom of heaven.”[679]

That is all. There is no dramatic justification of Warburton’s views;
they are without motive and foundation. _Social Strugglers_ does not
advance far along the path of the new realism.

As the years drew nearer the new century, the business man usurped
an ever larger place in American fiction; the romance which had been
sought in the deeds of 1776 was now discovered in the achievements of
enterprise. It was the unconscious testimony of literature to the hold
which business had got on the imagination of Americans. In the golden
days of the “full dinner-pail,” following the great victory of ’96,
the Captain of Industry reached the apogee of his fame. The voice of
detraction had not yet been lifted against him; the muckraker had not
yet set forth on his devastating career. To young reporters on city
papers looking ambitiously towards fiction as the goal of success,
what could offer greater appeal than the unwritten romance of Wall
Street and the Stock Exchange? They had described it for the daily
news columns, they had seen it extolled on the editorial page, why not
dramatize it in fiction? Here was the real interest of America--the
only reality that signified; yet the novelists had stupidly overlooked
it, because they lacked the journalist’s sense of news values, his
_flair_.

Of the abundant crop of fiction which resulted from this discovery, no
more characteristic examples need be sought than _The Short Line War_
(1899) and _Calumet “K”_ (1901), written in collaboration by Samuel
Merwin and H. K. Webster. Their popular success was immediate and
maintained surprisingly. The former ran to six editions, the last in
1909; the latter, to twelve editions, the last so late as 1915. They
are brisk stories, all action stripped of descriptive superfluities,
with plenty of newspaper punch: dramatizations of hustle and bluff
and the tricks of a cut-throat game. Charlie Bannon, hero of _Calumet
“K”_, is the boss who does things, who is on the job, who takes long
shots and “makes good”--a “movie” hero of efficiency. He has no time
nor inclination to think, possesses no philosophy, asks no questions
and is troubled by no doubts or scruples; his fertile brain and cool
nerve make him a first-class fighting man, and he fights as the good
soldier should on orders from above. The hero of _The Short Line War_,
Jim Weeks, is another Bannon with the same fertile brain, cool nerve,
calm tenacity of purpose, quick decisiveness, and the same lack of
intellectual interests. In war it is sound strategy to strike quick and
hard; and the Captain of Industry, let it be clearly known, is a war
captain. To play the game hard, to beat the other fellow by whatever
means serve, that is the ideal of a competitive _bourgeoisie_: not to
be too nice about the law, for everybody knows that the law is the
chief weapon of the strong; not to cherish foolish idealisms, for
everybody knows that success alone pays. No more heartless, brutal,
anarchistic books could be conceived--a mad philosophy for a mad world.

The broad movement towards a realistic portrayal of the economic city
produced its eddies and minor currents, which at times brought such
a commotion of the waters as to appear like the main current. Such
was the flood of political novels which came with the new century
and lasted well upwards of a decade. These were a by-product of the
muckraking movement--a part of the propaganda of the group of young
insurgents within the Republican party who were bent on rescuing the
party from control of the old bosses, and who prepared the way for the
more significant movement of Progressivism which followed. Such studies
as Francis Churchill Williams’s _J. Devlin--Boss_ (1901), and Elliott
Flower’s _The Spoilsmen_ (1903), were early examples; and Winston
Churchill’s _Coniston_ and _Mr. Crewe’s Career_ were probably the most
notable. They were journalistic for the most part, _exposés_ of the
“Boss” and the evils of the political machine. The “Boss” is painted in
various guises, as brutal, cunning, thoroughly vicious, or as a man
who plays the game with the same unsocial conscience that marks the
capitalist. Most frequently Lincoln Steffens is followed and the human
side of the “Boss” is “played up” equally with his political cunning.
It is the characteristic journalistic touch--a bit cheap but immensely
effective. As the movement of naturalism gained headway it became
increasingly apparent that the “Boss” was only a part of the “System,”
and the political novel merged in the economic. These brisk studies
constitute, however, a suggestive episode in our history--the literary
echo of our political history between the years 1900 and 1910.

Little in the way of social analysis was to be expected from a group
of clever journalists. They were reporters of fact, transcribers of
externals. They note the social unrest, but it is little more than
an undertone of the chorus of prosperity--a snarl of inconsequential
criticism. It is the sting of a troublesome mosquito that is brushed
off by the Captain of Industry who is too busy with big projects
to bother about insects. Such is Will Payne’s _Mr. Salt_ (1903)--a
sympathetic study of a coal-baron who is caught in the panic of ’93
but pulls out and rises higher. To provide dramatic contrast there is
the ineffective idealist who is growly and surly--“The whole thing is
rotten--the whole business scheme. It’s just a gold brick game operated
by Salt and his kind. I’d like to stick a fuse to it and touch it
off.”[680] It is feeble enough--this protest. The rebel joins wildly
in the great strike, is struck down by the hand of the law, rebels and
strikes again and gets nowhere. Only a bitter, ineffective hate rankles
in his heart, while Salt goes on triumphantly to greater power and a
sort of moral regeneration through love--a regeneration that does not
interfere with his keeping the title-deeds to his loot. An earlier
study--_The Money Captain_ (1898)--seemed to give promise of honester
work than this. It is the story of a struggle between a corrupt
gas-magnate and an enterprising editor whose _exposé_ puts the magnate
afoul of the law as interpreted by the magnate’s judges, and who is
saved from disaster by the timely death of the “duke.” At the end is a
touch of prophecy, quite startling in its forecast. These money-kings
with their strong prehensile fingers are the spawn of a common
plebeian America; the world of the makers is vulgarly democratic;
but there follows the age of the spenders, and that shall be finely,
altruistically aristocratic. The death of the hero “expunged from his
fortune that color of greedy vulgarity and left its gold untarnished.”

  Dexter, for all his success, was a figure in the common democratic
  foreground of business; he was intimately and solely of the great
  everyday warp and woof of toil. He bore all his fruit at once--when
  he died. An heirship was required to give the fortune value....

  In a way it was fine and beautiful--all that huge accumulation of
  pillage coming to the white, firm hands of this pretty, amiable
  capable, goodhearted woman. The sudden substitution of her graceful
  and gracious figure for the swart and iron figure of the duke was
  like an apt transformation scene, prophetic of the future.[681]

These earlier books are mere preliminary sketches--first studies
in economic backgrounds, hesitating between admiration and
censure--satisfied to exploit the “human interest” in the dour figure
of the money-grabber. The clever newspaper men did not know enough
to do better, more realistic work; they saw the daily activities of
business but they understood little of economics, less of sociology.
And the new realism was soon to yield itself captive to sociology--to
inscribe the name of Zola boldly on its pennant and go forth to
conquer. It was Frank Norris who wrote the pronunciamiento of the new
school, boldly, magnificently, with immense faith in the finality of
his own conclusions. _The Responsibilities of the Novelist_ was to
become the textbook of the young naturalists.


Footnotes

[621] See Charles Edward Russell, _The Story of Wendell Phillips_, p.
53.

[622] Quoted in Martyn, _Wendell Phillips: The Agitator_, p. 372.

[623] See _Speeches_, Second Series, p. 139.

[624] Quoted in Martyn, _op. cit._, pp. 412-413.

[625] _Speeches_, Second Series, p. 176.

[626] _Ibid._, p. 167.

[627] _Ibid._, pp. 152-153.

[628] _Ibid._, p. 154.

[629] See _Ibid._, pp. 356-359.

[630] See _Ibid._, p. 347.

[631] Edward Cary, _George William Curtis_, p. 78.

[632] See _Ibid._, pp. 25-26.

[633] See _Ibid._, pp. 180-181.

[634] See _Harper’s Weekly_, Sept. 20, 1873.

[635] _Orations and Addresses_, “Machine Politics and the Remedy,” Vol.
II, pp. 157-159.

[636] See _Ibid._, p. 160.

[637] J. H. Wilson, _The Life of Charles A. Dana_, p. 466.

[638] Ogden, _Life and Letters of Edwin Lawrence Godkin_, Vol. I, p. 11.

[639] _Ibid._, Vol. I, p. 17.

[640] _Ibid._, Vol. II, p. 140.

[641] _Nation_, July 8, 1915, p. 47.

[642] _On Liberty_, Chapter I.

[643] “Aristocratic Opinions of Democracy,” in _Problems of Modern
Democracy_, pp. 25-26, 30-31.

[644] Ogden, _op. cit._, Vol. II, p. 48.

[645] _Nation_, January 30, 1873, p. 68.

[646] See “Public Opinion and the Currency,” _Ibid._, February 27,
1873; “The Political Situation in 1896,” in _Problems of Modern
Democracy_.

[647] See “On Gold and Silver,” _Ibid._, July 6, 1876.

[648] _Ibid._, May 25, 1876.

[649] _Ibid._, June 1, 1876.

[650] “The Issue of the Campaign,” _Ibid._, July 2, 1896.

[651] “The Platform of Revolution,” _Ibid._, July 16, 1896.

[652] _Ibid._, January 19, 1893.

[653] _Ibid._, April 10, 1873.

[654] “The Watered Stock Hallucination,” _Ibid._, October 9, 1873.

[655] “Prosperity’s Advance Orator,” _Ibid._, June 18, 1896.

[656] “The Chicago Platform,” _Ibid._, July 16, 1896.

[657] “The Platform of Revolution,” _Ibid._, July 23, 1896.

[658] Ogden, _op. cit._, Vol. II, pp. 238-239.

[659] _Ibid._, Vol. II, p. 199.

[660] _Ibid._, Vol. II, p. 217.

[661] _Ibid._, Vol. II, p. 243.

[662] _Ibid._, Vol. II, p. 237.

[663] Vol. II, Chapter 13, p. 128.

[664] Chapter 4, p. 78.

[665] Vol. II, pp. 58-59.

[666] In his original scheme Professor Parrington included Tourgée’s
_A Fool’s Errand_, but the text shows that he decided against its
inclusion.--_Publisher._

[667] William Roscoe Thayer, _Life and Letters of John Hay_, Vol. II,
pp. 5-6.

[668] Chapter V.

[669] Thayer, _op. cit._, Vol. I., pp. 6-7.

[670] _Ibid._, Vol. II, p. 15.

[671] _Ibid._, Vol. I, p. 321.

[672] _Ibid._, p. 414.

[673] _Ibid._, p. 426.

[674] _Ibid._, Vol. II, p. 256.

[675] In his plan Professor Parrington included here H. F.
Keenan’s _The Money-Makers_, but apparently he decided against its
inclusion.--_Publisher._

[676] Chapter XXXI.

[677] Chapter XXXVI.

[678] Chapter XXXIII.

[679] Chapter VII.

[680] Chapter IX.

[681] _The Money Captain_, Chapter 22.




Part Two: New Patterns of Thought




