Chapter I • The Passing of the Tie-Wig School


I • Old Boston

The year 1815, that brought to a close the unfortunate American
venture into the maelstrom of the Napoleonic wars, may be conveniently
taken to mark for New England the transition to the nineteenth
century. With the rise of Unitarianism and the development of the new
industrialism, a ruder and more vigorous age entered Boston. It met
with a somewhat chilly reception. The patriarchal eighteenth century
still clung to its warm chimney corner, not liking to be dispossessed
by heirs of whom it testily disapproved. The old order stood on
its dignity, tenacious of its habitual authority. It lived quietly
in an aristocratic past, unregardful of the vigorous commonwealths
rising beyond the Appalachian mountains, and contemptuous of the new
political philosophy that preached the rights of man. A persistent
continuity of temper marked the ruling class, a continuity little
disturbed by the tumultuous revolutions of the past two generations.
Although nearly half the voters of Massachusetts, in the year 1800,
were Jeffersonian republicans, the knowledge of that fact only
stiffened the backbones of the regnant caste. It colored their minds
with a virtuous pessimism, but it edged their temper with the zeal of
righteousness. The Boston mobsters, it would appear, were republican,
and when the present custodians of the ark of decency were gathered
to their fathers, very likely evil days would come upon the land; but
while the righteous lived they would be faithful to their stewardship.
Their own households, at least, they would keep clean of all democratic
pollution; and so Boston and New Haven and Hartford--the capitals
of New England culture--drew about them the garments of Federalist
righteousness. Since the Revolution of ’76 a new authority had risen
on the ruins of the old Tory authority, but in spite of the change
of personnel and outward political forms, the spirit of respectable
New England remained pretty much what it had always been. John Quincy
Adams and Fisher Ames and Josiah Quincy were little different in
character and aims from Thomas Hutchinson and Joseph Sewall and Daniel
Leonard--they were common chips from the tough old New England oak.
High-minded yet narrow; devout yet not emotionally religious; thrifty
yet generous in approved causes; engaged in overseas commerce yet
oddly parochial--they were men fashioned by a rugged environment into
vigorous stock, that would hold tenaciously to what they had got and
would tolerate no insubordination on the part of their social inferiors.

With its twenty-five thousand inhabitants Boston ranked fourth in size
among American cities. Philadelphia, the social capital of America,
was nearly three times as large; New York nearly two and a half times;
and even Baltimore had lately come to exceed her in population. The
economic forces that make for liberalism had become largely impotent.
Free land had long since been exhausted in Massachusetts and social
lines were fixed. The northern frontier of Maine and New Hampshire
was rugged and uninviting, and York State lay to the West. Except in
the Connecticut valley the soil was thin and farming unproductive,
and in consequence the more ambitious turned to commerce and
manufacture which the physical conditions of the country invited. The
dominant interest of Boston was commercial, and the ruling coterie of
merchants and lawyers was narrowly Whiggish. They had modified their
pre-Revolutionary political philosophy no further than to substitute
the word republican for monarchical. The aristocratic temper dominated
the town meetings, and the principle of property rule was commonly
accepted as the essence of political wisdom. In substituting Federalism
for Toryism there was no easing of the restrictions on rebellious
plebeians. Quite repudiated were the rude leveling ways of the great
Revolutionary adventure. Boston gentlemen had come to understand too
well the danger of encouraging the mob, for as Fisher Ames pointed out
in 1787, “The people have turned against their teachers the doctrines,
which were inculcated to effect the late revolution” (_Works_, p.
11). Boston had had enough of revolutions since Daniel Shays had got
up one of his own aimed at the Boston purse, and French Jacobins had
let loose their devastating ideas upon a gullible world. Revolutions
that were not made in Boston, by Boston gentlemen, were quite certain
to be wicked and seditious; and Boston had definitely gone out of the
revolution business. It wanted above all things to undo the mischief
that had already been done, and take back into safe hands the political
power which in the days of revolutionary enthusiasm had been seized by
the agrarian democracy.

In the last decade of the eighteenth century the intellectual isolation
of New England was sharply accentuated and the consequent intellectual
stagnation became more disastrous. In other portions of America French
revolutionary theories of man and society were spreading widely and
shouldering aside the outworn past. A romantic equalitarianism,
based on the doctrine of human perfectibility, was displacing the
traditional economic realism, established on the dogma of total
depravity. The leveling movement, in consequence, was provided with
a persuasive idealism that awakened troublesome aspirations in the
disfranchised majority and gave a strong impetus to the democratic
movement. But New England leaders stood resolutely apart, accounting
all equalitarianism sheer romantic folly. The old stubborn realism held
its ground, interpreting political principles in terms of economics,
and dogmatically maintaining the sacred rights of property. Boston
Federalism refused to have anything to do with “atheistic France,” the
fruitful mother of Jacobin follies. Pollution, it was convinced, must
result from any commerce with infidel and innovating ideas. Gunpowder
that was played with might explode, and New England wanted no blowing
up of her excellent society. Virginia had lent credulous ears to the
voice of France, and the result was the atheist Jefferson and the
rabble of his licentious followers. Massachusetts was not gullible
and it would tolerate no Jeffersonian atheisms. And so instead of
adapting French romantic philosophy to new world needs, seizing upon
its social idealism to leaven the crude American lump--as Jefferson
and Colonel Mason and John Taylor and many another Virginia gentleman
had done--Boston Federalism rejected French ideas in the mass, dubbed
French idealism Jacobinism, and turned back upon a stubborn reaction.

The disastrous consequences of that rejection upon the mind of New
England cannot easily be measured. It is clear enough, nevertheless,
that the renaissance was delayed a full generation, and when it
came it assumed certain provincialisms that greatly lessened its
permanent influence upon the rest of America. The impress of its
contribution upon our national thought has been far less permanent than
that of Virginia, that came a generation earlier and was primarily
economic and political. It is a suggestive fact that in the work
of adapting the new Federal Constitution to democratic ends, New
England contributed no creative leader, none in any way comparable to
Jefferson; but on the contrary her most representative leaders--and
in particular Webster--followed the eighteenth-century tradition in
combating the equalitarian advance in the interest of economic groups.
Some explanation of this fact may be found, perhaps, in the selfish
isolation of New England Federalism, that closed the door on the
liberal thought of France.

In consequence of such isolation Boston became the recognized home of
the philosophy of a stake-in-society. If it clung tenaciously to an
old-fashioned Federalism after it had been abandoned elsewhere, it
was because Boston was more middle-class than Charleston, and had not
learned from experience with Jacksonianism how easily the majority will
may be shaped and controlled to particular ends. It inherited the old
Tory contempt for democracy and relied on the old stock arguments to
combat it. Its habitual tone was one of virtuous arrogance. The one
great and ever-present fear that haunted the pillows of worthy Boston
merchants and turned their dreams to nightmares, was fear of the mob
getting out of hand; and democracy, for them, was only a euphemism
for the mob--the ever-present menace to sober and decent government.
In the judgment of Theodore Dwight, brother of Timothy, “there could
be nothing more dreadful this side of hell.” Nowhere else in America
did the reaction against the democratic ideal carry so far as in
Boston. The church and the merchant associations joined with polite
society to cry it down, and upon the head of the democrat fell the
most extravagant vituperation. For a generation few respectable New
Englanders raised their voices in defense of democracy, but gentlemen
of principle and property followed the lead of the little clique that
was driving straight towards the Hartford Convention--blind sailors
navigating the Dead Sea of Federalist pessimism.

All this was before the reputed time of plain living and high thinking.
Intellectual Boston was as parochial as political Boston. The lights
whom Bostonians regarded as the torch-bearers of New England culture
have long since been extinguished and their names forgotten even in
Beacon Street. Amongst the literati of the little Boston of 1800 the
historian need concern himself with no more than two or three: Fisher
Ames (1758-1808), the Federalist lawyer-wit, and Robert Treat Paine
(1773-1811), esteemed the ninth wonder of the Boston world. Other
figures there were, of course, in addition to the literati: Harrison
Gray Otis, the eloquent voice of Faneuil Hall, and Josiah Quincy, whom
Lowell likened to an old Roman of the elder virtuous days, and who
during a long life of ninety-two years was an example of stalwart and
antiquated Federalism. Old Boston bred dignified figures in plenty,
men admirably equipped to be college presidents, ambassadors, orators
on formal occasions, purveyors of cultivated inutilities and polished
commonplace--men like Edward Everett, whom all Boston praised while
they lived and forgot when they were dead; but it bred no thinkers or
men of letters who count in the larger history of America. Boston was
still parochial, content with little things.


II • Fisher Ames • The Oracle of the Tie-Wig School

Of this testy little world that clung to its smallclothes and tie-wig,
refusing to adopt the Jacobin innovation in dress and manners and
politics, declining to temper its prejudices to the gusty whims of a
leveling age, Fisher Ames was the universal counselor and oracle. A
vivacious little gentleman to whom politics was the breath of life,
he achieved so tremendous a reputation in his short lifetime that all
New England looked to him for leadership and Harvard College wanted to
make him its president. He came of vigorous stock, prone to consult
its own will and speak its opinions with no squeamish concern for a
neighbor’s views. His brother, Dr. Nathaniel Ames, was as violent a
Republican as Fisher was a Federalist, a hater of all lawyers whom
he accounted the “pettifogging interest”; and when the two members
of the family came together at dinner the talk must have been worth
hearing. Diverse worlds and hostile philosophies faced each other over
the roast, and the sauce no doubt was well spiced. Dr. Nathaniel had
a pretty gift himself in the way of pungent speech, and Fisher’s wit
was the admiration of all New England. When Gouverneur Morris--reputed
the greatest wit in America--visited Massachusetts, Fisher Ames was
pitted against him, and Boston believed that the honor of the Bay
State was worthily upheld. His pet hobby was the inherent tyranny of
all democracies, and when he once got astride his wooden horse and dug
in the spurs, the onset was tremendous. The letters that have come
down to us are a gold mine of picturesque vituperation, from which
one may dig a wallet of choice nuggets. The vivacity of his anathemas
is delightful, and one would give much to have heard Dr. Nathaniel’s
retort militant.

There are the solidest grounds for regarding Fisher Ames as the
representative citizen of Boston in the year 1800. He was the cleverest
and most intelligent spokesman of a social and political circle quite
untouched by the new French liberalisms, content with the habitual and
familiar, and mightily concerned that the future should be as like
the past as one generation of oysters is like another. A lawyer who
shared the strong property consciousness of the Boston merchant, and a
churchman who accepted the moral leadership of the Calvinist clergy, he
offered stout and uncompromising resistance to innovation. “A change,
though for the better, is always to be deplored by the generation in
which it is effected,” he said. “Much is lost and more is hazarded”
(_Works_, p. 15, edition of 1809). The new gospel of progress that came
in with French romanticisms, he would have none of. In the face of a
noisy Jacobinism that threatened to carry all before it, he fought a
spirited fight, turning pamphleteer when his broken health removed him
from Congress, counseling and scolding his fellow Federalists with his
last breath. Others might truckle and compromise, but not Fisher Ames.
His faith was founded on the solid granite of Yankee prejudice.

The very solidity of that prejudice made him the trenchant spokesman
of the older Boston conservatisms--that and the vivacity of his prose
style which is approved Augustan, uncorrupted by what he dubbed
“pompous Johnsonian affectation.” His contemporary reputation was
enormous. Accounted a great orator, he was accounted an even greater
political philosopher, and his pamphlets were appraised by President
Kirkland of Harvard as “the light of genius and wisdom darted athwart
the gloom of our political chaos.” “In the character of Mr. Ames,”
said the Harvard president, “the circle of the virtues seemed to be
complete, and each virtue in its proper place” (_Works_, Introduction,
p. xxviii). Yet in spite of so authoritative a pronouncement, Fisher
Ames does not seem today so great a man as he seemed to his own
generation. From the data collected in a stout volume published soon
after his death as “a voice of instruction and warning to his country,”
and from the letters published by his son in 1854, it is plain enough
that this “powerful and original genius” was a retailer of somewhat
shopworn goods, a complete Federalist Tory after the current Boston
fashion. To Fisher Ames Federalism, as understood in New England, was a
religion. He defended it with the ardor of the moralist, convinced that
it included all the political virtues, and that whoever rejected it was
a child of the devil. Whenever he considered the unpromising state of
the country--which luxury he often indulged--whether in the midst of
Shays’s Rebellion or of the Jeffersonian revolution, he fell into black
pessimism. He grew hot from fires of his own kindling, and the gloomier
he became the more vigorously he blew the bellows.

To the sinful publican self-conscious virtue is peculiarly irritating,
and since Fisher Ames accounted most of his generation political
publicans, he was at odds with all but a scant remnant of Federalist
saints. From this isolation, from the defeat that overwhelmed his party
in the great election of 1800, and from aggravating ill health, which
beginning when he was thirty-seven incapacitated him three years later
for public life, he fell into a state of chronic political despondency
that extracted a grim pleasure from the contemplation of democratic
follies and the anarchy towards which the country was hastening. During
his last years his wit became acid; his letters are filled with caustic
comment to sharpen the temper of those on the fighting line. Of these
racy comments, so characteristic of Federalist spleen, a few examples
must serve to convey the spirit: “Our country is too big for union,
too sordid for patriotism, too democratic for liberty.” “We are in the
hands of the philosophers of Lilliput.” “I have as loyal and respectful
an opinion as possible of the sincerity in folly of our rulers.” “As
to liberty, we are to have none--democracy will kindle its own hell,
and consume in it.” “Democracy is a troubled spirit, fated never to
rest, and whose dreams, if it sleeps, present only visions of hell.” In
his last years Fisher Ames had become a shrill Jeremiah crying in the
gates of an Israel that mocked the old prophets.

His political philosophy was simple, yet so native to Calvinist-Yankee
New England, and historically so characteristic, that it provides
a useful candle to throw light into the old New England garrets.
In certain aspects it is close kin to the Whiggery of Locke and
Pitt, particularly in its concern for the sacred right of property
rule--a principle that he casually recognizes in his frequent
assertion that “the mass of the federalists are the owners of the
commercial and monied wealth of the nation” (_Works_, p. 426).
But in post-Revolutionary Boston, suffering from the acute fright
inflicted by Daniel Shays, this English Whiggery had come to assume
a particular native form that differentiated it from its original.
In the primitive Calvinist-Yankee world political theory had been
shaped by the theocratic conception of stewardship, by which was
meant an authoritative leadership reposing in the best and wisest,
yet subject to the will of God as revealed in the Bible. Minister
and magistrate, therefore, professed to justify their acts, not by
expediency or interest, but by absolute ethical standards. From this
early practice developed the pronounced ethical temper of New England
political thought that set it apart from the Virginia school, a temper
that persisted after the transfer of authority from Puritan minister
and magistrate to Tory merchant and lawyer. With the growth of the
aristocratic spirit in the middle eighteenth century, the squirearchy
assumed unchallenged political leadership, and it was from the remnant
of the old gentry remaining after the expulsion of the Loyalists,
strengthened by a new generation of merchants and lawyers, that Boston
Federalism drew its personnel. It professed republicanism, but it was
instinctively aristocratic. It was true to its Puritan origins in
expounding its political philosophy in terms of an absolute morality,
and true to its aristocratic origins in assuming to be the special
custodians of law and order. It no more questioned its special right
to rulership in the state than it questioned its social position; and
in both politics and society it professed the ancient doctrine of
stewardship.

The kinship between the political philosophy of Fisher Ames and John
Adams is quite evident. They are cut out of the same Puritan-Yankee
cloth, but the former is a more careless tailor. Founded on less
adequate analysis and lacking the wide historical appeal of Adams,
assuming rather than proving the fact of a universal property
aristocracy, and the economic origins of political power, the
philosophy of Ames postulates the same ideal of justice as the end of
government, discovers in faction the dragon to be slain, and concludes
that only a static division of powers can insure political stability.
Nevertheless the difference between the two men is enormous. John Adams
was a philosopher, and Fisher Ames was only a lawyer-politician. The
ideal of justice which the former postulated was fundamentally noble,
whereas the ideal of justice which the latter assumed was narrowly
legal. Both accepted the Puritan doctrine of human wickedness--a
doctrine derived from medieval Toryism--and from it deduced the
necessity of a coercive sovereignty; but Fisher Ames went further and
assumed that the Puritan doctrine of the elect and the Yankee doctrine
of the successful were one and the same, and that God’s remnant in
Israel was no other than the prosperous merchants and lawyers of
Boston. All the great multitude of the unprosperous, by the same
doctrine, were the mass of the unregenerate, condemned for the good of
society to be ruled by a rod of iron.

The noble doctrine of justice, therefore, became for Fisher Ames
little more than the divine right of the minority to coerce the
majority, in the name and through the agency of laws and statutes. In
his view justice was little more than a drab realist in a lawyer’s
wig, adjudicating title deeds, and delivering its findings out of law
books. Its one concern was to safeguard what had been got, rather than
to secure just and equal rights. It dreaded all rude and tumultuary
innovation, and would tolerate no change that was not implicit in
legal principles. Its golden rule was due process of law. Love of
one’s neighbors was, no doubt, an excellent private virtue, but it was
impractical, if not immoral, in the state. Concern for the improvident
sinners must not influence government to impair the rights of the
thrifty saints; for government was instituted and exists to safeguard
established things. “The chief duty and care of all governments,” he
argued, “is to protect the rights of property and the tranquillity of
society” (_Works_, p. 125). Hence to Fisher Ames government was the
common policeman and judge, whose function was to arrest the turbulent
and bring them to the bar of the Common Law. Its beginning and end
was the Tory principle of coercion. Its sovereignty was arrogant
and domineering, taking no account of the democratic principle of
good will. “The motives to refuse obedience to government are many
and strong,” he explained; “impunity will multiply and enforce them.
Many men would rebel, rather than be ruined; but they would rather
not rebel, than be hanged” (_Works_, “Lucius Junius Brutus”). With
government thus conceived of, naturally he desired that it should be
strong; that it should impose its will ruthlessly upon the rebellious.
Naturally also he regarded every idealist, the Rousseaus and Paines and
Jeffersons--all the mischievous hosts of “democratick babblers”--as
a dangerous enemy of law and order, desperately bent on overturning
the rights of vested interests and the tranquillity of society. This
is sufficient to explain the vindictiveness of his assault upon Shays
and his followers, as “bankrupts and sots, who have gambled or slept
away their estates”--while in the Revolutionary army--and were now
engaged in the business of treason against the commonwealth, and the
characteristic conclusion that he draws--“the certainty of punishment
is the truest security against crimes” (_Works_, “Lucius Junius
Brutus,” p. 3). To Fisher Ames and Daniel Shays, justice seems to have
had very different aspects.

To the uncritical there is a certain persuasive dignity in the
philosophy of Boston Federalism. Gentlemen like Fisher Ames were
careful to appear well in public; they liked to be regarded as
faithful stewards of the common weal. Concern for the _res publica_
they professed so heartily that it seems ungracious to question their
motives. How excellently they could make out a case for themselves will
appear from the following exposition of Fisher Ames’ philosophy, as it
was understood by a Harvard president:

  Mr. Ames was emphatically a republican. He saw that many persons
  confounded a republick with a democracy. He considered them as
  essentially distinct and really opposite. According to his creed,
  a republick is that structure of an elective government, in
  which the administration necessarily prescribe to themselves the
  general good as the object of all their measures; a democracy is
  that, in which the present popular passions, independent of the
  publick good, become a guide to the rulers. In the first, the
  reason and interests of the society govern; in the second, their
  prejudices and passions. The frame of the American constitution
  supposes the dangers of democracy.... [The constitutional checks]
  are contrivances and devices voluntarily adopted by the people
  to restrain themselves from obstructing, by their own mistakes
  or perversity, the attainment of the publick welfare. They are
  professed means of insuring to the nation rulers, who will prefer
  the durable good of the whole to the transient advantage of the
  whole or a part. When these provisions become ineffectual, and
  the legislator, the executive magistrate, and the judge become
  the instruments of the passions of a people, or of the governing
  majority, the government, whatever may be its form, is a democracy,
  and the public liberty is no longer safe. True republican rulers
  are bound to act, not simply as those who appoint them _would_,
  but, as they _ought_; democratick leaders will act in subordination
  to those very passions which it is the object of government to
  control.... Then it is, that men, not laws, govern. (_Works_,
  Introduction, pp. xxiv-xxv.)

“The durable good of the whole” is an excellent phrase; but when the
skeptical critic asks for more exact plans and specifications, the only
answer is a request for a vote of confidence. The representative is
presumed to be wiser and more patriotic than his constituents--quite
above passion or interest--and may safely be intrusted with “the
publick good.” “The love of country,” Fisher Ames was fond of
insisting, “is the morality of politics,” and the Federal Constitution
he believed to be so happily balanced that partisan selfishness must
transmute itself into patriotism. But when we dismiss these amiable
generalities--which reveal to what straits gentlemen were reduced in
their contest with democracy--and examine the political principles that
lie behind them, they do not appear so amiable. They imply as necessary
corollaries a continuous aggrandizement of the political state, the
principle of coercion, and the psychology of fear. It is no other than
the old Tory arrogance, new-modeled to suit republican taste. Fisher
Ames seems to have had no faith in the principle of good will or the
expediency of compromise; his contempt for the opposition was as frank
as Hamilton’s.

  Government does not subsist by making proselytes to sound reasons
  or by compromise and arbitration with its members; but by the power
  of the community compelling the obedience of individuals. If that
  is not done, who will seek its protection, or fear its vengeance.
  (“Lucius Junius Brutus,” _Works_, p. 5.)

  For let it be remarked, that a feeble government produces more
  factions than an oppressive one; the want of power first makes
  individuals legislators, and then rebels. Where parents want
  authority, children are wanting in duty. It is not possible to
  advance further in the same path; the one will conduct us first
  to anarchy, and next to foreign or domestick tyranny; the other,
  by the wise and vigorous exertion of lawful authority, will lead
  to permanent power, and general prosperity. I am no advocate for
  despotism; but I believe the probability to be much less of its
  being introduced by the corruption of our rulers, than by the
  delusion of the people. (“Camillus,” _Works_, p. 17.)

A weak, government, Ames argues insistently, is no other than a
hotbed of faction, and faction is the fruitful mother of democratic
anarchy. Again and again he returns to an exposition of the familiar
eighteenth-century dogma that found its classic exposition in the
tenth number of _The Federalist_; and his argument takes on darker
colors from the Calvinist background of his mind. To those who have
been reared on the sour doctrines of reprobation and election, the
children of Adam become a major political concern. If God has cast
off and denied the mass of the unregenerate, how shall the political
philosopher hope to redeem them? If divine wisdom has granted them no
part in the congregation of the righteous, what rights have they in
the republic of the patriotic? To Fisher Ames town and village and
farm showed plentiful examples of those whom the devil had marked for
his own, and if they were gathered into a numerical democracy with the
saints, how should the minority of the latter safeguard the Ark of
the Sanctuary? How should the durable good of the whole be provided
for? Thrift and godliness were not exactly synonymous terms to the
Calvinist-Yankee, but it was clear that the godly will practice thrift,
and those who have thriven, have _ipso facto_ made out a case for their
godliness. In this uncertain world two things seemed reasonably clear:
that the poor are in a more doubtful state than the rich; and that in
a moral world only the elect may be expected to serve the cause of
morality. The wicked incline to democratic faction, but the prosperous
serve the durable good of the whole.

To one cradled in such prejudices, the current phrase, “gentlemen of
principle and property”--a phrase that provides the chorus to his
thought--lacked the savor of cynicism that it suggests to modern ears.
It was compounded of the ideals of Puritan and Yankee, and Fisher Ames
seems never to have questioned its adequacy, or doubted its finality.
To gentlemen of principle and property he looked to provide a bulwark
against the immoral multitude; they were the stewards of society, on
whom devolved the duty of protecting the whole from democratic faction.
They had erected the Federal Constitution, which Jacobins were seeking
to destroy; and in defense of that Constitution he brought forth his
heaviest artillery. He contributed nothing new to the discussion; but
he repeated the familiar arguments with the gusto of a dogmatist.
“Simple governments,” he asserted, “are despotisms; and of all
despotisms, a democracy, though the least durable, is the most violent”
(_Works_, “American Liberty,” p. 382). The mortal weakness of all
democracies he discovered in their immorality. A democracy will make
every people “thoroughly licentious and corrupt.” “The known propensity
of a democracy is to licentiousness, which the ambitious call, and the
ignorant believe to be liberty.”

  The great object, then, of political wisdom in framing our
  constitution, was to guard against licentiousness, that inbred
  malady of democracies, that deforms their infancy with grey hairs
  and decrepitude. (_Ibid._, p. 384.)

  There is universally a presumption in democracy that promises
  everything; and at the same time an imbecility that can accomplish
  nothing, not even preserve itself. (_Works_, “Falkland,” p. 151.)

“Politics should have no passions,” this caustic old Federalist
professed to believe, yet his bitterness against the Jeffersonians who
threatened to overturn the funding law, the national bank, the midnight
judicial appointments, and other measures of the best Federalist minds,
was almost unseemly. It would appear that “the durable good of the
whole” flew out at the window, when danger to commercial interests came
in at the door. To erect a strong government and then lose control of
it was a disaster indeed. With the political state in the hands of
atheistic democrats, Fisher Ames was prepared to welcome the coming of
anarchy, and his pessimism throve on the prospect. But that no warning
might be lacking he laid down the whole theory of government in plain
terms, that even Jefferson might understand:

  But the essence, and almost the quintessence, of good government
  is, to protect property and its rights. When these are protected,
  there is scarcely any booty left for oppression to seize; the
  objects and the motives to usurpation and tyranny are removed. By
  securing property, life and liberty can scarcely fail of being
  secured: where property is safe by rules and principles, there is
  liberty. (_Works_, “Phocion,” p. 181.)

This is pure Federalism, stripped of all cant, speaking out frankly.
It is the philosophy of John Locke brought in to serve the rising
capitalism of New England, threatened by a Physiocratic agrarianism.
The dogma of political morality has yielded to economic realism. The
stake-in-society principle is the reply of the Puritan-Yankee to the
democratic romanticism of Jefferson and Madison--a principle which,
fortunately, “these apostles from the race-ground and the cock-pit”
paid little heed to.

To a sophisticated generation, long familiar with the political ways of
gentlemen of principle and property, Fisher Ames appears as a caustic
little gentleman, vivacious and intolerant, who nodded his tie-wig
dogmatically, and spoke his opinions oracularly. He quite evidently
relished his ample store of old-fashioned prejudices, cherished them
carefully, and prided himself on the wit with which he set them forth.
If he was not the repository of all political wisdom that he believed
himself to be, he was at least no demagogue, and in honoring him the
Boston of the year 1800 was but painting its own portrait. It would be
ungracious, perhaps, to add that Fisher Ames and Boston Federalism,
defeated in their cherished projects, were both suffering from an
extraordinarily aggravated case of the political spleen.


III • Robert Treat Paine, Jr. • Wit

Young Tom Paine, who took his brother’s and his father’s name--partly
because a certain other Tom Paine had achieved a fame that Boston did
not regard as enviable--shared with Fisher Ames the literary renown
of the New England capital, a renown so great that Boston paid him
quite astonishing sums for such couplets as his indolence suffered him
to turn off. The popularity of his wares was a notable instance of
the working of the law of supply and demand. The patriotism of Boston
preferred domestic to imported goods, and he offered his verses to a
public not very critical of quality. Boston had never had a poet of her
own, while Connecticut with her Hartford Wits was the envy of all New
England. Certain poetesses to be sure, had tried with “hallowed hands”
to “attune Columbia’s lyre”--to quote Paine’s eulogy of Mrs. Sarah
Wentworth Morton, “blest Philenia, noblest of the choir” (_Works_,
“Menander to Philenia,” p. 129)--but their sentimentality was a bit
cloying, and when genius appeared in the person of a Harvard graduate,
graced with wit and adorned with all the learning of the schools,
Boston was quick to acclaim him as her own.

The young man thus seized upon, and as it were raped by fame, was
the last of the eighteenth-century wits, the most dashing product of
a generation that patched its verse with tags of the classics and
called it lisping in numbers. In temper and manners he belonged wholly
to the tie-wig school that swaggered till the War of 1812 and then
became obsolete overnight. As a young man about town he displayed
the latest London clothes and set himself up as the very glass of
fashion. Although he wore his own hair, he clung to smallclothes and
like an honest Federalist refused to adopt Jacobin trousers. He was
indisputably clever and he cultivated a pretty wit as assiduously
as any Augustan. He talked in epigrams, and a convivial evening--of
which he was quite too fond for his own good--was a failure that did
not produce a _bon mot_ to run through the town. His biographer has
preserved a number of such for the amusement of posterity, and one
at least deserves to be remembered by our younger critics. When the
prohibition against the theater was repealed in 1793, he remarked, “The
Vandal spirit of puritanism is prostrate in New-England.” In cleaving
to wit and abandoning Puritanism, Paine broke with sober Boston
convention, and soon all respectable folk began to shake their heads.
A thriftless fellow, he played with the devil openly in the eyes of
all Boston. He drank too much, he gambled, he haunted the theater and
was a favorite of the greenroom, he became the first dramatic critic
born and bred in New England, and when he married the daughter of an
English actor, his father disowned him. Quite naturally he came to
poverty, dissipated his strength, suffered many a humiliation, and died
at the age of thirty-seven, leaving his widow and young children to be
provided for by a public benefit at his beloved Federal Street theater.

Little of his wit, unfortunately, found its way into his verse, which,
modeled ostensibly on Dryden and Pope, lacks their vigorous common
sense, and laboring to be sublime succeeds in being heavy. His couplets
swell sonorously, but his thought does not keep pace with his rhetoric.
He follows his recipe carefully; adjectives duly support the nouns;
the caesuras are justly spaced and the balance of the parts is as nice
as if weighed in an apothecary’s scales. He seasons the whole with
the staples of personification and poetic diction; everything has
been provided for, and yet the cake is fallen that he takes from the
oven. Something is lacking to lighten the sodden mass. A contemporary
critic, viewing the finished product, expressed his judgment thus:

  Of Mr. Paine, as an author, we cannot speak in terms of unmingled
  praise. His verse, indeed, seldom loiters into prose; but it
  must be confessed, that his prose is here and there “tricked and
  frounced, till it outmantles all the pride of verse.” His numbers
  are, perhaps, never feeble or faultering, but a wild and frolic
  imagination, occasionally, wantons through his periods, and
  sometimes displays itself in contemning the chaster elegancies,
  and sometimes in neglecting the severer decencies of thought and
  diction. (_Works_, Introduction, p. lxxviii.)

It is certainly a partial eye that discovers a wild and frolic
imagination in these lumbering imitations of Pope, or in the occasional
excursions into the languorous fields of Della Cruscan sentiment.
When Paine ceases to be a wit he becomes an offense. To his admiring
contemporaries his poetry seemed to be pure metal, but to later
generations it is only plate, with the brass showing through the worn
spots. _The Ruling Passion_, delivered before the Phi Beta Kappa
Society in 1797, is perhaps the first poem of Paine’s that is much more
than vacuous and turgid rhetoric; and this is redeemed, in spite of
liberal helpings from Pope, by a certain vivacity of satire, phrased
with Augustan smartness. Such couplets as these still preserve a jaunty
literary swagger for later ears; how they tickled the more susceptible
ears of our grandfathers must be imagined:

  Where you send genius, send a fortune too;
  Dunces by instinct thrive, as oysters woo!
  For ne’er were veins of ore by chymist found,
  Except, like Hebrew roots, in barren ground!

Paine early grew old, and before he had reached his thirties his mind
had taken a rigid conservative bent. His affections were fixed upon a
past that was visibly falling into decay, and its ways were endeared
to him in the measure that they decayed. It was a matter of personal
pride with him to embody in his own manners the aristocratic bearing of
pre-Revolutionary times.

  Mr. Paine [says his biographer] attached great consequence to
  _manners_.... He was modelled upon the _old school_. Without being
  familiar, he was easy among friends, and courtly to strangers.
  In colloquial discussions, he rigidly adhered to the law of
  politeness; and in mixed society, he neither courted the _high_,
  nor avoided the _low_.... He frequently deplored a supposed decay
  of _manners_. With concern, he used to inquire “_In manners,
  where is the successor of Gen. Knox to be found?_” It was with
  him a constant topick of complaint, that “_The old, genteel, town
  families, had been elbowed out of house and home, by newcomers_;”
  that “_instead of the polished manners of a city, we should soon
  exhibit that growth of gentility, which is produced by ingrafting
  dollars upon village habits and low employments_.” (_Works_,
  Introduction, p. lxix.)

Affecting an aristocratic bearing, Paine was as complete a Tory as
the republican environment permitted. If he despised the new, pushing
middle class that had risen since the Revolution, he held in contempt
the numerous company of those he dubbed the yokel, the peasant, the
hind, or the plow-tail. Under the circumstances the best that he
could do politically was to turn Federalist, and he embraced the
principles of Fisher Ames with genteel conviction. “In politics,”
says his biographer, “Mr. Paine was a disciple of the old federal
school. He understood the constitution, as Washington administered,
and as Hamilton had expounded it” (_ibid._, p. lxxvii). During his
undergraduate days he had dabbled in French revolutionary philosophy,
and “the fanatic Atheism of France, decorated in all the meretricious
charms of eloquence and philosophy, took a transient possession of his
mind” (_ibid._, p. lxxviii). At graduation in 1792, he read a poem
entitled _The Nature and Progress of Liberty_, in which he eulogized
“liberal thought,” proposed to follow “Reason,” declared that “the
rights of man” are a gift from heaven, proffered the hand of fellowship
to France--

  May struggling France her ancient freedom gain,
  May Europe’s sword oppose her rights in vain--

and launched a devastating couplet at the great English opponent of the
Revolution--

  The fame of Burke, in dark oblivion rust,
  His pen a meteor--and his page the dust.

Three years later, on proceeding Master of Arts, he presented a poem in
very different vein. Three years were a generation in those stirring
times, and by 1795 the penetrating vision of this genius of twenty-two
had discovered the atheist poison in the cup of French democracy. _The
Invention of Letters_ rises to a climax in a satirical elaboration
of a line from the poem of 1792--“Licentious morals breed disease of
state.” Having learned his lesson from Fisher Ames, the sapient young
Federalist announces that democracy is the mother of faction, and
faction leads on to anarchy. In this poem for the first time Paine’s
wit runs freely, and certain lines are as jaunty as he ever penned.

  For place or power, while demagogues contend,
  Whirled in their vortex, sinks each humbler friend.
  See Crispin quit his stall, in Faction’s cause,
  To cobble government, and soal the laws!
  See Frisseur scent his dust, his razor set,
  To shave the treaty, or to puff Genet!
  In doubtful mood, see Mulciber debate,
  To mend a horse-shoe, or to weld the state!
  The whip’s bold knight, in barn, his truck is laid,
  To spout in favour of the carrying trade!
  While Staytape runs, from hissing goose, too hot,
  To measure Congress for another coat;
  And still, by rule of shop, intent on pelf,
  Eyes the spare cloth, to cabbage for himself!

  Envy, that fiend, who haunts the great and good,
  Not Cato shunned, nor Hercules subdued.
  On Fame’s wide field, where’er a covert lies,
  The rustling serpent to the thicket flies;
  The foe of Glory, Merit is her prey;
  The dunce she leaves, to plod his drowsy way.
  Of birth amphibious, and of Protean skill,
  This green-eyed monster changes shape at will;
  Like snakes of smaller breed, she sheds her skin;
  Strips off the serpent, and turns--Jacobin.

In view of the fact that Governor Samuel Adams, chief of the New
England Jacobins, was to occupy the stage, President Willard had
diplomatically struck from the manuscript the ten lines last quoted;
but Paine had the audacity to re-insert them in speaking, and the
tumultuous applause was sufficient proof that it was not from a Harvard
audience that Sam Adams got the votes that annually returned him
governor.

Verse imposed some slight restraint on Paine’s rhetoric, but in prose
when he was in full career--as in the grotesque eulogy of Washington
which stirred the patriotism of Boston Federalists--the reins are
on the neck of his eloquence, and he takes all barriers with fiery
abandon. Fact troubles his wild and frolic imagination not at all, but
like any plebeian demagogue--whose factional appeals he so furiously
condemned--he blew the bellows of Federalist partisanship with
extraordinary vigor, stoking his fire with rumor and misrepresentation
and party spleen. No slander was too gross, no lie too palpable to
serve his end. He baited the democrats quite shamelessly, and aroused
the mob of Boston gentlemen like a true Tory. One of his political
orations has been preserved by his editor in the collected edition of
his works, for the enlightenment of posterity--an oration delivered
in 1799, “at the request of the young men of Boston,” on the theme of
France and democracy. In this extraordinary composition Paine seems
to have been quite ravished by his own rhetoric, that flashes in many
a feint and parry before it impales its victim. It is a Federalist
philippic, designed to destroy the good name of all who have quitted
the sacred Federalist tribe. Words could hardly go further; disregard
for truth could scarcely be more brazen. Paine’s delight in clever
antitheses overweighs any scruples in regard to just statement. “The
French Republick,” he asserted, “has exhibited all the vices of
civilization, without one of the virtues of barbarism.” One or two bits
from this tremendous oration, that in “the glow of feeling, the swell
of language, and the brilliancy of sentiments” has “very seldom been
surpassed,” and that was “received with rapturous and enthusiastic
applause,” must suffice to illustrate the justice of the Federalist
claim to the custodianship of political good manners. “Politics should
have no passions,” Fisher Ames asserted--which excellent principle
young Robert Treat Paine exemplified thus:

  Political Empiricism has never attained, in any age or nation, so
  universal an ascendency, as at the present day in the “Illuminated
  Republick.” Unfettered by the fear of innovation, and unshackled by
  the prejudice of ages, the modern Frenchman is educated in a system
  of moral and religious chimeras, which dazzle by their novelty
  those volatile intellects, which prescriptive wisdom could never
  impress with veneration. Every Frenchman, who has read a little is
  a pedant; and the whole race of these horn-book Philosophers is
  content with the atheism of Mirabeau ... the absurd philanthropy of
  Condorcet, and the visionary politics of Rousseau. These are the
  boundaries of their literary ambition, of their political science.
  Hence it is, that they pretend to be too enlightened for belief,
  too virtuous for government.

  The feculence of party is not yet drained of its rankest sediment.
  The worshippers of democracy, though their altars are thrown down,
  are not yet converted from their devotions. The frozen snake has
  still some sparks of animation; and, if placed by compassion near
  your hospitable fires, he will revive with exasperated venom, and
  sting the hardy fool that fostered him. Deal therefore with these
  ferocious demoralizers, as our crafty mariners trade with the
  savages of the Indian ocean--with your men at their posts, your
  guns loaded, and your slow matches burning. (_Works_, p. 319.)

For all democrats Paine had the hearty contempt of an honest man for
a rogue, but for the intellectuals who expounded the new romantic
philosophy his indignation was measureless. “The legitimate plebeian
democrat,” he asserted, is “an enemy to all government, under which
he holds no office”; but fling him a bone from the public table and
“he becomes the very scavenger of administration.” The “Illuminated
Jacobin,” on the other hand, “never changes his principles.”

  His whole science is directed to unhinge society, his whole
  ambition to plunder it. He is too ravenous to be content with a
  system of order himself; and too selfish to permit its enjoyment
  by others. Like a hog in a flower-garden, he sets no value on the
  variegated foliage he destroys, and seems only desirous to root out
  every twig of vegetation, that can satiate his voracity. (_Ibid._,
  p. 321.)

To such fustian was he reduced when his wit left him. That a
gentleman could talk like that, and other gentlemen applaud, is a
sad commentary on the intellectual honesty of partisanship, even
amongst decent Federalists. Fustian was the order of the day, and
Paine was merely baying with his pack. If only he had not professed
such virtues his extravagance might be forgiven; but extravagance
ill becomes a distinguished repository of political wisdom. Once,
indeed, his vivacity got him into a nasty mess. While editor of _The
Federal Orrery_, he accepted in 1795 a political poem entitled _The
Jacobiniad_, the satire of which Paine “new-pointed and new-edged”
before printing. The democrats, at whom it was directed, were vastly
incensed, and a mob gathered before his lodging but was dispersed.
Later the son of one of the victims challenged him to a duel. Paine
declined but armed himself with an unloaded pistol. Accidentally
meeting his challenger in the street, he drew his weapon, but the
young fellow, standing in no awe of a favorite of the muses, struck
the pistol down and proceeded to give Paine a sound drubbing. To such
base treatment may genius come, when wit forgets that a sally of the
tongue may invite a counter sally of the fists. And so we leave him in
the dust of the street, ignobly laid low by the strength of that vulgar
democracy which was to bring down so many things held dear by Boston
Tories. His was, very largely, a wasted life--wasted by sheer indolence
and feeble will. He was a fellow of some parts, and a sentence from one
of his dramatic criticisms may not inaptly apply to him: “The character
is not a sot, but his humor has a mellower tilth for having been
husbanded and manured by ‘the excellent endeavor of drinking.’”




