Chapter III • The Authentic Brahmin


I • Oliver Wendell Holmes • Beacon Street Wit

Since the death of Holmes in 1894, his reputation has shrunk and
dwindled with that of his group. With the rise of other literary
schools, New England standards have been submitted to a somewhat rude
overhauling, and Brahmin ideals are no longer reckoned so authoritative
as they were once believed to be, nor the supremacy of Boston genius
so indisputable. Concord has risen as Cambridge and Beacon Street
have declined, and in the shadow of Emerson and Thoreau, the wit of
Back Bay is in danger of being obscured. Unsupported by his physical
presence, his writings seem far less vital than they did when the
echoes of his clever talk were still sounding through them. Certain
intellectual shortcomings are more obvious when his works are brought
together in a library edition: in the mass his prose seems far more
discursive and his verse thinner and more jingly than when the several
bits appeared singly, personally sponsored by the author in whose
cleverness everybody delighted. Read with sprightly vivacity to a
group of sympathetic listeners at the mellowest hour of the dinner,
his occasional verse must have sparkled brightly and have gone off
with such a crackle of laughter as to convince the Back Bay that the
asthmatic little gentleman with bubbling spirits was a veritable poet,
on the same friendly footing with the muse that he was with Beacon
Street. So frequently on pleasant occasions did Holmes appear before
his classmates and friends copy in hand, so often and so happily did he
respond to the invitation to write something, that it would have been
ungenerous of Boston--and Boston meant the Back Bay, the Saturday Club
and Harvard College--not to have crowned him with a wreath of her own
ivy.

For upwards of half a century, throughout the prime and on past the
Indian Summer of the New England renaissance. Holmes was Boston’s own
wit, inexhaustible in clever sayings, bubbling over with satire and
sentiment, the autocrat of her social gatherings, the acknowledged
head of her mutual admiration society. Not since Robert Treat Paine
had there been such a master of Yankee small talk. If he monopolized
the conversation he dealt generously with his listeners. The stream
was copious and the waters were never bitter or astringent, but with
just enough effervescence to suit the Boston palate. As a young
man the wit sparkled more brightly; as an old man the humor exuded
more gently. At twenty-five he described William IV of England with
republican irreverence: “The King blew his nose twice, and wiped
the royal perspiration repeatedly from a face which is probably the
largest uncivilized spot in England”; late in life he commented on
his obvious fondness of praise: “I was always patient with those who
thought well of me, and accepted all their tributes with something more
than resignation.” Taste had changed with the times in Boston. Wit was
yielding place to humor; eighteenth-century frankness had given way to
nineteenth-century refinement; Victorianism was in full and vigorous
bloom in the Beacon Street of 1850, and so Holmes became a Yankee
Victorian. The morals of an impeccable society required no castigation,
and he was under no obligation to satirize vice. Audacious sallies
would have been reckoned in bad taste. If the old-fashioned masculine
wit of Robert Treat Paine, with its echoes of Charles Churchill,
had presumed to intrude itself into the teacup society of Back Bay
drawing-rooms, the indignant Doctor would have shown it the door, and
the small talk would have flowed again, decorous and clean and amiable,
far more refined than the wit that had delighted their fathers.

And yet, though a full-blown Victorian in manners and tastes, Holmes
was something of a child of the eighteenth century at heart. The
situation in which he found himself might have proved disconcerting
if he had chosen to speculate upon it. By nature a thoroughgoing
rationalist, he lived in a romantic age. A gentleman of “parts and
learning,” with a quick and lively fancy that blossomed in the
pat phrase and neat couplet, he loved wit and hated dullness with
true Augustan zeal. The great days of Queen Anne were a perennial
inspiration to him. He clung to the heroic couplet through all the
changes of romantic styles. He moralized in rime with the fluency
if not the finish of Pope.[468] He satirized Calvinism with an
honest wrath that he might have learned of Swift. He commented in his
table-talk on the manners of the times with the chatty discursiveness
of Addison. Like the earlier wits, he discovered a deep sympathy for
the maturity and ripe wisdom of the classics. Writing to his friend
John O. Sargent, he remarked:

  I wish I had become as familiar with some classic author as you
  are with Horace. There is nothing like one of those perennial old
  fellows for good old gentlemenly reading; and for wit and wisdom,
  what is there to compare with the writings of Horace? You make
  me envious,--I vow I shall have to get up Juvenal or Catullus,
  naughty but nice, or somebody that nobody else knows.... I get so
  tired of the damp sheets of all sorts of _literati_ (worse than
  the “screeching women of Marblehead”) and clamorous essayists,
  that I want something always by me, calm, settled beyond cavilling
  criticism,--a cool, clear draught of Falernian that has been
  somewhere near two thousand years in the cellar. (Morse, _Life and
  Letters_, Vol. II, p. 311.)

But unhappily what could he do? He was the most sociable of persons,
and he lived and moved in an atmosphere surcharged with various
and sundry romanticisms. How could he preserve the spirit of quiet
rationalism, or assure himself gentlemanly leisure, with a host of
“isms” clamoring in his ears? He was amongst them even if he was not
of them. He strove to keep himself aloof, unfuddled by heady idealisms
and untroubled by strident reforms, but he could not shut his study
door against the infection. He could not deny his generation, and
inevitably he suffered his thought to be streaked and pied with the
current romanticism. He gave Lyceum lectures on Wordsworth and Keats
and Shelley, and their influence seeped into his verse. The Longfellow
fame was all about him, and he fell to composing ballads and idyls and
tales, quite as if he did not know better. Romantic garments fitted
him ill, yet he persisted in trying them on. He even got to like
them, and came finally to prefer _The Chambered Nautilus_ above his
other poems--a strange perversion of taste for a rationalist. _The
One-Hoss Shay_ is worth a volume of such pretty moralizing. _Parson
Turell’s Legacy_ and _The Moral Bully_ are in better vein--witty,
lucid, critical--than any half-hearted ventures in romanticism. The
eighteenth-century wit does not appear to advantage patched with
Victorian sentiment, and he should have been rationalist enough to know
it.

As a Beacon Street Victorian Holmes was as full of virtuous prejudices
as an egg is full of meat; but as a rationalist, with a modest
scientific equipment that came from his professional training, he
kept the windows of his mind open to the winds of scientific inquiry
that were blowing briskly to the concern of orthodox souls. Many a
barnacled craft was foundering in those gales, and Holmes watched
their going-down with visible satisfaction. He was perhaps the most
militant Unitarian amongst Boston laymen. Hatred of Calvinistic dogma
was an obsession with him; it dominated his thought and colored much
of his work, _Elsie Venner_ and his table-talk as frankly as _The
One-Hoss Shay_. The criticism to which he subjected the old-school
dogmas was always vehement, often vindictive. Long after the battle
had been won he kept annoying the retreating enemy. His father, Abiel
Holmes, was a rigorous follower of the Edwardean school, who after
nearly forty years’ service lost his pulpit for refusing to compromise
with Unitarian liberalism that had gained the fortress of the near-by
College Yard; and the stalwart among his congregation, having to yield
the building, the endowment and the communion plate, were forced to
establish themselves anew. In this unhappy schism that came about the
time Oliver Wendell Holmes was graduating from Harvard in 1829, the
latter went with the liberals. He had broken with the Calvinism of his
father, and in the reaction he went further than most along the path
of Unitarian rationalism--not the path of Channing that led to French
romanticism and transcendentalism, but the path of Andrews Norton that
led to a harder-headed rationalism. The reasons for this shift are
sufficiently evident in his writings. At his father’s table he had
watched too many “whey-faced” brethren to like the breed--men with “a
weedy flux of ill-conditioned hair,” whose

                                acrid words
  Turn the sweet milk of kindness into curds,
  Or with grim logic prove, beyond debate,
  That all we love is worthiest of hate,
  As the scarred ruffian of the pirate’s deck,
  When his long swivel rakes the staggering wreck!

  (_The Moral Bully._)

The words are bitter, but they reveal the length of his reaction from
the Calvinism on which he had been over-fed at home and at Phillips
Andover Academy; and they suggest also why, next to Theodore Parker,
Holmes came to be the best hated of Boston Unitarians amongst the
orthodox. On this one subject he was militantly radical, never
shirking debate, but whetting the edge of his satire and impaling his
victim neatly with his logic. He took sardonic delight in turning
Calvinism against itself, in the clever _reductio ad absurdum_ of the
Edwardean argument. Perhaps this major intellectual interest appears
most adequately in his picture of the Master, the autobiographical
rationalist whom he introduces into _The Poet of the Breakfast Table_.
A dabbler in the law, theology and medicine, a philosophic contemplator
of the Order of Things, who refused to permit “the territory of a man’s
mind” to be “fenced in,” who agreed with the Poet in thinking somewhat
ill of the specialist who dedicated his life to the study of beetles,
preferring to range widely through time and eternity, who followed
Darwin and was deep in bacteriology, trying “curious experiments in
spontaneous generation”--this was Holmes on the intellectual side, a
genial disseminator of the latest scientific speculations, a tolerant
amateur of the things of the mind, a friendly dabbler in absolute
moralities, who hoped “to do some sound thinking in heaven” if he ever
got there, but who was too pleasantly engaged with Beacon Street to
settle things now.

In his own special way, then, as a Brahmin of the Brahmins, Holmes
was a rebel, a puller-down of worm-eaten structures, a freethinker
rejoicing when free thought tossed a cargo of obsolete dogma into
Boston Bay, or drew out a linchpin of some respectable social coach.
He loved Boston the more because he believed that Boston was the home
of free thought and free speech, the capital of American brains, the
intellectual rebel of the continent. He did not agree with Emerson’s
strictures, or Parker’s. He would not concede that Boston was the “home
of the Hunkers.” It was provincial; it had crooked little streets; but

  I tell you Boston has opened, and kept open, more turnpikes that
  lead straight to free thought and free speech and free deeds than
  any other city of live men or dead men--I don’t care how broad
  their streets are, nor how high their steeples. (_The Professor at
  the Breakfast Table_, p. 4.)

When he contemplated the future of America, with Boston as its
intellectual leader, he was carried on the crest of an exuberant
optimism:

  A new nursery, Sir, with Lake Superior and Huron and all the rest
  of ’em for washbasins! A new race, and a whole new world for the
  new-born human soul to work in! And Boston is the brain of it,
  and has been any time these hundred years! That’s all I claim
  for Boston--that it is the thinking centre of the continent, and
  therefore of the planet. (_Ibid._, p. 104.)

If the mind is free other things will take care of themselves--this
pretty much sums up Holmes’s social philosophy. Only, he would add,
when the mind is used to its freedom, it will create a culture that
is well-mannered, that does not run to extravagant agitation, that
considers time, place, and outward circumstance in effecting needful
changes--the quiet decency of Channing rather than the noisier way
of Parker. The Brahmin way, after all, was the better way, Holmes
believed; and Channing was a Brahmin:

  Parson Channing put a little oil on one linchpin, and slipped it
  out so softly, the first thing they knew about it was the wheel of
  that side was down. T’other fellow’s at work now; but he makes more
  noise about it. When the linchpin comes out on his side, there’ll
  be a jerk, I tell you! Some think it will spoil the old cart, and
  they pretend to say that there are valuable things in it which may
  get hurt. Hope not--hope not. But this is the great macadamizing
  place--always cracking up something. (_Ibid._, p. 19.)

Certainly not on the intellectual side could Holmes be set down as
a conservative. He did not relish any such imputation and defended
himself with vigor:

  If to be a conservative is to let all the drains of thought choke
  up and keep the soul’s windows down--to shut out the sun from the
  east and the wind from the west--to let the rats run free in the
  cellar, and the moths feed their fill in the chambers, and the
  spiders weave their lace before the mirrors, till the soul’s typhus
  is bred out of our neglect, and we begin to snore in its coma or
  rave in its delirium--I, Sir, am a _bonnet-rouge_, a redcap of the
  barricades, my friends, rather than a conservative. (_Ibid._, p.
  18.)

It was this spirit of rationalism that made him--at some risk of
unpopularity--an unsparing critic of romantic equalitarianism. Here
again is an echo of the older century. Neither the Jacksonian nor the
transcendental version of the new gospel found favor in his eyes;
both seemed to run counter to the open facts of history. As a realist
he discovered justification for John Adams’s doctrine of economic
determinism: all society, he was convinced, tends to stratify in lines
of wealth distribution, in America as well as in Europe, and no dogmas
can prevent it. He went further and insisted that the possession of
wealth makes possible comfort, ease, leisure, culture; that those
lacking wealth are necessarily unfree and their lives in consequence
are meaner and narrower. Much of his criticism of Yankee villagers
and countrymen--and except Cooper, he was perhaps the most critical
commentator on Yankee provincialisms of speech and manners--springs
from the conviction that a niggardly economics had created a niggardly
society. He desired more wealth to the end of more culture. He was too
completely Brahmin to set material well-being as the ultimate goal
of the competitive struggle; that seemed to him the object of State
Street and of the plutocracy he frankly detested. In _The Poet at the
Breakfast Table_ he apologizes for calling one of his characters a
capitalist, on the ground that “the word seems to be equivalent to
highway robbery in the new gospel of Saint Petroleum.” Wealth as a
means to power he would have none of; but wealth as a means to leisure,
and leisure as a means to cultivated living, he was fond of extolling.
The machinery of Brahmin life must be well oiled, but the life is more
than the machinery. Always he returned to the intellectual as the
hallmark of every society that may be accounted excellent, and his
instinctive dislike of the middle class was founded on its intellectual
sterility. It lived opulently but meanly; its rich dinners wanted the
spice of wit, its ostentatious display lacked the salt of manners. It
was vulgar at heart, and Holmes hated vulgarity even more than he hated
John Calvin’s dogmas.

Unfortunately his Brahminism sealed pretty tightly certain windows of
his mind that might better have been kept open. A radical in the field
of theology where personal concern brought him to serious grappling
with the problem, a tolerant rationalist in the realm of the intellect,
he remained a cheerfully contented conservative in other fields. He was
unconsciously insulated against the currents of social and political
thought flowing all about him. Economic inequality he accepted rather
too complacently. His daily life ran so easy and comfortable a course
as never to prod him into questioning how other lives might be running.
By instinct and training he was an aristocrat, and he was never at
pains to conceal his preference for the well born and well mannered. He
professed a philanthropic sympathy for the cause of the slave, but he
shared the Beacon Street dislike of agitation--it was not well bred and
it might bring down more things than he cared to have brought down. The
most completely class-conscious of the Boston writers, he deprecated
all proletarian appeals. They were not, in his opinion, “wholesome
moral entertainment for the dangerous classes. Boys must not touch off
their squibs and crackers too near the powder-magazine.” The less said
about the wrongs of labor, the better--at least publicly. Social strata
being determined by economics, the agitator is little better than a
firebrand.

  You can’t keep a dead level long, if you burn everything down flat
  to make it. Why, bless your soul, if all the cities of the world
  were reduced to ashes, you’d have a new set of millionaires in a
  couple of years or so, out of the trade in potash. In the meantime,
  what is the use of setting the man with the silver watch against
  the man with the gold watch, and the man without any against them
  both?... Here we are travelling through the desert together like
  the children of Israel. Some pick up more manna and catch more
  quails than others, and ought to help their hungry neighbors more
  than they do; ... but we don’t want the incendiary’s pillar of a
  cloud by day and a pillar of fire by night to lead us in the march
  to civilization, and we don’t want a Moses who will smite the rock,
  not to bring out water for our thirst, but petroleum to burn us all
  up with. (_The Poet at the Breakfast Table_, pp. 5-6.)

In his attitude toward the present comfortable arrangement of society,
Holmes was no rebel. He was not callous to the evils of society, but
he was willing to take a longer time in the march towards civilization
than more exigent souls wished; it was a pleasant march on the whole,
and why quarrel over the difference in packs? If his attitude was
not the indifferentism of the well-to-do, it was near kin to it. He
reflected the negative qualities of Unitarianism, rather than the
positive, the free mind rather than the tender conscience. His social
bias is sufficiently revealed in the tributes of praise he bestowed
so generously. Among those whom he delighted to honor, the names of
Garrison, Phillips, Parker, Thoreau, Greeley, John Brown, do not
appear; instead he offered his praises to Everett, Webster, Bryant,
Whittier, Agassiz, Parkman, Wilkie Collins, the Grand Duke Alexis,
and a host of lesser celebrities known to the Back Bay. His heroes
were respectable souls rather than militant. As a critic his vision
seems to have been blurred by certain astigmatisms, and he discovered
heroic qualities more readily in the militant dead than in the militant
living. He delighted in the Boston of ’76, but it is reasonably
certain that if he had lived then he would have walked the streets of
that older Boston as a genial Tory, and would have suffered the fate
of other gentlemen who found it desirable to withdraw with Gage’s
Redcoats--unless, indeed, his love of the place had held him despite
his politics.

In his literary work Holmes was always the talker rather than the
writer. The charm of the vivid and racy colloquial marks every page.
A clever aphorism or telling pun is the objective of every paragraph,
and it explodes with a brilliant shower of sparks. But like every
talker his discursiveness is inveterate; he wanders far in pursuit
of his point and sometimes returns empty-handed. He was always an
amateur; life was too agreeable for him to take the trouble to become
an artist. The essay was his most congenial form--his novels are to be
taken no more seriously than his occasional verse. _Elsie Venner_ wraps
up the familiar problem of moral determinism in pleasantly discursive
chat of Yankee bumpkinism in contrast with Yankee Brahminism, and he
returns his impeccable hero to Beacon Street, after his sojourn in
the provinces, to reward him with the Brahmin rewards--a munificent
practice, a charming wife, and an exalted social position. What richer
reward could be desired by one who had tasted to the full the mellow
flavor of that society? Staid, delightful, self-satisfied, righteous
little Beacon Street! Last refuge and citadel of the old Brahmin
respectability; basking in the afternoon sunshine of its culture, not
realizing that its sun is already well past the meridian; in love with
its own virtues and unaware that the morrow will see the invasion of
the Huns and Vandals of plutocracy, to whose plethoric bank books
Brahmin culture must eventually bow--who would not have liked it?
It was something after all to have been its favorite wit, its ready
oracle, its clever poet, who in praising his fellow Brahmins was well
aware that he discreetly praised his own admirable qualities. Kindly,
delightful, fortunate Dr. Holmes! chief citizen of the Hub of the
Universe! He was born and lived with a silver spoon in his mouth, and
if a grudging posterity inclines to rate him and his little world
somewhat lower than he rated them, what difference can that make to
him? Tolerant himself, we should perhaps emulate his example, and not
insist too rudely that he is only a minor figure in American literature.


II • James Russell Lowell • Cambridge Brahmin

Whatever the critics may eventually come to say about Lowell, he was
certainly the ablest and most distinguished of the old Cambridge
breed, in the days when the Brahmin caste was disintegrating and
Brahmin ideals losing their hold on New England--a man of fine native
abilities in whom Harvard culture did its best to strike fire and light
and understanding to serve as a beacon to the rest of America. He was
not of the Concord line of transcendental individualists, nor of the
militant strain of reforming enthusiasts; but of the true Brahmin line
of Josiah Quincy and Edward Everett and Oliver Wendell Holmes--men of
sound culture who could serve God valiantly in the social station in
which He had placed them, without wanting to pull down the old church
to build a new. Like Charles Eliot Norton--_clarum et venerabile
nomen_--he had no plans of a new building in his pocket, but was
content to enlarge and embellish the old. He would serve culture rather
than causes. His gifts were Brahmin gifts, his prejudices were Brahmin
prejudices; and so in spite of a “certain sprightliness of brain”
that tempted him to rebel at the aridity of the scholastic commons on
which he fed, and in spite of certain youthful vagaries and incursions
into indiscreet places, he remained at bottom a Harvard conservative,
content with his birthright, hopeful that his ways were God’s ways.
This suffices to explain the extraordinary reputation of Lowell in
Cambridge circles, and the difficulty with which it made headway
elsewhere. Though he traveled much in his library--as Thoreau would
say--his prejudices remained narrowly local. To the last he remained
extraordinarily parochial.

Yet the culture he served so faithfully never fruited in wisdom. He
was never quite certain of himself, of what he really believed. He was
fond of standing off and studying himself quizzically, to learn what
sort of person he was; yet he was swayed by so many impulses he was
never quite sure what sort of legs were under him. He was hopelessly
bewildered by his own vast disorder. His mind was as cluttered as
a garret, filled with an endless miscellany of odds and ends. Life
puzzled him, as it puzzles every serious mind; but he allowed himself
to be too easily discouraged by his inveterate unwillingness to
think. He never speculated widely or analyzed critically. Ideas,
systems of thought, intellectual and social movements, he had no
interest in; he was content to remain a bookish amateur in letters,
loitering over old volumes for the pleasure of finding apt phrases and
verbal curiosities. With all his reading, history remained a blank
to him; and science he would have none of. “I hate it,” he confessed
late in life; “I hate it as a savage hates writing, because I fear
it will hurt me somehow.” A good many things hurt him in those later
years, and it was characteristic of him to say, “I continue to shut
my eyes resolutely in certain speculative directions.” He defined
culture as “intelligent purpose”; yet of such intelligent purpose his
intellectual life revealed little. Naturally he did not relish the
theological unsettlement that came with the advance of scientific
inquiry. Leslie Stephen’s rationalism troubled him, and after reading
the former’s _English Thought in the Eighteenth Century_, he wrote, “I
am very much in the state of mind of the Bretons who revolted against
the Revolutionary Government and wrote upon their banners, ‘Give us
back our God!’” (_Letters_, Vol. II, p. 168.) Neither did he relish
the economic unsettlement the industrial revolution was bringing to
Cambridge and America, but he looked back longingly to the quiet
days “before our individuality had been trampled out of us by the
Irish mob.” Standing between the older America and the new, with the
foundations disintegrating under his feet, he confused the disorder in
his own mind with the disorder in the external world of society, and
desperately sought to cling to his ancient hopes. A pathetic yearning
for orderliness in an age that has grown heedless of it was natural
enough in a mind that had come to expect little of life; but surely
orderliness, like charity, should begin at home.

It was, perhaps, not altogether his fault. His impulses were liberal
and his mind generous, but he was never strong enough to overcome the
handicap of the Lowell ancestry and training. When he spoke of himself
half whimsically as a natural Tory, he was putting his finger on the
Brahmin strain. The sanctity of the Lowell blood is a commonplace in
New England; but that it was Tory blood is less frequently remarked.
His grandfather, John Lowell, to be sure, was visited by certain
humanitarian compunctions, and in 1772 convinced himself that at
Common Law slavery could not stand, and was eager to put it to the
test in Massachusetts. But John Lowell was high in the councils
of the Federalist party, and a judge, and it is a safe guess that
his radicalism did not go deep. Certainly, the next generation was
stalwartly conservative. The three brothers represented the three major
professions of law, theology, and business, that constituted the New
England hierarchy. His father, Charles Lowell, after traveling abroad,
was settled as pastor of the West Church, Boston--Jonathan Mayhew’s
church--a post he held for fifty-six years. He was a stout Federalist,
a good hater of Jefferson,[469] a pleasant, cautious gentleman who
refused to be drawn into the bitter Unitarian-Trinitarian controversy
of the day--as unlike the militant Mayhew as a conventional soul could
well be.[470] His uncle, John Lowell, was a capable lawyer-politician,
one of the directing minds of the Federalist machine, earnestly
engaged in defending Massachusetts against the wicked Republicans.
Another uncle, Francis Cabot Lowell, was an enterprising capitalist,
founder of the city of Lowell, whose multiplying spindles, it was
hoped, would turn the wives and daughters of Yankee farmers, and the
poverty-stricken Irish immigrants, into efficient revenue-producers for
State Street securities.

From this pleasant background of Brahmin conservatisms, Lowell went
forth into a world given over to momentous changes, contemptuous of
all Brahmin standards, to find his way as he might. An original mind
would have marked out its own path, as Emerson did; a conventional mind
would have gone with the better sort, as Josiah Quincy did; but Lowell
was neither Emerson nor Quincy. Sensitive to change, he was rarely
self-reliant; generous in sympathies, he was timid in convictions. He
was no Come-outer to stand alone against the world, but unconsciously
he took color from his environment and was always glad to find a
staff to lean on. It was fortunate for his peace of mind that he
never realized how frequently he was no more than an echo of other
minds; yet the confusions and contradictions that mark off the several
periods of his life can be explained in no other way. From Brahminism
he drifted to radicalism, and from radicalism back to a modified
Brahminism; and these changes resulted from no native intellectual
unfolding, but from certain dominant personalities who drew him aside
from his natural orbit. He quitted college as a pleasant young Tory,
who paused in his Commencement Poem to address some pointed remarks at
Abner Kneeland--the last man imprisoned in Massachusetts for religious
opinion--upon the wickedness of an atheism that denied the faith of
Charles Lowell. But the ferment of the times was already working in
him, and when he was nineteen he wrote with youthful fervor, “I am
fast becoming ultra-democratic.... Liberty is now no longer a cant
word in the mouths of knaves and fools” (_Letters_, Vol. I, p. 33).
Within a year he had met Maria White, whose influence till her death
in 1853 was the determining factor in his intellectual life. She was
an ardent Abolitionist and reformer, and under her pleasant tutelage
Lowell was indoctrinated in the current philosophy of radicalism. He
spoke at Abolition meetings, and contributed to the Abolition press.
More important, he conceived that he had come upon his true mission
in letters. In an ode beginning “In the old days of awe and keen-eyed
wonder,” he put into verse his new creed, a prose statement of which
he elaborated in a letter explaining his _Prometheus_ in 1843, a year
before his marriage to Miss White:

  Although such great names as Goethe, Byron, and Shelley have all
  handled the subject in modern times, you will find that I have
  looked at it from a somewhat new point of view. I have made it
  _radical_, and I believe that no poet in this age can write much
  that is good unless he give himself up to this tendency. For
  radicalism has now for the first time taken a distinctive and
  acknowledged shape of its own. So much of its spirit as poets in
  former ages have attained (and from their purer organization they
  could not fail of some) was by instinct rather than by reason. It
  has never till now been seen to be one of the two great wings that
  upbear the universe.... The proof of poetry is, in my mind, that it
  reduces to the essence of a single line the vague philosophy which
  is floating in all men’s minds, and so renders it portable and
  useful and ready to the hand. (_Letters_, Vol. I, p. 73.)

Six years later he asserted confidently, “I am the first poet who has
endeavored to express the American Idea, and I shall be popular by and
by.” Yet within a few months he found the vein nearing exhaustion.
In a survey of his course up to 1850, he remarked that he had served
love and freedom hitherto, and he now proposed to serve beauty, adding
the significant comment, “I find that Reform cannot take up the whole
of me, and I am quite sure that eyes were given us to look about
us sometimes, and not to be always looking forward.... I am tired
of controversy” (_ibid._, Vol. I, p. 173). Between these several
confessions lies the bulk of Lowell’s contribution to the “causes”
of the times, and how adequately he served them is revealed in the
successive poems that came from his pen.[471] Their equal as a whole
is not to be found in the work of other contemporary radicals. The
better work is solidly vigorous, with competent iambs that often rise
to the dignity of such lines as “Slowly the Bible of the race is writ.”
The eager rhetoric of _The Present Crisis_ was the highwater mark of
Abolition argument in verse; but its serviceableness for quotation
cannot make it so good a poem as _Prometheus_ with its muscular blank
verse, or as _A Glance behind the Curtain_ with its portrait of
Cromwell, strong in his faith, ready for all needful iconoclasms:

                  I have no dread of what
  Is called for by the instinct of mankind;
  Nor think I that God’s world will fall apart
  Because we tear a parchment more or less.

This is frank transcendental radicalism, yet the truer Lowell of those
days of youthful enthusiasm is found in the _Biglow Papers_, first
written with spontaneous gusto out of his hatred of the imperialism of
the Mexican war, and later carefully embedded in the heavy machinery of
the prose setting. The native clutter of Lowell’s mind is there laid
bare--the grotesque mixture of homely satire, moral aphorisms, Yankee
linguistics, literary criticism--an unwieldy mass that he could neither
simplify nor reduce to order. The machinery spoils the propaganda and
weighs down the satire; yet the verse has survived because for once
Lowell let himself go and hit such heads as he had a mind to.

Lowell saw fit to retain most of his radical verse in the definitive
edition of his works, but his radical prose he disowned, and it was
left for pious hands to gather together long after his death. It was
perhaps as well for his reputation that the ambassador at the Court
of St. James’s should not be plagued by his youthful indiscretions.
In those prose writings were combustible materials. He went with
the Abolitionists in their brisk assaults on law, order, and the
Constitution. Whatever revolution was stirring anywhere found him
sympathetic. He was strong for the workingman’s revolution of 1848 in
France; it was social injustice that was to blame for mob violence, and
the fetish of _laissez faire_ was a sorry enough god to worship.

  The great problem of the over-supply of labor is not to be settled
  by a decimation of the laboring class, whether by gunpower or
  starvation.... The giant Labor did not merely turn from one side
  to the other for an easier position. Rather he rose up, “Like
  blind Orion hungry for the morn.”... They had learned by bitter
  experience that it was on the body of old King Log _Laissez-faire_
  that King Stork perched to devour them. _Let-alone_ is good policy
  after you have once got your perfect system established to let
  alone. (Quoted in Scudder, _James Russell Lowell_, Vol. I, pp.
  205-206.)

In common with the Abolitionists, Lowell appealed to the Declaration of
Independence against the Constitution. He took delight in satirizing
his Federalist forebears, who, he asserts, beginning to fear the light
of freedom, ingeniously constructed a “Sacred Parasol” for the new
Goddess of Liberty, “to prevent her from being tanned”:

  A stout machine of parchment was accordingly constructed, and,
  under the respectable name of a Constitution, was interposed
  wherever there seemed to be danger from the hostile incursions of
  light. Whenever this is spread, a dim twilight, more perplexing
  than absolute darkness, reigns everywhere beneath its shadow....
  This contrivance of ours, though the work of our own hands, has
  acquired a superstitious potency in our eyes. (_Ibid._, Vol. I, p.
  210.)

No wonder Lowell later disowned such apostasies, for after Maria
White’s death in 1853 came the dun professorial period of his life,
when Harvard laid hands on him and came near to reducing him to
its own ways. It revived the old Brahmin instincts that had lain
dormant during the years of his Abolitionism, without reviving the
old sanctions. Left without a cause, half ashamed of his youthful
indiscretions yet ill content to drift, he turned bookman and for
twenty-one years wandered with Norton and Longfellow and Child in the
Sahara of medieval scholarship. It was not a happy time with him.
There is plenty of evidence of his restlessness and dissatisfaction
that occasionally prompted the wish to turn wholly scholar and keep
his note-books in order; that prodded him to salvage the mass of his
accumulation by turning his lecture-notes into literary essays; and
that in other moods induced him to turn half savagely upon his dead
enthusiasms and find solace in clever satire. His vigorous salvagings
were scarcely worth the trouble. He had nothing important to say
about Dante or Pope or Wordsworth, and he said it with a good deal of
needless verbal exertion. The essay on Thoreau, written in 1865, was a
different matter. Here he was brought face to face with a past which
it still hurt him to remember; and the ill nature that colors his
comment is sufficient testimony to the painfulness of his memories.
Certainly he did not understand Thoreau, was incapable of understanding
him; yet might not his dislike have been prodded by the consciousness
that Thoreau had refused to make terms with Harvard culture as he had
done? An intelligent reading of Thoreau must have been an unpleasant
experience in Lowell’s mood, keenly aware of certain backslidings of
his own; and the essay is suggestive for the light it throws on Lowell,
not on Thoreau.

To this period belong most of the essays on which rests Lowell’s
reputation as a critic of letters and politics. Bright as that
reputation long was, it is beginning to show tarnish. Subjected to
the scrutiny of eyes unblinded by the congenialities of the Cambridge
coterie, it appears that Lowell’s brilliancy covered over certain grave
shortcomings that unfitted him for serious critical judgment.[472]
He had no standards other than ethical, only likes and dislikes; no
interest in ideas, only a pottering concern for the text; no historical
backgrounds, only isolated figures dwelling in a vacuum. He was puzzled
over new schools and unfamiliar technic, and was at ease only in
praising established reputations and confirming approved judgments.
He scoffed at Taine instead of going to school to him, and made merry
over Masson’s _Life of Milton_; yet he was wholly incapable of dealing
with men from whose fruitful minds came ideas that summoned throngs of
followers. In almost the last year of his life he spent weeks rereading
Rousseau, and was satisfied to dismiss him with the comment, “a
monstrous liar, but always the first dupe of his own lie” (_Letters_,
Vol. II, p. 424). _Leaves of Grass_ he dismissed as affected, not
original. He was shocked at Swinburne’s “Adamite” heresy--“When a man
begins to lust after the Muse instead of loving her, he may be sure
that it is never the Muse that he embraces” (_ibid._, Vol. I, p. 377).
He admired Howell’s prose style and loved the man, but he could not
bring himself to approve his literary and social theories.

During those sterile professorial years he was closing one door after
another. Scarcely an important movement of contemporary thought
awakened his interest. The hypothesis of evolution he rejected somewhat
flabbily. “I think the evolutionists will have to make a fetish of
their protoplasm before long,” he said in 1879. “Such a mush seems
to me a poor substitute for the Rock of Ages--by which I understand
a certain set of higher instincts which mankind have found solid
under their feet in all weathers” (_ibid._, Vol. II, p. 245). And as
late as 1886 he wrote, “I am a conservative (warranted to wash) and
keep on the safe side--with God as against evolution.” Naturally so
provocative a doctrine as economic determinism never showed its face in
his study; Karl Marx was not one of his intellectual companions. Even
the home-bred knight-errant, Henry George, did not greatly interest
him. “Why, who in the world buys such a book as that,” he exclaimed of
_Progress and Poverty_; and learning that a friend had subscribed for a
thousand copies, he remarked, “He _must_ be getting eccentric.”[473]

The political principles that he discovered in the smoke of his
professor’s pipe were equally naïve. He took himself seriously as a
guide and mentor in matters political. He was fond of talking about the
“noble science of politics”; yet he never took the trouble to ground
himself in the elements of the subject. He had scarcely read the primer
of political theory. Burke was probably the only political writer
who ever made any impression on his mind. Of American constitutional
history he was as ignorant as a politician, and when in Civil War
days he began to scratch the field of politics, he only uncovered
certain old Federalist prejudices that lay hidden under his later
accumulations. The extreme parochialism of the Brahmin mind is revealed
in Lowell’s incapacity to understand the South. The comment on Sibley’s
_Harvard Graduates_--“I do not know when the provincialism of New
England has been thrust upon me with so ineradicable a barb”--should be
turned upon Lowell’s dogmatic essays in American politics. He had not
the slightest comprehension of Calhoun’s doctrine of majorities; yet he
dismissed it contemptuously, after attributing it to one of Calhoun’s
followers.[474] He speaks of the “weak and wicked element” of states
rights--which he supposes the South owed to “the unhappy ingenuity of
Mr. Jefferson”--as an unhistorical repudiation of the principle of
coercive sovereignty established by the fathers, quite overlooking
the Hartford Convention. His treatment of Jefferson Davis and Andrew
Johnson is marked by the dogmatisms of one who is defending God’s will
against the devil’s sophistries. He will have no other interpretation
of history than an ethical interpretation, in which good and evil are
eternally at combat; and he closes his volume of political essays with
a comment that embodies for him the sum of all political wisdom:

  We have only to be unswervingly faithful to what is the true
  America of our hope and belief, and whatever is American will rise
  from one end of the country to the other instinctively to our side,
  with more than ample means of present succour and of final triumph.
  It is only by being loyal and helpful to Truth that men learn at
  last how loyal and helpful she can be to them. (_Ibid._, Vol. V, p.
  326.)

Into the stagnant atmosphere of the Elmwood study came on a happy day
in the middle sixties the vibrant personality of Edwin Lawrence Godkin,
and under the stimulus of his crisp thinking there began for Lowell
what may perhaps be reckoned an intellectual renaissance. Godkin was
a moderate English liberal, a man of complete self-assurance, whose
tart comment on politics and economics was pointed by a conviction
of the finality of his own conclusions. Under such teaching Lowell
made rapid progress in the new school of criticism fathered by _The
Nation_. The delight with which he read Godkin’s comment and the eager
faith with which he greeted his ideas suggest that his own ethical
interpretation of politics was giving way under the strain of post-war
experience. From Godkin he got some casual instruction in _laissez
faire_, and certain of its teachings snuggled down comfortably in his
mind beside the principles of coercive sovereignty and a centralizing
state, without awakening any suspicion of their incompatibility of
temperament. He never went over wholly to _laissez faire_; he was too
strongly Brahmin Federalist for that; but his leanings often carried
him into the English camp. It was a tonic to his native conservatism
that was troubled about the new theories of collectivism, and it
awakened strong doubts about the experiment in democracy. The reaction
against the radicalism of his Abolition days became sharp and final.
“We have got to work back from a democracy to our original institution
as a republic again,” he wrote Leslie Stephen in 1879 (_Letters_,
Vol. II, p. 161); and in 1888 he asserted that the republic would
endure only “so long as the ideas of the men who founded it continue
dominant” (_The Independent in Politics_, Vol. VI, p. 207). He warned
Thomas Hughes against the extension of suffrage in England,[475] and he
was more and more inclined to think that democracy meant a slough of
mediocrity underlain with the mud of corruption--that it might prove
to be “a Kakistocracy rather, for the benefit of knaves at the cost of
fools” (_Letters_, Vol. II, p. 159).

From the vigorous movements of protest of the seventies and eighties,
the agrarian uprising of the Middle Border and the proletarian
organization in the industrial centers, he drew added confirmation of
his fears. In his attitude towards both he was little more than an
echo of Godkin, who was laying about him briskly, hitting both farmer
and workingman with fine impartiality. He shared the latter’s contempt
for all agrarian programs, without quite understanding them. He knew
little of America. The continent was scarcely more than a hinterland
to Cambridge, a hinterland that he explored with some bewilderment
on a trip that carried him as far as Cincinnati. Equally ignorant of
economics and of the Middle Border, he had no basis for any opinion;
a juster man would have put the agrarian question aside as beyond his
competency; at least he would have been careful to clear his mind of
prejudice. But Lowell was as much a victim of capitalistic prejudice
as Thomas Bailey Aldrich and other Boston pseudo-intellectuals. The
old Brahminism was close to the surface in those later years, and a
scratch would reveal it. In the matter of the “Haymarket Riot” he
wrote Howells that “he thought those Chicago ruffians well hanged”--a
comment that recalls the Abner Kneeland episode of fifty years before.
Physically Lowell was in close proximity to the labor problem, but
intellectually he was worlds removed. He looked upon the labor unions
with heavy misgivings. He frankly feared the power of the proletariat
and was bitter in denunciation of social legislation. In 1869 he wrote
Godkin, “Pray give Henry Wilson a broadside for dipping his flag
to that piratical craft of the eight-hour men.... I have a thorough
contempt for a man who pretends to believe that eight is equal to ten”
(_Letters_, Vol. II, p. 31). And somewhat later he wrote Norton:

  I sometimes feel a little blue over the outlook here, with our
  penny-paper universal education and our workingmen’s parties, with
  their tremendous lever of suffrage, decrying brains.... But the
  more I learn, the more am I impressed with the wonderful system
  of checks and balances which history reveals (our Constitution is
  a baby-house to it!) and the more my confidence in the general
  commonsense and honest intention of mankind increases.... I take
  great comfort in God. I think He is considerably amused with us
  sometimes, but that He likes us, on the whole, and would not let us
  get at the match-box so carelessly, as He does, unless He knew that
  the frame of His Universe was fire-proof. How many times have I not
  seen the fire-engines of Church and State clanging and lumbering
  along to put out--a false alarm! And when the heavens are cloudy
  what a glare can be cast by a burning shanty! (_Ibid._, Vol. II, p.
  51.)

The ways of the Gilded Age were a rude shock to Lowell’s ill-grounded
idealism. The crude post-war exploitation and the political corruption
that marked the buccaneer stage of the rising plutocracy filled
him with anxiety. As an honest man he was angered by the common
scoundrelism of the politicians and the press and troubled at the
apathy of the public, but his dislike for economics did him a grave
disservice. In seeking out the guilty he went wide of the mark. To
trace the source of the virus that was poisoning the public life to an
exploiting economics, would have brought him close home. He chose to
think it was spread rather by western agrarians and city ringsters,
than by respectable New Englanders; yet after passing through the
_Crédit Mobilier_ scandal he was visited by unpleasant suspicions. “I
suspect,” he wrote after his return from the Cincinnati Convention
in 1876, “that few of our Boston men who have had to do with Western
railways have been more scrupulous [than the western Grangers.] I
rather think they set the example of tempting legislators with the hope
of questionable gains” (_Letters_, Vol. II, p. 170). With the open
facts of a Congressional investigation before him, Lowell got no deeper
than that. Yet his indignation must find outlet and he contributed
two poems to _The Nation_--“The World’s Fair, 1876,” and “Tempora
Mutantur”--in one of which he wrote:

  Show ’em your Civil Service, and explain
  How all men’s loss is everybody’s gain; ...
  Show your short cut to cure financial ills
  By making paper-collars current bills;
  Show your new bleaching-process, cheap and brief,
  To wit: a jury chosen by the thief;
  Show your State legislatures; show your Rings;
  And challenge Europe to produce such things
  As high officials sitting half in sight
  To share the plunder and to fix things right;
  If that don’t fetch her, why, you only need
  Your latest style in Martyrs--Tweed:
  She’ll find it hard to hide her spiteful tears
  At such advance in one poor hundred years.

  (_Letters_, Vol. II, p. 155.)

This is Godkin translated into the Lowell vernacular, and what issued
from his indignation was Godkin also--an apostolic ardor for civil
service reform. He had learned at least, that democracy had not yet
been achieved in America; that, indeed, such spontaneous liberalism
as had been bred by free land was in danger of being destroyed by
evils that issued from the loins of this same heedless frontier
order.[476] In 1876 he wrote, “Let us all work together (and the
task will need us all) to make Democracy possible. It certainly is
no invention to go of itself any more than the perpetual motion”
(_Letters_, Vol. II, p. 159). Yet in spite of his zeal, one may
be permitted to doubt that Lowell really desired any other than a
Brahmin democracy. In those later years his conception of an ideal
society was unconsciously colored by memories of Cambridge fifty years
before--a simple, patriarchal world, amenable to the rule of the better
sort. In such a world democracy seemed possible; but in the rising
proletarian-plutocratic order, what reasonable hope was there?

From his growing perplexities Lowell found a happy relief in his
mission abroad. The experience was a godsend to a mind that was growing
torpid. In 1869 he had written, “I fancy if I were suddenly snatched
away to London, my brain would prickle all over, as a foot that has
been asleep when the blood starts in it again. Books are good dry
forage; we can keep alive on them; but, after all, men are the only
fresh pasture” (_ibid._, Vol. II, p. 24). London, in this mellow
autumn of his life, ripened Lowell. He slipped into the congenial
environment as easily as Irving had done a generation before, and
found English society as delightful. He loved England with unaffected
heartiness, and under the stimulating experience he expanded into a
kindly English Liberal. The extreme Liberals--men like Mill and Arnold
and John Morley--he found less sympathetic; and radical thinkers like
William Morris he seems not to have known of. But English Liberalism
of the Gladstone type was own cousin to Cambridge Brahminism; it
united dignity and conscience; it seemed to him the ideal type of
government--the rule of God-fearing gentlemen who strove to be faithful
to their trusteeship, and who ruled because they were best fitted to
rule. Into such a world no other American of the times could have
entered more appreciatively than Lowell. If congeniality to the host
be a prime requisite in an ambassador, President Hayes made no mistake
in sending him to the Court of St. James’s. He was a distinguished
representative of Brahmin culture; but whether he was a representative
of the solid realities of America is not so certain.


Footnotes

[468] See _A Rhymed Lesson_.

[469] See _Letters_, Vol. I, p. 82.

[470] See Hale, _James Russell Lowell and His Friends_, p. 10.

[471] The more significant titles are: _Prometheus_ and _A Glance
behind the Curtain_, 1843; _Columbus_ and _The Present Crisis_, 1844;
_On the Capture of Fugitive Slaves near Washington_, 1845; _Biglow
Papers_, begun in 1846; _The Pioneer_, 1847; _Bibliolâtres_, 1849;
_Anti-Apis_, 1851.

[472] See C. Hartley Grattan, “Lowell,” in _The American Mercury_, Vol.
II, pp. 63-69.

[473] Five years later he was more sympathetic, but hopelessly
confused. See _Democracy_, Vol. VI, p. 35.

[474] See “The Rebellion,” in _Prose Works_, Vol. V, p. 134.

[475] See _Letters_, Vol. II, p. 175.

[476] See _The Independent in Politics_, Vol. VI, pp. 204-209.




Conclusion


To the ebullient romanticisms with which the foregoing pages have
dealt, the Civil War brought diverse fortunes; and from the titanic
conflict emerged an America rid of one of the feculent sources of
domestic schism. The romantic imperialisms of the slave economy were
gone forever. So much at least was cleared from the path of its
destiny, and the field of potential conflict was narrowed to the rival
imperialisms of eastern capitalism and western agrarianism. Both had
been vastly strengthened by the war. In the eastern centers was a
greatly stimulated industrialism, fed from the reservoirs of liquid
capital gathered in the process of financing the northern armies, ready
to turn to transcontinental railway-building, large-scale manufacture,
and a gigantic exploitation of the raw materials of mine and forest
and field. Along the Middle Border the old romance of the settlement
came to new life as the flood of homesteaders, augmented by disbanded
soldiers, poured over the prairie spaces beyond the Mississippi, to
repeat there the story of commonwealth building. East and West would
eventually clash, for their diverse economic needs were driving towards
a collision; but that would not come for a generation till the conflict
of interests was thrust into sharper relief.

In the meantime many familiar things were becoming anachronisms
over night, though they might linger on for years. As the romantic
revolution began with the laying aside of the smallclothes and tie-wig
of eighteenth-century aristocratic conservatism, so the new age began
with the putting away of the outworn dress of eighteenth-century
romantic liberalism. In the hurrying new days there was no time or
place for abstract theories of natural rights, for equalitarian
democracy, for local home rule--these relics of the past were thrust
aside in the scramble for wealth and power. The old philosophies were
swept out on the rubbish heap--Jefferson and Lincoln with Calhoun and
Stephens--and Hamilton and Marshall came to their own again. The lost
cause carried down to defeat much more than slavery, it carried down
the old ideal of decentralized democracies, of individual liberty; and
with the overthrow of the traditional principles in their last refuge,
the nation hurried forward along the path of an unquestioning and
uncritical consolidation, that was to throw the coercive powers of a
centralizing state into the hands of the new industrialism. Here was a
revolution that was to engulf the older romantic America, its dignified
literary ideals as well as its democratic political theory. In the
world of Jay Cooke and Commodore Vanderbilt, the transcendental dream
was as hopelessly a lost cause as the plantation dream; it was in even
worse plight, for it left no tragic memories to weave a new romance
about the fallen hopes. Emerson in Concord was as much out of date as
Lowell in Cambridge, or Gilmore Simms in Charleston. A new age had come
and other dreams--the age and the dreams of a middle-class sovereignty,
that was busily surveying the fields of its future conquests. From
the crude and vast romanticisms of that vigorous sovereignty emerged
eventually a spirit of realistic criticism, seeking to evaluate the
worth of this new America, and discover if possible other philosophies
to take the place of those which had gone down in the fierce battles of
the Civil War. What form this critical spirit assumed, and what replies
it returned to the strident challenge of the time, are questions not to
be answered here.




Bibliography


Only the more important titles dealt with in the present study are
listed hereunder, together with selected biographical and critical
material. The invaluable bibliographies in the _Cambridge History of
American Literature_, 4 vols., New York, 1917-22, cover most of the
writers considered, and the reader is referred to them.


Book I: Part I

Information will be found in the _Library of Southern Literature_ by E.
A. Alderman and others (16 vols., New Orleans, 1908-13) and in Montrose
J. Moses, _Literature of the South_ (New York, 1910). See also Carl Van
Doren, _The American Novel_ (New York, 1921).

I. The Old Dominion. See Thomas J. Wertenbaker, _Patrician and Plebeian
in Virginia_ (Charlottesville, Va., 1910).

II. For the economics of Jeffersonianism, see Charles A. Beard, _The
Economic Origins of Jeffersonian Democracy_ (New York, 1915; Chapter
XII). Also Charles Gide and Charles Rist, _A History of Economic
Doctrines_ (translated by W. Smart and R. Richards, Boston).

John Taylor: His works are out of print. Important titles are:
_An Inquiry into the Principles and Policy of the United States_
(Fredericksburg, Va., 1814). _New Views of the Constitution of the
United States_ (Washington, 1823). _Correspondence_ (edited by W. E.
Dodd, Richmond, 1908).

See “John Taylor, Prophet of Secession” (by William E. Dodd, in _Branch
Historical Papers, II_, Richmond, 1908). See also Beard, _Economic
Origins of Jeffersonian Democracy_.

III. John Marshall: Sufficient materials will be found in Albert J.
Beveridge, _Life of John Marshall_ (4 vols., New York, 1916-19).

IV. For the plantation tradition, see Francis Pendleton Gaines, _The
Southern Plantation_ (New York, 1924).

William Wirt: His works are out of print. _Letters of a British Spy_
(Richmond, 1803). _The Old Bachelor_ (2 vols., Richmond, 1810). _Life
and Character of Patrick Henry_ (Philadelphia, 1817; also several later
editions).

See John P. Kennedy, _Memoirs ... of William Wirt_ (Philadelphia, 1849).

Nathaniel Beverley Tucker: His works are out of print. _George
Balcombe; a Novel_ (2 vols., New York, 1836).--_The Partisan Leader;
a Tale of the Future_, by Edward William Sidney (printed for the
publishers, by J. Caxton, 1856 [_i.e._, Washington, printed by Duff
Green, 1836], 2 vols.): reissued as _A Key to the Disunion Conspiracy:
The Partisan Leader_ (2 vols. in one, New York, 1861); edition issued
at Richmond, 1862.

Some information about Tucker will be found in W. P. Trent, _William
Gilmore Simms_ (Boston and New York, 1892).

V. William Alexander Caruthers: _The Kentuckian in New York. Or, the
Adventures of Three Southerns. By a Virginian_ (2 vols., New York,
1834).--_The Cavaliers of Virginia, or the Recluse of Jamestown.
An Historical Romance of the Old Dominion_ (2 vols., New York,
1834-1835).--_The Knights of the Horse-Shoe; a Traditionary Tale of the
Cocked Hat Gentry in the Old Dominion_ (Wetumpka, Ala., 1845; New York,
1882, 1909).

John P. Kennedy: _Works_ (3 vols., New York, 1854; 9 vols., New York,
1871, with life by H. T. Tuckerman, Vol. X). _Swallow Barn, or a
Sojourn in the Old Dominion_ (2 vols., Philadelphia, 1832; several
later editions). _Horse-Shoe Robinson; a Tale of the Tory Ascendency_
(2 vols., Philadelphia, 1835; numerous later editions, the latest
in 1906). _Rob of the Bowl; a Legend of St. Inigoe’s_ (2 vols.,
Philadelphia, 1838; later editions). _Quodlibet: Containing Some Annals
Thereof ..._ (Philadelphia, 1840; 1860).

Edgar Allan Poe: The bibliography is extensive. See the _Cambridge
History of American Literature_.


Book I: Part II

II. John C. Calhoun: _Works_ (6 vols., Columbia, S. C., 1851; New
York, 1853-55). _Correspondence_, edited by J. F. Jameson (American
Historical Association, _Annual Report_, 1899, Vol. II).

Biographies: W. E. Dodd, in _Statesmen of the Old South_ (New York,
1911). H. von Holst, _John C. Calhoun (American Statesmen Series_,
Boston, 1882, 1899). W. M. Meigs, _Life of John Caldwell Calhoun_ (2
vols., New York, 1917). G. M. Pinckney, _Life of John C. Calhoun_
(Charleston, 1903). W. P. Trent, _Southern Statesmen of the Old Régime_
(New York, 1897).

Alexander H. Stephens: _Constitutional View of the War between the
States_ (2 vols., Philadelphia, 1868).

See L. B. Pendleton, _Alexander H. Stephens_ (Philadelphia, 1908).

Francis Lieber: _The Stranger in America_ (2 vols. in one, London,
1834). _Political Ethics_ (Philadelphia, 1838; edited by Theodore D.
Woolsey, Philadelphia, 1890; with introduction by Nicholas Murray
Butler, Philadelphia, 1911). _Essays on Property and Labor_ (New York,
1841). _Civil Liberty and Self-Government_ (2 vols., Philadelphia,
1853; London, 1859; edited by Theodore D. Woolsey, Philadelphia, 1891).
_Miscellaneous Writings_ (2 vols., Philadelphia, 1881; edited by Daniel
C. Gilman, Philadelphia, 1916).

See L. R. Harley, _Francis Lieber: His Life and Political Philosophy_
(New York, 1899).

III. For the southern position, see Jeannette Reid Tandy, “Pro-Slavery
Propaganda in American Fiction in the Fifties” (in _South Atlantic
Quarterly_, January March, 1922). Francis Pendleton Gaines, _The
Southern Plantation_ (New York, 1924; Chapter III).

William J. Grayson: _The Hireling and the Slave_ (Charleston, 1856).

IV. William Crafts: _A Selection in Prose and Poetry, from the
Miscellaneous Writings of the Late William Crafts. With Memoir by
Samuel Gilman_ (Charleston, 1828).

Hugh Swinton Legaré: _Writings_ (2 vols., Charleston, 1846; with
memoir).

William Gilmore Simms: His works have never been collected and most of
them are out of print. _Border Romances_ (17 vols., New York, 1859,
1866, 1879; 10 vols., New York, 1882; 15 vols., Chicago, 1885; 17
vols., Chicago, 1888; 17 vols., Atlanta, 1901 [?]). See W. P. Trent,
_William Gilmore Simms_ (New York, 1892)--an excellent study. Also see
J. Erskine, _Leading American Novelists_ (New York, 1910).


Book I: Part III

Excellent bibliographical material for western literature will be found
in Ralph Leslie Rusk, _The Literature of the Middle Western Frontier_
(2 vols., New York, 1925). See also W. H. Venable, _The Beginnings of
Literary Culture in the Ohio Valley_ (Cincinnati, 1891).

II. Interesting material will be found in Claude G. Bowers, _Party
Battles of the Jackson Period_ (Boston, 1922).

III. Timothy Flint: His works are out of print and rare. _Recollections
of the Last Ten Years_ (Boston, 1826). _Francis Berrian, or the Mexican
Patriot_ (Boston, 1826; Philadelphia and London, 1834). _The Life and
Adventures of Arthur Cleaning_ (Philadelphia, 1828). _George Mason,
the Young Backwoodsman; or, “Don’t Give up the Ship”_ (Boston, 1829;
with changed title, London, 1833). _The Shoshonee Valley; a Romance_
(Cincinnati, 1830).

See John Ervin Kirkpatrick, _Timothy Flint, Pioneer, Missionary,
Author, Editor_ (Cleveland, 1911)--an excellent study with bibliography.

James Hall: _Works_ (4 vols., New York, 1853-56). _Legends of the West_
(Philadelphia, 1832, 1833; five later editions).--_The Soldiers Bride;
and Other Tales_ (Philadelphia, 1833).--_The Harpe’s Head; a Legend of
Kentucky_ (Philadelphia, 1833); as _Kentucky. A Tale_ (London, 1834, 2
vols.).--_Tales of the Border_ (Philadelphia, 1835). _The Wilderness
and the War Path_ (New York, 1846; New York and London, 1849).

See J. L. Davis, “Judge James Hall, a Literary Pioneer of the Middle
West” (in _Ohio Archaeological and Historical Society Publications_,
October, 1909).

Augustus Longstreet: _Georgia Scenes_ (Atlanta, Ga., 1835; New York,
1840; several later editions).

See John Donald Wade, _Augustus Longstreet, a Study of the Development
of Culture in the South_ (New York, 1924), an excellent study with
bibliographical material.

Davy Crockett: Five titles are grouped under the name of Crockett:
_Sketches and Eccentricities of Col. David Crockett, of West Tennessee_
(1833). _A Narrative of the Life of David Crockett, of the State of
Tennessee_ (Philadelphia, 1834; seven editions in one year). _Life of
Martin Van Buren_ (1835). _An Account of Col. Crockett’s Tour to the
North and Down East_ (1835). _Col. Crockett’s Exploits and Adventures
in Texas_ (1836). The _Narrative_ is reprinted with an introduction by
Hamlin Garland, in _The Modern Student’s Library_, under the title,
_The Autobiography of David Crockett_ (New York, 1923).

There is no life of Crockett; such so-called works are uncritical
jumbles of fact and fiction. Some information will be found in John
Donald Wade, “The Authorship of David Crockett’s Autobiography”
(_Georgia Historical Quarterly_, September, 1922); S. H. Stout, “David
Crockett” (_American Historical Magazine_, Vol. VII, No. I, Jan.,
1902)--uncritical; Chester T. Crowell, “Davy Crockett” (_American
Mercury_, Vol. IV, No. 13).


