Chapter V • Adventures in Romance


I • William Alexander Caruthers • A Virginia Liberal

In the early thirties came the transition in Virginia from the
essay-sketch that had prevailed since the appearance of _The British
Spy_, to the full blown romance of love and adventure. The older
type had been a blend of nature description, social observation,
character sketches, with somewhat injudicious portions of sentiment
and moralizing, and with frequent resort to the old letter-form of
fiction that lingered out a surprising old age. Not only is the
transition revealed in the work of John P. Kennedy, whose _Swallow
Barn_, written in 1832, was followed in 1835 by _Horseshoe Robinson_,
but quite as strikingly in the work of Dr. William Alexander Caruthers,
whose _Kentuckian in New York, or, the Adventures of Three Southerns_,
published in 1834, was followed at once by _The Cavaliers of Virginia_,
1834-35.

Dr. Caruthers was a genial and cultivated Virginian from the Piedmont
region, with a ready wit and a clever pen, who had pretty well rid
himself of the intense and narrow parochialisms that restricted the
sympathies of Beverley Tucker. He was a Virginia liberal of the older
school, before the renaissance of the slave cause transferred southern
leadership to the South Carolina group, and he shared none of Tucker’s
partisanship for Calhoun. He had traveled widely both south and north,
and had discovered that human nature was much the same on both sides
of Mason and Dixon’s line. This experience qualified him to become a
shrewd and kindly interpreter of both sections of the country, and his
_Kentuckian in New York_ was an excellent contribution to the cause of
intersectional good-will. He sends two young South Carolinians just out
of college on a trip north, who fall in with a Kentuckian on the way,
and together they enjoy life in New York City, lose their hearts and
meet with divers romantic and amusing adventures. A fourth character,
a young Virginian, he sends to South Carolina, likewise to lose his
heart and encounter adventures; and the copious letters that travel
between them are filled with intelligent comment on unfamiliar ways.
The writers are generous-minded young liberals with keen eyes, and
their observations still make excellent reading after nearly a hundred
years.

The South Carolinian who falls romantically in love with a New York
girl is far from a Calhoun Fire Eater. He can see good even in the
Yankee, whom he defends against the common southern prejudice by
arguing that Yankee chicanery has resulted from a niggardly environment
and the competition that comes with overpopulation, a competition that
Virginia has been spared by the draining off of her population west;
and as for the Yankee “canting and sniveling,” “tell me,” he remarks,
“if you have not, in the very bosom of your great valley, as genuine
Presbyterians and Roundheads as ever graced the Rump Parliament, or
sung a psalm on horseback? And to give the devil his due, these same
Presbyterians are no bad citizens of a popular government” (Vol. I, p.
72). Virginia has judged the North out of her prejudices rather than
knowledge, and the advice Caruthers gives his Virginia neighbors, as an
antidote to the suspicions of Beverley Tucker, is to travel beyond the
boundaries of the Old Dominion.

  Every southern should visit New-York. It would allay provincial
  prejudices, and calm his excitement against his northern
  countrymen. The people here are warm-hearted, generous,
  and enthusiastic, in a degree scarcely inferior to our own
  southerns.... Many of these Yorkers are above local prejudices, and
  truly consider this as the commercial metropolis of the Union, and
  all the people of the land as their customers, friends, patrons,
  and countrymen. Nor is trade the only thing that flourishes.
  The arts of polished and refined life, refined literature, and
  the profounder studies of the schoolmen, all have here their
  distinguished votaries,--I say distinguished, with reference to the
  standard of science in our country. (Vol. I, p. 181.)

The material prosperity of the North contrasts painfully in his mind
with the condition of his native Carolina, and there is a note of
apprehension in his comment:

  The more I see of these northern states, the more I am convinced
  that some great revolution awaits our own cherished communities.
  Revolutions, whether sudden or gradual, are fearful things; we
  learn to feel attachments to those things which they tear up, as
  a poor cripple feels attached to the mortified limb, that must be
  amputated to save his life. A line of demarkation in such a case is
  distinctly drawn between the diseased and the healthy flesh. Such a
  line is now drawing between the slave and free states, I fear. God
  send that the disease may be cured without amputation, and before
  mortification takes place. I know that this latter is your own
  belief. What think you now, since you have seen the greater extent
  of the disease? (Vol. I, p. 165.)

The question is addressed to another young man on his travels, a young
Virginian who has gone south, and who is even more troubled at what he
finds. He cannot bring himself to think well of the sacred institution
as he sees it in South Carolina. There it is laid bare in all its naked
exploitation. The humaner relations between the races that he has known
in Virginia have been destroyed by the absentee system with its drivers
and overseers--“to these animals,” he says, “I have always had an utter
aversion.” The evils of the large-scale system have carried farther;
slavery in the Carolinas has destroyed the middle class of yeomen,
unduly exalted the aristocracy and utterly debased the poor white. The
single spot he heartily approves in the two commonwealths is Salem,
a Moravian settlement where no slavery exists, where all work, and
where education is thought so well of that the daughters of the first
southern families go there for their schooling. In Salem he found an
answer to the southern problem far more competent than Nullification.

  _Here_, then, is a triumphant answer--an answer in deeds, instead
  of words--in the happiness, and the substantial wealth of these
  simple and primitive Moravians. Here ... is an industrious,
  intelligent, and healthy community, in the very heart of all the
  misery I have described. Let us then improve by the lesson, seek
  out the sources of their prosperity, find the point where their
  plans diverge from ours, and, my word for it ... we become a great,
  a flourishing, and a happy people. (Vol. I, p. 80.)

To the problem of slavery he returns constantly, and his views may
perhaps be sufficiently understood from the following passages:

  The poor of a slave-country are the most miserable and the most
  wretched of all the human family. The grades of society in this
  state are even farther apart than in Virginia. Here, there is one
  immense chasm from the rich to the abject poor. In the valley
  of Virginia, or in the country where you are, there are regular
  gradations. The very happiest, most useful, and most industrious
  class of a well-regulated community, is here wanting. Their place
  is filled up by negroes; in consequence of which, your aristocrats
  are more aristocratic, and your poor still poorer. The slaves
  create an immeasurable distance between these two classes, which
  can never be brought together until this separating cause be
  removed. You know I am no _abolitionist_, in the incendiary meaning
  of the term; yet I cannot deny from you and myself, that they
  are an incubus upon our prosperity. This we would boldly deny,
  if a Yankee uttered it in our hearing; but to ourselves, we must
  e’en confess it. If I am, therefore, an abolitionist, it is not
  for conscience-sake, but from policy and patriotism. (Vol. I, pp.
  76-77.)

  With us [in Virginia] slavery is tolerable, and has something
  soothing about it to the heart of the philanthropist; the slaves
  are more in the condition of tenants to their landlords--they are
  viewed as rational creatures, and with more kindly feelings....
  _Here_ slavery is intolerable; a single individual owning a hundred
  or more, and often not knowing them when he sees them.... The
  slaves here are plantation live-stock; not domestic and attached
  family servants, who have served around the person of the master
  from the childhood of both.... Here, besides your white overseers,
  you have your black _drivers_;--an odious animal, almost peculiar
  to the far south. It is horrible to see one slave following another
  at his work, with a cow-skin dangling at his arm, and occasionally
  tying him up and flogging him when he does not get through his two
  tasks a day.... I do not observe much difference between the North
  and South Carolinians, except in the case of those who inhabit the
  most southern portions of the latter state. There your rich are
  more princely and aristocratic, and your poor more wretched and
  degraded; but to tell you the plain truth, many of your little
  slaveholders are miserably poor and ignorant; and what must be the
  condition of that negro who is a slave to one of these miserable
  wretches? (Vol. II, pp. 115-119.)

To the solution of the difficult problem Caruthers offers no easy
plan. He cannot go with the northern “enthusiasts” who propose
immediate emancipation. They do not comprehend the complexity of the
problem. “We cannot set slaves free among us. Such a course would
dissolve the social compact. It would set at defiance all laws for the
protection of life, liberty, and property, either among them or the
whites.” He foresaw clearly what happened during the unhappy days of
reconstruction. “Would it be any reparation of an hereditary wrong, to
plunge the subjects of that wrong, with ourselves, into irretrievable
ruin, to attain nominal justice?” The free negroes would constitute a
menace more serious than the northern city mobs, which latter Caruthers
had no liking for. “These city mobocracies, composed as they are,
principally of wild Irish, are terrible things”; how much worse would
be a negro mobocracy? A confirmed agrarian, he finds his chief hope in
a vigorous yeomanry, and until the South shall develop that, matters
must go ill with it. In the midst of the Carolina system his thoughts
return fondly to his native state. He is under no illusion in regard
to the tide-water region of Virginia. It has lived a generous life,
but spendthrift and wasteful, and has come to evil days. But in the
West, beyond the mountains, a newer and more vigorous age is rising
that “will sweep away the melancholy vestiges of a former and more
chivalrous and generous age.”

  Poor, exhausted eastern Virginia! she is in her dotage. Her
  impassable roads protect her alike from the pity and contempt
  of foreign travellers; but with all her weakness, with all the
  imbecilities of premature age upon her, I love her still. (Vol. II,
  p. 194.)

Of this more vigorous age the prototype is the title-hero of the
volume, the stalwart Kentuckian whose native intelligence and racy
speech delight the Carolinian. This free son of the untamed West is
portrayed with bold strokes, and if his talk leans somewhat heavily
on the current convention of frontier humor, if Montgomery Damon in
his picturesque exaggerations suggests Davy Crockett, the result is
none the less salty. Caruthers does not descend to caricature, but
writes with gusto, and the Kentuckian’s single letter is a little
masterpiece in the vein of the free frontier humor that was competing
with the cavalier romantic for popular approval. His whimsicalities,
Caruthers tells us, he hopes will encourage “a smile of good-humor”
so that this maiden product of the author’s pen may find its way into
the good graces of the reader--a course reckoned “the more necessary
by a southern aspirant, as there is evidently a current in American
literature, the fountainhead of which lies north of the Potomac, and in
which a southern is compelled to navigate up the stream if he jumps in
too far south” (Vol. II, p. 218.)

_The Cavaliers of Virginia, or the Recluse of Jamestown_, announced
in the postscript to the _Kentuckian in New York_, and published
soon afterwards, is a full-fledged historical romance, with Bacon’s
Rebellion for a background and a somewhat melodramatic figure of
a recluse warrior for its romantic hero. There is brisk action,
dramatic Indian fights, much ruffling of young cavaliers, and a fine
aristocratic swagger, but Caruthers’ sympathies seem to incline to the
more democratic elements and in the end his rebellious hero proves
himself a match for the brisk young blades. There is excellent reading
in it, as there is in his last work, _The Knights of the Horse-Shoe;
a Traditionary Tale of the Cocked Hat Gentry in the Old Dominion_,
published in 1845, and reissued as late as 1909; a genial story of
Governor Spotswood’s time. Caruthers deserved a better fate than fell
to his lot. In spite of his excellent work surprisingly little is known
about him; even the spelling of his name and the date of his death
are matters about which there is disagreement. From a slight sketch
contributed to _The Knickerbocker Magazine_ for July, 1838, _Climbing
the Natural Bridge_, it is known that he was a student at Washington
College, now Washington and Lee, at Lexington, Virginia, in the year
1818, and the signature affixed carries only one “r.” He seems to
have removed later to Savannah, Georgia, an enthusiastic description
of which he gives in the _Kentuckian in New York_. No doubt he there
practiced medicine and died in his prime, perhaps in the year 1846.
Virginia historians have inconsiderately neglected a cultivated and
open-minded writer who embodied the finer spirit of the Old Dominion
and whose stories have contributed their portion to the plantation
tradition.


II • John Pendleton Kennedy • A Southern Whig

A far more prosperous course was run by John P. Kennedy, whose
sympathies drew him north rather than south, and who early learned
that it is better to serve a rising than a decaying order. Very like
Caruthers in temperament and gifts, a liberal in all his sympathies, he
found the ties that bound him to the Old Dominion more fragile, and the
drift of circumstance carrying him with the stronger current. It was a
kindly fate that took him in charge, bringing him abundant prosperity
and contemporary fame.

One of the most attractive figures of his generation was this son
of a Maryland father and a Virginia mother. A gentleman of much
personal distinction, high-minded and of wide culture, endowed with
a pleasant wit, easy manners and generous nature, he is an agreeable
representative of the _ante bellum_ Southerns, an American Victorian of
the Cobden-Bright school, standing midway between the northern radical
and the southern Fire Eater. Like Henry Clay, he was a Whig engrafted
on a Jeffersonian root. Born and educated in Baltimore, he was a son of
the borderland, with strong ties of kinship and love that drew him to
the Old Dominion, and even stronger ties of intellectual, social and
financial interests that drew him towards Philadelphia and New York,
Saratoga and Newport. As a young man he found his inspiration in the
life of William Wirt, whose biography he afterwards wrote. Like Wirt,
he dreamed of combining law and letters and adopting the life of a
southern gentleman; but he discovered little that was congenial in the
exactions of the law, and in spite of considerable success as attorney
for certain Baltimore interests, he largely abandoned the profession.
He loved his Chaucer and Shakespeare more than his Coke and Blackstone:
he was more interested in Dickens and Thackeray and Carlyle and Irving
and Scott than in John Marshall’s decisions, and he followed the more
congenial path. He tried his hand likewise at politics. He was a member
of Congress for six years, was Secretary of the Navy during the last
months of President Fillmore’s administration, and was of service to
the Whig party as spokesman on dignified occasions. But he was never
a practical politician, and the rough and tumble of political life
he found utterly distasteful. As he grew older he unconsciously drew
further away from his southern antecedents. In his later years there
was little to distinguish him from Irving and Robert C. Winthrop and
other northern friends. He had left the world of Beverley Tucker far
behind him. He had severed all ties with Virginia and South Carolina,
and during the Civil War he was a militant Unionist, though it cost him
much grief and the loss of old friendships.

Kennedy’s life ran an usually placid and prosperous course, greatly
unlike that of Gilmore Simms. His father was a Scotch-Irish merchant
of Baltimore who married Nancy Pendleton, daughter of an excellent
Virginia family with many honorable connections. His early years
were not unlike Irving’s--a little Latin and Greek and much outdoor
life, with a desultory education got from vagrant books. The course
of study at the local college afforded far less intellectual stimulus
than _Tristram Shandy_, over which he pored of evenings, dissecting
the prose style to discover the secret of its charm, and filling his
notebooks with elaborately colloquial sentences, highly seasoned with
dashes and exclamation points. Graduating at eighteen, he enlisted in a
Baltimore regiment to fight the British, who were preparing their raid
on Washington. He went through the campaign as a summer lark, emerging
unscathed from the single skirmish. The field was lost, but whether the
honor of the crack Fifth was left on the battle ground may be judged
from Kennedy’s humorous comment. “Soon we had the famous ‘trial of
souls’--the battle of Bladensburg. The drafted militia ran away at the
first fire, and the Fifth Regiment was driven off the field with the
bayonet. We made a fine scamper of it. I lost my musket in the mêlée
while bearing off a comrade” (Tuckerman, _Life of Kennedy_, p. 79).

Throughout his twenties Kennedy was a studious dilettante in letters
and politics and law. He married but lost his wife and son within the
year; with his friend Peter Hoffman Cruse he published a series of
Baltimore sketches in two volumes entitled _The Red Book_; and at the
age of thirty-four married again. His second wife was the daughter
of Edward Gray, a wealthy Baltimore cotton-spinner who at the age of
eighteen had emigrated from northern Ireland to Philadelphia, became
a bank clerk and a Federalist simultaneously, adopted Washington and
Hamilton--whom he occasionally met in a professional way--as his
particular heroes, prospered greatly, purchased the Ellicott Mills a
few miles out of Baltimore, and set up a half feudal estate vastly
attractive to discriminating visitors like Irving.

Kennedy’s marriage to Elizabeth Gray in 1829 seems to have been the
turning-point of his life. Before this he had been a disinterested
liberal in his views, concerning himself in a political way with such
humanitarian issues as the repeal of the brutal debtor laws. He had
never been an avowed Jeffersonian like William Wirt and many of his
Virginia connections, but the Jeffersonian idealism must have appealed
to the generous sympathies of the young man. Immediately upon being
taken into the Gray family he adopted its ample scale of living, its
genial hospitality, its social and political philosophy. The influence
of the masterful Edward Gray was thenceforth a dominant creative factor
in Kennedy’s life, and he followed faithfully in the footsteps of his
father-in-law. The profits of the Ellicott Mills had been greatly
increased by the tariff act of 1824. Naturally Edward Gray was an
ardent protectionist, and Kennedy frankly espoused the same policy. He
accepted Henry Clay as his political leader, was sent to Congress on a
protectionist platform, lectured before Workingmen’s Institutes on the
advantages of industrial development, and gained a very considerable
reputation as an expounder of the American Plan. After the war he
became a Republican, voted for Grant, and adopted extreme nationalist
views. That the family income was dependent on tariff favors is a
detail which only a more realistic generation would suggest in
explanation of his political course; the fact remains, nevertheless,
that the youthful disciple of William Wirt adopted the new philosophy
of prosperity, became president of the board of directors of the
Baltimore and Ohio Railway, invested in West Virginia coal lands,
and was by way of becoming a captain of industry. The break with his
southern antecedents was complete and final; he went with his native
city in preferring the industrial to the plantation economy.

Baltimore in Kennedy’s day was a thriving port with a growing trade
to the West Indies and Europe. It had long been a convenient market
for the tobacco of Virginia, and with the development of the clipper
service its over-sea commerce expanded greatly. Unlike Charleston,
the mercantile interests predominated over the planter. Middle-class
ideals, to be sure, were still tempered by the dignified decorum that
lingered on from the eighteenth century. Merchants still emulated the
gentry and strove for personal distinction. They professed benevolent
ideals and their talk was much of public spirit and the progress of the
town. They adopted the romantic faith of their class in the beneficent
processes of trade and industry in furthering social well-being,
and they endowed Mechanics Institutes and founded public libraries
and museums with all the ardor of converts. In this agreeable work
of expounding the gospel of progress, Kennedy joined heartily. It
satisfied the latent idealism of his nature and recompensed him for
the loss of his Virginia heritage. Intellectually he was too honest to
pervert the gospel of progress to selfish class interest and seek to
hide the perversion behind sonorous platitudes, as his friend Robert C.
Winthrop of Boston was guilty of doing. He had too much love for the
English language to misuse it even in defense of the family income.
He could not contract his mind to the compass of a Whig politician’s.
His defense of industrialism, in consequence, embodies the spirit of
the best English liberalism as that liberalism was interpreted by
Victorian Englishmen. He seems to have been honestly convinced that the
future well-being of America was dependent upon the development of an
industrialism to provide an economic balance between manufactures and
agriculture.

Like his friend Irving, Kennedy was a devout romantic, with a love of
the old-time picturesque; but as a consistent Whig he would spin and
weave his romance out of domestic materials, refusing to import. He
was a child of the effervescent days following 1812, when the static
eighteenth century was breaking up and an ebullient romanticism was
permeating the land. Of this youthful period his thought reveals the
clear impress. Washington Irving from long pottering over the old-world
picturesque had become English romantic, with an inveterate dislike of
all innovation. The vulgar nineteenth century was destroying for him
the charm of the eighteenth; he would have had the world remain as it
was before the American and French revolutions had despoiled life of
picturesque feudal ways. Whereas Kennedy, sharing in a romanticism that
was economic and social--that was creating a wonderful America of the
future out of the raw materials of life--was content to remain native,
at home in the land of his birth. He might turn to the past for the
figures and scenes of his stories, but he discovered in the activities
of the present materials for romance quite as fascinating. He was
wholly Victorian in his genial optimism. He was receptive to new ideas
and promising ventures. He listened sympathetically to inventors and
scientists and promoters. He was instrumental in securing Congressional
aid to erect Morse’s telegraph line between Washington and his native
city. As Secretary of the Navy he provided for Commodore Perry’s
expedition to Japan, and the expedition to search for Dr. Kane in the
Arctic regions. But unfortunately his economic romanticism gradually
undermined his literary romanticism; he outgrew his earlier literary
ambitions, and the romances of his later life never got written. In the
end the gospel of progress was his undoing.

That the generous comfort in which he lived afforded him leisure, means
of travel, contact with distinguished people, goes without saying; but
that it was favorable to letters is far from clear. Divided interests
consumed his energies and kept him an amateur to the last. His literary
development was an evolution from a sketchy and humorous Addisonian,
with its echoes of the eighteenth century, to the full Victorian
romantic. The foreign elements from an earlier time slowly settled
to the bottom of the vat and left the pure wine of romance. But it
took time. Like other amateurs he was influenced by current literary
successes, and was much given to following the changing fashions. His
three best-known books, written between the ages of thirty-six and
forty-five, are unlike enough to have been written by different men.
_Swallow Barn_, like the youthful sketches of _The Red Book_, is
Irvingesque, and the Irving influence crops out again in a late book
_Quodlibet_; but _Horseshoe Robinson_ is substantial Revolutionary
romance, done in sober narrative with touches of realism; and _Rob of
the Bowl_ is light and whimsical cavalier romance, all atmosphere and
small talk, utterly unlike Irving. It is in this latter book, perhaps,
written in 1838 at the age of forty-two, that Kennedy really found
himself; he seems to move through the scenes more easily and with
greater delight than in any other of his pages.

That the leisurely sketches of _Swallow Barn_ belong to the school of
Irving is a fact as obvious as Kennedy’s love for the idling plantation
life. Quite too much, however, has been made of this imitativeness--it
is an imitativeness rather of method than of theme or style. If it was
not quite a pioneer work in the field of local description, it was
amongst the earliest. Paulding had dealt with Dutch colonial life,
and Timothy Flint and James Hall had begun the descriptive literature
of the West; but little else had been done at the time _Swallow Barn_
appeared. Longstreet’s _Georgia Scenes_ came out two years later.
Intrinsically as well as historically the work is curiously suggestive.
Nowhere else does the plantation life of the Old Dominion in the days
before its decline appear so vividly as in these discursive pages: “the
mellow, bland, and sunny luxuriance of her old-time society--its good
fellowship, its hearty and constitutional _companionableness_, the
thriftless gaiety of the people, their dogged but amiable invincibility
of opinion, and that overflowing hospitality which knows no ebb.”

Like Irving, Kennedy went back to the old home, but that old home was
Virginia and not England; and there he found still lingering on the
great plantations charmingly romantic anachronisms that had disappeared
elsewhere--a spontaneous romanticism of temperament that gave color and
zest to the daily routine. The aloofness of plantation life had bred in
the Virginia gentry a piquant individuality, a distinction as of old
morocco or calfskin. Philly Wart, the shrewdly humorous fox-hunting
lawyer; old Mr. Tracy of The Brakes, “turning a little sour with age”
and resembling “that waterish, gravelly soil that you see sometimes
around a spring, where nothing grows but sheep-sorrel,” who cherishes a
hereditary boundary dispute, pursuing his hypothetical rights through
all the law courts and discovering, when the matter has been amicably
settled by arbitration, that much of the zest has gone out of his
life; the heroine Bel Tracy, a frank wholesome girl with a dash of Di
Vernon in her romantic affectations that lead her to play at hawking:
such figures fit as naturally into the background as the pampered house
servants, the horseback riding, the constant visiting, the abundant
dinners. Especially the dinners, when the neighborhood is invited in.
The table spread with opulent hospitality and careless profusion--the
baked ham at one end and the saddle of roast mutton at the other, with
fried chicken, oysters, crabs, sweet potatoes, jellies, custards--a
prodigal feast that only outdoor stomachs could manage, and all by way
of preliminary to the dusty wine-bottles and easy stories that hold the
men long after the ladies have withdrawn. Surely the romance of Old
Virginia, preserved in these light-hearted discursive pages, is worth
remembering by later generations who have forgotten how to live so
genially.

In 1832 when _Swallow Barn_ was written, the southern mind was just
at the turn in its attitude towards slavery, and Frank Meriwether, a
Virginian Sir Roger de Coverley, bred in the humanitarianism of the
older liberals, accepts the institution as a present evil that is in
a way of natural extinction. Slavery in _Swallow Barn_ is kept in the
background. There are slaves, of course, on the plantation, many of
them; but they are in the tobacco fields or the quarters, far from the
mansion; and not till near the end of the book does Kennedy’s curiosity
induce him to visit the cabins and draw out Frank Meriwether in talk
on slavery. The result is what one could have foreseen. The plantation
master was the victim of a benevolent romanticism that vaguely looks
for a solution to colonization schemes that will return the negro to
Africa; but like other southern gentlemen he is somewhat testy at the
suggestion of outside interference. Slavery he regards as an exclusive
southern problem, to be solved by those who understand its complex
domestic implications. It would be better for everybody if Abolition
busybodies would mind their own affairs and cease stirring up feelings
where no good can come of it. To prove that Virginia gentlemen are
aware of their responsibility, Meriwether offers a half humorous
suggestion that negro emancipation might well follow the example of
English villeinage, with a slow break-up of the system, the emancipated
negro to remain in a protective feudal relation to his master. It was
an amiable notion to play with, and it fitted the feudal psychology of
the plantation.

In these early sketches Kennedy revealed an easy knack at writing
that gave promise of excellent work later. He has lightness, grace,
refinement, an eye sensitive to picturesque effects, delight in line
and texture and color, an agreeable wit and playful sentiment, a relish
for English idiom and the literary colloquial. In _Horseshoe Robinson_,
written three years later, he abandoned the essay-sketch and turned
to the school of historical romance then in full swing. The story is
done in the orthodox manner of the thirties; it is compounded of equal
parts gentry and commoners, the former providing respectability and the
latter dramatic interest, the whole garnished with a few historical
figures. There is quite obvious concern for authentic reality. The
title-hero, a shrewd homespun scout, is carefully drawn from life; the
background of bushwhackings and forays and onsets, and the numerous
company of blackguards and honest folk, are painted in skillfully;
and the whole conducts to a dramatic finale in the battle of King’s
Mountain. It is an excellent tale, quite worth reading today, but
scarcely comparable in vividness and brisk action--in picaresque
realism which any true war story must embody--with _The Partisan_
of Gilmore Simms, written in the same year of 1835. Realism was not
Kennedy’s forte and after _Horseshoe Robinson_ he abandoned the field
of the Revolution which offered so rich an opportunity for the robuster
genius of the Charleston romancer.

In _Rob of the Bowl_ Kennedy opened a promising vein that he never
adequately explored--the vein of the cavalier romantic. Temperamentally
he was ill fitted to deal with rollicking action or picaresque
adventure; he preferred the leisurely, discursive romantic, subdued
to gentle raillery or humorous tenderness. One trembles to think what
Simms would have made of the materials that Kennedy brought together
in this tale of old St. Mary’s in the days of Charles II. Here is the
raw stuff of a true bloody-bones thriller: a gentlemanly blackguard
with the stumps of his legs bound in a huge rocking trencher and moving
about with the help of crutches, who is deep in the contraband trade;
a swaggering young pirate, a Brother of the Bloody Coast, who falls
in love with the daughter of the Collector of the Port and kidnaps
her from her father’s house; a romantic lover, slender and clerkly,
but skillful with the rapier, who turns out to be the son of Rob; a
haunted house that covers the smuggling operations of Rob and Captain
Cocklescraft; and all this set against a background of partisan
struggle between Roundhead and Cavalier, Protestant and Catholic, in
the early days of the Maryland settlement.

But in the handling the story is far removed from a bloody-bones tale.
The action is deliberately subdued to the humoresque; atmosphere is
studiously created; adventure is held in strict subjection to the
whimsical; and a mellow old-time flavor is imprisoned in the leisurely
pages. Kennedy had an appreciative eye for picturesque characters, and
in _Rob of the Bowl_ he has gathered a choice group, limned--as he
would choose to say--with a partial hand. Garret Weasel, the garrulous
pot-valiant innkeeper, and Dorothy his termagant spouse; Captain Jasper
Dauntless, the cogging, wheedling swordsman who twists Dame Dorothy
about his fingers and inveigles his host into undue commerce with
his cups--these to be sure are stock characters, but they are done
with excellent vivacity. Their abundant talk is well seasoned, and
if the action sometimes drags, the company is good and the drinking
is a sufficient end in itself. All the while he is writing Kennedy
keeps half an eye on Elizabethan literature to assure himself of the
exact turn of phrase. His vocabulary is saturated with the homely old
speech, and his characters talk as if they had culled all the simples
of English cottage gardens to garnish the staple of their wit. He has a
keener delight than Simms in the picturesque archaic. He far surpasses
Irving in easy mastery of the old-fashioned colloquial, as indeed he
surpasses all our early novelists. He delights in the courtly wit of
the Cavalier equally with the humors of Dogberry and Falstaff and
Captain Bobadil, and he quite evidently is seeking to cross the sparkle
of Congreve with the robustness of the Elizabethans. The result may
sometimes appear a bit self-conscious; his phrases too often seem to
be on dress parade; but he can plead his precedents in justification.
In its fondness for the literary colloquial his prose style almost
suggests Thackeray, and it is this suggestion, perhaps, that gave rise
to the tradition that Kennedy wrote for the former a certain chapter
of _The Virginians_. That he supplied Thackeray with materials for his
Virginia backgrounds may be accepted as true, but the indebtedness
probably went no further.

_Rob of the Bowl_ is certainly Kennedy’s best work, as it is one of
the most finished and delightful of our earlier romances. Although it
ran to six editions, the latest in 1907, it has scarcely received the
recognition its lightness of touch deserves. But instead of opening
the vein further he turned away to venture in new fields. _Quodlibet_,
written in 1840,[401] is a surprising successor to _Rob_--a satire on
Jacksonian democracy, done with a light touch and great good humor.
In those acrimonious days when Old Hickory’s attack on the Bank so
embittered its Whig partisans, Kennedy kept his temper, tipped his
shafts with laughter and sent them neatly between the joints of the
Democratic armor. Against such amusing satire fustian is helpless.
The book is keen, vivacious, sparkling. The supposed follies of
Jacksonianism--its deification of the majority vote, its cant of the
sovereign people, its hatred of all aristocrats, its demagoguery and
bluster and sheer buncombe--are hit off with exuberant raillery. The
story professes to be an account of the rise to prosperity of the
Borough of Quodlibet, under the beneficent smile of Democratic finance.
Mean and insignificant before the coming of Jackson, with the removal
of the “Deposites,” “like Jeshurun, it waxed fat,” with its rows
of brick shops built on speculation and its Patriotic Copper-Plate
Bank that issued an unlimited supply of beautifully engraved notes
as a stimulus to enterprise. To be sure the bank broke and the
cashier absconded with his family to Europe, but its untoward end was
attributed by all Jacksonian New Lights to the vile machinations of the
Whigs. It was certainly Nick Biddle and the Barings, with their hatred
of Old Bullion Benton’s democratic gold coinage, that were the devil in
the pot to spill the people’s porridge.

Yet even in its laughter Kennedy’s political bias is sharply and
narrowly partisan. The satire is a capitalistic counter to the agrarian
attack on the rising money power, and it is colored by the chagrin of
gentlemen who find themselves displaced by plebeians. Something of the
old aristocratic contempt for the plain man functioning as a political
animal lingers in its pages, which the bubbling humor does not wholly
conceal. In Jackson’s onslaught on the Bank, Kennedy discovers only an
impudent demagoguery; it is selfish and stupid, turmoiling the country
for partisan ends and seeking to cover its petty spite with the mantle
of patriotism. The Old Hero cuts a sorry figure in these brisk pages,
and Van Buren a still sorrier one. The satire sparkles amusingly, but
it is drawn from the old Federalist vintage and it preserves the flavor
of a time when gentlemen frankly resented the rule of the unwashed
majority. For that very reason _Quodlibet_ is an unusually interesting
document. It is the most vivacious criticism of Jacksonianism in our
political library, one of our few distinguished political satires, and
it deserves a better fate than to gather dust on old shelves.

After _Quodlibet_ Kennedy did little else. The last twenty years of his
life were largely wasted. His dignified life of William Wirt, published
in 1849, seems to have met with approval, for it ran to six editions.
Our grandfathers liked stately narrative that portrayed their subjects
in full dress; and Kennedy gave them an impeccably respectable work in
which all the rugosities of character were ironed out neatly and a fine
starchy effect achieved. It is hard to understand how a writer so keen
to detect the whimsical should have drawn so lifeless a picture of the
genial Attorney-General. Perhaps the memory of Wirt’s reputed greatness
rested too heavily upon him; or it may have been that a lawyer in
old Virginia lived as colorless a life as the narrative suggests; at
any rate the novelist who never had failed to breathe life into the
characters of his fiction, somehow failed in depicting this excellent
gentleman of the old school. During the Civil War Kennedy contributed
to the northern cause his _Letters of Mr. Paul Ambrose on the Great
Rebellion in the United States_, in which he again showed that he
could keep his temper and argue calmly. It was a difficult theme for
which he was inadequately equipped. His constitutional argument is not
impressive and it makes an ill showing when set over against Alexander
H. Stephens’ _Constitutional View of the War between the States_. He
was a man of letters rather than a lawyer, and if he had eschewed
politics and law and stuck to his pen our literature would have been
greatly in his debt. Few Americans of his day were so generously
gifted; none possessed a lighter touch. He has been somewhat carelessly
forgotten even by our literary historians who can plead no excuse for
so grave a blunder.


III • Edgar Allan Poe • Romantic

It is from this slovenly background of aristocratic Virginia, with
its liberalisms and conservatisms running at cross purposes, that the
enigmatical figure of Poe emerged to vex the northern critics. In so
far as any particular environment determined his highly individual and
creative nature, it was the indolent life of the planter gentry, shot
through with a pugnacious pride of locality, with a strong dislike of
alien ways, with haughtiness, dissipation, wastefulness, chivalry.
In his proud, irascible individualism that went out of its way to
pick a quarrel, there is something of the spirit of John Randolph of
Roanoke, but pied and streaked with unfortunate qualities that to
many observers seemed the marks of the mere charlatan. As a southern
gentleman he imbibed the common dislike of New England, and this
dislike was aggravated by its diverse conception of the functions of
art, and by the misfortunes that attended his literary career. An
aesthete and a craftsman, the first American writer to be concerned
with beauty alone, his ideals ran counter to every major interest
of the New England renaissance: the mystical, optimistic element in
transcendentalism; the social conscience that would make the world
over in accordance with French idealism, and that meddled with its
neighbor’s affairs in applying its equalitarianism to the negro; the
pervasive moralism that would accept no other criteria by which to
judge life and letters--these things could not fail to irritate a
nature too easily ruffled. The Yankee parochialisms rubbed across his
Virginia parochialisms; and when to these was added a Yankee preëmption
of the field of literary criticism, when a little clique engaged in the
business of mutual admiration puffed New England mediocrities at his
expense, the provocation was enough to arouse in a sensitive southern
mind an antagonism that rivaled Beverley Tucker’s. In his unhappy
pilgrimage through life Poe was his own worst enemy, but he took
comfort in charging his ill fortune upon the malignancy of others.

Southern though he was in the deep prejudices of a suspicious nature,
his aloofness from his own Virginia world was complete. Aside from his
art he had no philosophy and no programs and no causes. He got from
Virginia what was bad rather than good, and his alienation from the
more generous southern ideals did him harm. It was perhaps harder to be
an artist in that slack southern society than in New England--harder
to be a romantic concerned only with twilight melancholy. It would
have been hard enough anywhere in Jacksonian America. His romanticisms
were of quite another kind than those his countrymen were pursuing;
and the planter sympathized with them no more than did the New York
literati, or the western men of letters. In a world given over to
bumptious middle-class enthusiasms, there would be scant sympathy for
the craftsman and dreamer. There was no unearned increment to be got
from investments in “the misty mid-region of Weir,” which Poe threw
on the market. The technician concerned with the values of long and
short syllables would find few congenial spirits in a world of more
substantial things; and the purveyors of shoddy tales would not take
it kindly if their shortcomings were pointed out and a more competent
craftsmanship insisted upon. And so, like Herman Melville, Poe came to
shipwreck on the reef of American materialisms. The day of the artist
had not dawned in America.

So much only need be said. The problem of Poe, fascinating as it is,
lies quite outside the main current of American thought, and it may be
left with the psychologist and the belletrist with whom it belongs.
It is for abnormal psychology to explain his “neural instability
amounting almost to a dissociated or split personality,” his irritable
pride, his quarrelsomeness, his unhappy persecution complex, his
absurd pretentions to a learning he did not possess, his deliberate
fabrications about his life and methods of work, his oscillations
between abstinence and dissipation, between the morbidly grotesque and
the lucidly rational, his haunting fear of insanity that drove him to
demonstrate his sanity by pursuing complex problems of ratiocination.
Such problems are personal to Poe and do not concern us here. And it is
for the belletrist to evaluate his theory and practice of art: his debt
to Coleridge and Schlegel; the influence of the contemporary magazine
on his conception of the length of a work of the imagination; the
value of his theory of the tyrannizing unity of mood in the poem and
short story; the provocation to the craftsman of the pretentiousness
of contemporary American literature, joined to a flabby and crude
technique; the grossness of the popular taste and the validity of his
critical judgments. Whatever may be the final verdict it is clear that
as an aesthete and a craftsman he made a stir in the world that has
not lessened in the years since his death, but has steadily widened.
Others of greater repute in his day have fared less prosperously in
later reputation. He was the first of our artists and the first of our
critics; and the surprising thing is that such a man should have made
his appearance in an America given over to hostile ideals. He suffered
much from his aloofness, but he gained much also. In the midst of gross
and tawdry romanticisms he refused to be swallowed up, but went his own
way, a rebel in the cause of beauty, discovering in consequence a finer
romanticism than was before known in America.


Footnotes

[401] The characteristic title is _Quodlibet: Containing some Annals
thereof, with an Authentic Account of the Origin and Growth of the
Borough and the Sayings and Doings of Sundry Townspeople: Interspersed
with Sketches of the Most Remarkable and Distinguished Characters
of that Place and its Vicinity. Edited by Solomon Secondthoughts,
Schoolmaster, from original MSS. Indited by him, and now made Public at
the Request and under the Patronage of the Great New Light Democratic
Central Committee of Quodlibet._




Part Two: The Renaissance of Slavery




