Chapter I • Southern Imperialism


I

By the year 1824 a change was becoming evident in the South that was
to affect profoundly the course of southern thought in regard to
her peculiar institution. The passing of the long Virginia hegemony
was a sign that southern opinion was undergoing a revolutionary
overturn, and that leadership henceforth would rest with men of a
different philosophy. The humanitarian spirit that marked the thought
of the preceding generation was dying out, to be replaced by a frank
recognition of local economic interests. Expectation that slavery was
on the way to natural extinction was yielding to the conviction that
the system was too profitable to the South to permit its extinction,
and this in turn bred an imperious desire to spread it westward to
the Pacific. With this significant shift from apology to imperialism,
it became clear to ardent pro-slavery men that lukewarm Virginians of
the old tradition were not the spokesmen to entrust with the fortunes
of the South, and leadership passed to the South Carolina school. In
that momentous shift much was implied. It was more than a shift from
Jefferson to Calhoun, from humanitarian idealism to economic realism.
It marked the complete ascendancy of a small minority of gentleman
planters over the inarticulate mass of southern yeomanry, and the
assertion of the aristocratic ideal as the goal of southern society.
It denied the principle of democracy as that principle was understood
in the North and West, and it rejected the new humanitarian spirit of
western civilization. It abandoned the Jeffersonian equalitarianism
that was so deeply rooted in the southern mind from Kentucky to
Georgia; it cast aside the agrarianism of John Taylor and the older
Virginians; and it set up in place of these congenial conceptions the
alien ideal of a Greek democracy. More momentous still, it threw down
the gauntlet to the ideals of the middle class, then in the first
flush of a triumphant career, and in the armed clash that eventually
resulted, it was destroyed by that class.

The intellectual capital of southern imperialism was Charleston, but
its numerical strength lay in the Black Belt, with South Carolina to
the east and Texas to the west, a compact territory the heart of which
was Georgia, Alabama, Mississippi and Louisiana. In this new South that
was rapidly passing through its frontier development, the patriarchal
system of Virginia gave way to a system of negro exploitation, more
naked as it passed further westward. It was here that the proportion
of slaves to whites was greatest; it was here that slave labor was
most profitable; and it was here in consequence that the slave economy
was most militant. The Black Belt became the native habitat of the
southern Fire Eater. In the late twenties and early thirties South
Carolina provided the outstanding leaders of the new school; but the
philosophy of imperialism spread rapidly and western men came more and
more to the front. George McDuffie and Bob Toombs, perhaps the boldest
of the loquacious tribe of Fire Eaters, came from Georgia; Alexander
H. Stephens was bred in the same turbulent state; L. Q. C. Lamar and
Jefferson Davis were from Mississippi. For the most part self-made,
products of a frontier environment, these western extremists had got
from Jefferson little more than an assertive individualism that easily
espoused the states-rights philosophy and prompted them to defend their
immediate interests. It was this vigorous group that largely created
the new southern psychology and prodded the southern mind along the
path marked out for it to travel. Democratic in their attitude towards
the white voter, middle class in their love of exploitation, they
retained little of the spirit of the Virginia school.

The expansion of the South to the Gulf region came a generation later
than the settlement of the Ohio valley. The Creek Indians who clung
tenaciously to the rich lands of Mississippi were long an obstacle to
the white advance, and the settlers filtered in slowly. Moreover the
slave economy was ill fitted to the business of pioneering. It was
difficult to transport negroes and establish great plantations in a
wilderness; there was too little security in a region that offered
every temptation to the slave to run away. The plantation system could
prosper only after a considerable degree of development had been
effected and sufficient negroes provided. On the other hand, the rich
soil, virgin and productive, offered every inducement for large-scale
production of cotton, tobacco and sugar. Here the economics of slavery
could be fairly tested, and if the system were found to be profitable
it would spread of its own impulse beyond the Mississippi, becoming
more imperialistic with every extension, ambitious to seize Texas with
its filibusters, looking as far as California and the Oregon territory
for future expansion. But while planning for such expansion it must
secure its strategic front at Washington, making certain that no rival
economy should control the central government to its disadvantage. It
was an ambitious program, but it was all implicit in the evident fact
that slavery in the Black Belt proved to be profitable.

The explanation of this sudden prosperity of the Black Belt is a
matter of familiar knowledge. Coincident with the first westward
expansion of slavery came a revolution in the technique of the English
cotton industry that brought about corresponding changes in southern
agriculture. The production of cotton textiles in England had long
been held back by the difficulty of spinning a fine and even thread.
When this problem was solved at the beginning of the century by the
invention of new machines, the cotton industry at once developed
amazingly, making heavy demands upon the supply of American raw
materials. This supply in turn was greatly increased by the invention
of the cotton gin, and the combined result of these inventions was
an upheaval in southern agriculture. In the eighteenth century the
southern staples were tobacco, rice and indigo; by 1825 the staples
had become cotton, tobacco and sugar. Almost in a decade cotton had
become king. In 1791, three years after Andrew Jackson settled in
Nashville, the total export of cotton was only 200,000 pounds. In 1803
it had risen to 40,000,000 pounds, and by 1860 the export for the
year was of the value of nearly two hundred millions of dollars. Such
figures provide a sufficient explanation of the militant spirit of the
slave economy after 1820. Here was an enormous vested interest, the
economic life of the South, that could not suffer its present or future
profits to be put in jeopardy by any political party on any pretext.
Its well-being and its prestige were both at stake. The peculiar
institution, which a generation before was commonly believed to be in
the way of natural extinction, had the South by the throat.

It was the strategic weakness of the South that the spirit of
exploitation, which following the peace of 1783 had spread through
America like the itch, should there have assumed its most hateful
form, far more revolting to the humanitarian sense and far less
justifiable to uneasy consciences than wage slavery. With every
extension the system became necessarily more brutal in exploitation.
As new plantations were opened the natural increase of negroes was
inadequate to meet the pressing demands for slaves. Since the abolition
of the traffic with Africa the occasional smuggling by venturesome
runners--many of whom were respectable New England church members--had
provided a totally inadequate supply of raw material; the price of
slaves rose steadily, and this in turn led to increasing speculation
in negroes. Buying and selling by middlemen went on briskly, to the
horror of northern humanitarians and the concern of southern. So
brutal and open was the exploitation that Alexander H. Stephens--the
kindest-hearted of men--went so far as to advocate the reopening of the
slave trade with Africa, as the lesser of the two evils. The better
South hated what it could not help. Although the slave trader remained
a social pariah with whom no gentleman would associate, his business
was a necessary evil of the system and could not be eradicated.

The reaction of the slave system upon the southern people, both
plantation masters and poor whites, was wholly evil. The generous
culture of Virginia failed to take root in the Black Belt. The
development of the plantation system under hired overseers infected
the masters, few in numbers and absolute in power, with an exaggerated
sense of their own greatness. The aristocratic spirit of the Old
Dominion had been tempered by a feeling of patriarchal responsibility
that humanized the relations between master and slave, and more
generous social contacts had created an admirable republican
squirearchy. But in the frontier Gulf states the rapid expansion of
the plantation system created an aristocracy given to swaggering,
_bourgeois_ in spirit, arrogant in manners. Republican simplicity was
losing vogue and there was much loose talk about the superiority of
the classes. It is said that when Alexander H. Stephens was appointed
a delegate to the Confederate Convention at Montgomery, he refused
to attend till he was assured that the jingoes would make no attempt
to set up a monarchy. Gideon Welles is authority for the story that
when news came to Washington of the secession of South Carolina,
Mrs. Jefferson Davis was all aflutter: “She said she wanted to get
rid of the old government; that they would have a monarchy South, and
gentlemen to fill official positions” (_Diary_, Vol. II, p. 256). Such
stories were probably the result of war hysteria; nevertheless they
suggest a bias in the southern temper that reveals how far the new
South had drifted from its Jeffersonian moorings.

Of this new South with its grandiose dreams of slave imperialism, fate
selected Jefferson Davis to be the political leader and spokesman. The
choice may have proved unfortunate, but it was logical. Much calumny
has been heaped upon his name, but that is the common fate of partisans
of lost causes. The real Jefferson Davis is to be sought in some mean
between the extravagant adulation of his friends and the slanders of
his enemies. Not a great man certainly; in no sense comparable to Lee
or Stonewall Jackson or Alexander H. Stephens; he was very far from a
petty or time-serving nature. As time softens the old animosities it
reveals the features of a high-minded southern gentleman who possessed
the virtues and the weaknesses of his race. Simple and austere in
tastes, he was the product of a crossing of the southern Puritan with
the aristocratic tradition of the Old Dominion. If he was not of
the old cavalier stock he was a gentleman by instinct and training.
His father was half Welsh, half English; his mother Scotch-Irish.
He came of Revolutionary stock. After the war his father settled in
Georgia and later removed to Kentucky, where the son was born in Todd
County in 1808. While still a small child he was taken to Wilkinson
County, Mississippi, where he was brought up on a plantation. Educated
at Lexington, Kentucky, and at West Point, he proved a serious,
capable student, who loved reading but possessed little intellectual
curiosity. His ideas were few, but those he embraced he clung to with
the tenacity of a strong nature. Resigning from the army after a few
years of honorable service, he settled down as a plantation master.
He was summoned from his isolation by the call for troops to serve
in the Mexican campaign, went through several battles with unusual
distinction, and proved himself an extremely able officer. With
his military fame the path to political preferment was open and he
demonstrated his ability in Congress. At the outbreak of the secession
movement he was eager to receive the appointment as commander of
the southern armies, but fate called him to the presidency of the
Confederacy and he devoted his best strength unselfishly to the cause,
only to find the accumulated bitterness of the North heaped upon his
single head. It was an unhappy lot, but there was iron in him, and he
bore it like a man.

Jefferson Davis was cut out of the same tough oak that fashioned John
C. Calhoun. Hard and unyielding, tenacious of opinion, dictatorial,
somewhat inclined to arrogance, he might break, but he would not
bend. The Scotch-Irish stock was rarely genial or tolerant, and Davis
possessed none of the seeming pliability of Lincoln that yielded the
non-essentials to secure the essentials. Utterly lacking in humor and
easy-going good nature, he offended by his very virtues. Profoundly
Puritan, he was narrow and rigid, a legalist in temperament, proud and
jealous of authority. Meticulously honest, he could not get on well
with men; he quarreled with his generals and wore himself out trying
to do everything himself. Politically he was a strict constructionist
of the most rigid views. He refused to follow Calhoun into the camp
of Nullification. His patriotism was extreme, and only a greater
loyalty to his state made him an advocate of secession. At bottom he
was a Jeffersonian and to the end of his life he was faithful to the
principles of his party. Kindly and humane, he treated his dependents
with singular consideration. He set up a curious little democracy
amongst the slaves of his plantation, and his negroes were devoted to
him with rare loyalty. There was in his nature not the slightest trace
of the exploiter; he was a patriarchal master after the old Virginia
ideal, with no hint of the speculator or middleman. The background of
his thought was agrarian and he shared with Jefferson a dislike for
capitalistic industrialism. The President of the Confederacy may have
been an unfortunate civil leader, but the slanders that so long clung
to his name are only worthy of the gutter. The sin that he was led into
was not counted a sin in his southern decalogue; it was the sin, not
of secession, but of imperialism--a sin common to all America in those
drunken times when the great West invited exploitation.




