Chapter IV • Samuel Adams • The Mind of the American Democrat


In the history of the rise of political democracy in America Samuel
Adams occupies a distinguished place. He was by no means the first
American to espouse the democratic cause, but he was the first to
conceive the party machinery to establish it in practice. The single
purpose of his life was the organization of the rank and file to
take over control of the political state. He was the instrument of a
changing world that was to transfer sovereignty from the aristocratic
minority to the democratic majority. Political sovereignty inheres
potentially in the mass will of the people; but if that will is
restrained from exercising its strength by an undemocratic psychology,
it remains powerless in presence of an organized minority. The America
in which Samuel Adams labored was ripe to throw off the inhibitions
of the popular will; and it was his perception of that fact, and the
tenacity and skill with which he cajoled the mass to “make a push for
perfect political liberty,” that made him an outstanding figure in our
history. In his hands the majority will became in reality the sovereign
will. But before he could wield it he must create it; and before he
could create it he must understand the mass mind. He must turn popular
prejudice to his own purpose; he must guide the popular resentment at
grievances into the way of revolution; he must urge the slow moving
mass forward until it stood on the threshold of independence, beyond
which lay the ultimate goal of his ambitions, the democratic state.
And so, in pursuit of his life purpose, Samuel Adams became a master
political strategist, the first of our great popular leaders.

The modern term, professional agitator, most adequately characterizes
him. He was an intriguing rebel against every ambition of the regnant
order. He hated every sort of aristocratic privilege, whether in
the form of overseas prerogative or in the later guise of native
Federalism; it must be swept away and a new, democratic order take its
place. In the pursuit of this great end he daily counseled treason
and made rebellion his business. Loyalty to the government _de facto_
was no virtue in his political ethics; he was not frightened into
conformity by the stigma attaching to the term rebel. America was
founded in rebellion, he well knew, and it should continue in rebellion
till every false loyalty was cast off and concern for the common
well-being accepted as the single loyalty worthy of respect. “What has
commonly been called rebellion in the people,” he commented wisely,
“has often been nothing else but a manly and glorious struggle in
opposition to the lawless power of rebellious Kings and Princes.”[261]
He was the outstanding example in his day of the militant idealist to
whom the dissemination of unrest was a matter of principle. No cause
goes forward without its leaders, and democratic America owes Samuel
Adams a debt which it has too grudgingly acknowledged.

He was born and grew up in an atmosphere of politics. His father
was a prosperous, well-read gentleman who found politics a pleasant
avocation; he established the Caucus Club for political discussion,
and became one of the leaders of the popular party that opposed the
Tory group, gathered about the royal officials. Its personnel can only
be guessed at, but it was probably composed of small merchants, with
a following of mechanics and other unimportant folk. It seems to have
been greatly interested in currency reform, and the elder Adams was
one of the principal organizers and stockholders of the Land Bank, a
project for increasing the money of the commonwealth. The institution
was roughly liquidated by government decree at the instigation of
commercial rivals interested in “tight money”; the father lost heavily
and the son was pretty much ruined by later attempts at arbitrary
collection on his stock. It seems to have been a petty and altogether
sordid move on the part of government, in which Hutchinson played an
important part. With the loss of his money Samuel Adams, Jr., settled
down to a meager, somewhat precarious existence, preferring politics
to profits, and began that long, arduous career which resulted so
momentously for America.

He had taken his two degrees at Harvard in the expectation of becoming
a minister; but while an undergraduate he was more interested in the
political classics than in theology, and he rejected the ministry for
the law. But a brief experience with Coke sufficed, and he turned
to more congenial fields. With a group of like-minded young men he
founded in 1748 _The Public Advertiser_, a weekly magazine of politics.
In the essays which as a young man of twenty-six he wrote for that
paper, he expounded a political creed frankly liberal. He began as he
ended, anti-Tory and pro-democratic. From then till the beginning of
the tax troubles he was a tireless contributor to the newspapers, and
except during the administration of the liberal Pownall, always in
the opposition. Hutchinson stated the exact truth when he said, “He
was for near twenty years a writer against government in the public
newspapers.” The need was urgent, for during those years the government
of Massachusetts was being subtly changed. With increasing prosperity,
ways of thinking, like styles of dress, were becoming more like those
of St. James’s. Ambitious young men were drawn into the circle of the
ruling group and caught with the bait of preferment. An aristocracy
was emerging that wanted only titles to make ready to set up a House
of Lords. Quite plainly it was time for the liberals to arouse the
rank and file of the people to the danger, and this became the daily
business of Samuel Adams.

The evidence available is insufficient to explain the motives which
impelled him to take up and carry forward so difficult and thankless
a work. The cost in personal ease and the good opinion of respectable
people was great, the peril certain, and the reward dubious.
Not lightly will a serious man compromise with treason; to talk
republicanism was not profitable in Tory New England; and Samuel Adams,
no more than another, was anxious to come to close acquaintance with
the hangman. What secret motives inspired the heart of this ascetic
Puritan--“he eats little, drinks little, sleeps little, thinks much,”
said the Loyalist Galloway, half sneeringly, half out of respect--we
can only guess at. Very likely there was an old grudge at a government
that had ruined him; very likely love of power stimulated his hatred
of the ruling clique; very likely his close association with tradesmen
colored his resentment at overseas regulation, for better than most,
he knew that the American goose was reserved for English plucking.
Nevertheless the more intimately one comes to know Samuel Adams the
more inadequate seem all cynical and sordid interpretations of his
strange career. He was no self-seeking politician, but a man of vision.
He believed ardently in the principle of local home rule. Love of
the New England town-meeting democracy was bred in his bones. More
clearly than others he saw the danger of erecting a governing class
irresponsive to the popular will. He was, in short, the embodiment
of the rising spirit of the eighteenth century that found expression
in individualism, that exalted liberty and hated tyranny--a spirit
that had for its ultimate purpose the reduction of the powers of the
political state.

His critical study of the methods of Tory politicians early stripped
from government the last vestige of glamor so appealing to the
ignorant. Adams understood too perfectly the secret springs and
backstairs intrigues that determined governmental policies, to be taken
in by appeal to his loyalty. English politics was a sordid business,
conducted by professional traders, to whom loyalty and patriotism were
no more than gestures to gull the simple. Quite as well as Franklin,
Adams understood its ways. He had watched the steady unfolding of the
ministerial program: how it was proposed to free the royal governor
and judges from popular restraint by the payment of salaries from the
royal chest; to change the charter in the interest of prerogative by
vesting the nomination of the councilors in the governor; to disarm the
democracy by destroying the town meeting as a political instrument;
in short to substitute government by ministerial instructions for
government by the people. As he watched the calculated encroachments
upon the historical rights of the commonwealth--rights that were
sanctioned by a hundred and forty years of exercise, and were now in
danger from carelessness--he would have been faithless to his duty
if he had not sought to arouse the people of Massachusetts to the
danger. There was no idle rhetoric in the words, “No time can better
be employed than in the preservation of the rights derived from the
British constitution.... No treasure can be better expended, than in
securing that true old English liberty, which gives a relish to every
other enjoyment.”[262]

In the fulfillment of this purpose to defend the democratic rights of
Massachusetts, Adams became no mean master of political theory. In the
works of no other writer is the total body of Revolutionary thought so
adequately revealed. He was deeply read in the political classics, and
all the great names--Hooker and Grotius, Pufendorf and Vattel, Coke and
Blackstone, Locke and Milton and Sidney and Hume and Montesquieu--are
spread largely through his pages to buttress his argument. In spite
of the elusive “meanders and windings” of his thought, veering and
tacking as the winds blew, three broad lines of defense are clearly
discernible. He rested his case on an appeal to the natural rights of
man, to the particular rights and privileges of the British subject
under the constitution, and to the express terms of the compact between
the crown and its emigrant subjects laid down in the several colonial
charters. Inasmuch as the American cause was to be argued before an
old-world court, it was common prudence to seek to justify the seeming
innovations of American institutional development, by old-world
precedent and authority. If he could base the American grievance on
the Whig doctrine of representation, he might rally the English Whigs
to the American cause. This was sound constitutionalism, and Adams was
too shrewd not to profess the highest respect for the glorious British
constitution. “You know there is a charm in the word ‘constitutional,’”
he slyly suggested to a fellow colonial; and such respect, not to say
veneration, he trumpeted to the world, until it may well have seemed
that he did protest too much.

In his first line of defense Adams was on familiar ground, and he
was supported by the authority of Locke, whose opinions were sacred
in the eyes of English Whigs. What use he made of him is evident;
“the immortal Locke,” he calls him at one time, and at another, “one
of the greatest men that ever wrote.” He had been a disciple of
Locke since his first interest in political theory, and he thought
and spoke habitually in terms of the natural-rights school. It is
sometimes asserted that the appeal to natural rights was made only
after the breakdown of the colonial argument drawn from constitutional
practice.[263] But as early as 1765 Adams based his argument on Locke
in assuming the economic origin of government, and the inevitable
connection between property and parliamentary representation.[264]
How heavily he leaned on the natural-rights school appears again
and again; particularly in a brilliant series of articles, signed
“Candidus,” written in 1771, where he paraphrases the _Second Treatise
on Government_:

  Mr. Locke has often been quoted in the present dispute ... and very
  much to our purpose. His reasoning is so forcible, that no one has
  ever attempted to confute it. He holds that “the preservation of
  property is the end of government, and that for which men enter
  into society. It therefore necessarily supposes and requires
  that the people should have property, without which they must be
  suppos’d to lose that by entering into society, which was the _end_
  for which they enter’d into it; too gross an absurdity for any man
  to own. Men therefore _in society having property_, they have such
  right to the goods, which by the law of the community are theirs,
  that no body hath the right to take _any part_ of their subsistence
  from them without their consent: Without this, they could have no
  property at all. For I truly can have no property in that which
  another can by right take from me when he pleases, against my
  consent. Hence, says he, it is a mistake to think that the supreme
  power of any commonwealth can dispose of the estates of the subject
  arbitrarily, or _take any part_ of them at pleasure. The prince or
  senate can never have a power to take to themselves the whole or
  any part of the subjects’ property without _their own_ consent;
  for this would be in effect to have no property at all.”--This is
  the reasoning of that great and good man. And is not our own case
  exactly described by him?[265]

This was excellent doctrine in the eyes of the English Whigs, and
it explains in part the support which Pitt and Camden lent to the
colonial cause. But in his second line of defense, namely, that the
English constitution was a fundamental charter of the natural rights
of the subject, and that a statute which disregarded those natural
rights was null and void, Adams was on less tenable ground. Every
attempt to establish such a principle, whether that fundamental law
be conceived of as the “law of God and nature,” special compacts like
the Magna Charta, or the Common Law, has met with failure in English
constitutional practice. Nevertheless Adams made use of the argument,
derived, very likely, from Coke.

  Magna Charta itself is in substance but a constrained Declaration
  or proclamation, and promulgation in the name of King, Lords, and
  Commons, of the sense the latter had of their original, inherent,
  indefeazible natural Rights, as also those of free Citizens equally
  perdurable with the other. That great author, that great jurist,
  and even that Court writer Mr. Justice Blackstone holds that this
  recognition was justly obtained of King John sword in hand: and
  peradventure it must be one day sword in hand again rescued and
  preserved from total destruction.[266]

  [Magna Charta] is affirm’d by Lord Coke to be declaratory of
  the principal grounds of the fundamental laws and liberties of
  England. “It is called _Charta Libertatum Regni, the Charter
  of the Liberties of the kingdom_, upon great reason ... because
  _liberos facit, it makes and preserves the people free_.”... If
  then according to Lord Coke, _Magna Charta_ is declaratory of
  the principal grounds of the _fundamental_ laws and liberties of
  the people, and Vatel is right in his opinion, that the supreme
  legislature cannot change the constitution, I think it follows,
  whether Lord Coke has expressly asserted it or not, that an act of
  parliament made against Magna Charta in violation of its essential
  parts, is void.[267]

Adams was probably fully aware of the weakness of the argument. The
well known attempt of Coke to establish a body of super-parliamentary
law that sanctioned the annulling of a statute had been a total
failure. Parliament had refused to yield sovereignty to the lawyers.
The Tories were on stronger ground in asserting Hume’s doctrine that
“the only rule of government is the established practice of the age,
upon maxims universally assented to”; and the established practice
was sufficient reply to the argument that “it is the glory of the
British constitution that it hath its foundations in the law of God and
nature.” Moreover the doctrine of virtual representation was at hand
to cover any discrepancy between natural rights and existing practice;
the argument from Locke was met by a legal refinement which held that
as the charter of Massachusetts was as of the manor of East Greenwich,
the freemen of Boston were personally represented by the parliamentary
member from that borough.

When Adams fell back upon his third line of defense, the appeal to
the colonial charter, he broke with the English Whigs completely. The
royal charters, by authority of which the colonies had been founded and
governed hitherto, were exalted by him into a secondary fundamental
law, subordinate to the English constitution, but with authority
beyond an act of parliament. This organic law of the charter was “the
only medium of their political connection with the Mother State,” he
argued, and as sacred to Americans “as Magna Charta is to the People of
Britain, as it contains a Declaration of all their Rights founded in
natural Justice.”[268]

  Thus we see that Whatever Govermnt in general may be founded in,
  Ours was manifestly founded in Compact.... By this Charter, we have
  an exclusive Right to make Laws for our own internal Government &
  Taxation: And indeed if the Inhabitants here are British Subjects
  ... it seems necessary that they should exercise this Power
  themselves; for they are not represented in the British Parliamt &
  their great Distance renders it impracticable: It is very probable
  that all the subordinate legislative Powers in America, were
  constituted upon the Apprehension of this Impracticability.[269]

After all, the futility of argument as a colonial defense against
Grenville or Townshend was evident to so shrewd a student of political
realism as Samuel Adams. If the colonies were to preserve their
traditional liberties, more effective means must be found than appeal
to justice or colonial use and wont. Force must be used, and that
force--short of armed rebellion--could be only an aroused public
opinion. It was like to prove a difficult business, this arousing of
an effective public opinion, and not wanting in danger; but neither
difficulty nor danger would deter a calculating enthusiast like Adams
from undertaking it. He was ready to devote his life to the work of
creating and guiding a popular interest in political measures.

The means which he made use of were as novel as they were repugnant
to the Tory statecraft. He was the first American to understand the
power of publicity, and not the least of his services to democracy was
his attack upon the principle of secret government. Affairs of state
had always been guarded jealously from public knowledge, on the theory
long before stated by Sir Robert Filmer that the subject must “have
nothing to do to meddle with mysteries of state, such _arcana imperii_,
or cabinet councils, the vulgar may not pry into.” Adams now proposed
to lay them open to common inspection. He insisted that questions of
governmental policy be taken out of the exclusive jurisdiction of
secret councils, and transferred to Faneuil Hall where the freemen
of Boston might examine them, and where the “Cause of Liberty” might
“be warmly espoused and ably vindicated.” Here was a revolutionary
proposal indeed, with its demand for public discussion and a popular
referendum; and naturally it gave offense to the crown officials. It
meant the vulgarization of government. It was a disturbing thought
to such men that government might come to be regarded as the common
concern of the tax-paying public; that the town meeting might fall
under the control of the plebeian mass and crowd in with its demands
upon the aristocratic Council. How could gentlemen deliberate freely
and determine wisely, with demagogues sitting in judgment on every word
and vote? So disturbing to gentlemen was any criticism that one of
Hutchinson’s followers went so far as to charge Adams with “Indecency
in ‘undertaking to answer a Governor’s Message,’” to which he replied:

  I know very well that it has been handed as a political Creed of
  late, that the Reasoning of the People without Doors is not to be
  regarded--But every “transient Person” has a Right publickly to
  animadvert upon whatever is publickly advanc’d by any Man, and I am
  resolv’d to exercise that Right, when I please, without asking any
  Man’s Leave.[270]

Effective organization of the rank and file of the people was the
business at hand. It was a new problem and there was need of new
methods. The Caucus Club, founded by his father, served as a training
school for the leaders; there the policies were determined upon for the
town meeting and the assembly, and there the plans for a continental
union were laid in Non-Importation Agreements, organization of
Committees of Correspondence, and the like. The program there agreed
upon Adams made it his business to put through the town meeting, as
the first step. When he faced his fellow Bostonians in Faneuil Hall
he relied upon the influence which long years of familiar intercourse
with all sorts and conditions of men had won for him, and many a Boston
freeman went to the meeting ready to vote for “whatever the old man
wanted.” Behind the imposing figure of John Hancock, or the eloquence
of John Adams, was certain to be the directing mind of the “master of
the puppets,” as Hutchinson sneeringly called Samuel Adams.

His hours of triumph in Boston town meeting or in the assembly were
preceded by an incredible amount of labor with the pen as well as with
the tongue, for this master politician was the journalist as well as
the organizer of the New England revolution. The public opinion on
which he depended was daily being made in chimney corners and tavern
talk, and he proposed to mold it through the agency of a party press.
No other pen in Boston was so busy as his. “There is Sam Adams writing
against the Tories,” his fellow townsmen are said to have remarked
when they saw his familiar candle burning long into the night. When he
was away in attendance on the Continental Congress he reproached his
friends at home for neglecting the work of publicity. “Your presses
have been too long silent. What were your Committees of Correspondence
about? I hear nothing of circular Letters--of joynt Committees &c.
Such Methods have in times past raised the Spirits of the people--drawn
off their Attention from picking up Pins, & directed their Views to
great objects.”[271]

With such neglect Samuel Adams could not be charged. As clerk of the
inevitable Committee of Grievances appointed by the Boston town meeting
in accordance with his prearranged plan, he wrote those plain-spoken
papers that stirred the wrath of Tory gentlemen; as clerk of the
assembly he was the chief author of successive state papers, which
under guise of replying to the prerogative principles of Bernard
and Hutchinson, set forth in masterly fashion the whole theory of
colonial rights; and as Chairman of the Committee of Correspondence
he appealed to his fellow Americans of every colony. Yet his official
writings constitute only a minor part of his total work. His letters
were innumerable and his newspaper articles crowded the desk of every
friendly editor. The labors undergone and the energy consumed were
enormous. It was no holiday task to create and guide a public opinion
that was so constantly falling into apathy.

Running through the third volume of Hutchinson’s _History of
Massachusetts Bay_ is a note of indignant protest at “the machinations
of selfish and designing men” who at the precise time when the feeling
between the two countries was friendliest, and an amicable settlement
of differences seemed likeliest, were assiduous to breed fresh discord
and frustrate the hopes of peace. That he had Adams chiefly in mind
there can be little doubt. During the “calm interval” of the summer
of ’71, when, according to Hutchinson, “the province was more free
from real evils” than for years, and when “to keep up a spirit of
discontent, recourse was had, either to evils merely imaginary, or to
such as were at a distance, and feared rather than felt,”[272] Adams
wrote the ablest of his many able newspaper articles.[273] In no other
phase of his work is the craft of the man so evident as in these
anonymous newspaper discussions. There was cunning as well as caution
in his method. Changing his style with every fresh quill and every
new pen name, putting forth an idea for the sake of denying it, then
examining its merits cautiously, and finally advocating it boldly, he
created like Falstaff a host of patriots out of a single Bostonian in
brown homespun, making it appear that many were troubled over evils
that were visible only to him. On occasion his style possesses the
light touch, the leisurely detail, the easy pleasantry of a Spectator
essay;[274] again, there is a note of biting irony and studied
insult;[275] and again, there is dignified discussion in which Adams
argues dispassionately with his countrymen, or pleads with them to
stand together in defense of the common welfare. But in whatever vein
or under whatever disguise he wrote, the conclusion of every argument
was the implied suggestion, how much better it would be if the American
people were to take into their own hands the management of their
affairs.

But before the colonial could be induced to strike for governmental
control, the old psychology of subserviency to the ruling class must
be uprooted; and an effective means to that end was to lay bare the
selfish motives of the aristocracy. To stimulate what we call today
class consciousness was a necessary preliminary to a democratic
psychology; and to this task Adams devoted every energy. The ways
of the iconoclast are rarely lovely, and the breaking of idols is
certain to wound sensitive souls. There was abundant justification
for the charge of Hutchinson that “robbing men of their characters”
was the “patriotic business” of Samuel Adams; but he missed the point
in attributing to him the motive, _Gubernatorum vituperatio populo
placet_. The respect that attached to Bernard and Hutchinson by
virtue of their official positions was a powerful ally of ministerial
authority; their words carried weight beyond the sanction of their
logic; for the good of America their power must be destroyed. Doubtless
Adams was ungenerous in attack; certainly he was vindictive in his
hates; but the cold record as we read it today justifies one in the
belief that the men whom he attacked were tools of the ministry,
and must be struck down if the rights of Massachusetts were to be
preserved. And it was due to the bitter denunciations of Adams that
Thomas Hutchinson was driven from his native land and forced to take
refuge in England, the best hated man in all the colonies.

But it was not enough to pull down the courtly Hutchinson, for behind
the governor was a group of lawyers and judges, equally subservient
to prerogative, adepts in the art of interpreting away rights by due
process of law. It became part of the day’s work, therefore, to lay
open the sacred precincts of the courts to common inspection; to create
a public opinion to review judicial decisions when those decisions
were political rather than legal. It was a startling innovation for a
private citizen to assert in the public press that “_state-lawyers_,
attorneys and sollicitors general, & persons advanced to the highest
stations in the courts of law, _prostitute_ the honor of the
profession, become _tools of ministers_, and employ their talents for
_explaining away_, if possible, the Rights of a kingdom.” Never before
had the integrity of the colonial courts been openly attacked and
the motives of the judiciary impugned. But it was far more startling
for Adams to lay down the thesis, that in matters which concern the
general welfare, the letter of the law is not to be considered final,
and “the opinions ... and determinations of the greatest Sages and
Judges of the law in the Exchequer Chamber, ought not to be considered
as decisive or binding ... any further, than they are consonant to
natural reason.”[276] If Franklin was concerned to create a new
economics in harmony with democratic needs, Samuel Adams was concerned
to democratize the New England law. He was dissatisfied with a legal
system created by a Tory past, and that had lately received a fresh
Tory impress at the hands of Blackstone. Such a body of law could not
answer the needs of a free people; it must be reshaped to conform to
new needs. And the conclusion towards which his thinking pointed was
the principle of a referendum of judicial decisions, for how otherwise
could it be determined whether a given decision were “consonant to
natural reason”?

Samuel Adams was little given to striking at the air, and he set
himself to the work of cutting the claws of the more obnoxious judges
with the same cool skill that marked his baiting of the governor.
Certain of them who held plural offices he maneuvered out of the
Council, on the ground that they ought not to exercise both legislative
and judicial functions; and when Bernard protested that they had been
members of the Council for years and by reason of “their knowledge of
the public business, were almost necessary to the body,” he replied
that they were to be released “from the cares and perplexities
of politics ... to make further advances in the knowledge of the
law”--which thrust, in view of the notorious fact that few of them had
been trained in the law, but had risen to the bench through political
influence, must be reckoned a palpable hit.[277] Others beyond his
immediate reach found their characters assailed and their motives
aspersed, until popular respect for them was destroyed; and the unlucky
judges who accepted payment from the royal chest found such a hue and
cry raised against them that they were driven to make choice between
the royal guineas or answering to the mob--a rude but effective way of
stimulating their loyalty to the commonwealth. In short, this “master
of the puppets,” measuring the power of the judges and fearing their
prerogative bias, did not scruple over ways and means of rendering them
more responsive to the popular will, which in the eyes of the best
people of Boston was no less than incendiary.

The work of Samuel Adams was largely done before the word democrat was
given vogue by the French Revolution, and he cautiously refrained from
using it; nevertheless he was probably the most thoroughgoing democrat
of his generation of Americans. He was wholly persuaded that the
sovereign people have a right to change their fundamental law, together
with the interpretation and administration of it, whenever they
desire; and that pending such change it was well to nullify an act of
prerogative subversive of their interests. “We contend, that the People
& their Representatives have a Right to withstand the abusive Exercise
of a legal & constitutional Prerogative of the Crown,” he argued in
reply to Hutchinson; “whenever instructions cannot be complyed with,
without injuring the people, they cease to be binding.”[278] From the
necessary corollary, that the people are competent to judge of their
own good and manage their own affairs, Adams did not shrink. Stated
thus in general terms, the theory possessed no novelty. The sovereignty
of the people had long been a staple of Whiggish theory; but Adams gave
to the doctrine democratic significance. The people, in his philosophy,
were something more than the wealthy and cultured minority to whom the
Whigs appealed; they were the mass of men--the yeoman, the tradesman,
the mechanic--all that multitude of homespun folk who had hitherto been
mere pawns in the political game. Such a passage as this, written four
years before Lexington, reads like Tom Paine and his doctrine of the
_res publica_:

  The _multitude_ I am speaking of, is the _body of the people_--no
  contemptible multitude--for whose sake government is instituted;
  or rather, who have themselves erected it, solely for their own
  good--to whom even kings and all in subordination to them, are
  strictly speaking, servants and not masters.... Philanthrop
  [Jonathan Sewall] I think, speaks somewhat unintelligently, when
  he tells us that the well being and happiness of the whole depends
  upon _subordination_; as if mankind submitted to government for the
  sake of being subordinate.... Mankind have entered into political
  societies, rather for the sake of restoring _equality_.... I am not
  of levelling principles: But I am apt to think, that constitution
  of civil government which admits equality in the most extensive
  degree, consistent with the true design of government, is the
  best.[279]

Accepting the sovereignty of the people, Adams was led to a pure
democracy, based on the town meeting. He rejected every form of “mixt
government,” whether in the form of king, lords and commons, or in
the form of constitutional checks and balances. That sober men should
profess to prefer the dominion of the few to the rule of all, he could
not understand. “I find everywhere some Men, who are afraid of a free
Government,” he said in 1776, “lest it be perverted, and made Use of
as a Cloke for Licenciousness. The fear of the Peoples abusing their
Liberty is made an Argument against their having the Enjoyment of it;
as if anything were so much to be dreaded by Mankind as Slavery.”[280]
Democracy he believed was inevitable, for “in these times of Light
and Liberty, every man chuses to see and judge for himself.”[281]
He was quite untroubled by any fear of the tyranny of the mass; he
was a good enough historian to know that it is always the minority
and not the mass that creates tyranny. Though Toryism might infect
the government circles, and aristocracy appeal to the wealthy and
ambitious, the great body of Massachusetts people were democratic, and
he looked forward hopefully to a new political order, created by the
popular mind. It came more quickly than he had expected, once the old
inhibitions were removed. “New Govts are now erecting in the several
American states under the Authority of the People,” he wrote soon after
Independence. “Monarchy seems to be generally exploded. And it is not
a little surprising to me that the Aristocratick Spirit, which appeard
to have taken deep Root in some of them, now gives place to that of
Democracy.”[282]

During the difficult after-years of reconstruction Adams remained
true to his democratic principles. As he had earlier resisted the
encroachments of monarchical centralization, he later fought against
Federalistic consolidation. He distrusted the Constitution as an
undemocratic instrument, fearing a centralized authority removed from
immediate control; and he joined heartily in the work of securing a
Bill of Rights. He welcomed the French Revolution and followed closely
the developing democratic philosophy which that great upheaval did so
much to clarify and disseminate. He remained an unrepentant Jacobin
during those acrimonious years when the Federalists were filling the
air with their anti-Jacobin fustian. He had heard gentlemen rant
before and was probably amused when, as Governor, he attended Harvard
Commencement and listened to young Robert Treat Paine fulminate against
the red atheism of France and its American spawn. Although a kinsman of
John Adams and warm friend, he welcomed the election of Jefferson as a
return to democratic principles after an unhappy period of “prejudice
and passion,” although he warned him, “you must depend upon being
hated ... because they hate your principles.” The last letter in the
collected edition of his works, addressed to his old friend Tom Paine,
November 30, 1802, is an appeal for democratic unity; and the words
with which it concludes--_felix qui cautus_--embody the principle of
his amazing political strategy. In playing for great stakes it is well
to be wary.

His anti-Federalism, aggravated by his frank advocacy of Jacobin
principles, cost him heavily in after days, and like Philip Freneau his
just fame was long obscured by partisan spleen. Although he retained
his hold on the affections of the Massachusetts electorate, and was
annually chosen Governor until the infirmities of age determined his
withdrawal from public affairs, he was silently dropped from the roll
of American patriots whose deeds were celebrated in current panegyrics.
His manuscripts were scattered after his death, and he was in the way
of being forgotten till Bancroft, in the next century, gave fresh
currency to his earlier reputation. Since then the figure of Samuel
Adams has grown steadily larger, although he still awaits a biographer
who will set him in his due place in the history of American liberalism.


Footnotes

[261] _Works_, Vol. II, p. 269.

[262] _Works_, Vol. I, p. 348.

[263] Hutchinson seems to justify such a view from a passage written in
1770: “The leaders here seem to acknowledge that their cause is not to
be defended on constitutional principles, and Adams now gives out that
there is no need of it; they are upon better ground; all men have a
natural right to change a bad constitution for a better, whenever they
have it in their power.” (Hosmer, _Life of Samuel Adams_, p. 259.)

[264] _Works_, Vol. I, p. 135.

[265] _Works_, Vol. II, p. 299.

[266] “The Rights of the Colonists,” in _Works_, Vol. II, pp. 355-356.

[267] “Candidus,” in _Works_, Vol. II, pp. 325-326.

[268] _Works_, Vol. I, p. 28.

[269] _Ibid._, Vol. I, p. 29.

[270] “A Chatterer,” in _Works_, Vol. II, pp. 45-46.

[271] _Works_, Vol. III, p. 289.

[272] _History of Massachusetts Bay_, Vol. III, p. 349.

[273] See in particular the “Candidus” articles in _Works_, Vol. II, in
which he elaborated his views on government by ministerial instructions.

[274] See “Puritan” articles, in _Works_, Vol. I, p. 201 _et seq._

[275] See “Candidus,” in Vol. II, p. 246; “Chatterer,” in Vol. II, pp.
35, 39, 43; “Layman,” in Vol. I, p. 322.

[276] _Works_, Vol. II., p. 436.

[277] _Works_, Vol. I, p. 80.

[278] _Works_, Vol. II, pp. 22, 26.

[279] _Works_, Vol. II, p. 150.

[280] _Works_, Vol. III, p. 244.

[281] _Ibid._, Vol. II, p. 39.

[282] _Ibid._, Vol. III, p. 305.




