Chapter III • Two Knickerbocker Romantics


I • Washington Irving

Fortunately the stolid New York of earlier days was not to pass away
without bequeathing to posterity some fragments of its chronicles.
In the midst of a pleasant society of smallclothes and tie-wigs, of
feudalism and Federalism, appeared young Washington Irving at the
precise moment when Sansculottism was beginning to make a stir in
the land, and gentlemen were putting away their knee-breeches to
don a republican dress--a decline in taste to which he would not
easily reconcile himself. A boyish wit from the eighteenth century,
a genial loiterer in the twilight of the old, he found himself out
of humor with the ambitions that were making over the little city he
loved. The present seemed to him not so amusing as the past, nor so
picturesque. That he had any business with the world of trade and
speculation he could not believe. Its concerns were not his. Its
new Wall Street counted for less in his eyes than the pipe of old
Diedrich Knickerbocker. Its decadent Federalism that was clinging
to the wreck of its hopes, and its roistering Democracy that wore
greasy clothes, spoke with an Irish accent, and was marshaled to the
polls by Tammany Hall, were of less consequence to him than the black
bottle that brought such curious adventures to Rip Van Winkle. The
wit and romance he took pleasure in were of another sort than the
kind his generation was getting drunk on--more insubstantial, less
heady, picturesque rather than profitable. So Irving gently detached
himself from contemporary America, and detached he remained to the end
of a loitering life, untroubled by material ambitions, enjoying the
abundance of good things that fell in his way, mingling with prosperous
folk and liking everybody--men as diverse as John Jacob Astor and
Martin Van Buren and John P. Kennedy--and unconsciously taking the
color of his environment, careful to turn into limpid prose such
romantic tales as he came upon and achieving thereby both reputation
and profit--a pleasant blameless way of living, certainly, yet
curiously unrepresentative of the America in which chance had set him
and which was to claim him as its first man of letters.

An incorrigible _flâneur_, Irving’s business in life was to loaf
and invite the picturesque. A confirmed rambler in pleasant places,
in the many lands he visited he was a lover of the past rather than
the present, seeking to recreate the golden days of the Alhambra or
live over the adventurous mood of the fur trader. The immediate and
the actual was an unsatisfying diet for his dreams. There was in him
nothing of the calm aloofness of the intellectual that stands apart
to clarify its critical estimate, and none of the reforming zeal of
the Puritan that is at peace only in the thick of a moral crusade. The
duty of saving the world was not laid on his untroubled soul. No man
of his generation was less of a rebel than Irving, and he went his
way unconcerned at things that quite upset Fenimore Cooper’s peace of
mind. In his early days, to be sure, he broke with the ambitious middle
class--if gently drawing away can be called breaking--because he could
not bring himself to like its ways and the devastation those ways were
entailing on the leisurely world he loved. Revolutions seemed to him
somewhat vulgar affairs. The French Revolution had brought destruction
on too many lovely things, and the industrial revolution was taking
too heavy a toll of the picturesque, to please him. He thought it a
pity that steam should drive the clipper ship from the seas and put
an end to snug posting in the tally-ho. Progress might be bought at
too dear a price. The bluff squire with his hounds, the great hall
with its ancient yuletide customs, the patriarchal relations between
master and man, seemed to him more worth while than the things progress
was substituting for them; so he turned away from the new and gently
ingratiated himself into the past in order to gather up such fragments
of the picturesque as progress had not yet destroyed.

But only for a time. His dislike of capitalism rested on no more
substantial basis than its substitution of vulgar trousers for
gentlemanly smallclothes. It was too new to have achieved dignity or
the charm of assured position. When that time should come and masters
of finance should stand before the world as generous dispensers of
patronage, when the development of business should have produced its
new barons, Irving’s dislike would lessen and he would associate with
the new capitalism on the same easy terms that he associated with the
old feudalism. In the meantime he stood apart, unconcerned with praise
or blame. The industrial revolution might work itself out as it would.
The seventeen years he spent abroad on his great pilgrimage were black
years for England. Wretchedness and poverty were all about him if he
chose to see. The “condition of England” question was rising out of the
factory smoke to challenge the conscience of England. But he did not
choose to see and his conscience was untroubled. As he idled about the
countryside or visited the hospitable manor houses, his eye was caught
by the grace of medieval spires rising from parish churches rather than
by the condition of the proletariat. He saw no children working in the
coalpits, for he did not choose to visit the collieries. He sympathized
vaguely with the new social movements then getting under way, but it
was not in his nature to be partisan to a cause. He may not have been
a Tory but he had lived so long with Tories and enjoyed so frankly
the charm of upper-class society, that his outlook was unconsciously
determined by such intimate contacts. While Secretary to the Legation
at London in the reform years from 1829 to 1831, he was aware of the
tremendous stir all about him, but his infrequent references to the
Reform Bill in his letters turned usually on its disastrous effects on
the publishing business. Only once during his long residence abroad
does he seem to have felt deeply the significance of the current
revolutionary unrest, and the mood that swept him away from his
habitual indifference bears the marks of a sudden awakening. Writing
from London on March 1, 1831, he said:

  We are in the beginning of an eventful week.... However, _the great
  cause of all the world_ will go on. What a stirring moment it is
  to live in. I never took such intense interest in the newspapers.
  It seems to me as if life were breaking out anew with me, or
  that I were entering upon quite a new and almost unknown career
  of existence, and I rejoice to find my sensibilities, which were
  waning as to many objects of past interest, reviving with all their
  freshness and vivacity at the scenes and prospects opening around
  me. I trust, my dear Brevoort, we shall both be spared to see a
  great part of this grand though terrible drama that is about to
  be acted. There will doubtless be scenes of horror and suffering,
  but what splendid triumphs must take place over these vile systems
  of falsehood in every relation of human affairs, that have been
  woven over the human mind, and for so long a time have held it down
  in despicable thraldom. (Pierre M. Irving, _Life and Letters of
  Washington Irving_, Vol. II, p. 199.)

Irving lacked a month of being forty-nine when he wrote this confession
of interest in matters political. It marks the first appearance of
liberalism in his thinking, and the last--somewhat vague to be sure,
unduly bottomed on romantic expectations, yet significant in so placid
a life and explanatory of his course, when a year later he returned to
America to knit up once more the raveled threads of his interests. It
was as an incipient liberal that he came back to a land then in the
first flush of the Jacksonian victory, eager to discover a romantic
charm in the vast changes that had come during the seventeen years
he had been abroad. He plunged into the business of re-discovery
with enthusiasm. He was in want of new literary materials, and as
he took his bearings, his creative interest was stirred to write on
American themes. He went to Washington and for three months listened
to the great debate on Nullification. He talked with business men
and politicians, with those who were prosperous and prominent, and
he drifted easily with the tide of liberalism. To be sure he could
scarcely be called a Jacksonian. Parties and causes did not greatly
interest him even then. An intelligent man, indeed, could hardly be
less concerned about political principles. Thirty years before, as a
clever young man about town, he had gone with the dominant Federalism
of the times, and had amused himself with political ambitions. His
brother Peter was editor of the Lewisite paper the _Chronicle_, but
Josiah Ogden Hoffman, with whose firm Irving was connected during his
desultory incursion into the law and to whose daughter Matilda he
was betrothed, was an old Loyalist and ardent Hamiltonian. His wife,
to whom Irving was warmly attached, was a daughter of John Fenno,
Hamilton’s editor. Under such tutelage it was natural for Irving to
poke good-natured fun at President Jefferson’s red velvet breeches in
_Salmagundi_; but his venture into practical politics proving little to
his taste, he quickly gave over such ambitions. In a letter to a clever
young lady of Republican sympathies, he thus announced his abandonment
of political hopes:

  I am as deep in mud and politics as ever a modern gentleman would
  wish to be; and I drank beer with the multitude; and I talked
  hand-bill fashion with the demagogues; and I shook hands with the
  mob, whom my heart abhorreth.... Truly this saving one’s country
  is a nauseous piece of business, and if patriotism is such a dirty
  virtue,--prythee, no more of it. (_Life and Letters_, Vol. I, Chap.
  XI.)

Years now separated him from that youthful experience. His long
absence from his native land had completely alienated him from
the fierce partisanship of contemporary America and he could view
matters political with calm detachment. Inclined to make the best
of any government _de facto_, he found it easy on his return to
accept Jacksonianism, and he soon discovered a genuine liking for Old
Hickory. “The more I see of this old cock of the woods,” he wrote
from Washington, “the more I relish his game qualities” (_ibid._,
Vol. II, p. 255). No doubt his early friend Paulding had much to do
with his ready acceptance of the new order, although he had come
in close contact with Martin Van Buren at the London legation and
was drawn to him. “He is one of the gentlest and most amiable men I
have ever met with,” he wrote to his brother, “with an affectionate
disposition that attaches itself to those around him, and wins their
kindness in return” (_ibid._, Vol. II, p. 220). Although distrustful
of some of the “elbow counsellors” of the Democracy he found little
cause for criticism and soon came to be regarded as one with them. The
Jacksonians were eager to make political capital out of his literary
reputation, and he was urged by Tammany Hall to stand for Congress and
later to accept a mayoralty candidacy. In 1837, probably through the
intervention of Paulding, he was offered a post in Van Buren’s cabinet.
These partisan offers he had the good sense to decline, but when in
1842 he was tendered the post of Minister to Spain he gladly seized the
opportunity to revisit a land he loved. His nephew is explicit in his
statement that the offer came wholly unsolicited, but Fenimore Cooper
was of another opinion.[423] Very likely Cooper was misinformed, but
whatever the truth the appointment was a godsend to Irving. His affairs
were in a bad way. The popularity of his writings was on the wane, the
panic had caught him with much of his capital invested in unprofitable
land speculations, and the “Roost” at Tarrytown was a heavy drain,
although he wrote whimsically, “I beat all the gentlemen farmers in
my neighborhood, for I can manage to raise my vegetables and fruits
at very little more than twice the market price” (_Life and Letters_,
Vol. II, p. 320). Only a severe nature like Cooper, sorely wounded
by the angry reception of his own honest criticism, would cavil at an
appointment so honorable to the government.

A friendly nature, Irving discovered friendliness wherever he went. His
own generosity appealed to the generosity of others, and he found it
easy in consequence to take a kindly view of men and parties. He was
harassed by none of Cooper’s quick suspicions and rigid principles, and
it must be added he had none of Cooper’s intuitive penetration into the
secret springs of human action that made the latter so acute a critic
of contemporary America. The sharp contrast in moods in which the two
men returned to America from their travels, the one harshly critical
of middle-class economics and frontier leveling, the other responding
naïvely to the enthusiasm for speculative expansion and eager to
exploit the romance of the westward movement, sufficiently reveals
the difference between them. The one was a dogmatic Puritan with the
dictatorial ways of the quarter-deck, the other was a play-boy of
letters temperamentally incapable of critical analysis. There was not a
grain of realism in Irving’s nature. His cheerful optimism was little
more than the optimism of the prosperous. Wholly ignorant of economics,
he never comprehended the significance of the revolutions in process
all about him, and this _naïveté_ blinded him to the motive of John
Jacob Astor in financing Astoria, as it blinded him to all the major
forces of the times. He was easily brought to see the romance of the
great struggle between rival companies for mastery of the fur trade,
but he did not comprehend how the glamour he threw about the venture
must inevitably strengthen his patron’s investment in imperialism.
Gullible as a child, he discovered nothing more significant in the
great struggle between agrarianism and capitalism for control of
government than the ungenerous suspicions and novel theories it bred.
For the outstanding liberals of New York he had scant sympathy. William
Leggett, Horace Greeley, Albert Brisbane, William Cullen Bryant,
influenced his views far less than did the masters of Wall Street; and
from the courageous movement of Locofocoism he drew back in distrust.
The one letter in which he elaborated such political convictions as he
had come to hold, is an interesting document that deserves quotation.

  As far as I know my own mind, I am thoroughly a republican,
  and attached, from complete conviction, to the institutions of
  my country; but I am a republican without gall, and have no
  bitterness in my creed. I have no relish for puritans either in
  religion or politics, who are for pushing principles to an extreme,
  and for overturning everything that stands in the way of their own
  zealous career. I have, therefore, felt a strong distaste for some
  of those locofoco luminaries who of late have been urging strong
  and sweeping measures, subversive of the interests of great classes
  of the community. Their doctrines may be excellent in theory, but,
  if enforced in violent and uncompromising opposition to all our
  habitudes, may produce the most distressing effects. The best of
  remedies must be cautiously applied, and suited to the taste and
  constitution of the patient.... Ours is a government of compromise.
  We have several great and distinct interests bound up together,
  which, if not separately consulted and severally accommodated, may
  harass and impair each other.... I always distrust the soundness
  of political councils that are accompanied by acrimonious and
  disparaging attacks upon any great class of our fellow-citizens.
  Such are those urged to the disadvantage of the great trading
  and financial classes of our country. You yourself know ... how
  important these classes are to the prosperous conduct of the
  complicated affairs of this immense empire. You yourself know,
  in spite of all the common-place cant and obloquy that has been
  cast upon them by political spouters and scribblers, what general
  good faith and fair dealing prevails throughout these classes.
  Knaves and swindlers there are doubtless among them, as there are
  among all great classes of men; but I declare that I looked with
  admiration at the manner in which the great body of our commercial
  and financial men have struggled on through the tremendous trials
  which have of late overwhelmed them, and have endeavored, at every
  pecuniary sacrifice, to fulfill their engagements. (_Life and
  Letters_, Vol. II, pp. 312-313.)

This persuasive presentation of the philosophy of compromise, with its
implicit defense of capitalism, marks Irving’s drift back to the middle
class with which he had long before broken. In the six years since his
return he had watched the country react to the great panic, and he went
with it in its veering towards the Whiggery of Henry Clay. The fragile
bonds of his attachment to the Democracy were becoming tenuous; other
attachments were insensibly drawing him towards the more congenial
representatives of wealth. He had all his life associated with the
Tory classes and it was easy for him to transfer his loyalty to the
American Tories. Under such influences began a slow _rapprochement
cordial_ towards the new philosophy of progress. He was seized with
the common mania of speculation and made some unfortunate investments
in wild lands and railways that seriously hampered him later, and he
commercialized his literary reputation by such money-making ventures as
_Astoria_ and the _Adventures of Captain Bonneville_. He discovered a
new romance in the great business of exploitation, and found the hand
of God in the profits of unearned increment. In the letter above quoted
from, he justified the ways of speculation thus:

  There are moral as well as physical phenomena incident to every
  state of things, which may at first appear evils, but which are
  devised by an all-seeing Providence for some beneficent purpose.
  Such is the spirit of speculative enterprise which now and then
  rises to an extravagant height, and sweeps throughout the land....
  The late land speculations, so much deprecated, though ruinous to
  many engaged in them, have forced agriculture and civilization
  into the depths of the wilderness; have laid open the recesses of
  primeval forests; made us acquainted with the most available points
  of our immense interior; have cast the germs of future towns and
  cities and busy marts in the heart of savage solitudes, and studded
  our vast rivers and internal seas with ports that will soon give
  activity to a vast internal commerce. Millions of acres which might
  otherwise have remained idle and impracticable wastes, have been
  brought under the dominion of the plough, and hundreds of thousands
  of industrious yeomen have been carried into the rich but remote
  depths of our immense empire, to multiply and spread out in every
  direction, and give solidity and strength to our confederacy.
  All this has in a great measure been effected by the extravagant
  schemes of land speculators. I am, therefore, inclined to look upon
  them with a more indulgent eye than they are considered by those
  violent politicians who are prescribing violent checks and counter
  measures, and seem to have something vindictive in their policy.
  (_Life and Letters_, Vol. II, p. 314.)

Thus did Irving become completely domesticated in the new world that
Rip Van Winkle had found so disconcerting when he came upon it out
of the quiet colonial past. The rediscovery of America proved to be
an agreeable business, and profitable in a professional way. His
enthusiasms, which in 1831 he felt were “waning as to many objects of
past interest,” were stimulated by the vast stir of the country, and
the spirit of romance once more ran briskly in his veins. The better
part of a year he rambled widely about the country, in order, as he
said, to get at home “upon American themes.” He visited Boston and the
White Mountains, then West to Ohio and St. Louis, then with an Indian
commissioner he penetrated the southwest prairies as far as the wild
Pawnee country beyond the South Canadian River, then to New Orleans and
Charleston, finally settling down in Washington to immerse himself in
politics. From there he passed over the Potomac for an extended trip
through the Old Dominion, returning to New York where he spent some
time with Astor at Hell Gate, finally in 1835 settling at Tarrytown
which was to be his home to the last. He had definitely determined on
his new field of work. His imagination had been stirred by his visit
to the prairies; the romance of the westward expansion was beginning
to find expression in the works of Timothy Flint and James Hall; the
public interest was ripe and John Jacob Astor was at hand to encourage
him. Thus stimulated Irving proposed to make the field of western
romance his own, with the result that he published in quick succession
_A Tour of the Prairies_, _Astoria_, and _The Adventures of Captain
Bonneville_.

On the whole the new venture did not prosper. The spirit of the
West was not to be captured by one whose heart was in Spain. In
_A Tour of the Prairies_ there is a certain homely simplicity and
straightforwardness that spring from a plain recital of undramatic
experience; and in _Astoria_ there is an unembellished narrative of
appalling hardship and heroic endurance, with none of the tawdry
romantics that mar the work of Flint and Hall. Yet neither is
creatively imaginative, neither stirs one with a sense of high drama.
The atmosphere of Snake River could not be created in the quiet study
at the “Roost”; it needed the pen of a realist to capture the romance
of those bitter wanderings in mountain and sagebrush. It is journeyman
work, and on every page one is conscious of the professional man of
letters faithfully doing this day’s allotment. It is much the same
with his _Life of Washington_. In this last great undertaking Irving
no longer writes with gusto. The golden days of Diedrich Knickerbocker
and Rip Van Winkle are long since gone; the magic is departed from
his pen; and a somewhat tired old gentleman is struggling to fulfill
his contract with his publisher. It was a mistake to venture on
the work, despite the fact that he had long been planning it. His
historical equipment was inadequate. He might make a pretty story out
of Washington’s early life and his days with the army, but he was far
too ignorant of politics, too credulous in judging his materials, to
interpret justly the fierce party struggles that seethed about the
President. Quite unconsciously in this last work he returned to the
political prejudices of his youth, and wrote an account of Washington’s
administrations deeply colored by his Federalist sources.

The most distinguished of our early romantics, Irving in the end was
immolated on the altar of romanticism. The pursuit of the picturesque
lured him away into sterile wastes, and when the will-o’-the-wisp was
gone he was left empty. A born humorist, the gayety of whose spirits
overflowed the brim, he was lacking in a brooding intellectuality,
and instead of coming upon irony at the bottom of the cup--as the
greater humorists have come upon it after life has had its way with
them--he found there only sentiment and the dreamy poetic. As the
purple haze on the horizon of his mind was dissipated by a sobering
experience, he tried to substitute an adventitious glamour; as romance
faded, sentiment supplied its place. So long as youth and high spirits
endured, his inkwell was a never-failing source of gayety, but as the
sparkle subsided he over-sweetened his wine. This suffices to account
for the fact that all his better work was done early; and this explains
why the Knickerbocker _History_ remains the most genial and vital of
his volumes. The gayety of youth bubbles and effervesces in those magic
pages, defying time to do its worst. The critic may charge the later
Irving with many and heavy shortcomings, but the romantic smoke-clouds
that ascend from Wouter Van Twiller’s pipe cannot be dissipated by the
winds of criticism.


II • James Kirke Paulding

Far more native to the limitations and hardships of American life and
far more loyal to its homely aspirations was James Kirke Paulding,
whose literary reputation came to be so deeply overshadowed by that
of his early friend. Sprung from plain stock--whether English or
Dutch his son remained in doubt, although inclining to believe the
former--and cradled in the fierce partisanship of the Revolutionary
struggle, he never abandoned his inherited liberalism or found his
love of country growing less. To the end of his life he remained a
primitive American of an earlier generation, somewhat puzzled by the
ways of another age that speculated in prosperity by running in debt,
and measured a man’s wealth by the amount he owed. His father had been
an active Whig in a Tory neighborhood who did not stint his service
to the Revolutionary cause. He was a member of the local Committee of
Safety, and acted as State Commissary to the Revolutionary forces, a
post which in the end brought him to ruin. In the dark days of the
struggle he pledged his private credit for supplies, and was never
reimbursed by a negligent commonwealth. The outcome was financial
disaster. The father was imprisoned for debt and his courage broken,
and the family long suffered from want. “We were not only poor,” the
son wrote later, “but steeped in poverty.” But there was excellent
stuff in the awkward, dreamy country boy. He was “built of stubborn
oak,” he remarked whimsically, “seasoned in the school of poverty,
like an old chimney-piece in a log cabin.” When at the age of nineteen
he was suddenly plunged into the world of New York City, he was shy,
uncouth, self-educated, and felt himself an alien in Wall Street and
Broadway. For the Federalist upper class he seems to have felt the
instinctive hostility of the outsider; but through the agency of the
Irvings--an elder sister having married William Irving--he was brought
into the companionship of a group of clever young men, and under the
stimulus of high talk and exuberant pranks, the latent idealism of his
nature expanded freely. This was his university, and while it left
something to be desired in the way of discipline, suffering too free
a rein to his discursive fancy, it quickened his native wit, awakened
his creative imagination, and put him to school to the pleasant craft
of writing. The _Salmagundi Papers_ were the first fruits of the
literary apprenticeship of the group, and although Irving has come to
receive the chief credit for them, the wit of Paulding seems quite as
sprightly, and his gayety as fresh.

That his later career in letters was less notable resulted in part from
the fact that he was an inveterate rambler by nature, and partly from
the fact that writing with him was occasional, a pleasant relief from
humdrum duties, and he did not choose to lay a curb on his vagrant
ways. In letters as in life he was always discursive, forgetful of his
objective in his delight at the beauty of the countryside, loading
his pages down with nature descriptions and clogging the action
of his tales with somewhat tedious homilies. After forty years of
writing he remained still an amateur, incapable of pruning the wilful
tangle of his fancy--an essayist of the leisurely school who ventured
incautiously into the realms of verse and fiction without mastering the
technic of the business. There was perhaps too much of the homespun
in him to permit him to become an artist. The experience of his youth
marked him too deeply, and all his life he remained as conscious a son
of the people as Hamlin Garland was later, delighting to chronicle the
ways of the obscure, somewhat militant in proclaiming the excellence
of homely virtues. Formed in an environment that bred a spontaneous
democracy, he was a confirmed equalitarian, untroubled by the itch to
rise in the world or exploit his fellows. Alone among the Knickerbocker
group, he was a Jeffersonian in the fundamentals of his social creed;
not in the lesser matters of Kentucky Resolutions and the like, but in
his Physiocratic leanings, in his profound distrust of all middle-class
programs and his preference for the simple country ways over the city
economy; and it was this deep-rooted agrarianism that set him against
capitalism and made him a later Jacksonian. In him there spoke out the
authentic New York, not of Broadway merchants or Wall Street bankers,
but of the plain rank and file of the people. Untouched by foreign
travel but widely acquainted with his native America, he was fashioned
out of the wool from the fireside loom and domestic dye-pot.

A writer so consciously and completely American would find abundant
occasion to put his pen to the service of his country at a time when
every English traveler turned critic and on his return home published a
volume of truculent disparagement of ways and things American. For the
most part those volumes were a defense of Toryism by the easy method
of attacking democracy, and they annoyed Paulding beyond measure. He
would not let them go unanswered, and from _The Diverting History
of John Bull and Brother Jonathan_ (1812) to _John Bull in America_
(1825), he published five different replies, varying his attack from
argument to burlesque. Something more than loyalty to his country
seems to have spurred him on. His dislike of England was inveterate,
partly because of the old Revolutionary feud, partly because of later
antagonisms. Almost at the hour of his birth the Paulding family had
been forced to quit their home for fear of the British and Tories who
daily threatened them; and a deep hatred of the British Tory he drew
in with his mother’s milk. To him England was a Tory country, reeking
with social injustice, the home of ancient abuses, and necessarily the
implacable enemy of democratic America. He was convinced that want and
tyranny and subserviency dogged the daily life of the English common
people; and the English Reviews that attacked the ways of democracy
with caustic British superiority, filled his honest republican heart
with wrath, and he jabbed his quill into the tough skin of John Bull
with patriotic vigor. The shame of the burning of the capitol rankled
in the American heart, and Paulding discovered fresh grievances in
remembering that from England had come the banking system and the
“shin-plaster dynasty” that would breed in the new country the evils
of the old if they were not looked to. He was convinced that the mother
country wished ill to her offspring, and he thanked God in successive
volumes that democratic America was not what Tory England was.

For despite the English travelers--Weld, Parkinson, Ashe, Bradbury,
Hall, Trollope, and all the rest of the loquacious tribe--Paulding was
persuaded that America constituted the hope of the future. Here in
this land he believed that men should eventually achieve a measure of
well-being undreamed of in the old world; already the old tyrannies
had been destroyed, the ancient poverty abated. From this stubborn
idealism nothing could turn him aside. It finds expression in an early
poem, and it provides the theme for his last novel. _The Backwoodsman_,
published in 1818, is a rambling and somewhat plethoric idyll of the
West, the hero of which is an archetype of the oppressed and exploited,
who finds a generous asylum in the free land beyond the Alleghenies,
and like Crèvecœur’s Andrew the Hebridean, expands the horizons of
his mind under the beneficent touch of freedom. _The Puritan and His
Daughter_, written over thirty years later, deals with a different
phase of the same general theme. It is a vivid picture of the strife
engendered in America by immigrant families who bring hither their
old-world feuds and animosities, and the curative influence of the
free environment that, in discovering the good rather than the bad in
neighbors, draws together the younger generation despite the jealous
parental authority that would keep them apart. The bigoted fathers make
trouble enough--the fanatical Puritan who fought with Cromwell and the
headstrong Cavalier who defended divine right--wilful men whom even
the common frontier perils cannot reconcile or make tolerant; but they
are powerless to thwart the ways of nature. The son of the Cavalier
discovers an attractive woman in the daughter of the Puritan, and when
love walks in the twilight what matters theology or politics. Youth has
its own notions of divine right; in its creed the dogmas of John Calvin
and Robert Filmer have no place; and if the lovers are more tolerant
than the fathers it only proves that a freer environment will manage
to soften the traditional animosities and beget a kindlier race from
the merging of classes. Such at least is the characteristic thesis
that Paulding elaborates through two volumes of discursive narrative
interspersed with bits of vigorous action.

Of this kindly melting pot Paulding himself was a product. He had
rid himself wholly of all ties that would bind him to Europe. He was
partisan to no cause or party, literary or political, of the old world.
He was content to be American and suffer his native land to bound his
loyalties. In his own literary practice he refused to imitate the
current English fashions and he spoke his mind freely to the American
reading public for its greedy swallowing of cheap imported food. He did
not take kindly to the English romantic writers, and went often out of
his way to have a dig at his two pet aversions, Scott and Byron.[424]
His amusing tale of _Koningsmarke, the Long Finne_, is a good-natured
burlesque of certain romantic mannerisms of the Waverley novels, and
a defense of Cooper’s _Pioneers_ for its homely realism. Paulding’s
dislike of the “blood-pudding” fiction that had come over from England,
and that proved so disastrous to the genius of Gilmore Simms, was
inveterate, and in his whimsical dedication of _The Puritan and His
Daughter_ to the sovereign people he comments on the public taste thus:

  I am not ignorant of your preference for high-seasoned dishes
  of foreign cookery, most especially blood-puddings, plentifully
  spiced and sauced with adultery, seduction, poisoning, stabbing,
  suicide, and all other sublime excesses of genius. I am aware also
  that Your Majesty, being yourself able to perform impossibilities,
  believed nothing impossible. Possessing this clew to Your Majesty’s
  royal approbation, I solemnly assure you I have gone as far as I
  could to secure it, with a safe conscience. I have laid about me
  pretty handsomely, and sprinkled a good number of pages with blood
  enough, I hope, to make a pudding. If I have any apology to make
  to Your Majesty, it is for permitting some of my people to die a
  natural death, a thing so unnatural that it has been banished from
  all works of fiction aiming at the least semblance to truth....
  But, may it please Your Majesty, I am troubled with weak nerves,
  and my great grandfather was a Quaker. I am, therefore, naturally
  averse to bloodshed, and have more than once nearly fallen into
  convulsions over the pages of Monsieur Alexandre Dumas, whom
  I consider a perfect Guillotine among authors. In short, may
  it please Your Majesty, I abjure poisoning, or smothering with
  charcoal, and confess myself deplorably behind the spirit of this
  luminous age, which is as much in advance of all others, as the
  forewheel of a wagon is ahead of the hind ones.

In his politics--and as a good American of the times he took his
politics seriously--Paulding found in the popular drift towards
Jacksonian democracy an expression of his deepest convictions. It
was moving in the direction he had long faced, and he went with
it whole-heartedly, enjoyed some of the emoluments of office, and
eventually served as Secretary to the Navy in the cabinet of Van Buren.
With Jackson’s attack on the Bank he must have been in deep sympathy,
for his dislike of the new financial system was of long standing. His
father had suffered heavily from a depreciated Continental currency,
and he early came to distrust all banks and banking. His political
views, indeed, were pretty much determined by the Physiocratic
convictions that underlay his thinking. He had been a Jeffersonian
long before the rise of Jacksonianism. Portions of his _Letters from
the South_, published in 1817, seem like excerpts from the agrarian
writings of John Taylor of Caroline. There is the same contemptuous
analysis of the “shin-plaster dynasty,” the same concern at the growth
of trading towns, the same conviction that cities and poverty and low
morals go hand in hand, the same trust in the perennial wholesomeness
of country life. Such a passage as this will suffice to reveal his
leanings towards a Physiocratic economy:

  I was saying, that we have too many people living in cities,
  in proportion to our farmers, who, after all, are the backbone
  of every country, whence originates its riches and its solid
  strength.... Yet our people cling to the towns and cities,
  attracted by the hope of sudden wealth, and despising the slow,
  yet sure, rewards of agriculture, which, without leading a man to
  inordinate riches, secure him for ever from the chances of sinking
  into beggary or want. The race of paupers receives no recruits
  from them; for in all my sojournings, I may say with truth, that
  I never saw an industrious farmer forsaken, “or his seed begging
  bread.” One great cause of the disproportion of numbers ...
  between the agricultural and other classes of the community, is
  the great system of paper money, which has struck at the root of
  regular, persevering industry, whose rewards, though slow, are
  always certain. For some years back, hardly a tradesman in our
  cities, and of late in our little towns (each of which, however
  insignificant, has now its snug little bank) thinks of growing rich
  by his industry. No; he must get accommodations at some bank, and
  plunge into speculations: nor can you now go into a cobbler’s stall
  without seeing a bank notice, or perhaps two or three, stuck up
  with an awl at the chimney-piece, to remind the honest gentleman
  that he owes a great deal more than he can pay. Thus is the axe
  laid to the very root of national morals, and consequently national
  prosperity, and the whole American people, farmers excepted, sunk
  into an abject subjection to banks and their directors. (_Letters
  from the South_, Vol. I, pp. 100-102.)

So confirmed an agrarian would easily arrive at agrarian conclusions in
his meditations on the nature and functions of the political state.
Unlike Irving, who, having no political convictions, was equally
pleased with Whig or Democrat if he happened to be a gentleman,
Paulding was something of a political philosopher with clear-cut
doctrines. He was too shrewd an observer of ways political to be
caught by party cries, or to ignore the class selfishness that would
make government a party to its ends. As a Jeffersonian he retained an
old-fashioned distrust of the political state. As an eighteenth-century
liberal he would keep the state within narrow bounds. Jealous for a
freedom worthy of free citizens, he wanted government to keep hands
off what did not concern it. He would not have the state used as a
cat’s-paw to pull anybody’s chestnuts out of the fire, whether in the
form of Clay’s American System, or what not. For protective tariffs
and internal improvements--those grandiose schemes for hastening
prosperity--he felt an old-fashioned repugnance that found issue
in amusing caricature. In _Westward Ho!_ he introduces a French
publican of a Mississippi River village who does not care for Yankee
improvements and describes them thus:

  Diable! monsieur, another improvement; last year they assess me for
  one grand public improvement! one road to go somewhere, I don’t
  know. Eh bien! I pay the money. Well, this year they assess me for
  one other grand public improvement--very grand--voilà, monsieur,
  one other road, right alongside the other, both going to the same
  place. Diable! I no want to travel on two turnpike roads. Ah!
  monsieur le colonel, I shall be very rich, O! very rich indeed,
  by these grand improvements. They take away all my land to make
  room for the grand improvement; they take away all my money to
  pay for him, and then they tell me my land worth four, six time
  so much as before. Peste! what that to me when my land all gone
  to the dem public improvement, hey? I shall be very rich then.
  Diable! I wish myself gone to some country where every thing was
  go backwards--what you call tail foremost, instead of forwards,
  for the dem march of improvement shall ruin me at last. (Vol. II,
  Chapter XVI.)

Satire aimed at the new gospel of progress is not infrequent in
Paulding. In _Koningsmarke_ he drew the picture of a politician that
was perhaps intended for a burlesque of Henry Clay. The worthy Wolfgang
Langfanger, member of the council of Elsingburgh, having “brought
his private affairs into great confusion, by devoting too much time
to the public good,” began “to think it high time the public good
should repay some part of its weighty obligations. He had accordingly
invented, and persuaded the Heer Piper to put into practice, a system
of internal improvement, which has been imitated, from time to time,
in this country ever since with great success. The essence of his plan
consisted in running in debt for the present, and living afterwards
upon the anticipation of future wealth” (Book Second, Chapter VI). Big
with his wonderful idea the busy councilor projected great docks and
wharves for the commerce that was to be invited to come, a fine canal
that would cut off a full six miles for barges that were not yet on
the stocks, and a magnificent plan of new streets that led through
houses that must be pulled down and fields that must forego their
usual harvests. Such goodly improvements naturally cost money, and to
maintain the public credit taxes were levied, and still more taxes,
until, like the French tavern-keeper, the good people of Elsingburgh
were brought to doubt the wisdom of investing in future prosperity at
so high a present cost.

  But the masterpiece of Langfanger’s policy was that of pulling
  down an old market, and building a new one in another part of the
  village, in the management of which business he is supposed to have
  laid down the first principles of the great and thriving science of
  political economy, or picking people’s pockets on a grand scale.
  He caused the people living near the old market to pay roundly
  for its removal as a nuisance; and then he caused the people that
  lived about where the new one was to be built, to pay roundly for
  the vast pleasure and advantage of its neighbourhood. Thus he
  pinched them through both ears, and got the reputation of a great
  financier. (Book Seventh, Chapter III.)

_Koningsmarke_ is Paulding’s most interesting work, and the utter
neglect that has overtaken it is far from deserved. It is native and
original, full of shrewd comment and sly satire, and it embodies most
of Paulding’s pet theories and aversions. Few books of the time are
more amusing than this tale of the Long Finne who moves in a dark cloud
of mystery woven by Bombie of the Frizzled Head, barks his sturdy
shins on many a blood-curdling adventure, proves a true knight to his
lady, and in the end turns out to be a very ordinary fellow who has
been blown up to heroic size by the black art of romance. Paulding
must have had great fun writing it, for his wit still preserves its
freshness after a hundred years. It is a whimsical satire on the ways
of the hour, literary and other, set against the background of an
old Swedish settlement on the banks of the Delaware; but the chief
purpose of its quizzical pages is the pouring of a broadside into
the picturesque hull of contemporary fiction. It is an attack on the
abundant extravagance of current romance that had been inflated by
“Monk” Lewis and Sir Walter. Paulding cleverly hits off the high-flown
and ghostly, the love of blood pudding, the snobbish contempt for the
homely and native. Written in 1823, the year of Cooper’s _Pioneers_,
it defends the realism of characters and setting in that work against
the charge of vulgarity and commonplace, but it takes pains to satirize
Cooper’s noble red man of the forest. Paulding’s Indians are more like
Bird’s than Cooper’s, material for burlesque rather than romance, but
as he runs over the names of the warriors--“the Big Buffalo, the Little
Duck-Legs, the Sharp-Faced Bear, the Walking Shadow, the Iron Cloud,
the Jumping Sturgeon, the Belly Ache, and the Doctor, all legitimate
sovereigns, with copper rings in their noses, blanket robes of state,
and painted faces”--amusement at their childishness is tempered by the
recognition that they have been overreached and dispossessed by the
grasping white men.

In some of his later work the line between burlesque and serious is not
so clearly marked, and one hesitates to pronounce whether _Westward
Ho!_ is a sober attempt at popular romance or a _reductio ad absurdum_
of the current romantic flummery. Certainly it is a preposterous story
with its melancholy hero driven mad by fear of madness and indulging in
gibberish that comes straight out of Shakespeare, and with its ample
crop of stock characters--Master Zeno Paddock and Mrs. Judith Paddock
with their prying inquisitiveness, Colonel Dangerfield the easy-going
Virginia gentleman who in staking his estate on a horse race embodies
the plantation tradition, and Bushfield the backwoodsman who cannot
live in a world that has left off its moccasins, and removes to a place
where there are no laws and no lawyers and where constables do not
visit a man who has thrashed his neighbor. _Westward Ho!_ is not an
amusing book; it is quite lacking in local color, and its casual bits
of realism and occasional satire are too inconsequential to signify.
_The Dutchman’s Fireside_, written at about the same time, is far more
successful. It purports to be an account of the Knickerbocker society
in the days of the Old French war, and it contains some lovely pictures
of old times that one reads with pleasure; but it indulges somewhat
freely in adventure amongst the Indians and in the war, and its love
story is needlessly romantic. Although Paulding still protests against
a blood-pudding diet, he indulges occasionally in the high-flown, to
the detriment of the idyllic note. Romance was all about him and
he could not wholly escape its compulsions. Too casual in his work,
too undisciplined in the craft of writing, he remained to the end an
amusing amateur, a homespun man of letters who never took the trouble
to master his technic. There was excellent stuff in him, solider
perhaps than in Irving, but his failure suggests the difference between
the journeyman and the artist.


Footnotes

[423] Writing to his wife a month afterwards, Cooper said: “By the
way, Mrs. Willing has let out the secret of Irving’s appointment. He
wrote to Webster to remember him _if any good thing offered_. So that
instead of not asking for the office, he asked for anything that was
good. There has been more humbug practised concerning this man than
concerning any other now living” (Cooper, _Correspondence of James
Fenimore-Cooper_, Vol. II, p. 469).

[424] See _Letters from the South_, Vol. I, _Letter XXII_.




