Chapter I • Colonial Backgrounds


I • New Stock

Immigration in the eighteenth century was almost wholly economic in
motive. The reports of free land and free opportunity in America
penetrated to remote hamlets of Great Britain, and more slowly to
the continent, and drew hither a rude influx of the dispossessed and
disinherited of Europe. From the hopeless poverty of great masses
of old-world laborers, increasing numbers sought escape through
emigration, accepting the hardships and uncertainties of the migration
in the hope of bettering themselves ultimately. A host of English
nondescripts--broken men, bond servants, “gaol birds,” the lees and
settlings of the old world--came overseas, voluntarily or under
duress, in numbers running into the hundred thousands, and shared with
German peasants from the Palatine, or Scotch-Irish from Ulster, the
back-breaking labor of subduing the wilderness. About these unfortunate
men and women no romance has gathered; tradition and history have not
remembered their names or glorified their deeds; yet their blood runs
in the veins of most Americans today of the older stock, and their
contribution to our common heritage was great and lasting.

Of the different racial strains that mingled their blood with the
earlier English--Irish, Huguenot-French, German, Scotch-Irish--the last
was by far the most important. Not since 1630, when the _Lady Arbella_
and her companion vessels brought the Puritans to Massachusetts Bay,
had there been an event so momentous to America as the arrival in 1718
of some four thousand Scotch-Irish from Ulster, the vanguard of an
army which by the time of the Revolution had risen to approximately
two hundred thousand, or more than twelve times the number of English
who settled Massachusetts. They were desperately poor; the available
lands near the coast were already preëmpted; so armed with axes, their
seed potatoes, and the newly invented rifle, they plunged into the
backwoods to become our great pioneering race. Scattered thinly through
a long frontier, they constituted the outposts and buffer settlements
of civilization. A vigorous breed, hardy, assertive, individualistic,
thrifty, trained in the democracy of the Scottish kirk, they were the
material out of which later Jacksonian democracy was to be fashioned,
the creators of that “western type which in politics and industry
became ultimately the American type.”[134]

Next to the Scotch-Irish, who for the most part were free peasants,
the most important addition to eighteenth-century America were the
indented servants. Mostly from England, Scotland, Ireland, and Germany,
they represented all trades and some of the professions. The white
slavers of the times were well organized and plied a brisk trade with
satisfactory profits; and in consequence, a steady stream of indented
servants poured into America to turn the wheels of colonial industry.
In his history of the German redemptioners, Diffenderfer has printed a
number of newspaper advertisements which throw a curious light upon the
traffic: here are two:

  From the _American Weekly Mercury_, February 18, 1729:

  Lately arrived from London, a parcel of very likely English
  servants, men and women, several of the men Tradesmen; to be
  sold reasonable and Time allowed for payment. By Charles Read of
  Philadelphia, or Capt. John Ball, on board his ship, at _Anthony
  Millkinson’s Wharf_.

  From the same for May 22, 1729, announcements of two ships:

  There is just arrived from Scotland, a parcel of choice _Scotch
  Servants_; Taylors, Weavers, Shoemakers and ploughmen, some for
  five and others for seven years; Imported by James Coults, etc.

  Just arrived from London in the ship _Providence_, Capt. Jonathan
  Clarke, a parcel of very likely _servants_, most Tradesmen, to be
  sold on reasonable Terms.

The several nationalities were appraised and rated by careful merchants
and the fittest import seasons considered.[135] The “best time for
Servants is about the month of May,” one merchant wrote to his agent in
Ireland; and another warned, “Irish servants will be very dull, such
numbers have already arrived from Different parts & many more expected,
that I believe it will be overdone, especially as several Dutch vessels
are expected here, which will always command the Market.”[136]

In the middle colonies, particularly Pennsylvania, the greater number
of servants came from the Rhine country. Deceived by swindling agents,
thousands of German peasants, eager to get away from their war-harried
and plundered homes, sold themselves into servitude to pay their
passage to America. For the better part of a century these German
redemptioners thronged the ports of Philadelphia and Baltimore, as the
following news items testify:

  From _Der Hoch Deutsche Pennsylvanische Bericht_, August 16, 1750:

  Six ships with Irish servants have arrived at Philadelphia, and two
  ships with German Newcomers. Some say 18 more on their way here;
  others say 24 and still others 10,000 persons.

  From the same, December 16, 1750:

  Capt. Hasselwood has arrived from Holland with the latest ship that
  brought Germans. It is the fourteenth that has come laden with
  Germans this year. 4,317 have registered in the Court House....
  Besides these, 1,000 servants and passengers arrived from Ireland
  and England.[137]

Of the human side of this widespread traffic some little idea may
be got from the diary of a certain John Harrower, a man of modest
education who became an articled schoolmaster to a Virginia family in
the year 1774. Following are some entries:

  Wednesday, 26th. [January, 1774.] This day I being reduced to
  the last shilling was obliged to engage to go to Virginia for
  four years, as a schoolmaster for Bedd, Board, washing and five
  pounds during the whole time. I have also wrote my wife this day a
  particular Acct of everything that has happened to me since I left
  her until this date....

  Munday 31st ... It is surprising to see the No. of good tradesmen
  of all kinds, th’t come on b’d every day ... while the Clerk was
  filling up the Indentures the doctor search’d every serv’t to see
  that they were sound ... seventy-five were Intend [indented] to
  Capt Bowres for four Years....

  Munday 7th ... at 4 pm put a servant ashore extreamly bade in a
  fever, and then got under saile for Virginia with seventy Servants
  on board all indented to serve four yeares there at their different
  Occupations....

  Munday, May 2nd.... At 2 pm the Capt carried five servts ashore to
  Hampton in order to sell their Indentures, But returned again at
  Midnight with[out] selling any more but one Boat Builder....

  Freiday, 6th ... at Hobshole there was five Glasgow ships and an
  English Brigantine lying, at 2 pm we passed by Leedstown on our
  Star board hand where there was a ship from London lying with
  convicts....

  Wednesday, 11th.... At 10 A M Both Coopers and the Barber from our
  Mace [mess] went ashore upon tryall. At night one Daniel Turner a
  servt returned onb’d from Liberty so Drunk that he abused the Capt
  and Chief Mate and Boatswan to a verry high degree, which made
  him to be horse whipt, put in Irons and thumb screwed, on houre
  afterward he was unthumbscrewed, taken out of the Irons, but then
  he was hand cuffed, and gagged all night....

  Munday, 16th. This day severalls came on b’d to purchase servts
  Indentures and among them there was two soul drivers, they are
  Men who made it their business to go on b’d all ships who have
  in either Servants or Convicts and buy sometimes the whole and
  sometimes a parcell of them as they can agree, and then they drive
  them through the Country like a parcell of Sheep until they can
  sell them to advantage, but all went away without buying any....

  Munday, 23rd [May] ... at same time all the rest of the servants
  were ordered ashore to a tent at Fredericksbg and several of their
  indentures were then sold, about 4 pm I was brought to Colonel
  Daingerfield, when we immediately agreed and my Indenture for four
  years was then delivered him and he was to send for me the next
  day.[138]

In some such fashion, year after year, thousands of immigrants were
transported to America, there to mingle their blood with that of the
earlier comers. They came as social derelicts, were greeted by the
awaiting “soul-drivers,” found masters, worked and got on, or lost
heart and slipped away into the tempting backcountry whither so many
broken men went in search of refuge. They were a plebeian lot, and they
endured the common fate of the underling. Very likely they transmitted
to their children a bitter hostility to the ways of an aristocratic
society, the residuum of old grievances, and this slowly accumulating
animus was eventually to count heavily with lower-class colonials in
favor of a more democratic order in the new world.


II • The Frontier • Lubberland

The frontier, which exercised so creative an influence in shaping
American character and institutions, was regarded in very different
lights by the gentleman and the commoner. To the former it was no other
than lubberland, the abode of rude leveling, the temptation to gross
social laxity. It drew away servants who were needed, and kept the
price of real estate low; and such very different persons as Cotton
Mather and John Dickinson agreed in desiring to stop the constant
drain into the backcountry, and keep settlers in the older portions.
Descriptions of the frontier indited by aristocratic pens convey an
idea very different from later democratic conceptions, and paint the
ancestors of later Jacksonians in unlovely colors.

Among the earliest of these records is _The Private Journal kept by
Madam Knight on a Journey from Boston to New York in the Year 1704_.
Madam Knight was a sprightly and intelligent woman, keeper of a dame’s
school in Boston, who set down in the journal some of the odd things
that came under her sharp eyes on her venturesome trip on horseback.
As she drew away from the older settlements, signs of relaxing social
convention multiplied with the worsening of the road. Connecticut,
which had always been too democratic to suit the Boston taste, she
found “a little too much Independant in their principalls.” It was not
careful to uphold proper social distinctions, but inclined to a free
and easy leveling altogether offensive:

  ... They Generally lived very well and comfortable in their
  famelies. But too Indulgent (especially ye farmers) to their
  slaves: suffering too great familiarity from them, permitting ym
  to sit at Table and eat with them (as they say to save time), and
  into the dish goes the black hoof as freely as the white hand. They
  told me that there was a farmer lived nere the Town where I lodged
  who had some difference with his slave, concerning something the
  master had promised him and did not punctually perform; wch caused
  some hard words between them; But at length they put the matter to
  Arbitration and Bound themselves to stand to the award of such as
  they named--wch done, the Arbitrators Having heard the Allegations
  of both parties, Order the master to pay 40s to black face, and
  acknowledge his fault. And so the matter ended; the poor master
  very honestly standing to the award.[139]

In the unsettled country strange figures with rude decivilized ways
made their appearance. Here is a description of one such product of the
wilderness:

  I had scarce done thinking, when an Indian-like Animal come to the
  door, on a creature very much like himselfe, in mien and feature,
  as well as Ragged cloathing; and having ’litt, makes an Awkerd
  Scratch with his Indian shoo, and a Nodd, sitts on ye block,
  fumbles out his black Junk [salt meat?], dipps it in ye ashes, and
  presents it piping hott to his muscheeto’s (?), and fell to sucking
  like a calf, without speaking, for near a quarter of an hower. At
  length the old man said how do’s Sarah do? who I understood was the
  wretches wife, and Daughter to ye old man.[140]

She thus describes a squatter’s hut in the backwoods:

  This little Hutt was one of the wretchedest I ever saw a habitation
  for human creatures. It was suported with shores enclosed with
  Clapboards, laid on Lengthways, and so much asunder, that the
  Light come throu’ everywhere; the doore tyed on with a cord in ye
  place of hinges; The floor the bear earth; no windows but such
  as the thin covering afforded, nor any furniture but a Bedd with
  a glass Bottle hanging at ye head on’t; an earthan cupp, a small
  pewter bason, A Bord with sticks to stand on, instead of a table,
  and a block or two in ye corner instead of chairs. The family were
  the old man, his wife and two children; all and every part being
  the picture of poverty. Notwithstanding both the Hutt and its
  Inhabitance were very clean and tydee.[141]

As Madam Knight meditated upon the causes of such poverty, she came to
a characteristic Boston conclusion:

  We may Observe here the great necessity and benefitt both of
  Education and Conversation: for these people have as Large a
  portion of mother witt, and sometimes Larger, than those who have
  bin brought up in Citties; but for want of emprovements, Render
  themselves almost Ridiculos, as above.[142]

It is in the chatty narrative of Colonel William Byrd of Virginia,[143]
that we find the earliest detailed description of the fringe of
squatter settlements. Colonel Byrd was the first gentleman of Virginia,
a man of old-world education and some literary taste,[144] polished
manners, and a vast number of acres of choice land which he had
acquired and held largely tax-free, by means well understood among
Virginia gentlemen.[145] Among the several capacities in which he
served the commonwealth in return for his many acres, was to act as
a member of a joint commission which in the year 1728 ran a boundary
line between Virginia and North Carolina. As he sat his horse in the
capacity of overseer, he observed many amusing things which he jotted
down in his journal.

The backcountry, it would seem, had already developed the free and
easy ways of a squatter world, shiftless, lubberly, independent, but
animated by hostility towards the aristocratic Old Dominion, from which
many of the settlers had come. North Carolina had long been a place of
refuge for debtors, criminals, and runaway servants, who used their
legs to even the score with a caste system; and Colonel Byrd regarded
the lazy crew with amused contempt:

  Surely there is no place in the World where the Inhabitants live
  with less Labour than in N Carolina. It approaches nearer to the
  Description of Lubberland than any other, by the great felicity
  of the Climate, the easiness of raising Provisions, and the
  Slothfulness of the People. Indian corn is of so great increase,
  that a little Pains will Subsist a very large Family with Bread,
  and then they may have meat without any Pains at all, by the Help
  of the Low Grounds, and the great Variety of Mast that grows on
  the High-land. The Men, for their parts, just like the Indians,
  impose all the Work upon the poor Women. They make their Wives
  rise out of their Beds early in the Morning, at the same time that
  they lye and Snore, till the Sun has run one third of his course,
  and disperst all the unwholesome Damps. Then, after Stretching and
  Yawning for half an Hour, they light their Pipes, and, under the
  Protection of a cloud of Smoak, venture out into the open Air;
  tho’ if it happens to be never so little cold, they quickly return
  Shivering into the Chimney corner. When the weather is mild, they
  stand leaning with both their arms upon the corn-field fence, and
  gravely consider whether they had best go and take a Small Heat at
  the Hough; but generally find reasons to put off till another time.
  Thus they loiter away their Lives, like Solomon’s Sluggard, with
  their Arms across, and at the Winding up of the Year Scarcely have
  Bread to Eat. To speak the Truth, tis a thorough Aversion to Labor
  that makes People file off to N Carolina, where Plenty and a Warm
  Sun confirm them in their Disposition to Laziness for their whole
  Lives.[146]

One thing Colonel Byrd noted everywhere: the lazy lubbers wanted
chiefly to be let alone; they dreaded the possibility of falling within
the Virginia line; they were content in their Eden, and had no wish to
exchange their freedom for the stricter rule of the Old Dominion:

  Wherever we passed we constantly found the Borderers laid it to
  Heart if their Land was taken into Virginia; they chose rather
  belong to Carolina, where they pay no Tribute, either to God or
  to Caesar.... Another reason was, that the Government there is
  so Loose, and the Laws so feebly executed, that, like those in
  the Neighbourhood of Sydon formerly, every one does just what
  seems good in his own Eyes.... Besides, there might have been
  some Danger, perhaps, in venturing to be so rigorous, for fear of
  undergoing the Fate of an honest Justice in Corotuck Precinct. This
  bold Magistrate, it seems, taking upon to order a fellow to the
  Stocks, for being disorderly in his Drink, was, for his intemperate
  zeal, carry’d thither himself, and narrowly escap’d being whipp’t
  by the Rabble into the Bargain.[147]

  They are rarely guilty of Flattering or making any Court to their
  governours, but treat them with all the Excesses of Freedom and
  Familiarity. They are of Opinion their rulers woul’d be apt to grow
  insolent, if they grew Rich, and for that reason they take care to
  keep them poorer, and more dependent, if possible, than the Saints
  of New England used to do their Governours.[148]

To the student of colonial politics such glimpses are suggestive.
They reveal how early was the popular distrust of magistrates and
government; and they serve to explain the most striking characteristic
of Revolutionary political practice--the movement to minimize the
power of the judiciary and the executive, and magnify the power of
the legislature; to keep authority within the control of the local
democracies. “Every one does just what seems good in his own Eyes”--in
this attitude of social _laissez faire_ that throve on a diet of corn
pone and salt pork was the origin of the coonskin democracy of Old
Hickory that was to bring eventual disaster to the plans of gentlemen.


III • The Frontier • Land of Promise

Quite another picture of the frontier was likely to be painted by
the eighteenth-century democrat. In the well-known _Letters_ of
Crèvecœur, and in the recently published _More Letters from an American
Farmer_,[149] is an analysis of frontier life and its creative
influence upon the emerging American character, far more sympathetic
and thoughtful than the casual narratives of Madam Knight and Colonel
Byrd. The author was a cultivated Norman-French gentleman, who about
the year 1759 or 1760 entered the English colonies from Canada, was
a surveyor for a time near Albany, a resident of Pennsylvania and of
Ulster County in the province of New York, eventually acquired a farm
of 120 acres in Orange County which he named “Pine Hill,” married
Mehetabel Tippet of Yonkers, and became a competent tiller of the soil
as well as a lover of country life. In disposition he was active and
energetic, curious concerning the ways of nature and society. In Canada
he had joined the army as lieutenant under Montcalm and was sent on a
map-making expedition to the wilderness beyond the Great Lakes, and
traveled from Detroit as far south as the Ohio River. After quitting
Canada following the fall of Quebec, he traveled from Nova Scotia
through the English colonies to the extreme south, and perhaps visited
Bermuda and Jamaica, noting keenly the country and the manners of the
people. Perhaps no other man before the Revolution was so intimately
acquainted with the French and English colonies as a whole, with their
near background of frontier and the great wilderness beyond, as this
French American; and it was from long and intimate contact with the
realities of colonial life that he wrote those comments that have
preserved his name to the present.

The Revolution broke in upon his peaceful life with disastrous
consequences. He took no part in the preliminary disputes, and was
under grave suspicion by his neighbors in Orange County and by the
British. He was thrown into prison in New York by his Majesty’s
officers, where his health was undermined and he was reduced to extreme
straits. Finally permitted to sail for Europe without his family, he
was shipwrecked off the coast of Ireland, but reached London where
he disposed of his manuscripts, and eventually got over to France
in August, 1781. After the peace he returned to America to find his
wife dead, his children scattered, and his farmhouse burnt. For a
time he was French consul at New York, where he interested himself
in establishing a packet service between France and America, and
in the improvement of agricultural methods, amongst other ways by
the establishment of botanical gardens. He was a scientific farmer,
introducing the system of cover crops into America and endeavoring to
introduce potato culture into France. He was a corresponding member of
the Académie des Sciences and the Royal Agricultural Society of Paris,
and a member of the Société d’Agriculture, Sciences, et Arts de Meaux,
and of the Société d’Agriculture de Caen. In 1790 he returned to France
where he died in 1813.

Underneath the discursive chat of his letters is the firm fabric of
economic fact. In the background of his thinking Crèvecœur was quite
definitely Physiocratic, in his warm humanitarianism as well as in his
agrarian bias. As the kindly Frenchman studied the ways of colonial
society and contemplated the future, he asked himself the question,
what was the American as he was perceptibly differentiating from his
European ancestors? That a new race was emerging in this new country,
he was convinced; and that it was not in consequence chiefly of a new
mixture of blood--although that was not without its influence--he
likewise believed. A more potent influence was at work and that
influence was environment. Crèvecœur was something of an economic
determinist who sought to explain laws, customs, institutions--the
pattern of the social web--by an inquiry into economic factors. _Mann
ist was er isst._ “Men are like plants; the goodness and flavor of the
fruit proceeds from the peculiar soil and exposition in which they
grow. We are nothing but what we derive from the air we breathe, the
climate we inhabit, the government we obey, the system of religion we
profess, and the mode of our employment.”[150] Transplanted from the
meager opportunities of the old world to the rich soil and ample spaces
of America, the European undergoes a subtle transformation.

  The rich stay in Europe, it is only the middling and the poor that
  emigrate. In this great American asylum, the poor of Europe have
  by some means met together, and in consequence of various causes;
  to what purpose should they ask one another, what countrymen they
  are? Alas, two thirds of them had no country. Can a wretch who
  wanders about, who works and starves ... can that man call England
  or any other kingdom his country? A country that had no bread for
  him, whose fields procured him no harvest, who met nothing but
  the frowns of the rich, the severity of the laws, with jails and
  punishments; who owned not a single foot of the extensive surface
  of this planet? No! urged by a variety of motives, here they came.
  Every thing tended to regenerate them; new laws, a new mode of
  living, a new social system; here they are become men: in Europe
  they were as so many useless plants, wanting vegetable mould, and
  refreshing showers; they withered and were mowed down by want,
  hunger, and war: but now by the power of transplantation, like all
  other plants, they have taken root and flourished! Formerly they
  were not numbered in any civil list of their country, except in
  those of the poor; here they rank as citizens. By what invisible
  power has this surprizing metamorphosis been performed? By that
  of the laws of their industry ... his country is now that which
  gives him land, bread, protection, and consequence: _Ubi panis ibi
  patria_, is a motto of all emigrants.... Here the rewards of his
  industry follow with equal steps in the progress of his labor; his
  labor is founded on the basis of nature, _self-interest_; can it
  want a stronger allurement?[151]

From economic individualism in presence of unexploited natural
resources, he deduces the natural emergence of a new American
psychology that differentiates the colonial from the European peasant.
If “from involuntary idleness, servile dependence, penury, and useless
labor,” the emigrant “has passed to toils of a very different nature,
rewarded by ample subsistence”; if he has left off being a peasant and
become a free-holder and citizen; will not this man “entertain new
ideas, and form new opinions”? He possesses a stake in society; his
horizons broaden, his ambitions quicken; this is his country.

  An European, when he first arrives, seems limited in his
  intentions, as well as in his views; but he very suddenly alters
  his scale ... he no sooner breathes our air than he forms new
  schemes, and embarks in designs he never would have thought of
  in his own country. There the plenitude of society confines many
  useful ideas, and often extinguishes the most laudable schemes
  which here ripen into maturity.[152]

  He begins to feel the effects of a sort of resurrection; hitherto
  he had not lived, but simply vegetated; he now feels himself a
  man, because he is treated as such; the laws of his own country
  had overlooked him in his insignificancy; the laws of this cover
  him with their mantle. Judge what an alteration there must arise
  in the mind and thoughts of this man; he begins to forget his
  former servitude and dependence, his heart involuntarily swells and
  glows; this first swell inspires him with those new thoughts which
  constitute an American.... From nothing to start into being, to
  become a free man, invested with lands, to which every municipal
  blessing is annexed! What a change indeed! It is in consequence of
  that change that he becomes an American.[153]

  _He_ is an American, who leaving behind him all his ancient
  prejudices and manners, receives new ones from the mode of life
  he has embraced, the new government he obeys, and the new rank he
  holds. He becomes an American by being received in the broad lap of
  our great _Alma Mater_. Here individuals of all nations are melted
  into a new race of men, whose labors and posterity will one day
  cause great changes in the world.[154]

Having convinced himself that economic relaxation was the creative
force in determining American institutions and psychology, he was
led to examine the working of that force in diverse portions of
America. It is neither in the older seacoast world, nor along the
extreme frontier that he discovers his representative America; but
in the broad stretches of clearings, the vigorous backcountry or
“middle-settlements,” where agriculture was followed soberly and
effectively. “Some few towns excepted, we are all tillers of the soil,”
he pointed out; and it is the farmer of the middle region of New York
and Pennsylvania, with his broad acres in prosperous cultivation, his
economic independence, and his manly vigor, that he most delights to
dwell upon:

  Europe has no such class of men; the early knowledge they acquire,
  the early bargains they make, give them a great degree of sagacity.
  As freemen, they will be litigious; pride and obstinacy are often
  the cause of lawsuits; the nature of our laws and governments
  may be another. As citizens it is easy to imagine, that they
  will carefully read the newspapers, enter into every political
  disquisition, freely blame or censure governors and others. As
  farmers, they will be careful and anxious to get as much as they
  can, because what they get is theirs.... As Christians, religion
  curbs them not in their opinions; the laws inspect our actions;
  our thoughts are left to God. Industry, good living, selfishness,
  litigiousness, country politics, the pride of freemen, religious
  indifference, are their characteristics.[155]

The thinly settled backwoods with their restless squatter population,
Crèvecœur regards as the rough vanguard of the westward-moving
settlements. It is here, he points out, that the forces of leveling
are strongest, that the last remnants of old-world distinctions and
privileges are stript away, that the idea of individual freedom carries
furthest, sometimes to social disaster. “He who would wish to see
America in its proper light,” he says, “and have a true idea of its
feeble beginnings and barbarous rudiments, must visit our extended line
of frontiers where the last settlers dwell.”

  Now we arrive near the great woods, near the last inhabited
  districts; there men seem to be placed ... beyond the reach of
  government, which in some measure leaves them to themselves ...
  as they were driven there by misfortune, necessity of beginnings,
  desire of acquiring large tracts of land, idleness, frequent want
  of economy, ancient debts; the reunion of such people does not
  afford a very pleasing spectacle.... The few magistrates they have,
  are in general little better than the rest; they are often in a
  perfect state of war; that of man against man, sometimes decided by
  blows, sometimes by means of law ... men are wholly left dependent
  upon their native tempers, and on the spur of uncertain industry,
  which often fails when not sanctified by the efficacy of a few
  moral rules. There, remote from the power of example, and check of
  shame, many families exhibit the most hideous parts of our society.
  They are a kind of forlorn hope, preceding by ten or twelve years
  the more respectable army of veterans which come after them. In
  that space, prosperity will polish some, vice and law will drive
  off the rest, who uniting with others like themselves will recede
  still farther; making room for more industrious people, who will
  finish their improvements, convert the loghouse into a convenient
  habitation, and rejoicing that the first heavy labors are finished,
  will change in a few years that hitherto barbarous country into a
  fine, fertile, well regulated district. Such is our progress, such
  is the march of the Europeans toward the interior parts of this
  continent. In all society there are off-casts; this impure part
  serves as our precursors or pioneers.[156]

Crèvecœur’s chattiness and bucolic love of nature may easily obscure
for the casual reader, the solid economic core of the _Letters_. The
story of Andrew, the Hebridean, with its note of idyllic simplicity,
reads like a tale out of the French romantics; yet in its broad outline
it is the story of many an immigrant who penetrated to the hospitable
backcountry, took land, and prospered. The strong coloring of the
description is only partly French; in part it is a reflection of the
spontaneous optimism that was working like leaven in colonial society.
It is the old-fashioned phrasing rather than the matter that makes the
_Letters_ seem obsolete to modern readers. Change the wording, soften
the bucolic enthusiasm, and the sober American of earlier generations,
as he observed the arrival of the strong-armed peasant from the north
of Europe, would have discovered nothing strange in such a sentiment as
this:

  After a foreigner from any part of Europe is arrived, and become
  a citizen; let him devoutly listen to the voice of our great
  parent, which says to him, “Welcome to my shores, distressed
  European; bless the hour in which thou didst see my verdant fields,
  my fair navigable rivers, and my green mountains!--If thou wilt
  work, I have bread for thee; if thou wilt be honest, sober, and
  industrious, I have greater rewards to bestow on thee--ease and
  independence. I will give thee fields to feed and clothe thee; a
  comfortable fire-side to sit by.... I shall endow thee besides
  with the immunities of a freeman.... Go thou, and work and
  till; thou shalt prosper, provided thou be just, grateful, and
  industrious.”[157]

Andrew the Hebridean is a portrait painted by a Physiocratic
humanitarian, but the idealism that would build peace and content
on honest foundations, and would deny them to none, not even the
poorest if they proved worthy, found frequent justification in the
prosaic experience of colonial America. If many an immigrant found
“soul-drivers” awaiting them, many others like Andrew found a more
hospitable reception.

Across the peaceful scenes depicted in the _Letters_ soon fell the dark
shadow of civil war, and Crèvecœur’s content was rudely broken in upon.
As a French humanitarian he loathed war and all its works, and every
instinct and argument counseled him to stand apart from the strife
that seemed to him so meaningless. He liked peace and orderly ways and
he could not work himself into a passion over the supposed wrongs of
a people who seemed to him blessed above all others on this troubled
earth. As a philosophical farmer he held the politician in contempt and
refused to take seriously abstract theories of statecraft. The citizen
who stuck to his plow was happier, he believed, than the citizen who
talked noisily of his wrongs, and was eager to overset things. The
rough leveling of the frontier he had found distasteful, and as he
watched the development of the Revolutionary disputes, he seems to have
discovered in the Whig program an irruption of the tumultuous frontier
leveling that threatened to sweep away the common peace and well-being.
The source of the unrest he traced to New England, the feculent
wellspring of all the hypocrisies; it was inspired, he was convinced,
by a selfish demagoguery and led by unprincipled mobsters. In so far
as he held partisan sympathies, they inclined to the Loyalist side.
His education in England and his breeding as a gentleman, drew him
towards the Loyalist gentry with whom he associated in Orange County,
and repelled him from the noisy ardor of the plebeian patriots. Yet in
spirit he stood resolutely aloof, although his sympathies were cruelly
hurt by the sufferings that fell under his observation. In certain
letters only recently published (_Sketches of Eighteenth Century
America_), he narrates the misfortunes that befell innocent men and
women from the bitterness of civil strife,[158] and draws a picture of
the lawlessness and greed of patriot committeemen, and the intolerance
of the mob spirit, that is not pleasant to contemplate.[159]
Bitterness rarely exudes from his pen, but when he considers the ways
of Whig politicians he now and then indulges in a passage that reveals
his loathing of the mercenary spirit that he discovers in the new
patriotism. In the conclusion of “The American Belisarius” he gives
vent to his anger against those who outrage common morality; if it were
not for the fact that this is a moral universe, he says ironically:

  I’d worship the demon of the times, trample on every law, break
  every duty, neglect every bond, overlook every obligation to which
  no punishment was annexed. I’d set myself calumniating my rich
  neighbors. I’d call all passive, inoffensive men by the name of
  inimical. I’d plunder or detain the entrusted deposits. I’d trade
  on public moneys, though contrary to my oath. Oath! Chaff for good
  Whigs, and only fit to bind a few conscientious Royalists! I’d
  build my new fortune on the depreciation of the money. I’d inform
  against every man who would make any difference betwixt it and
  silver, whilst I, secure from any discovery or suspicion by my good
  name, would privately exchange ten for one. I’d pocket the fines
  of poor militiamen extracted from their heart’s blood. I’d become
  obdurate, merciless, and unjust. I’d grow rich, “fas vel nefas.”
  I’d send others a-fighting, whilst I stayed at home to trade and
  to rule. I’d become a clamorous American, a modern Whig, and offer
  every night incense to the god Arimanes.[160]

A lover of peace and good will, a humanitarian concerned only with
justice and the common well-being, seeking new ways to enlarge the
returns of agriculture, devoid of petty ambition and local prejudice,
a friend of man, Hector St. John de Crèvecœur was an embodiment of the
generous spirit of French revolutionary thought, a man whom Jefferson
would have liked for a neighbor. His sketchy and discursive writings
may not be notable literature, but we could ill spare them from the
library of eighteenth-century America.


Footnotes

[134] See Commons, _Races and Immigrants in America_, p. 37.

[135] Sometimes the profits were unexpectedly great, as is illustrated
by the case of a certain George Martin, who contracted with a
shipmaster to transport himself, his wife, and five children to America
for fifty-four pounds. He paid down $16, but died on the passage.
On the arrival of the vessel in port, the captain foreclosed on the
contract, sold the widow for twenty-two pounds, the three eldest sons
at thirty pounds each, and the two youngest, who were under five years
of age, he sold for ten pounds, realizing one hundred and twenty-two
pounds on a debt under fifty-one pounds. (Diffenderfer, _The German
Immigrants into Pennsylvania_, p. 268).

[136] _Ibid._, p. 229.

[137] _Ibid._, Part II, “The Redemptioners,” p. 209.

[138] For the entire diary, see _American Historical Review_, Vol. VI,
pp. 65-107.

[139] _The Private Journal, etc._, p. 40.

[140] _Ibid._, pp. 29-30.

[141] _Ibid._, p. 28.

[142] _Ibid._, p. 45.

[143] “The History of the Dividing Line,” in _The Writings of Colonel
William Byrd of Westover in Virginia, Esquire_, New York, 1901.

[144] At his death his library contained some four thousand volumes,
“the largest private library in the English-speaking colonies,”
according to his biographer.

[145] His father died possessed of 26,231 acres. He himself owned at
his death “no less than 179,440 acres of the best land in Virginia.”

[146] _Op. cit._, pp. 75-76.

[147] _Ibid._, p. 87.

[148] _Ibid._, p. 81.

[149] Published under the title of _Sketches of Eighteenth Century
America_ by the Yale University Press, 1925.

[150] _Letters ..._, in edition of 1904, p. 56.

[151] _Ibid._, pp. 52-55.

[152] _Ibid._, p. 76.

[153] _Ibid._, pp. 77, 79.

[154] _Ibid._, pp. 54-55.

[155] _Ibid._, pp. 57-58.

[156] _Ibid._, pp. 58-60.

[157] _Ibid._, pp. 90-91.

[158] See, e. g., “The Man of Sorrows,” “The Wyoming Massacre,” “The
History of Mrs. B.,” “The Frontier Woman.”

[159] See, e. g., “The American Belisarius” and “Landscapes.”

[160] _Sketches of Eighteenth Century America_, p. 249.




