Chapter I • Agrarianism and Capitalism


I • The Background of Ideas • English and French Contributions

With the close of the war the question of the times was the urgent
problem of the form and control of the new political state to be
erected: whether it should be the coercive sovereign of the whole, or
should share its sovereignty with the several states. Although the
problem was political, the forces that were driving to a solution were
economic, and were commonly recognized as such. Agrarian and mercantile
interests opposed each other openly and shaped their political programs
in accordance with their special needs. Not until French romanticism
popularized the doctrine of social equalitarianism was there any
serious questioning of the principle of the economic basis of politics.
The fact of property rule was challenged in America no more than in
England, and the laws of suffrage in the several states were founded
on that principle. The new state, therefore, took its shape from men
who were political realists, deeply read in the republican literature
of the seventeenth century, and inspired by the ideals of the rising
English middle class. The opponents of the new state, on the other
hand, were economic liberals who rejected English middle-class ideals,
and inclined increasingly to the humanitarian theory of the French
thinkers, though with an eye always upon American conditions. The
struggle between these two schools of thought determined the final
outcome of a long and acrimonious contest.

The English middle class had received its creative bent from
seventeenth-century Puritanism. That vast movement survived political
defeat and effected a silent revolution in English character that
projected its ideals far into the future. It permeated the rising
tradesman class, stimulated its ambition, and gave it an ethics
precisely fitted to its needs. In inculcating the doctrine of a sacred
calling to work, it substituted the modern attitude towards production
for the medieval. It rejected the older conception of work for the sake
of a livelihood, of production for consumption, and substituted the
ideal of work for its own sake, of production for the sake of profit.
It implicitly condemned the leisurely, play-loving and pleasure-taking
activities of medieval England, and substituted a drab ideal of
laborious gain, that measured life in terms of material prosperity
and exalted the business of acquisition as the rational end of life.
In the sanction of such an ethics, wealth became the first object of
social desire; and this ideal, that answered the ambitions of the
rising middle class, was preached under the authority of religion. To
labor diligently in the vocation to which one is called of God, it was
believed, was to labor under the great Taskmaster’s eye, and in the
confident hope of eternal reward.

No conceivable discipline was better calculated to breed a utilitarian
race and create a nation of tradesmen. The immediate result was the
emergence of a middle-class, unimaginative, laborious, prudential,
who devoutly believed that the right to rise in the world, to pursue
economic well-being in a competitive society, was the most sacred of
human rights; that those who were faithful in little things, God would
make rulers over great things. To scant one’s service, whether to God
or one’s master, was the cardinal sin; work, thrift, self-denial, were
the cardinal virtues. This amazing revolution in the ethics of work
laid the basis upon which modern England was to rise; it carried in its
loins the industrial revolution. The rise of the new ethics coincided
historically with the final disintegration of the craft guilds, and
the emergence of the great trading companies. It provided a desirable
sanction for the modern principle of exploitation, and the development
of the middleman system of distribution; and these conceptions the
Puritanized English commercial class seized upon eagerly, and in
capable fashion set about the work of creating the system of modern
capitalism.

Every rising group is jealous of its interests and active in asserting
them. It joins forces with whatever movements of current liberalism
promise to further its purpose, but it will see to it that the wider
movement shall serve its narrower ends. The commercial class gathered
strength swiftly during the early seventeenth century, and with the
gentry formed the backbone of discontent with the strong rule of
Strafford. London was growing fast, “the abode of smoke, disease and
democracy,” as a contemporary gentleman phrased it; and the London
burgesses supported Parliament heartily. The new money-economy wanted
to be free from governmental restrictions and exactions, and the
simplest way seemed to lie in asserting parliamentary sovereignty. That
hope was frustrated after 1660 when control of Parliament passed into
the hands of the landed gentry. The aristocracy was too strong for the
middle class, and the latter was forced to buy its privileges in the
open parliamentary market. Not until the intellectual liberalism of
the later eighteenth century clarified its conception of the minimized
state, did the money economy rise to fresh political consciousness, and
then it joined heartily with the new liberalism in an attack upon the
centralized powers of the political state.

The philosophy of this new liberalism was derived largely from two
notable thinkers of the preceding century, Harrington and Locke,
supplemented later by Adam Smith. The influence of the _Oceana_ upon
later thinkers was profound. In grasping and applying the principle of
the economic interpretation of history Harrington laid the foundation
of modern political theory. The true source of political power, he
asserted, is economic power--“empire follows the balance of property.”
The form of government in a given country, whether monarchical,
aristocratic, or democratic, according to the doctrine of economic
determinism, depends upon the ownership of land, whether vested
largely in one, in a minority, or in many. This primary economic power
is modified, however, by the presence in every society of a natural
aristocracy; the authority of character and ability imposes a natural
leadership on those less capable, and disturbs the simple economics
of the situation. Because of the resulting clash of interests,
political stability can be secured only by a judiciously calculated
system of checks; and the system which Harrington elaborated provided
for a bicameral legislature--the aristocratic branch proposing and
debating, and the democratic branch resolving--rotation in office,
and the ballot, to the end that there should be a government of laws
and not of men. His ideal was rulership by the best and wisest under
well-considered laws, circumscribed by a written constitution.

Locke followed Harrington in founding his political theory upon
economics, but he gave to it a characteristically middle-class
interpretation. Harrington had been primarily concerned with a land
economy; Locke was to become unconsciously a spokesman of a money
economy. The persistent problem of that economy was the security of
private property against sequestration, and the ultimate effect of
Locke’s teachings was to secure and strengthen the rights of property
in the state. In basing his doctrine of property ownership upon labor,
he prepared the way for a conception of economic power dissociated
from land. In the universal communism which marks the state of nature,
he argued, private property rights result from labor bestowed, and
are ethically and socially valid. But in such a state of nature, the
possession and enjoyment of property thus detached from the communal
whole are at constant hazards. “The great and chief end, therefore, of
men uniting into commonwealths and putting themselves under government,
is the preservation of their property.”[292] If such was the original
purpose for which government was instituted among men, it follows that
government must regard property rights with particular tenderness;
for if the state prove untrustworthy, the original compact upon
which it was erected is dissolved, and society returns to a state of
nature. Locke therefore went far in asserting the inviolable rights of
property, laying it down as a guiding principle that the sovereign in
time of war may lawfully enforce conscription upon the bodies and lives
of his subjects, but not upon their property. “The supreme power cannot
take from any man any part of his property without his own consent,”
for “to invade the fundamental law of property” is to subvert “the end
of government.”[293] In thus asserting the sacredness of property,
Locke laid the foundation of the new philosophy of capitalism.

As English capitalism grew stronger it began to envisage more
critically the fundamental problem of the powers and functions of the
political state. A state controlled by the landed interests, given to
imposing vexatious restrictions upon trade, could not answer its needs;
freedom rather than regulation was requisite to healthy development.
From the Physiocratic teachings had come the new conception that
economic well-being cannot be imposed from above by governmental
paternalism, but results from untrammeled individual enterprise. The
great concern of government should be to assist and not hamper industry
and trade; political policies should follow and serve commercial
interests. Thus was provided the background from which emerged
_The Wealth of Nations_, the declaration of independence of modern
capitalism. Adam Smith completed the work of Locke, and gave definite
form to the middle-class liberalism of eighteenth-century England, a
liberalism that in the pursuit of commercial freedom found it desirable
to limit the powers of the state. The Tory state had been centralized
and paternal, the capitalistic state was to be reduced to the position
of umpire between competitors. The net results, thus, of two hundred
years of English middle-class struggle to free its economic ambitions
from governmental restrictions was the conception of the social,
political, and economic sufficiency of _laissez faire_. “Let alone” had
been erected into a fetish.

In France, on the other hand, the economic interpretation of history
dominated political thinking far less than in England, and the liberal
movement owed more to a group of intellectuals than to the middle
class. The French leaders were a remarkable group, far removed in
temper from Harrington and Locke and Adam Smith. The Physiocrats were
agrarians and the romantics were humanitarians. They followed the path
of logic to broad principles. As leadership passed from Montesquieu to
Rousseau, French liberalism abandoned the cautious historical appeal,
and turned to generalization that carried far beyond liberalism. The
Rousseau school became advanced radicals, aiming at the regeneration
of society as a whole, seeking political justice by a universal appeal
to reason. This explains the breadth and suggestiveness of their
thinking, as well as the smallness of their immediate achievement. In
seeking much they overreached accomplishment, for they had behind them
no disciplined, class-conscious group, pursuing definite ends. But in
outrunning their own time, they became leaders of later times; and the
unfulfilled program of Rousseau carried over to become the inspiration
of later humanitarianism.

The creative impulse of French romantic philosophy was a passionate
social idealism. A disciple of Locke, Rousseau went further than
his master and translated politics and economics into sociology.
That a juster, more wholesome social order should take the place of
the existing obsolete system; that reason and not interests should
determine social institutions; that the ultimate ends to be sought were
universal liberty, equality, and fraternity--such in brief were the
main conceptions of his philosophy. “Regard for the general good” must
be accepted as the sole test of laws and institutions. He attacked the
problem by way of psychology, essaying a revaluation of human nature.
Incalculable harm had been done, and grave mistakes made, Rousseau
believed, by the old slanderous interpretation; to assume that every
man is a knave, governed solely by self-interest, was an assumption
contrary to fact. It was a generalization deduced from certain acquired
characteristics. If in a competitive society men prove to be selfish,
ambitious of power and distinction, brutal in seeking egoistic ends,
the blame attaches to a vicious social system that has debased them
from their natural state. In a state of nature men are kindly,
rational, sociable; but in society the great rewards fall to the
self-seeking. A ruthless social order is forever perverting the natural
man; whereas if social rewards were bestowed on the social-minded,
the innate sense of justice would speedily modify and control the
impulse to egoism. The solution of the vexing social problem, Rousseau
concluded, lay in a return to a state of nature, where under the
determining influence of wholesome environment the individual should
develop naturally, unperverted by false standards and unjust rewards.

French radicalism, then, was driving in the same direction with English
liberalism, but it went much further. Both desired a loosening of the
machinery of centralized power as represented by the political state;
but whereas English liberalism protested against a paternalism that
diminished its profits, French radicalism struck at the principle
of centralization. Political institutions it regarded as artificial
agencies for the purposes of exploitation--the state was little more
than a tax machine; whereas the living source and wellspring of every
true civilization is social custom, voluntary association, free
exchange. The root of French radicalism was anarchistic, and its ideal
was an agrarian society of free-holders. It would sweep away the long
accumulated mass of prescriptive rights, the dead hand of the past,
and encourage free men to create a new society that should have as
its sole end and justification, the common well-being. A pronounced
individualism characterized both movements, French and English; but
in the one case it was humanitarian, appealing to reason and seeking
social justice, in the other it was self-seeking, founded on the right
of exploitation, and looking toward capitalism.

During the period with which we are concerned, American thought, become
militantly self-conscious but still vague and inchoate touching any
ultimate program, drew inspiration from both sources; but the deeper,
controlling influence came finally to be English rather than French.
The common doctrine of decentralization fitted American conditions,
but to many Americans decentralization, whether social or political,
had proved undesirable. The common doctrine of liberty accorded with
the passions released by the Revolution, but the French humanitarian
conceptions of equality and fraternity found little response in a
middle-class, competitive world. On the contrary, the English doctrine
of economic individualism made universal appeal. In presence of vast,
unpreëmpted resources, the right of every man to preëmpt and exploit
what he would, was synonymous with individual liberty. Any government
which should endeavor to limit such exploitation would be bitterly
assailed; and if the small man were free to enjoy his petty privilege,
the greater interests might preëmpt unchallenged. The total influence
of old-world liberalism upon the America of post-war days was,
therefore, favorable to capitalistic development and hostile to social
democracy. Until the early years of the nineties the democratic spirit
of French radicalism was little understood in America, and the field
remained free to the English middle-class philosophy, which appealed
equally to the agrarian and the capitalistic groups.


II • The Political Situation

Against this background of ideas, the political tactics of the year
1787 are sufficiently comprehensible. Two major problems had been
settled by the war, namely, that henceforth the exploitation of America
was to remain the prerogative of Americans, and that in the new country
there was no place for a king or a titled aristocracy. But with these
preliminaries settled, the problem remained to determine the form and
powers of a national government. Should that government be entrusted
with coercive sovereignty, or should it remain the titular head of
confederated sovereign commonwealths? The latter solution had been
accepted during the period of war, and in proposing abolition of the
Articles of Confederation and the substitution of a new instrument, the
burden of proof fell upon the advocates of the new. How the problem
was met and the solution achieved by a skillful minority in face of
a hostile majority is a suggestive lesson in political strategy. It
is a classic example of the relation of economics to politics; of the
struggle between greater property and smaller property for control of
the state.

The strategic position of the large property interests in the year
1787 was favorable to a bold stroke. In the northern and middle
states the controlling influence was wielded by a powerful money
group that had been slowly rising during pre-Revolutionary days,
and had greatly increased its resources and augmented its prestige
as a result of war financing and speculation in currency and lands.
They at once assumed the leadership which before had belonged to
the gentry. Like all eighteenth-century realists they exhibited a
frank property-consciousness that determined all their moves. With
them affiliated such members of the older gentry as remained, the
professional classes, ambitious Revolutionary officers who had set up
the militant Order of the Cincinnati, together with a numerous body
of the disappointed and the disaffected; the net result of which was
a close working alliance of property and culture for the purpose of
erecting a centralized state with coercive powers. They were powerfully
aided by two outstanding characteristics of the eighteenth-century
mind: an aristocratic psychology which was deeply ingrained in the
colonial through the long unchallenged rule of the gentry; and the
universal belief in the stake-in-society theory of government,
evidenced by the general disfranchisement of non-property-holders.
Property had always ruled in America, openly and without apology,
and the money group could count on a spontaneous response to its
demand that property should reorganize the feeble central government
and set up one more to its liking. In the South this reorganization
was unnecessary, for the planter aristocracy, in siding with the
Revolution, remained masters of their society, and the money group
had not risen to challenge their supremacy. It remained only for the
northern interests to join forces with the planters to bring the great
property interests of the country under one banner.

The status of the small property holders, on the other hand, was much
less happy. They were in possession of many of the state governments,
and were strongly wedded to the Articles of Confederation; but they
were deep in populism and their agrarian measures offered rallying
points for a powerful opposition. They lacked disciplined cohesion and
were wanting in a broad program. The militant mood of Revolutionary
days had given place to suspicion and disillusion, and their fighting
strength was greatly weakened. They were suffering the fate of all
post-war governments. The widespread depression was attributed to
populist policies, and all the evils from which the country was
suffering were laid at the doors of agrarian legislatures. Under such
conditions the political strategy of the money group was predetermined.
The issue was ready-made. Astute politicians like Hamilton seized the
opportunity and crystallized the discontent by the ingenious argument
that the trouble was too much agrarianism, that agrarianism resulted
from too much democracy, and that the inevitable end of too much
democracy was universal anarchy. The root of all the troubles, it was
asserted, was the pernicious slackness of the Articles of Confederation
which prevented a vigorous administration. There could be no prosperity
until a competent national government was set up on a substantial basis.

The inevitable consequence was that the ideal of popular democratic
rule received a sharp setback. The aristocratic prejudices of the
colonial mind were given a more militant bias by skillful propaganda.
Democracy was pictured as no other than mob rule, and its ultimate
purpose the denial of all property rights. Populistic measures were
fiercely denounced as the natural fruit of democratic control; all
America was in danger of following the destructive example of New
Hampshire and Rhode Island. “Look at the Legislature of Rhode Island,”
exclaimed a speaker in the New York Constitutional Convention, “what
is it but the perfect picture of a mob!” The virus of democracy
was a poison that destroyed the character of the people as well as
government; was not the fate of Rhode Island a warning to the rest
of the country? Here is a picture of that commonwealth, drawn by an
English gentleman before agrarianism had done its worst.

  The government of this province is entirely democratical, every
  officer, except the collector of the customs, being appointed ...
  either immediately by the people, or by the general assembly....
  The character of the Rhode Islanders is by no means engaging,
  or amiable, a circumstance principally owing to their form of
  government. Their men in power, from the highest to the lowest, are
  dependent upon the people, and frequently act without that strict
  regard to probity and honour, which ought invariably to influence
  and direct mankind. The private people are cunning, deceitful, and
  selfish: they live almost entirely by unfair and illicit trading.
  Their magistrates are partisan and corrupt: and it is folly to
  expect justice in their courts of judicature; for he who has the
  greatest purse is generally found to have the fairest cause.... It
  is needless, after this, to observe that it is in a very declining
  state.[294]

“Under the Articles of Confederation,” comments a recent student,
“populism had a free hand, for majorities in the state legislatures
were omnipotent. Any one who reads the economic history of the time
will see why the solid conservative interests of the country were
weary of the talk about the ‘rights of the people,’ and were bent upon
establishing firm guarantees for the rights of property.”[295] The
money-economy had made up its mind that such government as that of
Rhode Island could not longer be tolerated. An example must be made of
such hotbeds of anarchy; if reason would not be listened to, force must
be used. An ardent Federalist, Judge Dana of Massachusetts, offered a
possible solution:

  This state [Rhode Island] will not choose delegates to the
  convention, nor order on their delegates to Congress. I hope they
  will not, as their neglect will give grounds to strike it out of
  the union, and divide its territory between their neighbors....
  According to my best observation, such a division of this state
  would meet the best approbation of the commercial part of it,
  though they are afraid to take any open measures in the present
  state of things, to bring it about. Their interest must dictate
  such a measure; they never can be secure under the present form
  of government, but will always labor under the greatest mischief
  any people can suffer, that of being ruled by the most ignorant
  and unprincipled of their fellow citizens. This state is too
  insignificant to have a place on an equal footing with any of
  the others in the Union, unless it be Delaware. Therefore a
  bold politician would seize upon the occasion their abominable
  anti-federal conduct presents, for annihilating them as a separate
  member of the Union.[296]

“It is fortunate,” wrote General Varnum to Washington, confirming Judge
Dana’s analysis of the economic divisions of Rhode Island, “that the
wealth and resources of this state are chiefly in possession of the
well affected, and they are entirely devoted to the public good.”

It was Shays’s Rebellion, that militant outbreak of populism that
set all western Massachusetts in uproar, and spread to the very
outskirts of Boston, which crystallized the anti-democratic sentiment,
and aroused the commercial group to decisive action. With its armed
attack upon lawyers and courts, its intimidation of legislators, its
appeal for the repudiation of debts, it provided the object lesson
in democratic anarchy which the “friends of law and order” greatly
needed. The revolt was put down, but the fear of democracy remained
and called aloud for stronger government. “We see the situation we are
in,” exclaimed a Boston member in the Massachusetts Constitutional
Convention. “We are verging toward destruction, and every one must be
sensible of it.” Shays had failed, but with political power in the
hands of agrarian legislatures, friendly to debtors, what dangers must
not the future hold in store? Was it not the patriotic duty of the
sober conservators of society to set up betimes a strong constitutional
defense, before the rights of property were swept away by the fierce
tide of democracy? Writing to Washington under date of October 23,
1786, General Knox argued:

  On the very first impression of faction and licentiousness, the
  fine theoretic government of Massachusetts has given way, and its
  laws are trampled under foot.... Their creed is, that the property
  of the United States has been protected from the confiscation of
  Britain by the joint exertions of all, and therefore ought to be
  the common property of all.... This dreadful situation, for which
  our government have made no adequate provision, has alarmed every
  man of principle and property in New England. They start as from a
  dream, and ask what can have been the cause of this delusion? What
  is to give us security against the violence of lawless men? Our
  government must be braced, changed, or altered to secure our lives
  and property. We imagined that the mildness of our government and
  the wishes of the people were so correspondent that we were not as
  other nations, requiring brutal force to support the laws. But we
  find we are men--actual men, possessing all the turbulent passions
  belonging to that animal, and that we must have a government
  proper and adequate for him. The people of Massachusetts ... are
  far advanced in this doctrine, and the men of property and the men
  of station and principle there, are determined to establish and
  protect them in their lawful pursuits.... Something is wanting and
  something must be done.[297]

During these years of unrest the problem of a new fundamental law
was carefully studied by the anti-agrarian leaders and solutions
suggested. A remarkable change had come over their thinking. They
discarded the revolutionary doctrines that had served their need in the
debate with England. They were done with natural rights and romantic
interpretations of politics and were turned realists. They parted
company with English liberalism in its desire for a diminished state.
Their economic interests were suffering from the lack of a strong
centralized government, and they were in a mood to agree with earlier
realists who held that men are animals with turbulent passions, and
require a government “proper and adequate” for animals; and in view
of local agrarian majorities, a proper and adequate government could
not be had without a strong centralized state. The solution, they
were convinced, lay in a return to some form of seventeenth-century
republicanism, possibly modeled after Harrington, but with further
checks upon the power of the democratic branch of the legislature, and
a stronger executive. Hobbes with his leviathan monarchy had gone too
far, but he had, at least, understood the need of a strong state; and a
strong state, subservient to their interests, the business and landed
groups were determined to set up as a barrier against a threatening
agrarianism.

The great obstacle to such a program was the political power of the
farmers, bred up in the traditional practice of home rule, jealous of
local rights, and content with the Articles of Confederation. These
home rulers would not take kindly to any suggestion of a centralized
state, even though it should be republican in form. The thing must be
done skillfully, if it were to succeed. To nullify where they could not
override the political power of the agrarians, therefore, became the
practical problem of the money-economy. The fear aroused by Shays’s
Rebellion provided the strategic opportunity, and the best brains of
the country suggested the method. The struggle had begun which was to
provide a new fundamental law for the United States.


Footnotes

[292] _Second Treatise on Civil Government_, Chapter IX.

[293] _Ibid._, Chapter XI.

[294] Burnaby, _Travels through the Middle Settlements in North America
in the Years 1759 and 1760_.

[295] Beard, _The Supreme Court and the Constitution_.

[296] Austin, _Life of Elbridge Gerry_, Vol. II, pp. 66-67.

[297] Brooks, _Henry Knox_, pp. 194-195.




