Chapter I • New Worlds


I

While Calhoun was instructing the South in the theory of a Greek
democracy, other sons of the South were learning, in the new world
to which they had removed, the ways of a very different democracy--a
democracy native to the frontier and quite unconcerned with Greek
ideals. In the Ohio valley was gathering a multitude of rough
libertarians who had exchanged the restrictions of the old settlements
for the freedom of the new. To these bumptious levelers rulership by
established authorities made no appeal. They attached no respect to
broadcloth, but preferred to manage their affairs in their own way
by appeal to the majority. Taught by experience the worth of certain
Jeffersonian principles, they took seriously the doctrine of equality
and proposed to put it into practice. They were coonskin apostles of
liberty and equality--if not of fraternity--backwoods democrats who
by virtue of numbers established in common practice the principle of
the sovereignty of the popular will. Springing up naturally on the
frontier, the practice of democracy received from it a new validity
and became the determining factor in the nationalism that America
was creating in the early years of the nineteenth century. That it
was a crude and often shoddy democracy, that it never justified its
pretentions in the eyes of a critical realism, did not lessen the zeal
with which men clung to it or weaken their loyalty. Democracy became
the common faith of the West, and in becoming the common faith of the
West it was put in the way of becoming the common faith of America.

If the romantic temper is a spontaneous by-product of social change,
that temper found in the upheaval attending the western migration
a plentiful aliment that had been wanting in the static eighteenth
century. In that older world men had been held fast in the grip of the
customary and familiar; but in the free West all was new and strange.
The crossing of the Appalachian barrier that had long held back the
settlements was an adventurous undertaking that fired the imagination.
Romantic in spirit and scope, it was meanly picaresque in a thousand
unlovely details. Plain men engaged in it, provident and improvident,
hard-working and shiftless; heroes had a share in it, but blackguards
and outlaws and broken men--the lees and settlings thrown off from the
older communities--had a share as well. The world that provided a stage
for the courage of Daniel Boone and the fighting qualities of George
Rogers Clark bred also the Davy Crocketts and Mike Finks and Col.
William Suggses, who discovered there opportunities for the development
of less admirable qualities; and it engulfed in its depths a host of
nameless adventurers who drifted into the wilderness settlements, drank
and quarreled and begot children, suffered from the chills and ague,
spread a drab poverty along the frontier, and were put away under
ground and forgotten by the more fortunate who salvaged prosperity from
the abundant wreckage.

From this crude society emerged the new states with governments
designed to serve simple ends. Jealousy for his sovereign right to
do as he pleased was the chief concern of the free western voter;
as a sovereign citizen he refused to be subject to the creature
commonwealth. If governors and legislators and judges got uppish he
would throw them out of office and put in others who better understood
the rights of free Americans. It was this rude equalitarianism that
marked the early stage of western commonwealth building. Naïve
Jeffersonians, these frontier citizens had not learned from Hamilton
how useful the political state may become to those who know how
to control its policies to their particular ends; but that lesson
they were soon to learn. The citizens of Georgia received excellent
instruction from no less a man than Chief Justice Marshall in the
matter of the Yazoo frauds; and as such lessons sank into their minds
their political philosophy underwent a silent change. The coonskin
individualism that created Jacksonian democracy was gradually
undermined by a middle-class individualism that inclined to the
Whiggery of Henry Clay. The former was a spontaneous expression of the
frontier spirit, the latter a calculating expression of the maturing
settlement. The one discovered its native habitat on the backwoods
farm, the other in the county seat town. The one was agrarian _laissez
faire_, the other was exploitative paternalistic. The followers of
Jackson wanted the state kept simple and frugal, the followers of Clay
wanted it to engage in ambitious programs of internal improvement;
and from these antagonistic principles emerged a bitter feud between
Democracy and Whiggery that in western townships revived the old
alignment of agrarian and Federalist of earlier times.

In such a contest the principle of Whiggery must eventually triumph.
It was an expression of “the genius of the times.” Economics and
psychology were daily arguing in its behalf. From the first early
settlements of the Ohio valley, it must be remembered, circumstances
were creating a new middle class that was to stamp itself indelibly on
western life and institutions. The spirit of speculation had entered
the wilderness with the early surveyors. With its vast resources the
Inland Empire offered the first opportunity to exercise the newly
won right to exploit the western hinterland, and it was seized upon
greedily. Agriculture was still the common business and land hunger
the common passion. The irruption of the land-hungry hordes upon
the fertile Ohio valley, it will be recalled, synchronized with the
speculative debauch that followed the conclusion of the peace of
1783, and this in turn was a by-product of the sudden expansion of
the new capitalistic finance. Speculation had suddenly become every
man’s business, and wild lands and wild-cat banks, joining fortunes
for better or worse, brought forth a characteristic progeny. The new
gospel of progress found more willing hearers than the old gospel of
righteousness. Every adventurer into the Ohio valley was a potential
speculator, and every settler was eager to sell out to a later comer
at an advance. The real estate agent followed close on the footsteps
of Daniel Boone, quick to profit from the explorations. Land was the
staple commodity and such a turnover had never before been known in
America. Every clearing in the woods was speedily capitalized, and
every townsite was reckoned rich in potential values. The new cities
were founded in unearned increment and prospered with its increase.
With European peasants flocking to the West from their poverty-stricken
countries, and the exploited of the East seeking new openings there,
it was an unlucky speculator who could not exchange his paper values
for substantial equivalents. Law, religion, education, culture,
were pressed into the service of speculation. How widely the spirit
permeated the West is suggested in the experience of Timothy Flint,
frontier missionary. Writing from Saint Charles, Missouri, in 1818, he
commented somewhat bitterly:

  Religion, when I came here was considered contemptible. The phalanx
  of opposition was in array from one end of the street to the
  other. Why did they invite me here? On speculation. A minister--a
  church--a school--are words to flourish in an advertisement to sell
  lots. (John Ervin Kirkpatrick, _Timothy Flint, etc._, Appendix B,
  p. 293.)

From the determining factors, then, of abundant wild lands, rapid
increase in population, and an elastic credit, operating on a vast
scale, came the optimistic, speculative psychology of the new West.
It is the common disease of every period of unstable economics. It
had traveled west with every extension of the frontier; and it became
acute in the Ohio valley in the romantic days following the War of
1812. In colonial times before the upheaval of the Revolution, prices
of land and commodities had been stable. The basic silver currency
varied little in quantity or value; coin was scarce, but the occasional
emission of paper money produced little disturbance, for the reason
that the farmer habitually reckoned his income in the produce of his
farm and fireside. But with the unsettling of exchange values by
the wide use of bank notes, prices at once shifted to a speculative
basis. The familiar commodities ceased to have a fixed use value, and
a cash psychology superseded the traditional commodity value. The old
stability was gone. The familiar domestic economy that functioned
primarily in terms of consumption rather than profit disintegrated
under the workings of a paper system and gave place to a speculative
economy.

It was this revolution that set apart the new West from the older
traditional America and made it the special repository of the new
middle-class spirit of progress. The change had been long preparing.
Writing from Boonesborough in January, 1776, the agent of the
Transylvania Land Company pointed out that the western country
“abounded with land mongers,” and that his company had already issued
nine hundred patents.[413] These adventurous spirits were only pioneers
pointing the way for later hordes that after 1815 pushed eagerly
onward. “Old America seems to be breaking up, and moving westward,”
commented a traveler in 1817 as he watched the long line of Conestoga
wagons moving towards Pittsburgh; and in the fall of the same year
Timothy Flint said of Saint Charles, Missouri, that “there was an
average of one hundred people every day coming to the town, or passing
to near-by points. Nearly all were poor and not one family in fifty had
a Bible” (Kirkpatrick, _Timothy Flint, etc._, p. 102). “This western
fever has seized old and young,” remarks a character in Cooper’s _Home
as Found_, “and it has carried off many active families from our parts
of the world.... Most of the counties adjoining our own have lost a
considerable portion of their population.” One reason for this vast
exodus from the East is suggested by a recent student who remarks:
“A considerable part of the significance of the frontier lies behind
the frontier. In one sense, the westward expansion of the American
people was a flight from the new industrialism” (Norman Ware, _The
Industrial Worker_, p. xx). To these adventurers from the East was
added an increasing immigration. During the period from the close of
the Revolution to the War of 1812, the annual immigration averaged no
more than four or five thousand. In the year 1817 it rose to 22,000,
and thereafter an augmenting stream poured into America and filtered
westward. They were natural prey to shrewd promoters, and in _Martin
Chuzzlewit_ Dickens has drawn a picture--not wholly caricature--of what
befell some of them. But whatever might be their individual fate, they
provided fuel to the fire that was consuming the old agrarianism and
clearing the ground for the western middle class.


II

With land as its staple commodity the West naturally interpreted
progress in terms of increasing land values; and these in turn were
dependent on better markets, better roads, and a freely flowing tide of
immigration. In a country of such vast distances internal improvements
were an everyday necessity. With every mile that a turnpike was driven
into the wilderness new opportunities were opened up. Monies paid for
wild land went into the Federal treasury; it was only just, according
to the western view, that such monies should return to the West in the
form of public improvements, for with such improvements tax values were
increased, prices of all commodities rose, and progress was furthered.
The Federal government could not fairly leave its offspring to shift
for themselves, but must consider itself _in loco parentis_ to the
rising commonwealths. It was a persuasive argument, appealing alike to
farmer and speculator, to town and country, but it played havoc with
the older Jeffersonianism. Jefferson thought always in terms of the
agrarian producer functioning in a stable economic world; speculation
was not in his philosophy; unearned increment was a crop he never
calculated on; and in sympathy with an older liberalism he would reduce
the state to the narrow rôle of policeman. But the new West, thinking
in terms of its immediate needs, desired a broad and benevolent
paternalism. It wanted the Federal government to butter its bread
regardless of the ultimate cost of the butter.

The complete embodiment of this spirit of paternalistic progress was
the master politician of the times, whose dramatic career, beginning
as a Jeffersonian and ending as a Hamiltonian, suggests the confusions
of a world in transition. Henry Clay was the hero of the new West, the
spokesman of the new ambitions. A man of great personal charm, engaging
manners, buoyant temperament, exuberant patriotism, and persuasive
tongue, he migrated in 1797 at the age of twenty-one from Richmond,
Virginia, to Lexington, Kentucky, then a booming county-seat town only
twenty-two years removed from the building of its first blockhouse. The
population of the state had more than doubled in seven years, and by
1797 it had risen above 180,000. Of this aggressive little world Clay
soon became the accredited representative at Washington. He had been
brought up under the old domestic economy and carefully tutored in the
Jeffersonian philosophy. For four years he had been private secretary
to George Wythe, a distinguished Virginian of the older generation,
a profound lawyer and teacher, a scholarly political thinker, a
humanitarian, and a confirmed agrarian. When Clay left Virginia he
carried with him the Jeffersonianism of Wythe; but he was wanting in
the trained intellect of his preceptor and his views were inadequately
grounded. His subsequent career revealed him as an impressionable
nature modifying his convictions with his environment. In Kentucky the
spirit of speculative expansion seized him and inoculated his mind with
the new gospel of progress. He early convinced himself that government
was not doing its full duty unless it helped its citizens to make
money, and he persistently pressed on Congress the need of federal aid
to develop the West. In 1812 he fell victim to the war psychology,
turned jingo, and substituted an ardent patriotism for sober reason.
Thereafter he became increasingly nationalistic, demanding a strong
army and navy, pleading for a loose construction of the constitution,
arguing for paternalism. His Jeffersonianism was quietly put away
like a garment out of style. Grossly ignorant of the schools of
economic thought, he was an opportunist who shifted from the older
domestic economy to the later capitalistic, without comprehending the
significance of the change. Unread in history and political theory,
he trusted his fluency to get him out of any inconsistencies he might
blunder into. In the course of his long career he found himself
at different times on both sides of every important question; yet
gravitating to the middle-class position, the exponent of exploitation
in the name of progress, spokesman of the commercial, financial and
manufacturing interests, a new-model Federalist passionately defending
the new money economy--a curious ending for one who began as a pupil of
George Wythe.

And yet not curious when one considers the ambitions of the world that
molded him. Clay was a born politician who rarely came to grips with
reality. Devoted to the principles of republican liberty as he found
them in the Constitution, he professed to believe that government
could be trusted to distribute favors with impartial hand. Personally
honest, he never realized how often he allowed himself to become the
unconscious tool of powerful economic interests. With his desire to
please everybody he was an easy prey for skillful lobbyists. He had
been at one time attorney for the Bank, yet he denied vehemently
that his defense of the institution had been influenced by such
connection. He had become a Hamiltonian without gaining Hamilton’s
clear understanding of the economic basis of politics. A brilliant
opportunist, he was guided by no fixed political principles but tacked
with the shifting winds. A brilliant romantic, he was the persuasive
prophet of an age that was dreaming of a prosperity that should gather
in certain favored reservoirs through the agency of subsidies and
taxes, and trickle thence through all the land to water the roots
of industry. It was fitting that such a man should be the father of
Whiggery, and fitting also that he should stand as the embodiment of
the spirit of compromise. One great lesson, at least, he had learned,
that greater men too often do not learn, the lesson that republican
government rests on good will and that such good will demands a
policy of give and take among rival interests. Compromise may be
displeasing to earnest souls, but it is implied in any workable system
of democratic rule.

Like Calhoun and Webster, Clay was a victim of changing times. If he
had lived a generation later, when the middle-class revolution had been
accomplished and the principle of capitalism was in undisputed control,
he would have achieved a far greater personal success. But capitalism
was not yet strong enough to uphold him against rival economies, and
he failed of his lifelong ambition to be President. He was broken by
the Jacksonian revolution, in spite of the fact that no other American
politician has been so loved by a hero-worshiping electorate--and it
should be added, has been so lovable.


Footnotes

[413] See James Hall, _Romance of American History_, Appendix.




