Chapter III • The War of Belles Lettres


To turn from the field of political theory to the realm of polite
literature is not to quit the partisan battle-ground. The long struggle
between Federalist and Democrat was too bitter and absorbing, too
sharp in its alignment, not to conscript gentlemen of culture equally
with politicians. Every available quill was called to the colors, and
a civil war of _belles lettres_ broke out, that exceeded in animosity
any other known to our literary history. Attack and counter-attack were
slashing and acrimonious. Gentlemen forgot their manners and indulged
fiercely in tall language. Satire ran about the streets seeking new
victims to impale; slander lay in wait for every passer-by. The
crudest lies found willing listeners and sober ministers turned from
writing sermons to enshrine pothouse tales in heroic couplets. In this
virulent battle the Federalists, on the whole, had the better of it,
for they were greater masters of invective and flayed their victims
less clumsily; but the Democrats made up in ardor what they lacked in
skill, and the blows that fell on carefully tied wigs must have hurt
cruelly. As poetry those old satires may seem to us feeble enough,
but as historical documents they are eloquent. The passion of a world
in revolution, the hopes and fears of our forefathers as they watched
the great fires consuming the world in which they had grown up, still
survive in those stinging lines, as a reminder to later generations of
the rough and inhospitable way that democratic America has traveled in
its onward course.


I • The Federalist Group


1. The Hartford Wits

What Federalism was capable of in the way of polite letters is
sufficiently revealed in the work of a coterie of poetasters who
are known in our literary histories as the Hartford Wits. The title
of the group suggests their literary antecedents. They were the
representatives of a literary mode that had slowly percolated through
the crust of Puritan provincialism and imparted a certain sprightliness
to a dour temper. They were the literary old-guard of the expiring
eighteenth century, suspicious of all innovation, contemptuous of every
idealistic program. They stood stoutly by the customary and familiar.
The nineteenth century was knocking at their door, but they would
not open to it. And as they saw that new century coming in the guise
of revolution, exciting to unheard-of innovations in the fields of
politics and economics and religion and letters, giving rise to Jacobin
Clubs and Jeffersonian democracy, they set themselves seriously to
the work of barring its progress through their own little world. They
conveniently associated the economic unrest of post-war days, that
gave birth to a strange progeny in Rhode Island and New Hampshire and
Massachusetts, with the contamination of French atheism, charged all
unrest to the account of democracy, and hastened to put it down in the
name of law and righteousness. They hated new ways with the virtuous
hatred of the well-to-do, and dreamed of a future America as like the
past as one generation of oysters is like another.

There is a certain historical fitness in the fact that the Wits
should have arisen in Connecticut and been the intellectual children
of Yale. For generations the snug little commonwealth had been the
home of a tenacious conservatism, that clung to old ways and guarded
the institutions of the fathers with pious zeal. Nowhere else in New
England did the ruling hierarchy maintain so glacial a grip on society.
The Revolution of ’76 had only ruffled the surface on Connecticut life;
it left the social structure quite unchanged. The church retained its
unquestioned control of the machinery of the commonwealth; and the
church was dominated by a clerical aristocracy, hand in glove with a
mercantile aristocracy. Fresh currents of thought that were stirring
the pulpits of eastern Massachusetts--suggestions of an Arianism that
was to lead to the Unitarian schism--did not reach so far as New Haven,
and Yale was content to remain the bulwark of an obsolete Calvinism.
In such a soil Federalism would flourish like Jonah’s gourd; and it
exuded a special odor of sanctity from the Calvinism in which it was
rooted. To stout Federalists like Timothy Dwight, the current dogma of
total depravity sufficed to disprove the validity of all democratic
aspiration. It was a presumption little short of blasphemous to
assert that sinners are competent to manage the temporal affairs of
society. The doctrine of equalitarianism was a particular stench in the
nostrils of the aristocratic clergy, who disliked all leveling. The
Irish immigrants seem to have been the most offensive equalitarians.
A New England gentleman, traveling in Pennsylvania in the nineties,
wrote home: “I have seen many, very many Irishmen, and with a few
exceptions, they are ... the most God-provoking Democrats on this side
of Hell.” And in 1798 Harrison Gray Otis wrote: “If some means are not
adopted to prevent the indiscriminate admission of wild Irishmen and
others to the right of suffrage, there will soon be an end to liberty &
property.”[374] To prevent, if possible, such an unhappy outcome, the
upper classes of New England fell to organizing and drilling all the
elements of conservatism for a vigorous defense. They wrote and spoke
and preached, till the mind of respectable New England was saturated
with prejudice. The democratic principle was converted into a bogey to
frighten the simple. Such a hideous misshapen imp of darkness, such a
vile hag of anarchy had never before been painted for the imagination
of honest Yankees to shudder at; and if democracy seemed to them a
wild and fearsome thing making ready to destroy their venerated social
order, they only believed what the minister preached on the Sabbath and
the squire asserted on week days. The plebeian democrat, very likely
in debt, was quite overwhelmed by the organized forces of village
respectability.

In this great work of saving the commonwealth of Connecticut from the
pollutions of democracy the Hartford Wits were competent laborers. The
more important members of the group were John Trumbull, Timothy Dwight,
Joel Barlow, Lemuel Hopkins, David Humphreys, Richard Alsop, and
Theodore Dwight. To these may be added the names of Dr. Elihu Hubbard
Smith and Dr. Mason F. Cogswell, who were friends and occasional
collaborators. Nearly all were Yale men with a pronounced Yale
predilection for Calvinism and Federalism, admirable representatives
of the oligarchical upper class of the provincial Connecticut society.
Timothy Dwight, grandson of Jonathan Edwards, was a minister and
president of Yale; Hopkins, Smith and Cogswell were physicians of high
professional standing; Trumbull and Theodore Dwight were lawyers;
Barlow and Humphreys found their way into the diplomatic field, and
Alsop was a merchant. They were all comfortably well off and several
were wealthy. Alsop was one of the few millionaires of the time; Barlow
acquired a fortune in France; and Humphreys late in life established
a textile industry incorporated for half a million. Hot Federalists,
they found in Washington, Governor Trumbull, and Fisher Ames, their
political mentors and guides. The most active of the group politically,
was Theodore Dwight, who with his cousin Timothy was a director of
the Eagle Bank, a Federalist institution, and bitterly opposed to the
chartering of Republican banks. When one of the latter applied to the
legislature for a charter he denounced it as a “child of intrigue and
the mother of Discord.” He was deep in the Hartford Convention, serving
as its secretary and later as its historian. He denounced Jeffersonian
republicanism as seeking to “discredit the ministry, decry religion,
and destroy public worship,” and as he saw it spreading through New
England he attributed to it the certain decay of morality and the
impending break-up of family ties, exclaiming with somewhat extreme
vivacity: “The outlaws of Europe, the fugitives from the pillory and
the gallows, have undertaken to assist our own abandoned citizens, in
the pleasing work of destroying Connecticut.... Can imagination paint
anything more dreadful on this side of hell!”

Later generations remember best the massive character of Timothy
Dwight, a man endowed with all the Connecticut virtues and walking
amongst his fellows with magnificent confidence in his powers.
A great preacher, an authoritative theologian, a distinguished
administrator--“every inch a college president”--a ready counselor on
any knotty point be it in law or politics or finance or agriculture or
_belles lettres_, a born leader of men, and by way of recreation an
inditer of Hebraic epics and huge didactic poems and ample Connecticut
pastorals, a confirmed traveler observing the manner of life in many
commonwealths and preserving his observations in solid volumes--he was
a man to compel the admiration of his fellows and put his stamp upon
his age. So vast was the contemporary reputation of Timothy Dwight, and
so many-sided, it may seem ironical that time should have shrunk him
to the narrow compass of a paragraph in our literary history. And yet
the more curiously one considers the work of the great president of
Yale, the more insistent become one’s doubts concerning the fineness
of this nugget of Connecticut gold. It shows very suspicious signs of
tarnish. His commanding presence and authoritative manner, his sonorous
eloquence, his forwardness in defense of what few doubted, his vehement
threshing of straw long since reduced to chaff, his prodigious labors,
his abundant printing, no longer seem so authentic a seal of greatness
as they seemed to his open-mouthed contemporaries; and one suspects
that he impressed his fellow citizens by the completeness with which
he measured up to every Connecticut ideal, rather than by the creative
vigor of his mind. The great Timothy, in short, seems to a later
generation to have been little more than a walking repository of the
venerable Connecticut _status quo_.

The intellectual inquisitiveness that gave birth to disintegrating
theory in the mind of his grandfather Jonathan Edwards, and made him a
profoundly revolutionary influence in his time, was wholly lacking in
the grandson. The latter refused to follow the questioning intellect
into unsurveyed fields. He would not meddle with change. His mind
was closed as tight as his study windows in January. He read widely
in the fields of rationalism, but he read only to refute. Now and
then to be sure, certain generous promptings visited him: he spoke
out against slavery; he encouraged the higher education of women.
But from such temptations to become a living voice he turned away to
follow the main-traveled road of Connecticut prejudice. His eyes were
fixed lovingly upon the past, and his fondest dreams for his native
commonwealth hovered about the ideal of a church-state which John
Cotton had labored to establish and Increase Mather to preserve. It
is with those capable theocrats of Massachusetts Bay, rather than
with Thomas Hooker of Hartford, that he is to be associated. Two
men could scarcely be more alike than Timothy Dwight and Increase
Mather; their careers ran in similar lines; each was the unmitered
pope of his generation, and each owed his extraordinary influence
to the same sterling qualities. As ecclesiastical politicians they
drew no line between religious and secular affairs, but were prompt
with a hand in every affair of the commonwealth. They spoke and
wrote with unquestioned authority. They regarded the minister as the
responsible leader of society who must not suffer his flock to be
led astray. The church was the guardian of morality, and the state
was its secular arm. The true faith must not be put in jeopardy by
unfaith. To Timothy Dwight infidelity and democracy went hand in
hand, and to suffer the commonwealth to fall under the control of
the godless meant the end of all morality and religion. To uphold the
established order--of which he was a distinguished member--was for him
the first of Christian duties. A stalwart Federalist, he was a good
hater of all Jacobins. His detestation of Jefferson was virulent and
he swallowed the nastiest tales about the great Virginian without a
qualm, never doubting their authenticity. It was sometimes hinted that
he was too much the aristocrat to feel the warmest sympathy for the
unprosperous, and there seems to have been ground for the suspicion.
The unprosperous were likely to be infected with Jeffersonian heresies,
and as he watched them being drawn off to the York-state frontier,
he rejoiced that their voting power was no longer to be feared. Such
restless spirits, he pointed out, “are impatient of the restraints of
law, religion, and morality; grumble about the taxes, by which Rulers,
Ministers, and Schoolmasters are supported.... We have many troubles
even now; but we should have many more, if this body of foresters had
remained at home.”[375] If the disaffected did not like the way the
Congregational-Federalist party managed the good state of Connecticut,
it were a godsend if they should remove beyond its boundaries.

But it is with the literary work of Timothy Dwight that we are more
immediately concerned, and in all his abundant output, totaling
fourteen volumes and perhaps as much more in manuscript, the same
solid qualities are revealed. It is the occasional work of a man
wanting humor, playfulness, grace, lacking subtlety and creative
suggestiveness, but with a shrewd common sense, a great vigor, and a
certain grandiose imagination. A sonorous declaimer, he dearly loved
combat and the shock of marshaled argument. He went out of his way
to invite majestic effects. In _The Conquest of Canaan_ he described
so many thunderstorms that Trumbull suggested he ought to furnish a
lightning rod with the poem. Such a man could not move easily in narrow
spaces. An epic was none too slight to contain his exuberant rhetoric.
His ready versification, one often feels, runs like a water pipe with
the faucet off; the words flow in an unbroken stream with never a pause
to pick or choose. Yet even in his amazing copiousness there is vigor;
a well-stocked mind is pouring out the gatherings of years. When he
pauses to give advice--as he was fond of doing--his abundant sense
is worth listening to; the homely wisdom of his talk to the farmers
in the sixth part of _Greenfield Hill_ is not unlike Franklin. As a
satirist he belongs to the Churchill school; he is downright, abusive,
often violent, quite lacking the lightness of touch and the easy gayety
that runs so pleasantly through _M’Fingal_. His _Triumph of Infidelity_
is solid old-fashioned pulpit-thumping. The spirit of toleration was
withheld from him by his fairy godmother, and he knew no other way of
dealing with those who persisted in disagreement after their mistakes
had been pointed out, than the cudgel. In this tremendous poem he lays
about him vigorously. On Hume and Voltaire and Priestley, and all their
followers, his blows fall smartly. Bloody crowns ought to be plentiful,
but--though he does not seem to know it--the blows fall on straw men
and none proves mortal. On the whole one prefers him in the pastoral
mood when he lays aside his ministerial gown, and _Greenfield Hill_,
unless one excepts the _Travels in New England and New York_, remains
his most attractive work. Yet even that is sadly in need of winnowing.
A great college president Timothy Dwight may very well have been; he
was worshiped by his admirers only this side idolatry; but a great
thinker, a steadfast friend of truth in whatever garb it might appear,
a generous kindly soul loving even publicans and sinners, regardful of
others and forgetful of self, he assuredly was not.


2. “The Anarchiad”

Most of the political satire of the Wits was done in collaboration,
and consists of occasional sketches contributed to newspapers--with
explanatory comments and notes--dealing with matters of current
interest. Of the major works thus produced, _The Anarchiad_, _The
Echo_, and _The Political Greenhouse_, the first will suffice to reveal
the political sympathies of the Hartford group. _The Anarchiad_ is a
mock epic designed to counteract the populistic tendencies of post-war
times. It was published in _The New Haven Gazette_ between October 26,
1786, and September 13, 1787. In 1861 it was resurrected from a long
sleep by Luther G. Riggs, and reissued with an introduction and notes.
“This fearless satire,” according to the editor, “is supposed to have
exerted great and beneficial influence upon the public mind, and to
have tended in no small degree to check the leaders of insubordination
and infidel philosophy”; and it must be regarded as “a _national Poem_,
battling nobly for the right universal, for the majesty of law, and for
the Federal government.” The idea was got from a contemporary English
screed entitled _The Rolliad_, one of the numerous political satires
of which the late eighteenth century was so fond. Probably most of the
members of the group had a hand in it, but the acrid quality of its
comment owes more to Hopkins than to the others.

For such work the angular Connecticut physician was admirably fitted.
The son of a Waterbury farmer. Dr. Lemuel Hopkins was the most
picturesque member of the Hartford Wits, the most characteristically
Yankee. Brought up at the plow-tail, he received nevertheless an
excellent education, and because of a hereditary predisposition
to consumption turned to the medical profession. After serving
his apprenticeship at Wallingford he entered upon his practice at
Litchfield in 1776. During the Revolution he served for a short time
as a volunteer, but soon returned to his lancet and medicine case. In
1784 he removed to Hartford where he spent the remainder of his life.
In person he was tall, lean, stooping, rawboned, with coarse features
and large brilliant eyes. His uncouth appearance and eccentricity of
manner made him a striking figure, and his caustic wit rendered him
a redoubtable antagonist. As a physician he stood at the head of the
Connecticut profession. He was one of the founders of the Medical
Society of Connecticut, and as a frequent contributor to professional
literature he exerted a wide influence on the current practice.

The eccentric doctor seems to have been as honest as he was outspoken.
He was uncompromising in his warfare on all quacks, both medical and
political. For a time as a young man he was a disciple of French
infidel philosophy, but he cured his mental indisposition by a severe
Biblical regimen, and having restored himself to the robust health of
Calvinistic Christianity, he devoted himself to the work of curing
others. He became in consequence a specialist in the treatment of the
ravages caused by the _bacillus gallicus_. For every sort of humbug
he had a hearty contempt, and any political nostrum not listed in the
Federalistic materia medica he regarded as arrant quackery. He thought
no better of old wives’ remedies in government than in medicine,
and when the Rhode Island legislature passed its paper-money act in
1785, and six months later Shays’s Rebellion broke out, and mobs were
besieging the legislature of New Hampshire, he proposed to speak
plainly to the good people of Connecticut on the follies of popular
delusions. This would seem to have been the origin of _The Anarchiad_.
It sprang from the indignation of Dr. Hopkins, when, to quote from the
poem,

  In visions fair, the scenes of fate unroll,
  And Massachusetts opens on my soul.
  There Chaos, Anarch old, asserts his sway,
  And mobs in myriads blacken all the way.

The sardonic temper of Dr. Hopkins fitted him for virulent satire,
and in this bitterest of the productions of the Wits, the reins were
on the neck of the muse. Scarcely another New England satire reflects
so sharply the class consciousness that underlay the bitter struggle
between agrarianism and capitalism. It is a slashing attack upon
agrarian economics and democratic liberalism, a versified echo of
the anger of creditors who were fighting the measures of populistic
legislatures. The staple of the satire is the wickedness of all
paper-money issues, with the State of Rhode Island as the chief of
agrarian sinners. About this main theme is gathered a miscellany
of Federalist shibboleths--the godlessness of Shays and his crew,
the seditious spirit of all who oppose the new Constitution, the
demagoguery of democratic politicians--and the satire rises to a
patriotic crescendo in declaiming against the folly of the democratic
ideal. So tremendous a work, however, cannot be adequately described;
the lines must speak for themselves. The following bits may serve in
lieu of the whole, the first of which is a comment on Rhode Island, the
pariah of States:

  Hail! realm of rogues, renown’d for fraud and guile,
  All hail! ye knav’ries of yon little isle.
  There prowls the rascal, cloth’d with legal pow’r,
  To snare the orphan, and the poor devour;
  The crafty knave his creditor besets
  And advertising paper pays his debts;
  Bankrupts their creditors with rage pursue,
  No stop, no mercy from the debtor crew.
  Arm’d with new tests, the licens’d villain bold,
  Presents his bills, and robs them of their gold;
  Their ears, though rogues and counterfeiters lose,
  No legal robber fears the gallows noose.
  Look through the State, the unhallow’d ground appears
  A pen of dragons, and a cave of bears;
  A nest of vipers, mix’d with adders foul;
  The screeching night-bird, and the greater owl:
  For now, unrighteousness, a deluge wide,
  Pours round the land an overwhelming tide;
  And dark injustice, wrapp’d in paper sheets,
  Rolls a dread torrent through the wasted streets;
  While net of law th’ unwary fry draws in
  To damning deeds, and scarce they know they sin.
  New paper struck, new tests, new tenders made,
  Insult mankind, and help the thriving trade.
  Each weekly print new lists of cheats proclaims,
  Proud to enroll their knav’ries and their names;
  The wiser race, the snares of law to shun,
  Like Lot from Sodom, from Rhode Island run....[376]

  Nor less abhorr’d, the certain woe that waits
  The giddy rage of democratic States,
  Whose pop’lar breath, high-blown in restless tide,
  No laws can temper, and no reason guide:
  An equal sway, their mind indignant spurns;
  To wanton sway, the bliss of freedom turns;
  Led by wild demagogues, the factious crowd,
  Mean, fierce, imperious, insolent and loud,
  Nor fame, nor wealth, nor power, nor system draws--
  They see no object, and perceive no cause;
  But feel, by turns, in one disastrous hour,
  Th’ extremes of license, and th’ extremes of power....

  Will this vain scheme bid restless factions cease,
  Check foreign wars, or fix internal peace?
  Call public credit from her grave to rise,
  Or gain in grandeur what they lose in size?...
  But know, ye favor’d race, one potent head
  Must rule your States, and strike your foes with dread.
  The finance regulate, the trade control,
  Live through the empire, and accord the whole.
  Ere death invades, the night’s deep curtain falls,
  Through ruin’d realms the voice of +UNION+ calls; ...
  On you she calls! attend the warning cry;
  +Ye live united, or divided die!+[377]

  But chief the race allured by fleeting fame,
  Who seek on earth the politicians name;
  Auspicious race! whom folly joys to bless,
  And wealth and honor crown with glad success;
  Formed, like balloons, by emptiness to rise
  On pop’lar gales, to waft them through the skies ...
  See, from the shades, on tiny pinions swell
  And rise, the young +DEMOCRACY+ of _hell!_
  Before their face the _powers of Congress_ fade,
  And _public credit_ sinks, an empty shade;
  Wild severance rages, wars intestine spread,
  Their boasted +UNION+ hides her dying head;
  The forms of government in ruin hurl’d,
  Reluctant empire quits the western world.[378]

Amid such democratic welter and mortal confusion the sole hope of
safety lies in Federalism, and the sapient leader who shall bring order
out of the wild misrule is thus greeted:

  Ardent and bold, the smiling land to save,
  In council sapient as in action brave,
  I fear’d young Hamilton’s unshaken soul,
  And saw his arm our wayward host control; ...
  Fire in his eye, and thunder on his tongue.[379]

Other work the Hartford Wits did, but none which need detain us. Soon
changes and removals broke up the coterie, and they went diverse ways
to diverse rewards: Timothy Dwight to safeguard Yale undergraduates in
New Haven, Humphreys to the American legation at Paris, Trumbull to
the Michigan frontier, and Barlow to his notable career in Europe. But
happily not before they had contributed their portion of sweetness and
light to the great debate. The Wits were no skulkers in presence of
“insubordination and infidel philosophy,” when their economic interests
were touched.


II • The French Group

The Wits were not devoid of cleverness, but they were wanting in
ideas. They were partisans rather than intellectuals. In the rôle of
self-appointed custodians of Federalist moralities they were rather
tedious fellows, who substituted fustian for creative thought, and blew
up their verses with flatulent rhetoric. They sealed the windows of
their minds against the disturbing winds of doctrine that were blowing
briskly; they inspected the family tree of every new idea to determine
its respectability. An occasional fresh idea is necessary to keep one
from falling into staleness and mediocrity; but the Wits chose to
remain too ignorant to be interesting, and it is a relief to turn from
them to the more stimulating company of the French partisans. Here at
least there was intellectual sincerity: a genuine desire to understand
what was going on in the larger world of thought; to use what brains
God had given them to better the lot of the American people. Philip
Freneau, Joel Barlow, and Hugh Henry Brackenridge were not intellectual
giants, but they represent the best intelligence then being devoted to
literature in America, and their work retains a suggestiveness today
far beyond that of the Hartford Wits.


1. Philip Freneau • Poet of Two Revolutions

It is fitting that our first outstanding poet should have been a
liberal. The idealist has always seen deeper into the spirit of America
than the realist, and been less complacent with halfway achievement.
And it is equally fitting that his idealism should have got him into
trouble with the dominant group of his generation. Philip Freneau
was a volunteer in two revolutions, a color-sergeant carrying the
newly unfurled flag of democracy in the thick of civil strife. He
was a lifelong rebel, whose rebellions turned out to be patriotic or
seditious as they went with or against the purpose of the victorious
party. In the Revolution of ’76 he fought shoulder to shoulder with
John Adams and Hamilton and Washington, and his services were accorded
high praise. His poems inspired patriotic enthusiasm, greatly aided the
national cause, and won wide approval. But in the Revolution of ’93 he
parted company with Adams and Hamilton and Washington. When the old
leaders turned back in fear at the unloosing of democratic aspirations,
he went forward to new battles. He served the cause of ’93 with the
same ardor that had inspired his pen in ’76. It was not a new cause in
his eyes, but the old; not a different war, as Federalists asserted,
but other battles of the same war--the never ceasing struggle for human
freedom.

In thus breaking with the party of Federalism and casting his lot with
the democratic Jacobins, Freneau contracted a serious _mésalliance_
that destroyed his good name. Thereafter he was marked as a vulgar
democrat, a disseminator of insubordination and infidelity, an evil
influence among a respectable, God-fearing people. The further he went
in his new crusade, the lower he sank in decent opinion, until the
poet of the American Revolution came to be regarded as the hireling
mouthpiece of Jefferson, a writer of wretched and insolent doggerel,
an incendiary journalist--a mean and paltry figure beside the stately
forms of the Fathers of the Constitution. Gentlemen exhausted the
resources of ample vocabularies to express their detestation of his
leveling ways. To Timothy Dwight he was “A mere incendiary, or rather
... a despicable tool of bigger incendiaries, and his paper ... a
public nuisance.” To the gentle-natured Irving he was “A barking cur,”
and to Washington, whose words were accorded a quasi-royal respect,
he was “That rascal Freneau”: rather loose expressions, certainly,
for cultivated gentlemen to apply to another cultivated gentleman,
the friend of Madison and Brackenridge. It is evident that Freneau
and the great Federalist leaders disagreed somewhat violently in
their interpretations of the purpose and scope of the new venture in
republicanism.

The source of their disagreement lay in divergencies of social
philosophy too great to be bridged. In his republicanism Freneau
had gone far in advance of the Federalists. He was a democrat while
they remained aristocrats. He had rid himself of a host of outworn
prejudices, the heritage of an obsolete past, which held them in
bondage. He had read more clearly the meaning of the great movement
of decentralization that was shaping a new psychology, and must
lead eventually to democratic individualism. He had no wish to stay
or thwart that development; he accepted it wholly with all its
implications. He had freed his mind from the thralldom of caste; he
was impelled by no egoistic desire to impose his will upon others;
he was wholly free from the lust of economic aggression, either for
himself or for his class. He was an idealist who cared only for the
_res publica_, the common well-being, and he desired chiefly that the
new American government should serve the needs of a free people. There
was no envy in the soul of Freneau, and no self-seeking. He was the
friend of civilization rather than the advocate of particular forms
of government. He put his trust in local self-rule rather than in a
coercive state. Like Paine he distrusted all centralizing power. Like
Franklin he regarded the every-day world of business and politics as
a preposterous arrangement, unconcerned with justice; and he took it
on himself to do what he could to make it over. All his life he was an
unmuzzled advocate of whatever new movements gave promise of lessening
the old tyrannies. In championing the cause of democracy, he championed
a score of lesser causes: Unitarianism, deism, antislavery, Americanism
in education: thereby bringing down on his head the resentment of
all the conservatisms, religious, political, economic, social, then
prospering in America. Nevertheless he went his way through a sordid
world of politicians and speculators, feeding upon whatever shreds of
beauty he met with, a dreamer and an idealist sneered at by exploiters,
a spirit touched to finer issues than his generation cared for.

The chief desire of Freneau’s life was to be a poet, and if the country
had not been turmoiled by revolution, doubtless he would have been
content to “live unpromoted and write poems.” But revolution and not
poetry was the serious business of the age, and he chose to have a hand
in that business. Many later critics have lamented his choice. They
regret that he did not turn aside from the battle-ground to wander in
pastoral fields; that he was not content with the _noctes coenaeque
deum_ where the minstrel’s song is sufficient passport to hospitality.
It is a nice question of literary ethics. The raw material of poetry
was in Philip Freneau; there was need only of calm years to master
his art and clarify the vague romanticism of his nature. He had only
to stand apart from the turmoil, refusing to soil his hands with
politics, and cultivate his faculty for verse, to have made himself the
indisputable founder of American poetry. He was endowed with a romantic
imagination and love of natural beauty, a generation before the
romantic revival, and he might well have become a notable contributor
to that revival.

But he refused to stand apart. He would not hire a substitute to
defend the cause of freedom. There was rough work to be done, and
the democrats were too few to spare so competent a workman. So when
poetry proved unequal to the task he turned journalist, and set to
work in a field unclaimed by the muses. It was an immense sacrifice,
bringing disaster to all hope of contemporary fame, and tarnishing his
reputation in after years. His place in American letters was fixed by
a Federalist verdict, and he has since remained obscure and neglected
by all, save an occasional historian who dips into a few poems, regrets
that the smell of revolution is so rank, and dismisses him with the
comment that Campbell and Scott did him the honor to appropriate a
figure of speech without acknowledgment. Only within recent years
has a collected edition of his poems been accessible, and his prose
writings still remain buried in newspaper files. In consequence the
literary critics have echoed the political critics, and given new
life to the old partisanship. Thus Professor Wendell remarks that
“a considerable part of his poetry ... consists of rather reckless
satire, not conspicuously better or worse than much other satire of the
period.”[380] Even Professor Tyler, usually so generous in sympathy for
our early writers, dismisses Freneau with these words:

  The poor old man, thus found dead on the lonely New Jersey moor,
  had undoubtedly some sweetness in his heart; but he permitted
  very little of it to work its way down to the tip of his pen.
  With that pitiless pen of his he had fought many a fierce fight
  in his day.... He was the poet of hatred, rather than of love....
  Among all his verses, the reader finds scarcely one lyric of
  patriotic enthusiasm, nor many lines to thrill the hearts of the
  Revolutionists by any touch of loving devotion to their cause, but
  everywhere lines hot and rank with sarcasm and invective against
  the enemy.... Like Odell, Freneau was a good hater; his was the
  wrathful muse; his chosen warfare was grim, unsparing, deadly. He
  was the satirical gladiator on behalf of the Revolution, even as
  Odell was the satirical gladiator in opposition to it.[381]

Such commentary is neither discriminating nor just. That the ways of
Freneau were often ruthless it needs only a casual reading of his
satire to perceive; that he was a good hater is quite as apparent;
but that the deeper springs of his nature were bitter is not true. He
was no satirist like Churchill to love filth and delight in venom.
It was an age of partisan ruthlessness, and if Freneau was a fierce
partisan it was because the new hope then whispering to liberals was
in danger of being stifled by selfish men who feared it. The vision of
a free republic arising on the ruins of colonial monarchy had taken
possession of his imagination; a republic admirable in justice and
righteous in all its ways. That vision, he believed, might be realized
if the republicans stood firm in its defense. A thousand perils beset
it. The lingering colonial traditions--the ties of old custom--were
powerful advocates of the old inequality; the greed of profit and
power--the ambitions of a monied aristocracy--were equally powerful
advocates of new tyrannies. Not only must George III and his Tory
supporters be driven from the land, but the work thus begun must be
carried through. An army of domestic enemies must be dealt with--a
formidable aristocracy of wealth and family. Naturally it would be no
holiday task. The King had no mind to be driven out of his American
dominions, and the Federalists had no mind to surrender control of the
new American state. And so no choice remained to the republicans but
to make the advocates of monarchy and aristocracy appear so hateful in
the eyes of the people that they would rise and destroy them.

In times of profound upheaval the demands of partisanship are stern
and exacting. The gray-goose quill may serve the cause of peace, but
the porcupine quill stings and rankles more; and if Freneau was given
to using the latter it was because he cared greatly for the ends to
be achieved. “How oft has rugged nature charged my pen with gall,”
he lamented late in life as he contemplated the enemies he had made.
Sensitive and proud, he had a Gallic impetuosity of onset. If he
plundered the broadsides of their store of abuse and ransacked the
dictionaries of their wealth of scurrility, it was not because he loved
abuse and scurrilities. If like Sam Adams, he was given to robbing men
of their characters, it was due to no personal or selfish motives;
those great ones whom he lampooned so fiercely, he believed were
enemies of the new order. If “his chosen warfare was grim, unsparing,
deadly,” as Professor Tyler asserts, it was because he was fighting for
a great ideal against men who were equally grim, unsparing, deadly.
Unembittered laughter had little opportunity to try its sanative
qualities in that long warfare of bushwhackers.

During the last quarter of the century the writings of Freneau in verse
and prose constitute an abstract and brief chronicle of the times. If
they seem old-fashioned to us today, they were quite new-fashioned
to the men who first read them. The early satires, printed in 1775
must have fallen upon American ears with almost startling effect.
A revolutionary change had come over Freneau; he had broken wholly
with the colonial temper and turned nationalist a year before the
Declaration of Independence. When he graduated from Princeton College
in the summer of 1771, he wrote in collaboration with Hugh Henry
Brackenridge a commencement poem entitled _The Rising Glory of
America_, in which the youthful collegians, bred up in a hotbed of
Whiggery, were as British as Pitt himself. The new English imperialism
fairly rioted in the swelling couplets. The poem is a prophecy of the
time when the British flag should wave from the Atlantic to the Pacific
over a contented people, who “warm in liberty and freedom’s cause,”
gloried in the name of Briton. Agriculture and commerce are duly
celebrated as the twin pillars of American prosperity, and the pages of
colonial history are combed for great names and heroic deeds. On the
roll of American heroes Braddock, Sir William Johnson, and Whitefield
are the most conspicuous. Oddly enough Washington’s valor at the time
of Braddock’s defeat was unknown to these collegians in 1771, but
was afterwards discovered and inserted in later editions. Following
independence Freneau revised the poem and the changed circumstances
played havoc with the colonial text. Braddock was silently expunged
together with “Britannia’s warlike troops, Choice spirits of her isle.”
“False Gallia’s sons” becomes “Gallia’s hostile sons.” A notable
tribute to English generosity seemed incongruous to Freneau after his
experience on the prison ship and was deleted. He no longer felt that

  The British epithet is merciful,
  And we the sons of Britain learn like them
  To conquer and to spare.

What happened to Freneau during the years following his graduation is
uncertain, but in July, 1775, he appeared in New York City with his
pockets stuffed with another sort of verse, which he scattered among
the print-shops, the rebellious spirit of which may be judged from the
prayer,

  _Libera Nos, Domine._--Deliver us, O Lord, not only from British
  dependence, but

    From the scoundrel, Lord North, who would bind us in chains,
    From a royal king Log, with his tooth-full of brains,
    Who dreams, and is certain (when taking a nap)
    He has conquered our lands, as they lay on his map.

    From a kingdom that bullies, and hectors, and swears,
    We send up to heaven our wishes and prayers
    That we, disunited, may freemen be still,
    And Britain go on--to be damned if she will.[382]

The colonial slipped easily from Freneau and left him wholly American.
And with the colonial psychology there slipped from him also the
useless impedimenta of old-world social and political philosophies.
How far he advanced towards the democratic conception of society,
during those first rebellious years, is not clear; but he had set his
foot on a path that must conduct him far if he did not turn back.
And it is certain that he never turned back. His declaration of
independence from King George was the first of many such declarations
of independence--for himself and his fellow Americans. Thereafter
his serious business was the work of stripping from the colonial
every loyalty which still bound him to England. He supplemented the
work of Paine in teaching men whose fathers were English that they
were of another nation; that they could no longer remain both English
and American, but must make choice between the two allegiances. Year
after year he stirred the troubled waters, arousing the spirit of
nationalism by attacking everything pro-British. His attacks on the
English generals, the Tories, the royalist printers, were but means to
the great end of uprooting the traditional dependence on England and
quickening the new national psychology.

The second stimulus to Freneau’s revolutionary ardor came from the
French uprising. Later in the summer of 1775 he had quitted New York
and sailed for the West Indies. He spent two years on the Island of
Santa Cruz, then and later engaging in sea voyages about the islands
and along the American coast. They were creative years, when removed
equally from the distractions of war and the utilitarianism of America,
he was free to cultivate the romantic strain of poetry that was strong
in him. Then followed unhappier days. A period of stagnation had come
to him during the years of post-war reaction; and if fresh fuel had
not been brought from overseas to kindle anew his social enthusiasms,
it is likely that he would have drifted into a stale and unprofitable
old age. The spirit of romantic poetry was deadened by an unsympathetic
environment, but with the democratic hope rising in France came a fresh
call to arms. He discovered a larger and nobler interpretation of his
republican creed, that was to transform it into French Jacobinism
and arm it for a new leveling crusade. If he could not be a poet to
America he would enlist in the army of democracy. Not only must the
new government be made French-democratic instead of English-Whig,
but all distinctions of rank must be swept away, together with every
tyrannical dogma of church and state. In short there must be a social
house-cleaning, the limits of which were to be determined only by
reason and the common democratic good. So Freneau enthusiastically
joined with Paine and Jefferson in the partisan labor of spreading the
new faith.

His literary activity during this second period was remarkable. Songs
and odes and satires came from his ready pen in unending stream, eager,
cutting, vibrant with feeling. It requires an intimate knowledge of
the times to make out the identity of every figure at which he shoots
his arrows, but it needs no very intimate knowledge to measure the
intensity of his partisanship. The democratic hopes and fears of those
vibrant days find reflection in many an acrid verse. He was at one with
Jefferson in his concern at the monarchical reaction.

  In ten short years, of freedom weary grown
  The State, Republic, sickens for a throne.

The man who attached to the pen name of Peter Slender the letters O. S.
M.--One of the Swinish Multitude--would not fail to take the part of
the private soldier neglected by the state:

  Sold are those arms which once on Britons blazed,
  When, flushed with conquest, to the charge they came;
  That power repelled, and Freedom’s fabrick raised,
  She leaves her soldier--famine and a name![383]

Nor would he fail to capitalize the aristocratic contempt of the
Federalists for that same swinish multitude.

  Lodge where you must, drink small-beer where you can,
  But eat no roast pig, if no Federal man....

  Your mouth was made for rye or barley bread;
  What claims have you to halls of state,
  Whose business is to stand and wait,
    Subservient to command?
  What right have you to white-bread, superfine,
  Who were by nature destin’d for “_a swine_”--
    As said good Edmund Burke,
    The drudge of Britain’s dirty work,
  Whose mighty pamphlets rous’d the royal band![384]

During the tumultuous year of ’93 Freneau issued a series of
_Probationary Odes by Jonathan Pindar, Esq._, which reflect sharply
the partisan passions aroused by the French Revolution. They were
lampoons directed at members of government who were in the democratic
black-book, chiefly John Adams, Knox, and Hamilton. The introductory
poem was addressed _To all the Great Folks in a Lump_; the second, _To
Atlas_, was an attack on Hamilton; the third, _To A Select Body of
Great Men_, was a lampoon of the Senate; and the fourth, _To a Would Be
Great Man_, was addressed to Freneau’s particular _bête noire_, John
Adams. This last, apropos of _Davila_, will serve to show the popular
reception which that unfortunate work received.

    Daddy Vice, Daddy Vice,
    One may see in a trice
  The drift of your fine publication.
    As sure as a gun
    The thing was just done
  To secure you a +PRETTY HIGH+ station.

    When you tell us of _kings_
    And such pretty things
  Good mercy! how brilliant your page is!
    So bright is each line
    I vow you’ll shine
  Like--a glow worm to all future ages.

    On Davila’s page
    Your discourses so sage
  Democratical numskulls bepuzzle,
    With arguments tough
    As white leather or buff,
  The republican Bull Dogs to muzzle.

    ’Tis labor in vain,
    Your senses to strain,
  Our brains any longer to muddle;
    Like Colossus you stride
    O’er our noddles so wide
  We look up like frogs in a puddle.

If Freneau’s hatred of the men who opposed the democratic movement
was immeasurable, his enthusiasm for the new age of reason that he
believed was rising was as boundless. His pages during those years of
Jacobin radicalism are dotted thick with odes to liberty and addresses
to republicans; probably more fully than any other pages they reflect
the spirit that in England and America was forming Tom Paine clubs,
and projecting innumerable programs of social reform. A new social
conscience was stirring in Freneau, broadening immensely the horizon of
his thought; and if he counted rather too confidently on the appeal to
reason to bring the golden age, he proved himself thereby a true child
of his generation. In such lines as these one discovers the spirit that
moved Godwin to write _Political Justice_.

  How can we call those systems just
  Which bid the few, the proud, the first,
    Possess all earthly good;
  While millions robbed of all that’s dear
  In silence shed the ceaseless tear,
    And leaches suck their blood....

  Let laws revive, by heaven designed,
  To tame the tiger in the mind
    And drive from human hearts
  That love of wealth, that love of sway,
  Which leads the world too much astray,
    Which points envenomed darts:

  And men will rise from what they are;
  Sublimer, and superior, far,
    Than Solon guessed, or Plato saw;
  All will be just, all will be good--
  That harmony, “not understood,”
    Will reign the general law.

  For, in our race, deranged, bereft,
  The parting god some vestige left
    Of worth before possessed;
  Which full, which fair, which perfect shone,
  When love and peace, in concord sown,
    Ruled, and inspired each breast.[385]

In quite another vein, that reveals Freneau’s unusual mastery of
colloquial prose, is the following passage, impersonating Robert
Slender, the country philosopher.

  Mr. Editor,

  Having heard that there was a tavern at about the distance of a
  mile or so from my favorite country spot, where now and then a few
  neighbors meet to spit, smoke segars, drink apple whiskey, cider
  or cider-royal, and read the news--a few evenings ago, I put on my
  best coat, combed out my wig, put my spectacles in my pocket, and a
  quarter dollar--This I thought was right; for although Mrs. Slender
  told me eleven-pence was enough, says I, I’ll e’en take the quarter
  dollar, for a man always feels himself of more consequence when he
  has got good money in his pocket--so out I walks with a good stout
  stick in my hand, which I always make a point to carry with me,
  lest the dogs should make rather freer with my legs than I could
  wish. But I had not gone more than half the way, when, by making a
  false step, I splash’d my stocking from the knee to the ancle. Odds
  my heart, said I, see what a hand I have made of my stocking; I’ll
  be bail, added I, I’ll hear of this in both sides of my head--but
  it can’t now be helped--this, and a thousand worse accidents,
  which daily happen, are all occasioned by public neglect, and the
  misapplication of the public’s money--Had I, said I, (talking to
  myself all the while) the disposal of but half the income of the
  United States, I could at least so order matters, that a man might
  walk to his next neighbor’s without splashing his stockings or
  being in danger of breaking his legs in ruts, holes, gutts, and
  gullies. I do not know, says I to myself, as I moralized on my
  splash’d stocking, but money might with more profit be laid out
  in repairing the roads, than in marine establishments, supporting
  a standing army, useless embassies, exorbitant salaries, given to
  many flashy fellows that are no honor to us, or to themselves,
  and chartering whole ships to carry a single man to another
  nation--Odds my life, continued I, what a number of difficulties a
  man labors under, who has never read further than Lilly’s grammar,
  and has but a poor brain--had I been favored with a good education,
  I could no doubt readily see the _great usefulness_ of all these
  measures of government, that now appear to me so unaccountable--I
  could then, said I, still talking to myself, see the reason why
  the old patriots, whose blood flowed so freely in purchasing our
  independence, are cast aside, like a broken pitcher, (as the
  Scripture says) and why the old tories and active refugees are
  advanced to places of power, honor and trust.[386]

In another writer so whimsical a note would have no other purpose than
to fill a Spectator paper. But the garrulous Robert Slender is Freneau
in quieter vein, pursuing his old purpose. As a social philosopher
his opinions are oddly like those of Tom Paine. In commenting on
the government’s use of the people’s money he was seeking to awaken
interest in the social possibilities of government: that government
would better serve the _res publica_ through internal improvements,
than by creating armies and navies and providing posts and pensions
for great men. This was a fashion of thought which Paine had done much
to spread, and in the midst of a pompous Federalism, when gentlemen
professed to believe that government could acquire reverence in the
people’s eyes only by being hedged about with ceremonial, Robert
Slender’s cogitations were very much to the point. If government were
truly democratized, if it concerned itself with realities, serving the
people in the homely affairs and common needs of everyday life, there
would be no need of aristocratic ceremonial. Like Paine, Freneau was an
idealist, with his head full of ideas which to practical men were only
silly French notions; and yet the idealist, in this matter of the _res
publica_, was the true realist.

For all his Jacobinism Freneau might have been spared some of the
odium that gathered about his head if he had not turned partisan
journalist and put himself in the thick of the fight. In the eighteenth
century the newspaper editor had not yet wholly risen from the rank
of mechanic; he was still a master-printer, with hands much too
ink-stained to pass himself off as a gentleman, and with financial
resources too limited to be intellectually independent. If his paper
were largely literary he made no powerful enemies, but let him enter
politics or seek to mold public opinion on important matters, and he
was likely to meet the fate of John Mein, outspoken editor of the
_Boston Chronicle_, who was destroyed for exposing the weakness of the
merchants’ non-importation policy.[387] Freneau had had considerable
experience in newspaper work at times when his sea life had grown
irksome, but he took no active part in politics until the fall of 1791,
when he set up the _National Gazette_ in Philadelphia, and began that
tumultuous career lasting two years which brought so much abuse upon
him.

The detailed story of his connection with the _Gazette_ is given in an
admirable study,[388] and need not be recounted further than to bring
into relief the bare essentials. Soon after the formation of the new
government Hamilton had provided himself with a newspaper, _The United
States Gazette_, that was an effective advocate of all Hamiltonian
policies. The editor, John Fenno, seems to have been a vigorous fellow,
into whose hands Hamilton threw much of the public printing, and whose
debts he paid when they became pressing. Alarmed at the influence
wielded by the newspaper, Jefferson and Madison approached Freneau,
who had been contemplating a new venture, with the suggestion that
he set up a rival democratic paper. To encourage him Jefferson gave
Freneau a small post as translator in the State Department, worth $250
a year. The _National Gazette_ was thereupon established, and for two
years a war between the hostile papers went on fiercely. If the _United
States Gazette_ lauded the virtues of the English government, extolled
the wisdom of Hamilton and abhorred all Jacobins, the _National
Gazette_ retorted in kind, attacking the Secretary of the Treasury
and applauding the growing Jacobite spirit that struck at every form
of aristocracy. It became the common clearing house for democratic
propaganda, and Freneau’s influence spread so widely that he may justly
be regarded as “the leading editor in America” during those critical
years.

It is quite evident today that “the chief business of the _Gazette_
was to destroy Hamilton.” Probably more largely than any other
writer, Freneau awakened a popular distrust of Federalist men and
measures, which a few years later was to break the party. Jefferson’s
often-quoted remark, “His paper has saved our Constitution _which was
fast galloping into monarchy_, and has been checked by no one means so
powerfully as by that paper,” is somewhat extravagant; nevertheless the
universal detestation in which Freneau was held by all Federalists is
sufficient testimony to his influence. Washington was greatly ruffled
and wanted to remove him from his petty post in the State Department,
but Jefferson would not consent. It seems that Washington felt no
ill-will toward John Fenno, who drew six times the sum from the public
treasury that Freneau received. But Fenno was no democrat, “hostile to
garter, ribbon, crown, and star;” Fenno was no unsparing critic who
would attack even Washington if he lent himself to undemocratic ends;
whereas Freneau was plain-spoken, and no gentleman likes plain speaking
from subordinates.

All this was a hundred years ago and more. The inditers of those
partisan scurrilities, Democrat and Federalist alike, have long since
ceased their bickerings. Words which once stung like a whiplash
have become only echoes of dead passions. As the struggles of those
tumultuous years fall into truer perspective, the figure of Philip
Freneau takes on larger and nobler proportions. The cloud of calumny
that long obscured his virtues is dissipating, and we discover in him
an eager child of an age of democratic aspiration, the friend and
advocate of social justice. Like Paine and Jefferson and Franklin, he
was a notable American, who gave himself unselfishly to the work of
furthering the common well-being. “It was a long and stormy life,” says
Forman, “and it was lived for human rights and human freedom”--

  Still on the people’s, still on Freedom’s side;
  Still in the cause of man severely true.

After all, the poet in Freneau was deeper than the partisan. Despite
his conviction that a sordid America cared nothing for poetry--that “an
age employed in edging steel can no poetic raptures feel”--his love of
beauty was never killed nor the spring of poetic creation dried up.
In moments of release from cares he found solace in the poetry that
welled up from the unembittered depths of a rich and generous nature.
The portrait drawn by Professor Tyler depicts one side of Freneau; the
following lines, from a very late poem, reveal another:

    The world has wrangled half an age,
  And we again in war engage,
  While this sweet, sequestr’d rill
  Murmurs through the valley still....

    But, with all your quiet flow,
  Do you not some quarrels know!
  Lately, angry, how you ran!
  All at war--and much like man.

    When the shower of waters fell,
  How you raged, and what a swell!
  All your banks you overflow’d,
  Scarcely knew your own abode!

    How you battled with the rock!
  Gave my willows such a shock
  As to menace, by its fall,
  Underwood and bushes, all:

    Now you are again at peace:
  Time will come when that will cease;
  Such the human passions are;
  --You again will war declare.

    Emblem, thou, of restless man;
  What a sketch of nature’s plan!
  Now at peace, and now at war,
  Now you murmur, now you roar;

    Muddy now, and limpid next,
  Now with icy shackles vext--
  What a likeness here we find!
  What a picture of mankind![389]

This was the valedictory of Philip Freneau. His life was bitter and
turbulent, cast in a bitter and turbulent age; yet he found some grains
of comfort in the contemplation of nature and the exercise of the
poet’s craft. Through it all his heart remained clean and his hands
unstained. If he was not a great poet whom all the critics praise, he
loved beauty and served it in a careless world among an indifferent
people, and it ill becomes America to forget his contribution or deny
him some portion of the honor that has fallen generously to others no
more deserving.


2. Joel Barlow • Jacobin

That he should have long associated with the Hartford Wits and
collaborated with them in defense of Connecticut Federalism must have
seemed to Joel Barlow in after years the choicest bit of comedy in his
varied career. His subsequent adventures led him far from the strait
path of Yale orthodoxy. In those ripe later years life had pretty well
emptied him of all dogmatisms and taught him the virtue of catholic
sympathies. He had become acquainted with diverse philosophies and
had observed the ways of alien societies, and from such contacts the
horizons of his mind had broadened and his character mellowed. It was
a long road that he traveled from New Haven to his Washington salon.
Born a Connecticut Yankee, he accepted in his youth all the Connecticut
conventions, and graduated from Yale with as complete a stock of
respectable opinions as his classmate Noah Webster. An energetic
capable fellow, he wanted to get on in life. He wanted to be rich and
famous, and he tried many roads that promised to lead to that desirable
goal--law, politics, journalism, poetry, psalmody, speculation. Needing
a job he volunteered soon after graduation as chaplain in the army.
He had not prepared for the ministry and while preaching somewhat
indifferently to ragged soldiers he dreamed of poetic fame, and devoted
more time to his couplets than to pious meditation. His abilities
discovering no more profitable field for exercise than writing verse,
he was pretty much at a stand till chance sent him abroad as agent
for one of the speculative land-companies that were springing up like
mushrooms in post-war America. There he found his opportunity. In
France, where he established his headquarters, he entered a world of
thought vastly different from that of prim little Hartford. It was an
extraordinarily stimulating experience into which he threw himself with
zest. Seventeen years, from 1788 to 1805, he spent abroad on that first
visit, and those years changed the provincial Yankee into one of the
most cosmopolitan Americans of his generation. From a member of the
Hartford Wits, ardent in defense of the traditional Connecticut order,
he had become a citizen of the world, outspoken in defense of the
rights of man.

It was this later Barlow, completely new-outfitted by French romantic
tailors, that after years remember and that early friends could
not forgive. In adopting the Jacobin mode and setting himself to
the serious business of political thinking, he invited the caustic
criticism of his former associates; yet nothing in his life was more
creditable or marks him more definitely as an open-minded, intelligent
man. He was as receptive to new ideas as Timothy Dwight was impervious.
He plunged boldly into the maelstrom of speculation then boiling in
Europe. He moved in the society of the intellectuals, inquired into the
latest political and social theories, turned humanitarian, reëxamined
his Calvinistic theology in the light of current deism, and became one
of the free democratic thinkers swarming in every European capital.
He was equally at home in London and Paris, passing long periods of
time in both cities. An active member of the Constitutional Society of
London, he was intimate with Joseph Priestley, Horne Tooke, and Tom
Paine, sympathized with every liberal movement, and offered his pen to
the cause of a freer England. His _Advice to the Privileged Orders_ was
eulogized by Fox on the floor of Commons, and the Pitt ministry was
moved to suppress the work and proscribe the author. Thereupon Barlow
went into hiding. There seems to have been considerable provocation for
the government’s action. “It is safe to say,” remarks his biographer,
“that no political work of the day created so wide an interest or was
so extensively read.” With Paine and Barlow both loose in England there
was need of the government looking to its fences.

In 1793 he was made a citizen of France. His French career was not
unlike Paine’s, whom he resembled in many ways. He had much of the
latter’s genius for publicity and skill in propaganda, and his career
was a great stimulus to radicals at home. He was not too busy to
serve his country in a diplomatic way. He risked his life to aid
American prisoners in Africa and by his skill and address eventually
freed them--an achievement that few men could have gone through with
successfully. In the meantime he had not neglected his private affairs.
He made a fortune in the French funds, which he increased by able
merchandising. He had come to his goal by distant roads, and on his
return to America in 1805 he took up his abode at Washington, creating
a delightful countryseat on the outskirts of the raw little capital
where he maintained a salon for American liberals. He seems to have
felt no inclinations towards Connecticut; the old ties were broken
now for good, the French Jacobin could not fit into the rigid grooves
of Hartford Federalism. Six years later he was impressed a second time
into the diplomatic service, was sent to France on a difficult mission,
followed Napoleon, then on the Russian campaign, was caught in the
break-up of the grand army, suffered exposure, contracted pneumonia,
and died in a village near Cracow in Poland--a fate which many honest
Federalists regarded as amply merited by his vicious principles.

The later reputation of Barlow has been far less than his services
warranted or his solid merits deserved. His admirable prose writings
have been forgotten and the _Columbiad_ returns always to plague him.
The common detraction of all Jacobins and democrats fell heavily on so
conspicuous a head. “It is simply impossible,” says his biographer,
“for the historian of Federal proclivities and environment to do
justice to the great leaders of Republicanism in America.” Barlow
was forced to pay a heavy price for his intellectual independence.
Detraction was always lying in wait for him. John Adams, who had
suffered many a sharp thrust from him, wrote to Washington, “Tom Paine
is not a more worthless fellow.” Of the Yale dislike Barlow was well
aware, for he once confessed that he would have presented the school
with some needed chemical apparatus but he “supposed that, coming
from him, the college authorities would make a bonfire of them in the
college yard.”[390] Yet it is hard for a later generation to discover
wherein lay the viciousness of his life or principles. A warm-hearted
humanitarian, he was concerned always for the common well-being. The
two major passions of his life were freedom and education. During the
last years at Washington he was ardently promoting a plan for a great
national university at the seat of government, and had he lived ten
years longer his wide influence would probably have accomplished it.
His sins would seem to have been no other than an open break with the
Calvinism and Federalism of the Connecticut oligarchy--somewhat slender
grounds on which to pillory him as an infidel and a scalawag.

The social foundation of Barlow’s political philosophy is lucidly
presented in the _Advice to the Privileged Orders_, a work that
deserves a place beside Paine’s _Rights of Man_ as a great document
of the times. It does too much credit to American letters to be
suffered to lie buried with a dead partisanship. It is warm with the
humanitarian enthusiasm that had come down as a rich heritage from
the Physiocratic school of social thinkers. Two suggestive ideas lie
at the base of his speculations: the doctrine of the _res publica_,
and the doctrine of social responsibility for individual well-being.
The former, given wide currency by the _Rights of Man_, resulted from
the imposition of social conscience on abstract political theory, out
of which was derived a new conception of the duties and functions
of the political state--the conception that the state must be the
responsible agent of society as a whole rather than the tool of a
class, and that its true concern is the _public thing_, safeguarding
the social heritage as a common asset held in trust for succeeding
generations; the latter resulted from the inquiry into the relations of
the political state to the individual citizen--its responsibility as
the social agent, for the social waste of wrecked lives and thwarted
happiness, a waste that a rational social order would greatly lessen if
not eradicate. Barlow flatly denied that the primary function of the
state is the protection of property interests; its true end lies in
securing justice. But justice without equal opportunity is a mockery;
and equal opportunity is impossible unless the individual citizen
shall be equipped to live on equal terms with his fellows. Hence the
fine flower of political justice is discovered in education; in that
generous provision for the young and the weak that shall equip them
to become free members of the commonwealth. Like Paine’s _Agrarian
Justice_, the _Advice to the Privileged Orders_ is an extraordinarily
modern work, far more comprehensible today than when it was written.
That the “State has no right to punish a man, to whom it has given no
previous instruction,” and that “She ought not only to instruct him in
the artificial laws by which property is secured, but in the artificial
industry by which it is obtained,” are doctrines that seem far less
preposterous to us than they seemed to Timothy Dwight. The president of
Yale College was greatly troubled over Calvinistic sin; Joel Barlow was
greatly troubled over social injustice; in that difference is measured
the distance the latter had traveled in company with the French
Jacobins.

The root of his political thinking is the doctrine of equalitarianism.
“Only admit,” he says, “the original, unalterable truth, _that all men
are equal in their rights, and the foundation of everything is laid_.”
Accepting the romantic doctrine that human nature is excellent in its
plastic state, and capable of infinite development, he is untroubled
by the fact of human selfishness. He sees no bogey in democracy to
frighten timid souls, no specter of anarchy in the rule of the people.

  They say mankind are wicked and rapacious, and “it must be that
  offences will come.” This reason applies to individuals; but not to
  nations deliberately speaking a national voice. I hope I shall not
  be understood to mean, that the nature of man is totally changed by
  living in a free republic. I allow that it is still _interested_
  men and _passionate_ men, that direct the affairs of the world.
  But in national assemblies, passion is lost in deliberation, and
  interest balances interest; till the good of the whole community
  combines the general will.

  If government be founded on the vices of mankind, its business is
  to restrain those vices in all, rather than to foster them in a
  few.[391]

It was his sensitive social conscience that brought him to revolt
against all class government. He had seen the naked sordidness of such
governments in Europe, and he watched with concern the beginnings of
like government in America. The significance of the Hamiltonian program
could not escape so shrewd an observer as Barlow; he was too much a
realist to take political professions at face value. “I see,” he wrote,
“immense fortunes made by our funding legislators out of the public
funds which they funded for themselves.” Politics for profit was a
sorry spectacle to him, and he occupied his mind much with the problem
of erecting the machinery of an adequate democratic state that should
be faithful to its stewardship as agent of the whole.

It was this difficult problem with which he dealt in his _Letter
to the National Convention of France_. In this suggestive work two
ideas determined his thinking: the doctrine of the sovereignty of
the majority will, and the doctrine of government as a social agent.
In both he returned to the position of Roger Williams a hundred and
fifty years before. The sovereignty of the majority will he conceives
to be continuous and immediately effective; it cannot be held in
check by a rigid constitutionalism, for as Paine had pointed out,
such constitutionalism is no other than government from the grave.
He proposed therefore, that the fundamental law be amendable by
legislative enactment, one legislative body proposing and the next
determining, under full publicity. As a guarantee that such action
should express the popular will, that love of power on the part of the
agent should not defeat the purpose of society, he held that there must
be annual elections. Representatives should be periodically excluded
from candidacy, and other representatives fresh from the people sent
up, for “power always was and always must be a dangerous thing.” The
principle of recall he regarded as indispensable in a democratic
government, for it “will tend to maintain a proper relation between
the representatives and the people, and a due dependence of the former
upon the latter. Besides, when a man has lost the confidence of his
fellow citizens ... he is no longer their representative; and when he
ceases to be their’s, he cannot in any sense be the representative of
the nation.” The fundamental principle of state-craft Barlow states
thus: “Every individual ought to be rendered as independent of every
other individual as possible; and at the same time as dependent as
possible on the whole community.” The familiar romantic doctrine of
the diminished state is implicit in all his reasoning. Like Paine he
would do away utterly with the old mystery of government under which
ambitious men cloak their will to power; “for whatever there is in
the art of government, whether legislative or executive, above the
capacities of the ordinary class of what are called well-informed men,
is superfluous and destructive and ought to be laid aside.”

A thoroughgoing radical in economics and politics, Barlow was no
innovator in polite literature. He had pulled himself out of many a
Connecticut provincialism, but he stuck fast in the bog of provincial
poetry. It has long been the fashion to make merry over _The
Columbiad_, and there is only too patent a reason for it. To criticize
it is a work of supererogation. The appeal of “the grand style” seems
to have been too much for him. Some explanation doubtless is to be
found in the fact that he was working over an earlier poem done in the
days of an ebullient patriotism. It was a mistake to return to it,
for the heroic note in the vein of a political pamphleteer must play
havoc with it. What he now attempted, in the light of his long European
experience, was to embody in the narrative suitable political ideas,
transforming _The Vision of Columbus_ into an epic glorifying the great
republican experiment. His purpose is set forth in the preface.

  [The] real object of the poem is to inculcate the love of national
  liberty, and to discountenance the deleterious passion for violence
  and war; to show that on the basis of republican principle all good
  morals, as well as good government and hopes of permanent peace,
  must be founded; and to convince the student in political science,
  that the theoretical question of the future advancement of human
  society, till states as well as individuals arrive at universal
  civilization, is held in dispute and still unsettled only because
  we have had too little experience of organized liberty in the
  government of nations, to have well considered its effects.

The humanitarian note is strong. War, slavery, monarchy, injustice,
the tyranny resulting from political inequality, and a host of other
evils, social and political, are assailed in vigorous declamation. It
may not be good poetry but the sentiments are those of an enlightened
and generous man. The conclusion rises to a vision of a golden age of
international commerce and universal peace, when “earth, garden’d all,
a tenfold burden brings,” and the sundered nations shall draw together,
and--

  ... cloth’d majestic in the robes of state,
  Moved by one voice, in general congress meet
  The legates of all empires.

In that future time science will have learned “with her own glance to
ken the total God,” and philosophy will “expand the selfish to the
social flame.” Of the political ideas incorporated in the massive work
some suggestion may be got from the following lines:

  Ah, would you not be slaves, with lords and kings,
  Then be not Masters; there the danger springs.
  The whole crude system that torments this earth,
  Of rank, privation, privilege of birth,
  False honor, fraud, corruption, civil jars,
  The rage of conquest and the curse of wars,
  Pandora’s total shower, all ills combined
  That erst o’erwhelmed and still distress mankind,
  Boxt up secure in your deliberate hand,
  Wait your behest to fix or fly this land.

    Equality of right is nature’s plan;
  And following nature is the march of man.
  Whene’er he deviates in the least degree,
  When, free himself, he would be more than free,
  The baseless column, rear’d to bear his trust,
  Falls as he mounts and whelms him in the dust....

    Too much of Europe, here transplanted o’er,
  Nursed feudal feelings on your tented shore,
  Brought sable sires from Afric, call’d it gain,
  And urged your sires to forge the fatal chain....
  Restore their souls to men, give earth repose,
  And save your sons from slavery, wars and woes.

    Based on its rock of right your empire lies,
  On walls of wisdom let the fabric rise;
  Preserve your principles, their force unfold,
  Let nations prove them and let kings behold.
  +Equality+, your first firm-grounded stand;
  Then +FREE ELECTION+; then your +FEDERAL BAND+:
  This holy Triad should forever shine
  The great compendium of all rights divine,
  Creed of all schools, whence youths by millions draw
  Their themes of right, their decalogues of law;
  Till men shall wonder (in these codes inured)
  How wars were made, how tyrants were endured.[392]

Diverse politics incline to diverse literary judgments, and the
critics are not yet done with Joel Barlow. If he was not a great poet
or a great political thinker, he was at least capable, open-minded,
generous, with a sensitive social conscience--certainly the most
stimulating and original of the literary group that foregathered
in Hartford. Injustice has long been done him by overlooking his
picturesque career, and his services to America, and restricting his
introduction to posterity to a few lines from _Hasty Pudding_. To
make a mush of so honest a thinker, to ignore his very considerable
contributions to the cause of democracy, is to impose too heavy a
penalty for his defection from Connecticut respectability. He suffered
quite enough in his lifetime. In the thick of his revolutionary
struggles abroad his wife begged him “to go home and be respectable”;
but it was not in the ardent nature of Joel Barlow to listen to such
counsel of timidity. He was in too deep to go back, and so while
Timothy Dwight was gathering laurels from every bush in Connecticut,
this apostle of humanitarianism, this apostate from Calvinistic
Federalism, was content to remain a byword and a shaking of the head
in the villages of his native commonwealth. For all which, perhaps,
the Washington salon and the intimate association with Jefferson may
have served as recompense. Better society could not be found even in
Hartford.


3. Hugh Henry Brackenridge • Free-Lance Democrat

In taking leave of this disturbant time when new social theories were
bringing confusion to weak understandings, one cannot do better than
to dip into the wittiest and most readable sketch produced by that
vigorous generation, as well as one of the sanest. _Modern Chivalry_
was the single noteworthy contribution to American letters by Hugh
Henry Brackenridge, a western Pennsylvanian of Scotch birth, and a
graduate of Princeton in the class with Freneau and Madison. With the
former he had practised his couplets, collaborating in writing the
commencement poem, _The Rising Glory of America_. After leaving college
he tried his hand at the usual things open to young graduates, was
tutor in the college, taught in an academy, studied divinity, served
as chaplain in the Revolutionary army, and later read law. He removed
eventually to the frontier town of Pittsburgh, was active in Republican
politics, became an ardent pro-French sympathizer, and finally went
upon the supreme bench of Pennsylvania. He wrote for his own amusement
and tried his hand at various kinds of polite literature, producing
a masque, a poetic drama on Bunker Hill, prose essays, some sermons,
and turned at last to satire. For this he was admirably equipped;
he possessed a keen, well-balanced mind, a prose style delightfully
colloquial and a wit pleasantly caustic.

Brackenridge is a refreshing person to come upon after one is satiated
with the heroic. A free-lance critic, independent in thought and act,
he was no vociferous party or class advocate given to enlisting God on
his side. Federalist and Republican alike might lose their heads and
indulge in unseemly clamor, but Brackenridge with good Scotch judgment
refused to howl with the pack. A stout and unrepentant democrat, he was
no visionary to shut his eyes to unpleasant facts lest they disturb
his faith. As he considered the turbulent confusions of an America
in rough process of democratization, he saw the evils as clearly as
the hope, and it amused him to satirize those evils after the manner
of Don Quixote. _Modern Chivalry_ has proved somewhat of a puzzle to
later critics who have not cleared their minds of the old cobwebs of
Federalist criticism. Thus a literary historian has suggested that it
is “a half-hidden satire on democracy”[393] and he inclines to number
it among the literary ram’s horns that were blown against the walls of
the democratic Jericho. But such an interpretation certainly misses
the point. Brackenridge had become a thorough Westerner with a fresh
point of view. Among the stump fields of his Pennsylvania circuit he
was equally removed from the cynicism of Hamilton and the romanticism
of Barlow. He saw all about him a rough and tumble democracy, living a
vigorous and capable if not lovely life. As a democrat he accepted the
fact of political equality and approved of it; the thing was there and
needed no justification or defense. Some of its ways were foolish, many
of its purposes were shortsighted; it amused him therefore to sharpen
his pen against certain of its absurdities and essay the remedial
effects of unembittered laughter. He was a realist concerned with
realities.

_Modern Chivalry_ is our first backcountry book. It is redolent
of stump-lands and their rude leveling ways, and for years it was
immensely popular along the western frontier. It is a satire aimed
primarily at backwoods shortcomings, but with an eye that kept turning
towards the older settlements to scrutinize their equal shortcomings.
Its main theme is concerned with certain weaknesses of popular
sovereignty already unpleasantly evident as a result of the extension
of suffrage; and in particular with the unseemly office-hunting zeal
of coonskin candidates. The preposterous spectacle of a pushing fellow
with no qualifications setting himself up for high office was to become
more frequent with the later rise of Jacksonian democracy; but already
there was abundant justification for the satire of Brackenridge. The
records of the time are loud in criticism of the demagoguery that
resulted from the sudden shift of leadership in consequence of the
social upheaval following the Revolutionary War. The old leaders of the
aristocratic tradition had fled or had fallen into disfavor, and new
men, too often of small capacity and less breeding, had pushed into
the seats of authority. With the triumph of Jefferson this transfer
of power went forward briskly to the scandal of all aristocrats. The
lust of office spread like the plague, and demagogues caught the
popular ear, none too nice to distinguish between sense and fustian.
Irving brushed against the democratic weakness in his brief venture
into politics, and vented his spleen in _Rip Van Winkle_. It is this
which Brackenridge deals with primarily in _Modern Chivalry_, the
first part of which was published in 1792 and the second in 1805. The
general leveling of offices, he pointed out, was not democracy, but the
abuse and ruin of democracy. America was engaged in a great and noble
experiment; the success of that experiment depended upon an honest and
intelligent electorate; it must not be brought to failure by demagogues
through the incapacity of the voter.

Brackenridge had come in later years to be a pacifist. He had had his
fill of revolutions and armed revolts. As a principal arbitrator during
the tumult of the Whisky Insurrection, he had come to fear popular
lawlessness; and as a friend of the French Revolution he was concerned
at the methods of the Jacobin leaders. Commenting on the Whisky
Insurrection he said in later years:

  I saw before me anarchy, a shock to the government, a revolution
  impregnated with the Jacobin principles of France.... Let no man
  suppose I coveted a revolution; I had seen the evils of one already
  in the American; and I had read the evils of another, the French.
  My imagination presented the evils of the last strongly to my view,
  and brought them so close to a possible experience at home, that
  during the whole period of the insurrection, I could scarcely bear
  to cast my eye on a paragraph of French news.[394]

A reasonable and intelligent democracy, holding steadily to the
purpose of the common good, was his cherished ideal. He was not a
political philosopher interested in general principles. His purpose
was to satirize manners, not to speculate on causes; and in the days
of triumphant republicanism the most conspicuous target was offered by
the tousled head of the demagogue, “the courtier of democracy.” In the
preface to the 1846 edition, the editor thus summarizes the political
views of Brackenridge:

  An enlightened democracy was looked upon by him as the true
  nobility. He considered the true democrat as the true gentleman,
  who _ought_ to feel a stain on his fair reputation, “as a wound.”
  He maintained “that democracy is not in its nature coarse, and
  vulgar, or destitute of high integrity and honor.” The aim and
  end of his writings was to raise the standard of democracy, and
  to elevate “the noble of nature” to the same level with any
  other noble, in those qualities which constitute true nobility.
  The noble of nature, in his opinion, ought not to yield to the
  noble of aristocracy or monarchy, in strict integrity, in liberal
  and benevolent feelings, in propriety of manners and general
  intelligence.

The work is a string of adventures, interspersed with miscellaneous
discussion, of Captain John Farrago--who is evidently Brackenridge
himself--and his bog-trotting servant Teague O’Regan. The Captain
is an intelligent person, well read in the literature of the times,
and “a good deal disposed to subscribe to the elementary principles”
of Paine’s _Rights of Man_. He can summarize neatly the arguments
on both sides of the political questions of the day, but he retains
the open mind and cautious judgment of the independent. He is
a free-lance critic, democratic in sympathies but unsparing in
exposure of absurdity. His hits fall right and left, on the country
yokel, the city speculator, members of Congress, the institution of
slavery. He is greatly concerned to preserve his servant from the
temptations of ambition which assail him in the backwoods as well as
in Philadelphia. The career of Teague O’Regan is a broad satire on
the mounting ambition of old-world peasants to push their way up.
That the underling should rise in a democratic country was well; but
that he should be in unseemly haste to scramble into positions beyond
his capacities, that in pushing his private fortunes he should bring
ridicule upon the democratic experiment, was not well. Teague O’Regan’s
desire to scramble discovered quite too fertile a field for his own
or the country’s good. He is nearly sent to Congress by a backwoods
constituency, listens to other seductive appeals, and in the end is
sent by President Washington to the West as a revenue officer, where
he falls into the untender hands of the whisky rioters, and finds his
Irish beauty marred by a coat of tar and feathers.

It is in his burlesque of electorate methods that Brackenridge hits
most sharply at the current tendencies of republicanism. The ways of
the backwoods he caricatures by describing a contest between an honest
deacon and an ignorant Scotch-Irishman, which he came upon in his
peregrinations.

  When they looked upon the one, they felt an inclination to promote
  him. But when, again, on the other hand, they saw two kegs which
  they knew to be replenished with a very cheering liquor, they
  seemed to be inclined in favor of the other. The candidates were
  called upon to address the people, and the grave person mounted
  the stump of a tree, many of them standing round, as the place was
  a new clearing. His harangue was listened to by some of the older
  and more sedate, and one man, hard of hearing, seemed to make great
  effort to catch the sounds. As soon as the man of the two kegs took
  a stump, he was surrounded by an eager crowd.--“Frinds,” said he,
  in the native Scotch-Irish, “I’m a good dimicrat, and hates the
  Brattish--I’m an elder of the meetin’, forby, and has been overseer
  of the roads for three years:--An’ ye all know, that my mammy was
  kilt o’ the Ingens--now all ye that’s in my favor, come forit an’
  drenk.” Appetite, or rather thirst, prevailed, and the voters gave
  their votes to the man with the two kegs.[395]

If whisky decided elections in the backcountry, business controlled
them in the city. The following is almost modern in its caricature:

  The candidates were all remarkably pot-bellied; and waddled in
  their gait. The captain inquiring what were the pretensions of
  these men to be elected; he was told, that they had all stock
  in the funds, and lived in brick buildings; and some of them
  entertained fifty people at a time, and ate and drank abundantly;
  and living an easy life, and pampering their appetites, they had
  swollen to this size.

  “It is a strange thing,” said the captain, “that in the
  country, in my route, they would elect no one but a weaver or a
  whisky-distiller; and here none but fat squabs, that guzzle wine,
  and smoke segars.”... “No, faith” (said his friend), “there is na
  danger of Teague here, unless he had his scores o’ shares in the
  bank, and was in league with the brokers, and had a brick house at
  his hurdies, or a ship or twa on the stocks ... all is now lost in
  substantial interest, and the funds command everything.”[396]

That there might be no mistake as to the meaning of his satire
Brackenridge set down at the end an explicit statement of his purpose.

  As already hinted by some things put into the mouth of the
  captain, I could make it a principal matter to form the heart of
  _a republican government_. And in order to this, keep out all
  that nourishes _ambition_, the poison of public virtue.... In the
  American republics, we retain yet a great deal of the spirit of
  monarchy. The people are not aware of the phraseology itself, in
  some instances.... The first lesson I would give to a son of mine
  would be to have nothing to do with public business, but as a duty
  to his country. To consider service in civil life, no more to be
  desired than service in the military.... Those who say to them,
  _vox populi vox dei_, offer up an incense to flattery, as impious
  as the worshippers of the Caesars. They should be warned to beware
  of flatterers, whose object is not to serve them, but themselves.
  The demagogue in a democracy, and the courtier in a monarchy, are
  identical. They are the same, plying the same arts in different
  situations.... I shall have accomplished something by this book, if
  it shall keep some honest man from lessening his respectability by
  pushing himself into public trusts for which he is not qualified;
  or when pushed into public station, if it shall contribute to keep
  him honest by teaching him the folly of ambition, and farther
  advancement.... This is in great part, the moral of this book; if
  it should be at all necessary to give a hint of it.

One may do a worse service to democracy than to point out its faults.
Brackenridge was no truckler either to King George or to his neighbors.
Living in the midst of a coonskin democracy, he refused to believe
that there was any particular virtue in coonskin. It is not the cap
but what is under it that signifies. He was a vigorous individualist,
a confirmed democrat, a friend of all honest liberalisms, a man who
honored his own counsels and went his own way. We could better spare
more pretentious books from the library of our early literature than
these clever satires that preserve for us some of the homely ways of a
time when American institutions were still in the making.


Footnotes

[374] Quoted by Samuel Eliot Morison in _Harrison Gray Otis_, Vol. I,
p. 107.

[375] _Travels_, Vol. II, p. 458.

[376] Number III.

[377] Number X.

[378] Number XI.

[379] Number IX.

[380] _Literary History of America_, p. 300.

[381] _Literary History of the American Revolution_, Vol. I, p. 172.

[382] _Poems_, Pattee edition, Vol. I, p. 141.

[383] _The American Soldier._

[384] _To Duncan Doolittle._

[385] _On False Systems of Government._

[386] _Letters on Various Interesting and Important Subjects, etc._,
by Robert Slender, 1799; quoted by Pattee, Introduction to _Poems of
Philip Freneau_.

[387] See A. M. Schlesinger, _The Colonial Merchants and the American
Revolution_, Chapter IV.

[388] Forman, “The Political Activities of Philip Freneau,” in _Johns
Hopkins Studies in History and Political Science_, Vol. XX.

[389] _The Brook of the Valley._

[390] Purcell, _Connecticut in Transition_, p. 27.

[391] _Advice to the Privileged Orders_, pp. 66, 70.

[392] _Book VIII._

[393] Cairns, _History of American Literature_, p. 147.

[394] _Modern Chivalry_, edition of 1846, p. 170.

[395] _Ibid._, p. 105.

[396] _Ibid._, pp. 127-128.




Conclusion


With the triumph of Jefferson in the great struggle of 1800, the first
democratic battle had been won at the polls, but victory remained still
in doubt. The new liberalism was in the saddle, but how long it would
keep its seat, or whither it would drive, no one could foresee. The
aristocratic eighteenth century was still in secure possession of all
the vantage points of polite culture. It still held the positions of
honor and emolument and dictated the ways of society. The tie-wig and
smallclothes had not yet been put to rout by homespun and coonskin, and
were laying plans to make good the first defeat. Polite letters were
still content with the old wit ideal, still enamored of the couplet,
still in love with caustic satire, still transfixing democracy with its
sharp quills. The nineteenth century with its cargo of romanticisms had
not yet crossed the Atlantic, and while Napoleon was strewing Europe
with the wrecks of old empires, America was still dwelling in the
twilight of a century that was loath to be gone.

The account in the American ledger was complex and not easily cast up,
yet Jefferson might well have regarded with satisfaction the results
of two hundred years of new-world experience. The drift was all in
the direction he was facing. The age of theology was gone, the age of
political speculation was passing, the age of constitution building
was over. Disintegration had come upon every system of caste brought
hither from the old world; the free economics of a decentralized
society had proved a sufficient solvent to destroy the principle
of monarchy and of aristocracy, and prepare the American mind for
a venture in republicanism. Overseas liberalisms had flourished in
the soil that proved inhospitable to overseas conservatisms; and it
was these European liberalisms that provided the mold into which ran
the fluid experience of America to assume substantial form. That
the venture in republicanism would inure to the benefit of agrarian
America--to the producers on their scattered farms--Jefferson seems
never to have doubted; and the ready naturalization of the philosophy
of equalitarianism in the backwoods settlements might well have seemed
to justify his hopes. Nevertheless new forces were preparing that
were to bring about momentous changes in nineteenth-century America.
Capitalism with its banks and credit and elastic currency and its
psychology of speculation, and industrialism with its technique of
factory production, were already at work preparing a different pattern
of life for America, a pattern wholly unlike that of the simpler
agrarianism with its domestic economy, which Jefferson represented. A
new romanticism of the middle class was eventually to shoulder aside
the aspirations of gentleman and farmer alike, and refashion America
after its own ideal. What was implied in that momentous change provides
the theme for another study, and cannot be entered upon here.




Bibliography


Only the more important titles dealt with in the present study are
listed hereunder, together with selected biographical and critical
material. The invaluable bibliographies in the _Cambridge History of
American Literature_, four vols., New York, 1917-22, cover most of the
writers considered, and the reader is referred to them for detailed
material.


Book I: Part I

I. English Backgrounds: For the broader European movements, see
Preserved Smith, _The Age of the Reformation_ (New York, 1920). For
English movements, see David Masson, _Life of Milton_ (6 vols.,
London, 1859-80). The important ideas of Luther will be found in _An
Open Letter to the Christian Nobility of the German Nation Concerning
the Reform of the Christian State_ (1520); _The Babylonian Captivity
of the Church_ (1520); _A Treatise on Christian Liberty_ (1520). For
discussion, see L. H. Waring, _The Political Theories of Martin Luther_
(New York and London, 1910). For Calvin, see Williston Walker, _John
Calvin, The Organiser of Reformed Protestantism_ (New York and London,
1906; with bibliographical note).

II. The Transplanting of Ideas: For political history see James
Truslow Adams, _The Founding of New England_ (Boston, 1921). For
literary history consult the invaluable work of Moses Coit Tyler, _A
History of American Literature, 1607-1765_ (2 vols., New York, 1878).
Histories of Congregationalism will be found in Henry M. Dexter,
_The Congregationalism of the Last Three Hundred Years as Seen in
Its Literature_ (New York, 1880; with full bibliography); Williston
Walker, _A History of the Congregational Churches in the United
States_ (New York, 1900); also W. Walker, _Creeds and Platforms of
Congregationalism_ (New York, 1893).

III. John Cotton: Little of Cotton’s work has been reprinted. _A Reply
to Mr. Williams His Examination_ was reissued in _Narragansett Club
Pub._, Vol. II, pp. 1-240. His most important work is _The Way of the
Congregational Churches Cleared_ (London, 1648).

No life has been written. See Cotton Mather’s _Magnalia_; W. Walker’s
_Ten New England Leaders_ (New York, 1901); A. Young, _John Cotton’s
Life and Letters. Chronicles of the First Planters, etc._ (Boston,
1846).

John Winthrop: _Journal ..._ (Hartford, 1790); as _The History of New
England ..._ edited by J. Savage (2 vols., Boston, 1825-26, 1853);
edited by J. K. Hosmer (2 vols., New York, 1908).

See R. C. Winthrop, _Life and Letters of John Winthrop_ (2 vols.,
Boston, 1863, 1866, 1869, 1895). J. Twitchell, _John Winthrop, First
Governor of Massachusetts_ (New York, 1892).

IV. Thomas Hooker: His works have not been reprinted. The _Survey of
the Summe of Church-Discipline ..._ was published in London in 1648.
Contemporary notes of his _Sermon before the General Court on May 31,
1638_, were printed with comment by J. Hammond Trumbull, in _Conn.
Hist. Soc. Col._, Vol. I, No. 19.

For his life, see G. L. Walker, _Thomas Hooker, Preacher, Founder,
Democrat_ (New York, 1891; with bibliography by J. H. Trumbull).

Roger Williams: _The Works of Roger Williams. Edited by members of the
Narragansett Club_ (6 vols., Providence, 1866-1874).

No satisfactory life has been written. The best is Oscar S. Straus,
_Roger Williams, the Pioneer of Religious Liberty_ (New York, 1894).
See also Edmund J. Carpenter, _Roger Williams: A Study of the Life,
Times and Character of a Political Pioneer_ (New York, 1909; Grafton
Hist. Series).


Book I: Part II

I. Samuel Sewall: _Diary_ (printed in _Mass. Hist. Soc. Col._, Series
5, Vols. 5-7). No life has been written.

II. Increase Mather: The extensive bibliography is confused, and a
definitive list is being prepared by T. J. Holmes and G. P. Winship.
Few works have been reprinted, and about the only available title is
_Illustrious Providences_ (Boston and London, 1684; London, 1687);
under title of _Remarkable Providences_ (London, 18561, 1890).

The authoritative life is by Kenneth B. Murdock, _Increase Mather,
The Foremost American Puritan_ (Harvard University Press. 1925; with
bibliography). See also Williston Walker, _Ten New England Leaders_
(New York, 1901).

Cotton Mather: The bibliography is enormous, but few titles are
available. _The Wonders of the Invisible World_ (Boston, 1693) has been
twice reprinted: with title, _Salem Witchcraft ..._ and notes by S. P.
Fowler (Cambridge, 1861); and with I. Mather’s _Account of the Tryals
of the New-England Witches_ (Library of Old Authors, London, 1862).
_The Bostonian Ebenezer_, Boston, 1698, was reprinted in Old South
Leaflets, Boston, 1896. The _Magnalia Christi Americana_, London, 1702,
was reissued (2 vols., Hartford and New Haven, 1820); and the same with
notes by T. Robbins, and translations of foreign quotations by L. F.
Robinson, and a life by S. G. Drake (Hartford, 1853). The _Essays to Do
Good_ has been reprinted ten times, the latest editions London, 1842,
and Boston, 1845. The most available text is _Selections from Cotton
Mather_, edited with introduction, by K. B. Murdock (New York, 1926;
American Authors Series).

The best life is by Barrett Wendell, _Cotton Mather, Puritan Priest_
(New York, 1891; Harvard University Press, 1925). See also A. P.
Marvin, _The Life and Times of Cotton Mather_ (Boston, 1892).

III. John Wise: _The Churches Quarrel Espoused ..._ (Boston, 1710,
1715, 1745, 1772); reissued with the _Vindication_, with introduction
by J. S. Clark (Boston, 1860). _A Vindication of the Government of the
New-England Churches. Drawn from Antiquity; the Light of Nature; Holy
Scripture ..._ (Boston, 1717, 1772); reissued with the preceding title
(Boston, 1860).

No life of Wise has been written.


Book II: Part I

I. Colonial Backgrounds: See Herbert L. Osgood, _The American Colonies
in the Eighteenth Century_ (2 vols., New York, 1924).

New Stock: See John R. Commons, _Races and Immigrants in America_ (New
York, 1902, 1920). F. R. Diffenderfer, _The German Immigrants into
Pennsylvania ..._ (New York, 1900). _The Diary of John Harrower (Amer.
Hist. Review_, Vol. VI, p. 65).

The Frontier--Lubberland: _The Journal of Sarah Kemble Knight_ (New
York, 1825; Albany, 1865; Norwich, Conn., 1901).

William Byrd: _Westover Manuscripts: containing the History of the
Dividing Line ... A Journey to the Land of Eden ..._ (Petersburg,
Va., 1841); reissued under title, _The History of the Dividing Line_
(edited by T. H. Wynne; 2 vols., Richmond, 1866). Also _The Writings of
“Colonel William Byrd of Westover in Virginia, Esq.”_ Edited by J. S.
Bassett (New York, 1901).

The Frontier--Land of Promise: _Letters from an American Farmer ..._
(London, 1782; with note by W. P. Trent and introduction by Ludwig
Lewisohn, New York, 1904). _More “Letters from an American Farmer,”_
edited with introductions by H. L. Bourdin, R. G. Gabriel, and S. T.
Williams, and issued under the title, _Sketches of Eighteenth Century
America_ (New Haven, 1925).

For the life of Crèvecœur, see Julia Post Mitchell, _St. Jean de
Crèvecœur (Col. Univ. Studies in English and Comp. Lit._, New York,
1916).

II. Jonathan Edwards: _Works_ (8 vols., Leeds, 1806-11). _Works_,
edited by S. E. Dwight (10 vols., New York, 1829, 1830). _Works_ (10
vols., Edinburgh, 1847). Numerous other editions and many reprints.

The best life is by V. G. Allen, _Jonathan Edwards_ (Boston, 1889,
1890; with bibliography). See also Woodbridge Riley, _American Thought_
(New York, 1915).

III. Benjamin Franklin: The best edition of his works is that edited by
J. Bigelow (10 vols., New York, 1889). The _Autobiography_ was first
printed complete by J. Bigelow, New York, 1874. The latest reprint is
in the American Authors Series, edited with introduction by Percy H.
Boynton (New York, 1926).

Of the several lives, see James Parton, _Life and Times of Benjamin
Franklin_ (2 vols., New York, 1864); J. B. McMaster, _Benjamin Franklin
as a Man of Letters_ (Boston, 1887); J. T. Morse, _Benjamin Franklin_
(American Statesmen Series, Boston, 1889). See also W. A. Wetzel,
_Benjamin Franklin as an Economist_ (_Johns Hopkins Studies in Hist.
and Pol. Science_, Thirteenth Series, Vol. IX, pp. 421-476). A recent
life: Phillips Russell, _Benjamin Franklin: The First Civilized
American_ (New York, 1926).


Book II: Part II

I. Imperial Sovereignty and Home Rule: For the literature of the
Revolutionary period, see the invaluable _Literary History of the
American Revolution_, by Moses Coit Tyler (2 vols., New York, 1897;
with annotated bibliography). For the political phases, see C. H. Van
Tyne, _The Causes of the War of Independence ..._ (Boston and New York,
1922); A. M. Schlesinger, _The Colonial Merchants and the American
Revolution, 1763-1776_ (New York, 1918); J. T. Adams, _Revolutionary
New England, 1691-1776_ (Boston, 1923).

II. Thomas Hutchinson: _The History of Massachusetts_ (3 vols., Boston
and London, 1764-1767-1828; Vols. I and II, Boston, 1795). _Diary and
Letters of Thomas Hutchinson ..._, edited by P. O. Hutchinson (2 vols.,
Boston, 1884-1886). J. K. Hosmer, _Life of Thomas Hutchinson_ (Boston,
1896).

Daniel Leonard: _Massachusettensis_ (London, 1776); reissued with
_Novanglus_ by John Adams, and ascribed on the title page to Jonathan
Sewall (Boston, 1819).

Jonathan Boucher: _A View of the Causes and Consequences of the
American Revolution_ (London, 1797).

III. John Dickinson: _Political Writings_ (2 vols., Wilmington, 1801).
_Writings_, edited by P. L. Ford (3 vols., Philadelphia, 1895).

See C. J. Stillé, _The Life and Times of John Dickinson_ (Philadelphia,
1891).

IV. Samuel Adams: _Writings_, edited by H. A. Cushing (4 vols., New
York, 1904-08).

See J. K. Hosmer, _Samuel Adams_ (Boston, 1884); revised edition (1898,
American Statesmen Series). W. V. Wells, _The Life and Public Services
of Samuel Adams_ (3 vols., Boston, 1865).

V. John Trumbull: _Poetical Works_ (2 vols., Hartford, 1820). _The
Progress of Dulness_ (New Haven, 1772-73). _An Elegy on the Times_
(Boston, 1774; New Haven, 1775). _M’Fingal_ (printed in parts from
1775 to 1782, and much revised; first published entire, Hartford,
1782; numerous contemporary editions). _The Progress of Dulness_
and _M’Fingal_ are reprinted in _The Connecticut Wits_, edited with
introduction and bibliography by Vernon L. Parrington (New York, 1926,
American Authors Series).

No life of Trumbull has been written.

Francis Hopkinson: _Miscellaneous Essays and Occasional Writings_ (2
vols., Philadelphia, 1792). George Hastings, _Life and Works of Francis
Hopkinson_ (University of Chicago Press, 1926).

Jonathan Odell: _The Loyal Verses of Joseph Stansbury and Doctor
Jonathan Odell_, edited by Winthrop Sargent (Albany, 1860).

Samuel Peters: _A General History of Connecticut ... to which is added
an Appendix, wherein New and True Sources of the Present Rebellion are
pointed out ... By a Gentleman of the Province_ (London, 1781; New
Haven, 1829; New York, 1877).


Book III: Part I

I. Agrarianism and Capitalism: A vivid account of the party struggles
of the time is given in Claude G. Bowers, _Jefferson and Hamilton_
(Boston, 1925), with full bibliography. For political theory, see
Harold J. Laski, _Political Thought in England from Locke to Bentham_
(New York, 1920). Charles E. Merriam, _A History of American Political
Theories_ (New York, 1903). A dramatic account of Shays’s Rebellion is
given in Edward Bellamy, _The Duke of Stockbridge_ (New York, 1901).

II. The Great Debate: The bibliography is extensive. See J. Elliot,
_Debates in the Several State Conventions on the Adoption of the
Federal Constitution ..._ (4 vols., Washington, 1827, 1836; 5 vols.,
Philadelphia, 1906). Max Farrand, _Records of the Federal Convention of
1787_ (3 vols., New Haven, 1911). S. B. Harding, _The Contest over the
Ratification of the Federal Constitution in the State of Massachusetts_
(New York, 1896). Charles A. Beard, _An Economic Interpretation of the
Constitution of the United States_ (New York, 1913). _The Federalist_,
numerous editions; the best are those edited by H. C. Lodge (New
York, 1886) and by P. L. Ford (New York, 1898). Richard Henry Lee,
_Observations leading to a fair examination of the system of government
... In a number of Letters from the Federal Farmer to the Republican_
(reprinted in _Pamphlets on the Constitution of the United States,
1787-1788_, edited by P. L. Ford, Brooklyn, 1888).

III. Alexander Hamilton: _Works, Comprising his Correspondence_, edited
by J. C. Hamilton (7 vols., New York, 1850-51). _Works_, edited by H.
C. Lodge (10 vols., New York, 1885).

There are numerous lives. See J. C. Hamilton, _The Life of Alexander
Hamilton_ (2 vols., New York, 1834). H. C. Lodge, _Alexander Hamilton_
(Boston, 1882, 1898). J. T. Morse, _The Life of Alexander Hamilton_
(2 vols., Boston, 1876). See also Gertrude Atherton, _The Conqueror_
(New York and London, 1902). A. H. Vanderberg, _The Greatest American,
Alexander Hamilton ... with a Symposium of Opinions by Distinguished
Americans_ (New York and London, 1922). F. S. Oliver, _Alexander
Hamilton: An Essay on the American Union_ (New York, 1907)--an English
view.

John Adams: _Works ... with a Life of the Author_, edited by C. F.
Adams (10 vols., Boston, 1850-56).

See J. Q. Adams and C. F. Adams, _The Life of John Adams_ (2 vols.,
Philadelphia, 1871). J. T. Morse, Jr., _John Adams_ (Boston, 1884,
1898). _Letters of Mrs. Adams, the Wife of John Adams_, edited by C. F.
Adams (2 vols., Boston, 1840). C. M. Walsh, _The Political Science of
John Adams_ (New York, 1915).


Book III: Part II

I. The Impact of the French Revolution: Abundant material will be found
in Charles D. Hazen, _Contemporary American Opinion of the French
Revolution_ (Baltimore, 1897, _Johns Hopkins Studies in Hist. and Pol.
Science_, Extra Vol. 16). See also _The Journal of William Maclay_,
edited by E. S. Maclay (New York, 1890). For _Publicola_, see John Q.
Adams, _Writings ..._, edited by Worthington C. Ford (7 vols., New
York, 1913-17).

II. Tom Paine: _Writings ..._, edited by Moncure D. Conway (4 vols.,
New York, 1894-99). Moncure D. Conway, _Life of Thomas Paine ... To
which is added a Sketch of Paine by William Cobbett ..._ (2 vols., New
York and London, 1892).

Thomas Jefferson: _Writings_, edited by H. A. Washington (9 vols.,
Washington, 1853-54). _The Works of Thomas Jefferson_ (with _Anas_ and
_Autobiography_), edited by P. L. Ford (12 vols., New York, 1904-05).

Numerous lives, many of which are wholly unreliable. The official
biography was written by Henry S. Randall, _The Life of Thomas
Jefferson_ (3 vols., Philadelphia, 1858, 1871). Of later studies the
following are excellent: David S. Muzzey, _Thomas Jefferson_ (New York,
1919); Francis W. Hirst, _Life and Letters of Thomas Jefferson_ (New
York, 1926)--an English view; and Albert Jay Nock, _Jefferson_ (New
York, 1926). See also Sarah N. Randolph, _The Domestic Life of Thomas
Jefferson_ (New York, 1871) and Thomas E. Watson, _The Life and Times
of Thomas Jefferson_ (New York, 1903).

III. The Federalist Group: For backgrounds of the Hartford wits, see
Richard J. Purcell, _Connecticut in Transition: 1775-1818_ (Washington,
1918). William A. Robinson, _Jeffersonian Democracy in New England_
(New Haven, 1916). Samuel E. Morison, _Life and Letters of Harrison
Gray Otis_ (2 vols., Boston, 1913). For criticism, see F. Sheldon,
“Pleiades of Connecticut” (_Atlantic Monthly_, Vol. XV). Mrs. Annie
R. Marble, _Heralds of American Literature_ (Chicago, 1907). Moses
Coit Tyler, _Three Men of Letters_ (New York, 1895)--Dwight and
Barlow. The writings of the Wits have long been out of print. The most
available text is _The Connecticut Wits_, edited with introduction
and bibliographies, by Vernon L. Parrington (New York, 1926, American
Authors Series), which reprints large portions of Trumbull, Timothy
Dwight, Barlow, Humphreys, _The Anarchiad_, and portions of _The Echo_.

Timothy Dwight: The most important titles are _The Conquest of Canaan
..._ (Hartford, 1785). _The Triumph of Infidelity ..._ (1788).
_Greenfield Hill ..._ (1794). _Travels in New England and New York:
1796-1815_ (4 vols., New Haven, 1821-22; London, 1823).

See W. B. Sprague, _Life of Timothy Dwight_ (Sparks _Lib. Amer. Biog._,
Second Series, Vol. IV, Boston, 1845).

The French Group: Philip Freneau: _Poems_, edited for the Princeton
Hist. Assoc. by Fred L. Pattee (3 vols., Princeton, 1902-07). Victor
H. Paltsits, _A Bibliography of the Separate and Collected Works of
Philip Freneau, together with an Account of his Newspapers_ (New York,
1903). Mary S. Austin, _Philip Freneau, Poet of the Revolution_ (New
York, 1901). S. E. Forman, _The Political Activities of Philip Freneau_
(Baltimore, 1902, _Johns Hopkins Studies in Hist. and Pol. Science_,
Series XX, No. 9-10). Mrs. Annie R. Marble, _Heralds of American
Literature_ (Chicago, 1907).

Joel Barlow: His works are out of print, but portions will be found in
_The Connecticut Wits_ (New York, 1926). The important titles are: _The
Vision of Columbus ..._ (Hartford, 1787; London, 1787). _A Letter to
the National Convention of France ..._ (London, 1792). _Advice to the
Privileged Orders in the Several States of Europe ..._ (London, 1792,
1796). _The Conspiracy of Kings ..._ (London, 1792). _The Hasty Pudding
..._ (New York, 1796; Salem, 1799; Stockbridge, 1799). _The Columbiad_
(Philadelphia, 1807; London, 1809).

Charles Burr Todd, _Life and Letters of Joel Barlow_ (New York, 1886).
See also Tyler, _Three Men of Letters_ (New York, 1895), and Marble,
_Heralds of American Literature_ (Chicago, 1907).

Hugh Henry Brackenridge: _Modern Chivalry: Containing the Adventures of
Captain John Farrago, and Teague O’Regan, his servant ..._ (2 vols.,
Philadelphia, 1792; Vol. 3, Pittsburgh, 1793; Vol. 4, Philadelphia,
1797). These four volumes constitute Part I. Part II was issued in two
volumes, Philadelphia, 1804-05. Many revisions and changes of the text
followed. The complete work was issued in four volumes (Philadelphia,
1815), the fourth volume containing new material. Another complete
edition was issued in two volumes (Pittsburgh, 1819). For detailed
information see _Cambridge History of American Literature_ (Vol. I, p.
526).

An account of Brackenridge and in particular of his experience during
the Whiskey Rebellion, in a memoir by H. M. Brackenridge, prefaces the
edition of 1846 and later editions. No life of Brackenridge has been
written. His fugitive writings in verse, drama, and prose are numerous
but inaccessible. Some comment on Brackenridge is given in Henry Adams,
_Life of Albert Gallatin_ (Philadelphia, 1879).




Index [Volume One]


  Adams, James Truslow, 20 n, 30 n, 36 n, 58 n, 87 n, 103 n

  ----, John, 179, 188, 190, 200 n, 205, 207, 208, 213, 222, 241, 247,
        249, 253, 259, 292, 296, 299, 307-320, 323, 324, 328, 340, 368,
        375, 384

  ----, John Quincy, 283, 324, 325-326

  ----, R. G., 310 n

  ----, Samuel, 123, 181, 196, 200, 206, 228, 233-247, 311, 322, 344,
        348, 372

  ----, Samuel, Sr., 234

  _Address and Declaration of the Friends of Universal Peace and
        Liberty_, 339 n

  _Address to the Inhabitants of Quebec_, 219

  _Advice to the Privileged Orders in the Several States of Europe_,
        324, 383, 384-386, 386 n

  _Age of Reason, The_, 324, 341

  _Agrarian Justice_, 337-339, 385

  Allen, V. G., 154, 157 n, 160 n

  Alsop, Richard, 359, 360

  Alvord, C. W., 184 n

  _American Belisarius, The_, 147, 147 n

  _American Historical Review, The_, 136 n

  _American Political Theories_, 280 n

  _American Soldier, The_, 375 n

  _American Times, The_, 257-259

  _American Weekly Mercury, The_, 134

  Ames, Fisher, 360

  _Anarchiad, The_, 249, 363-367

  André, Major John, 256

  Andros, Sir Edmund, 118

  Anne, Queen, 87, 166

  _Answer of Bernard to the Petition of the House of Representatives to
        the King_, 199 n, 204 n

  _Apology for the Bible, An_, 324, 337 n

  _Arbitrary Government Described: & the Government of the
        Massachusetts Vindicated from that Aspersion_, 44

  Aristotle, 213, 282, 284

  Arnold, Benedict, 256

  _Autobiography of John Adams_, 309 n

  _Autobiography of Thomas Jefferson_, 350 n

  Augustine, Saint, 68, 150

  Austin, James Trecothick, 276 n


  Babeuf, François Noel, 337

  _Babylonian Captivity, The_, 12 n

  Baillie, Joseph, 35

  Ball, Captain John, 134

  Bancroft, George, 247

  Barlow, Joel, 324, 359, 360, 367, 368, 382-389, 391

  Barré, Isaac, 183

  Beard, Charles A., 184 n, 276 n, 287 n, 320 n

  Belcher, Mr., 113

  Bentham, Jeremy, 285, 292, 296

  Berkeley, Bishop, 162

  Bernard, Governor, 198, 199, 200, 201, 204, 205, 216, 224, 242, 243,
        244

  Blackstone, Lord, 189, 236, 238, 244, 249, 280, 343, 352, 353

  Blathwayt, Mr., 127

  _Bloudy Tenent of Persecution for Cause of Conscience, The_, 68 n, 70
        n, 71 n, 72

  _Bloudy Tenent Yet more Bloody, The_, 68 n, 69 n, 71 n

  _Body of Liberties_, 21, 76, 80

  Bolingbroke, Henry Saint John, Lord, 319

  Borgeaud, Charles, 58 n

  _Boston Chronicle, The_, 379

  _Boston Gazette, The_, 128

  Boucher, Rev. Jonathan, 190, 194, 214-218

  Bowres, Captain, 135

  Brackenridge, Hugh Henry, 368, 369, 372, 390-395

  Braddock, General Edward, 373

  _Brook of the Valley, The_, 381 n

  Brooke, Lord, 34

  Brooks, Noah, 277 n

  Browne, Robert, 59

  Bunyan, John, 40, 85

  Burke, Edmund, 69, 183, 324, 325, 334, 335, 375

  Burnaby, Rev. Andrew, 276 n

  Byles, Rev. Mather, 128, 192, 248

  Byrd, Colonel William, 138-140, 141


  Cairns, William B., 391 n

  Calef, Robert, 108

  Calhoun, John C., 320

  Calvin, John, 9, 11, 12-15, 20, 23, 27, 30, 42, 76, 89, 100, 150,
        159, 249

  Camden, Charles Pratt, Earl of, 183, 189, 224, 238

  Campbell, Thomas, 370

  _Candidus_, 237, 239 n, 242 n, 243 n

  Canticles, 40, 65, 66 n, 154

  Care, Henry, 119 n

  Carson, Hampton Lawrence, 284 n

  _Causes of the War of Independence, The_, 179 n, 182 n, 184 n, 188 n,
        189 n, 203 n

  Channing, William Ellery, 62, 65, 105, 106

  Charles I, King, 16, 19, 55, 76, 77, 84, 225

  Chastellux, Marquis de, 250

  _Chatterer, A_, 241 n, 243 n

  _Christian Commonwealth, The_, 81-84

  Church, Dr., 118 n

  Churchill, Charles, 248, 249, 257, 363, 371

  _Churches Quarrel Espoused, The_, 120, 122 n, 123

  Cicero, 213, 317

  Clark, Mr., 113

  Clarke, Captain Jonathan, 134

  Clymer, George, 221, 230, 252

  Clinton, George, 285

  ----, Sir Henry, 258, 259

  Cogswell, Dr. Mason F., 359

  Coke, Sir Edward, 44, 64, 89, 188, 222, 234, 236, 238, 239, 343, 352

  Colbert, Jean Baptiste, 173

  Colman, Rev. Benjamin, 109

  _Colonial Merchants and the American Revolution, The_, 183 n, 379 n

  _Columbia University Contributions to Philosophy, Psychology and
        Education_, 155 n

  _Columbiad, The_, 384, 387-389

  _Columbian Centinel, The_, 325

  _Commentaries_ (Blackstone), 280

  _Common Sense_, 329-332

  Commons, John R., 134 n

  _Congratulation, The_, 257

  _Connecticut in Transition: 1775-1818_, 384 n

  _Conquest of Canaan, The_, 362

  _Considerations for J. W._, 39

  _Considerations on the Propriety of Imposing Taxes in the British
        Colonies, for the Purpose of Raising Revenue by an Act of
        Parliament_, 226 n

  _Contemporary American Opinion of the French Revolution_, 321 n, 323 n

  Conway, Moncure D., 177 n, 336 n, 339 n

  Corinthians, Second Epistle to the, 66 n

  Cotton, Rev. John, vi, 19, 27-37, 38, 49, 51, 54, 55, 57, 60, 62, 63,
        64, 72, 82, 99, 101, 361

  _Cotton Mather, Puritan Priest_, 108 n, 114 n

  Coults, James, 134

  Crèvecœur, Hector St. John de, 140-147

  Cromwell, Oliver, 10, 29, 66, 82, 220

  Crusoe, Robinson, 166

  _Curiosa Americana_, 115

  Cushing, Caleb, 249


  Daingerfield, Colonel, 136

  D’Alembert, Jean le Rond, 324

  Dana, Judge, 276

  Danforth, Mr., 93

  Daniel, Book of, 66 n

  Davenport, Rev. John, 60

  ----, Mr., 113

  David, King, 31

  Dean, John Ward, 80 n

  _Declaration of Rights of the Stamp Act Congress_, 219

  _Decline and Fall of the English System of Finance, The_, 340

  _Defence of the Constitution of Government of the United States of
        America, A_, 310, 311, 312 n, 315 n, 316 n, 317 n, 318 n

  Defoe, Daniel, 90, 91, 110, 166

  _De Jure Naturae et Gentium_, 121

  _Diary of Jonathan Edwards_, 154

  _Diary of John Harrower_, 135-136

  _Diary of Cotton Mather_, 107, 109, 109 n, 110 n, 112, 123, 123 n,
        128 n

  _Diary of Samuel Sewall_, 88, 90 n, 91 n, 92 n, 93, 93 n, 94 n, 95 n,
        96 n, 97 n, 113 n, 126 n, 127 n

  _Diary and Letters of Thomas Hutchinson_, 196 n

  _Diary of the Revolution_, 191 n

  Dickinson, John, 137, 167, 219-232, 253, 291, 344

  Diderot, Denis, 324

  Diffenderfer, F. R., 134, 135 n

  _Discourses on Davila_, 310, 311, 324, 376

  Dodd, William Edward, 345 n

  _Don Quixote_, 390

  Duck, Chancellor, 56

  Dudley, Joseph, 29

  ----, Governor Joseph, 92, 93, 104, 112, 113, 118, 126-127

  ----, Paul, 112, 127

  Duguit, Léon, 73 n

  Dulaney, Daniel, 221, 226, 344

  Dummer, Mr., 92

  Duns Scotus, 14

  Dwight, Theodore, 359, 360

  ----, Rev. Timothy, 249, 358, 359, 360-363, 367, 369, 383, 385, 389


  _Early American Philosophers_, 155 n

  _Ecclesiasticall Politie_, 149, 149 n

  _Echo, The_, 363

  _Economic Basis of Politics, The_, 287 n

  _Economic Interpretation of the Constitution, An_, 184 n

  _Economic Origins of Jeffersonian Democracy, The_, 320 n

  _Economic Writings of Sir William Petty, The_, 171 n

  Edwards, Jonathan, vi, 105, 120, 151, 152-163, 249, 359, 361

  _Elegy on the Times, An_, 249

  Elizabeth, Queen, 7

  Eliot, Rev. John, 30, 59, 81-84

  ----, Sir John, 38

  _Elliot’s Debates_, 229 n, 230 n, 282 n, 283 n, 302 n

  Emerson, Ralph Waldo, 62, 153

  _End of the Wicked Contemplated by the Righteous, The; or, The
        Torments of the Wicked in Hell, no Occasion of Grief to the
        Saints in Heaven_, 159 n

  Endicott, Roger, 23, 29, 50

  Epistle to the Romans, 67

  Ernst, Dr. James E., 67 n

  _Essay of Projects, An_, 166

  _Essay for the Recording of Illustrious Providences, An_, 105, 106

  _Eternity of Hell Torments, The_, 159 _n Every Man in his Humour_, 28


  _False Systems of Government, On_, 377 n

  _Familiar Letters of John and Abigail Adams_, 253 n

  _Federal Constitution in Massachusetts, The_, 284 n

  _Federalist, The_, 283 n, 284-288, 289

  Fenno, John, 311, 379, 380

  Ferne, Dr., 46

  _Feu de Joie, The_, 257

  Filmer, Sir Robert, 103, 189, 190, 215, 218, 240

  _First Principles of Government_, 280

  Ford, Paul Leicester, 231 n, 283, 284 n

  ----, Worthington C., 326 n

  Forman, S. E., 311 n, 379 n, 380

  Fothergill, Dr., 169

  _Founding of New England, The_, 20 n, 30 n, 36 n, 58 n, 87 n

  Fox, Charles James, 383

  Franklin, Benjamin, vi, 90, 97, 124, 128, 162, 164-178, 180, 188,
        202, 236, 244, 328, 334, 347, 363, 369, 380

  ----, Ebenezer, 165

  ----, James, 96, 128, 166

  ----, Josiah, 166

  ----, Mrs., 168 n

  _Freedom of the Will, On the_, 157

  Freneau, Philip, 247, 251, 255, 256, 368-381, 390

  _Frontier Woman, The_, 146 n

  Fuller, Dr., of Plymouth, 23


  Gage, General Thomas, 128, 183, 199, 259

  Galloway, Joseph, 235, 259

  _Gazette of the United States, The_, 311, 311 n

  _General History of Connecticut, A_, 260-262

  Genesis, Book of, 94

  Genêt, Citizen, 323

  George III, King, 182, 183, 184, 185, 190, 228, 256, 259, 330, 340,
        371, 373, 395

  _German Immigrants into Pennsylvania, The_, 134, 134 n

  Gerry, Elbridge, 288

  _God’s Sovereignty_, 156 n

  Godwin, William, 292, 296, 313, 376

  Goldsmith, Oliver, 172

  Gooch, George Peabody, 73 n

  _Grace Abounding_, 40

  _Greenfield Hill_, 363

  Grenville, George, 240

  Grotius, Hugo, 236

  _Group, The_, 207


  Halifax, Marquis of, 280

  Hamilton, Alexander, vi, 275, 281, 284, 285, 289, 292-307, 317 n,
        320, 323, 328, 342, 346, 347, 348, 367, 368, 375, 380, 391

  Hancock, John, 205, 241

  Harding, Samuel Bannister, 284 n

  Harrington, James, 25, 26, 103, 213, 269, 270, 278, 280, 296, 318, 319

  _Harrison Gray Otis_, 359 n

  Harrower, John, 135-136

  Hartford Wits, The, 291, 357-367, 368

  Hartley, David, 170

  Hasselwood, Captain, 135

  _Hasty Pudding, The_, 389

  Haynes, Governor, 57, 57 n

  Hazen, Charles D., 321 n, 323 n

  _Henry the Fourth_, 28

  _Henry Knox_, 277 n

  Henry, Patrick, 222

  _Heresiography_, 64 n

  Higginson, Thomas Wentworth, 321

  Hirst, Francis W., 342 n

  _History of American Literature, A_, 391 n

  _History of American Literature during the Colonial Period, A_, 89 n

  _History of the Congregational Churches in the United States, A_, 23
        n, 25 n, 100 n, 101 n, 148 n

  _History of English Democratic Ideas in the Seventeenth Century, A_,
        73 n

  _History of the Dividing Line, The_, 138 n, 139-140

  _History of Massachusetts Bay Colony_, 31 n, 33 n, 34 n, 50 n, 127 n,
        196, 198 n, 203 n, 205 n, 219 n, 242, 242 n

  _History of Mrs. B., The_, 146 n

  _History of New England, A_, 118 n

  _History of New England_ (Winthrop), 49 n, 105

  _History of the Supreme Court_, 284 n

  Hobbes, Thomas, 68, 69, 103, 208, 278, 280, 296, 300, 319

  Hillsboro, Lord, 200, 201

  _Hoch Deutsche Pennsylvanische Bericht, Der_, 135

  Homer, 250

  Hooker, Richard, 12, 67, 68, 149, 236

  ----, Thomas, 47, 53-62, 68, 79, 90, 99, 361

  Hopkins, Dr. Lemuel, 359, 364-365

  ----, Rev. Samuel, 105

  Hopkinson, Francis, 252-255, 291

  Hosmer, J. K., 196 n, 200, 237 n

  Howe, Joseph, 249

  ----, Sir William, 164

  Hubbard, Rev. William, 57

  Hume, David, 171, 222, 236, 239, 280, 296, 298, 319, 352, 353, 354,
        363

  Humphreys, David, 359, 360, 367

  Hutchinson, Mistress Anne, 24, 28, 29, 49, 50, 194, 195

  ----, Mistress Peggy, 191

  ----, Colonel John, 38

  ----, Thomas, Sr., 195

  ----, Governor Thomas, 31 n, 33 n, 50 n, 127 n, 181, 194-206, 207,
        219, 224, 234, 235, 237 n, 241, 242, 243, 245, 250, 259

  _Hutchinson Papers_, 36 n


  _Increase Mather, the Foremost American Puritan_, 98 n, 100 n, 101 n,
        103 n, 104 n, 106 n

  _Institutes of Calvin_, 20, 30, 31 n, 42 n, 249

  Irving, Washington, 369, 391

  Isaiah, 14, 66 n


  James I, King, 55, 76

  Jay, John, 284

  Jefferson, Thomas, iii, vi, 72, 147, 176, 190, 222, 230, 247, 259,
        280, 292, 296, 299, 302, 306, 307, 312, 320, 324, 327, 333,
        337, 342-356, 362, 368, 374, 375, 379, 380, 389, 391, 397, 398

  _Johns Hopkins Studies in History and Political Science_, 311 n, 321
        n, 379 n

  Johnson, Dr. Samuel, 307

  ----, Sir William, 373

  _Jonathan Edwards_, 154 n, 157, 160 n

  Jones, Adam Leroy, 155 n

  Jonson, Ben, 28, 76

  _Journal of William Maclay_, 323, 342

  _Journal_ (Winthrop), 32, 45 n, 47 n


  Knight, Madam Sarah, 137-138, 141

  Knox, General Henry, 277, 375


  Lafayette, Marquis de, 323

  _Landscapes_, 147 n

  Laski, Harold J., 190 n, 280 n

  Latimer, Hugh, 55

  Laud, Archbishop, 23, 27, 32, 55, 56, 84, 215, 256

  _Law in the Modern State_, 73 n

  _Layman_, 243 n

  Lechford, Thomas, 23

  Lee, Richard Henry, 284, 288-291

  Leonard, Daniel, 194, 207-213, 216, 250

  _Letter to Lord Onslow_, 335 n

  _Letter of Lord Say and Sele_, 48 n

  _Letter to Lord Say and Sele_, 31 n

  _Letter to Major Mason_, 57 n

  _Letter to the National Convention of France_, 386-387

  _Letter to Mr. Niles_, 179 n

  _Letter to John Taylor_, 313 n, 316 n

  _Letter to Robert Wodrow_, 123 n

  _Letter to the Town Clerk of Providence_, 67 n, 72 n

  _Letters from an American Farmer_, 140, 142 n, 143 n, 144 n, 145, 145
        n, 146

  _Letters of Fabius_, 230, 231

  _Letters from the Federal Farmer to the Republican_, 284, 288-291

  _Letters from a Pennsylvania Farmer_, 219, 223 n, 224 n, 225, 226 n,
        228 n

  _Letters on Various Interesting and Important Subjects_, 378 n

  _Leviathan, The_, 209, 280

  _Libera Nos, Domine_, 373

  _Liberty of the Press in the American Colonies, The_, 119 n

  _Life and Letters of Thomas Jefferson_, 342 n

  _Life and Letters of John Winthrop_, 39 n, 40 n, 41 n, 43 n, 44 n, 45
        n, 46 n, 47 n

  _Life of Samuel Adams_, 196 n, 237 n

  _Life of Franklin_, 171

  _Life of Elbridge Gerry_, 276 n

  _Life of Thomas Hutchinson_, 200 n, 201 n, 202 n, 203 n

  _Life of Milton_, 64 n, 75 n

  _Life of Thomas Paine_, 336 n, 339 n

  Lilburne, “Free-born” John, 328

  _Lilly’s Grammar_, 249, 378

  Lincoln, Earl of, 29

  _Literary History of America, A_, 116 n, 150 n, 284 n, 371 n

  _Literary History of the American Revolution, A_, 207 n, 226 n, 371 n

  Livy, 213

  Locke, John, iv, 66, 69, 103, 121, 123, 149, 189, 190, 196, 213, 215,
        217, 220, 222, 236, 237, 238, 239, 269, 270, 271, 282, 296,
        316, 319, 338, 343, 344

  _Loyal Verses of Joseph Stansbury and Dr. Jonathan Odell, The_, 168
        n, 257 n, 259 n

  Luther, Martin, 6, 9, 11-12, 70, 72, 100

  _Luxury, Idleness and Industry, On_, 174 n


  Machiavelli, 280, 312, 319

  Maclay, Senator William, 323, 342

  _M’Fingal_, 249, 250-251, 363

  McMaster, John Bach, 171

  Madison, James, 282, 284, 285, 286, 287, 288, 292, 299, 311, 315,
        369, 379, 390

  _Magnalia Christi Americana_, 33 n, 63, 63 n, 108, 115, 116

  Malthus, Thomas Robert, 313

  _Man of Sorrows, The_, 146 n

  Marshall, Chief Justice John, 310, 353

  Martin, George, 134 n

  Mary, Queen, 91 n

  Mason, George, 231, 281, 292

  _Massachusettensis_, 207-213

  _Massachusetts Historical Society Collections_, 81 n, 90 n, 112 n,
        123 n

  _Massachusetts Historical Society Proceedings_, 119 n, 328 n

  Masson, David, 64 n, 75 n

  _Master John Cotton’s Answer to Master Roger Williams_, 37 n

  Mather, Cotton, 14, 27, 28, 33, 56, 63, 75, 85, 86, 97, 99, 106-117,
        120, 123, 127, 128, 137, 148, 162, 195

  ----, Increase, 76, 98, 99-106, 114, 119, 127, 214, 361

  ----, Richard, 60, 99

  ----, Samuel, 195

  Mather Dynasty, The, 98-117

  Mathers, The, 98, 120, 128, 162

  Mein, John, 379

  _Memoirs of Rev. Nathaniel Ward_, 80 n

  _Memorial of the Present Deplorable State of New England ... by the
        Male-Administration of their Present Governor, Joseph Dudley,
        Esq. and his Son Paul, A_, 112 n

  Merriam, Charles E., 280 n

  Milton, John, 10, 12, 38, 59, 66, 72, 103, 149, 189, 236, 280, 288,
        320

  _Mississippi Valley in British Politics, The_, 184 n

  _Model of Moses His Judicials_, 33

  _Modell of Christian Charity_, 43

  _Modern Chivalry_, 390-394

  _Modest Inquiry into the Nature and Necessity of a Paper Currency,
        A_, 170

  Montcalm, Marquis de, 141

  Montesquieu, Baron, 236, 271, 280, 282, 284, 319

  Moore, Frank, 191 n

  More, Sir Thomas, 350

  _More Letters from an American Farmer_, 140

  _More Wonders of the Invisible World_, 108

  Morison, Samuel Eliot, 359 n

  Morris, Gouverneur, 192, 282, 292, 324

  ----, Robert, 184, 221, 252, 259, 295

  Murdock, Kenneth B., 98 n, 100 n, 101 n, 103 n, 104 n, 106 n


  Napoleon, 324, 353, 384, 397

  _Narragansett Club Publications_, 25 n, 35 n, 37 n, 57 n, 64 n, 66 n,
        67 n, 68 n, 69 n, 71 n, 72 n, 74 n

  _Narrative of the Surprizing Works of God, A_, 160

  _Nation, The_, 86 n

  _National Gazette, The_, 379

  _Negotiations in London_, 169 n

  Nemours, DuPont de, 346

  _New England Courant, The_, 128

  _England Weekly Journal, The_, 128

  _New Haven Gazette, The_, 363

  _New Roof, The_, 254

  _New View Points in American History_, 179 n

  _News-Letter_, 127-128

  Norris, Isaac, 221

  _Notes on Virginia_, 347

  North, Frederick Lord, 253, 373

  _Novanglus_, 200 n

  _Novanglus and Massachusettensis_, 208 n


  Oakes, President, 102

  _Objections to the Proposed Plan of a Federal Government for the
        United States on Genuine Principles_, 254-255

  _Oceana_, 25, 269, 319

  Odell, Rev. Jonathan, 255-259, 371

  Olivers, The, 250

  Onslow, Lord, 335

  Otis, Harrison Gray, 359

  ----, James, 205, 212, 310


  Paget (_also_ Pagit _or_ Pagitt), Rev. Ephraim, 64 n

  Paine, Robert Treat, 247, 324

  ----, Tom, 62, 72, 245, 247, 259, 293, 307, 324, 325, 327-341, 352,
        353, 369, 374, 376, 378, 380, 383, 384, 385, 386, 387, 393

  Palfrey, John Gorham, 118 n

  _Pamphlets on the Constitution_, 231 n

  _Patriarcha_, 189, 215

  Pattee, Fred L., 373 n, 378 n

  Paul, Saint, 8, 15, 67

  Peters, Rev. Hugh, 75

  ----, Rev. Samuel, 58

  ----, Rev. Samuel (of Connecticut), 259-263

  _Petition to the King_, 219

  Petty, Sir William, 170, 171, 172

  _Phaenomena Quaedam Apocalyptica_, 93

  _Philadelphiensis_, 254 n

  Philip, King, 29, 30

  Phips, Governor William, 86, 104, 119

  _Pillars of Salt_, 110

  Pitt, William, 8, 164, 182, 183, 185, 188, 220, 224, 226, 227, 238,
        292, 293, 372

  ----, William (the younger), 340, 385

  Plato, 213

  Plugson of Undershot, 174

  _Poems of Philip Freneau_, 373 n, 378 n

  _Poganuc People_, 13

  _Political Activities of Philip Freneau, The_, 311 n, 379 n

  _Political Greenhouse, The_, 363

  _Political Ideas of the American Revolution, The_, 310 n

  _Political Justice_, 376

  _Political Science of John Adams, The_, 319 n, 334 n

  _Political Theory of Roger Williams, The_, 67 n

  _Political Thought from Locke to Bentham_, 280 n

  Pope, Alexander, 248, 249, 318

  _Positions to be Examined concerning National Wealth_, 173

  Postgate, R. W., 337 n

  Pownall, Governor Thomas, 205, 235

  _Pretty Story, A_, 253

  Price, Lucien, 86 n

  Price, Richard, 334

  Priestley, Joseph, 280, 292, 296, 334, 383

  Prince, Rev. Thomas, 94, 114, 128

  _Principles of Trade_, 173

  _Private Journal Kept by Madam Knight on a Journey from Boston to New
        York in the year 1704, The_, 137-138

  _Probationary Odes by Jonathan Pindar, Esq._, 375

  _Problem of Sovereignty, The_, 190 n

  _Progress and Poverty_, 338

  _Progress of Dulness, The_, 249

  _Projet d’une Disme Royale_, 171

  Proverbs, 113

  Psalms, 83

  Ptolemy, 13

  _Public Advertiser, The_, 235

  _Publick Occurrences_, 127

  _Publicola_, 324, 325-326

  Pufendorf, Baron, 121, 236, 280

  Purcell, Richard J., 384 n

  _Puritan_, 243 n

  Pym, John, 220


  _Queries and Remarks Respecting Alterations in the Constitution of
        Pennsylvania_, 177 n

  Quesnay, François, 346


  _Races and Immigrants in America_, 134 n

  Read, Charles, 134

  _Reflections on the Augmentation of Wages_, 174 n

  _Remarkable Providences_, 105

  _Replye to the Answ: Made to the Discourse about the Neg: Vote, A_,
        44, 46 n

  _Resolves of the House of Representatives of Massachusetts Bay_, 202 n

  Revelation, Book of the, 66 n, 83, 94

  _Revolution from 1789-1906_, 337 n

  Reyner, Mr., 91

  _Rhode Island Historical Society Publications_, 64 n

  Riggs, Luther G., 363

  _Rights of the Colonists, The_, 238 n

  _Rights of Man, The_, 324, 334-337, 340 n, 384, 385, 393

  _Rise of Modern Democracy, The_, 58 n

  _Rising Glory of America, The_, 372, 390

  _Rip Van Winkle_, 391

  Robinson, Rev. John, 17

  _Rolliad, The_, 364

  Rousseau, Jean Jacques, 154, 164, 271, 272, 324, 334


  Sainte-Beuve, 178

  Santayana, George, vi

  Sargent, Winthrop, 168 n

  Say and Sele, Lord, 29, 34

  Schlesinger, A. M., 179 n, 183 n, 379 n

  Schuyler, Livingston Rowe, 119 n

  Scroggs, Lord Chief Justice, 119 n

  Scott, Sir Walter, 256, 370

  _Selling of Joseph, The_, 95

  _Sermon IX_, 159 n

  _Sermon XXVII_, 158 n

  _Sermon XXXIV_, 156 n

  Sewall, Henry, 90

  ----, Jonathan, 207, 246

  ----, Samuel, 85, 87, 88-97, 113, 114, 117 n, 124, 126, 127, 165,
        170, 195

  Shays, Daniel, 277, 278, 320, 352, 364, 365

  Shakespeare, 28

  Shelburne, Earl of, 183

  Sidney, Algernon, 103, 189, 213, 236, 280

  _Simple Cobler of Aggawam, The_, 76-80

  Singletary, Amos, 284

  _Sinners in the Hands of an Angry God_, 159 n

  _Sketches of Eighteenth Century America_, 140 n, 146, 147 n

  Smith, Adam, 171, 173, 269, 271, 296, 346

  ----, Dr. Elihu Hubbard, 359

  Solomon’s Song. See Canticles

  _Some Good Whig Principles_, 177 n

  Song of Songs. See Canticles

  _Speech of January 6, 1773_ (Hutchinson), 203 n

  Spinoza, 152

  _State Trials_, 119 n

  _Statesmen of the Old South_, 345 n

  Stoddard, Rev. Solomon, 153, 249

  Stone, Rev. Samuel, 57

  Stoughton, Lieut. Governor, 85

  Stowe, Harriet Beecher, 13, 153

  Strafford, Earl of, 269

  _Summary View of the Rights of British America, A_, 244 n

  Sumner, William Graham, 294

  _Supreme Court and the Constitution, The_, 276 n

  _Survey of the Summe of Church Discipline, A_, 54, 60-62

  Swift, Jonathan, 333


  Tailor, Colonel, 113

  _Thomas Hooker, Preacher, Founder, Democrat_, 55 n, 58 n, 59 n

  Thompson, General, 284

  Tippet, Mehetabel, 141

  _To all the Great Folks in a Lump_, 375

  _To all True-hearted Christians_, 96

  _To Atlas_, 375

  _To Duncan Doolittle_, 375 n

  Tooke, Horne, 339, 383

  _To a Select Body of Great Men_, 375

  Townshend, Charles Viscount, 240

  _To a Would Be Great Man_, 375

  _Travels in New England and New York_, 362 n, 363

  _Travels through the Middle Settlements in North America in the Years
        1759 and 1760_, 276 n

  _Treatise on Christian Liberty_, 12

  _Treatise on Taxes_, 171

  _Treatises on Civil Government, Two_, 189, 237, 270 n

  _Two Letters on the Tea Tax_, 228

  _Triumph of Infidelity, The_, 363

  Trumbull, Rev. Benjamin, 248

  ----, John, 248-252, 254, 359, 362

  ----, John (the painter), 248

  ----, Governor Jonathan, 248, 360

  Tyler, Moses Coit, 89 n, 123, 207 n, 220, 226 n, 256, 371, 372, 381


  _United States Gazette, The_, 379


  Vane, Sir Harry, 10, 12, 38, 59, 66, 72, 73-74

  Van Schaak, Peter, 192

  Van Tyne, C. H., 179 n, 182 n, 184 n, 188 n, 189 n, 203 n

  _Various Prospects_, 280

  Varnum, General, 276

  Vattel, Emrich von, 236, 239, 280

  Vauban, Sébastien de, 171

  _View of the Causes and Consequences of the American Revolution, A_,
        215-218

  _Vindication of the Government of the New England Churches, A_, 119
        n, 120, 122 n, 123

  _Vision of Columbus, The_, 387

  Voltaire, 324, 363


  _Walker, G. L._, 55 n, 56 n, 58 n, 59 n

  ---- Williston, 23 n, 24, 100 n, 101 n, 148 n

  Wallace, Robert, 280, 319

  Walley, Major, 119

  Walpole, Horace, 203

  Walsh, C. M., 319 n, 334 n

  Ward, Nathaniel, 21, 33, 55, 76-81, 84

  Warren, Mrs. Mercy, 207

  Warwick, Earl of, 29

  Washington, George, 184, 258, 259, 276, 277, 292, 295, 305, 323, 349,
        360, 368, 369, 380, 393

  Watson, Bishop, of Llandaff, 324, 337

  _Way of the Congregational Churches Cleared, The_, 35

  _Wealth of Nations, The_, 171, 173, 271, 296

  Webster, Daniel, 25

  ----, Noah, 291, 299, 382

  ----, Peletiah, 291

  Wedderburn, Alexander, 164

  Wendell, Barrett, 107, 114 n, 116, 150 n, 284 n, 370

  Whately, George, 173

  _When the Wicked shall have Filled up the Measure of their Sins,
        Wrath will come upon them to the Uttermost_, 159 n

  Whitfield, Rev. George, 160, 373

  Whittier, John G., 89

  Wigglesworth, Rev. Michael, 85

  Wilkes, John, 251

  Willard, Rev. Samuel, 87

  William III, King, 91 n

  Williams, Roger, iv, vi, 6, 10, 12, 24, 25, 28, 35-36, 37, 49, 50,
        53, 54, 57 n, 59, 62-75, 77, 79, 94, 100, 103, 105, 121, 333,
        341, 386

  Willing, Thomas, 221

  Wilson, James, 254, 291, 292

  ----, Rev. John, 59

  ----, Wood row, 306

  _Wingate on the Common Law_, 93

  Winthrop, Adam, 41

  ----, John, 17, 18, 19, 30, 32, 38-50, 51, 55, 57, 58, 71, 80, 88,
        92, 97, 105

  ----, Margaret, 39

  _Wisdom and Goodness of God, In having Made both Rich and Poor, The_,
        337

  Wise, Rev. John, 94, 101, 118-125, 162

  _Witchcraft, Then and Now_, 86 n

  _Wonders of the Invisible World, The_, 86 n, 108, 115-116, 116 n

  Worcester, Bishop of, 253

  _Word of Comfort to a Melancholy Country, A; Or the Bank of Credit_,
        124

  _Word of Congress, The_, 257

  _Works_ of John Adams, 207 n, 309 n, 311 n, 312 n, 313 n, 314 n, 315
        n, 316 n, 317 n, 318 n

  _Works_ of Samuel Adams, 199 n, 234 n, 236 n, 237 n, 238 n, 239 n,
        240 n, 241 n, 242 n, 244 n, 245 n, 246 n

  _Works_ of John Dickinson, 226 n, 227 n, 228 n

  _Works_ of Jonathan Edwards, 156 n, 158 n, 159 n

  _Works_ of Benjamin Franklin, 168 n, 169 n, 170 n, 171 n, 173 n, 174
        n, 176 n, 177 n

  _Works_ of Alexander Hamilton, 298 n, 301 n, 304 n, 306 n

  _Works_ of Martin Luther, 12 n

  _Works_ of Thomas Paine, 177 n, 335 n, 338 n, 339 n, 341 n

  _Works_ of Daniel Webster, 26 n

  _Writings_ of John Quincy Adams, 326 n

  _Writings of Col. William Byrd of Westover in Virginia, Esq., The_,
        138 n

  _Writings_ of Thomas Jefferson, 303 n, 347 n, 348 n, 350 n, 351 n,
        353 n, 355 n

  _Wyoming Massacre, The_, 146 n


  Yates, Robert, 285




The Romantic Revolution in America [Volume Two]




Foreword


In justification of the choice of writers and allotment of space in
the following pages, let it be said frankly that I have been guided
by what I conceived to be the historical significance of the several
documents. With aesthetic judgments I have not been greatly concerned.
I have not wished to evaluate reputations or weigh literary merits, but
rather to understand what our fathers thought, and why they wrote as
they did. This will serve to explain the considerable number of pages
devoted to southern letters, as well as to certain well-nigh forgotten
figures. For the purpose I had in view such a method was inevitable.
Lost causes have a way of shrinking in importance in the memory of
later generations, and the historian must go back to the days before
their overthrow, and view them in the light of their hopes. Time is
not always a just winnower; it is partial to success and its verdict
too often inclines to the side of the biggest cannon or the noisiest
_claque_. The exhuming of buried reputations and the revivifying of
dead causes is the familiar business of the historian, in whose eyes
forgotten men may assume as great significance as others with whom
posterity has dealt more generously. Communing with ghosts is not
unprofitable to one who listens to their tales. To our fathers John
Taylor and Beverley Tucker and Fisher Ames were living figures; they
spoke for their generation, and they may have something still to say to
a later generation. For dealing at length with such men as Hugh Legaré
and Gilmore Simms and John P. Kennedy and Herman Melville, no apologies
need be offered. They have too long been slighted. Walt Whitman I have
chosen to regard as the forerunner of a later school, and have reserved
the consideration of his work for another study. Certain other men I
have omitted regretfully out of regard to space--diverse figures such
as Orestes Brownson, Albert Brisbane, and John Esten Cooke, together
with a group of poets and essayists, who though they have long been
reckoned ghosts are nevertheless well worth knowing. Even echoes imply
substance somewhere.

                                                                V. L. P.

_Seattle, February 22, 1926._




Introduction


The present volume is the second in a proposed study of the main
tendencies of American thought as expressed in our literature. In
the preceding volume I have considered the incoming into America of
certain old-world ideals and institutions, and the subjection of
those ideals and institutions to the pressure of a new environment,
from which resulted the overthrow of the principles of monarchy and
aristocracy, and the setting up of the principle of republicanism.
In the present study I purpose considering certain new growths that
sprang up in the land thus cleared--what particular forms they assumed
and why they assumed such forms. The delimitations of the period
to be treated of are fixed by two wars that disturbed the normal
unfolding of national experience: the War of 1812 that hastened the
development of nineteenth-century ideals, and the Civil War that
uprooted certain of the crasser growths of those vigorous years. The
half century that lay between these dramatic episodes was a period of
extravagant youth, given over to a cult of romanticism that wrought as
many marvels as Aaron’s rod. In the South, in New England, and on the
western frontier, it laid hold of men’s minds, consuming the stubble
of eighteenth-century harvests, sweeping away the drab realisms of
a cautious past, and offering in their stead more alluring ideals.
Revolutions, greater and lesser, trod on each other’s heels; the common
adventure led into unexplored paths; and the final outcome for which it
was all preparing was the emergence of a new middle class that in the
succeeding half century was to subdue America to middle-class ends.

Such drastic overturnings of the customary and familiar, such swift
ruptures with the past, quite evidently do not come from trivial
causes. Men do not put off the old before the new is ready; and if in
those credulous years they turned romantic and refused to heed the
counsels of experience, it was because the soil had been new-plowed for
the growing of such crops as their fathers had not known. The grapes
from which the wine of romance is vinted, it must not be forgotten, are
rooted in the common earth. The loveliest romantic dreams spring from
a parentage that is humbly prosaic. There is no more fruitful source
of romantic hope than a fluid economics that overflows all narrow
preëmptions and sweeps away the restrictions that hamper free endeavor.
With fresh economic realms to conquer, the dullest plodder discovers
a stimulus in anticipation that sets him upon creating a Utopia. The
breaking up of the static, the bold adventuring upon new worlds, is the
fertile soil in which romance springs most luxuriantly. It needs no
uncommon eyes, surely, to discover in the swift changes that came to
America in the wake of the second English war, the seed-bed of those
ebullient romanticisms which in politics and economics, in theology
and literature, turned away so contemptuously from the homespun past.
Of a sudden America was becoming a new world with potentialities
before undreamed of; and this new America was no longer content with
the narrow ways of a more cautious generation. The older America of
colonial days had been static, rationalistic, inclined to pessimism,
fearful of innovation, tenacious of the customary. It conceived of
human nature as evil, and accounting men incurably wicked, it opened no
doors to Utopian dreams of a golden future. The round of daily life was
confined within a narrow domestic economy, with few and rare changes in
social status. Growth in population came mainly from natural increase.
Exploitation was laborious, and such wealth as was laid by was gained
in shop and field, in fisheries and shipping. With its expectations
cramped by a drab agrarianism, it was content to remain primitively
self-sufficient, not given to seeking riches by speculative short-cuts,
clinging to the habitual, distrustful of change.

During the thirty-odd years between the Peace of Paris and the end
of the War of 1812 that older America was dying. The America that
succeeded was a shifting, restless world, youthfully optimistic,
eager to better itself, bent on finding easier roads to wealth
than the plodding path of natural increase. It conceived of human
nature as acquisitive, and accounting acquisitiveness a cardinal
virtue, it set out to inquire what opportunities awaited it in the
unexploited resources of the continent. The cautious ways of earlier
generations were become as much out of date as last year’s almanac. New
commonwealths were rising in the wilderness; immigration from war-torn
Europe was pouring in; wild lands were daily coming on the market.
Money was to be made by the enterprising, and the multitude of the
enterprising was augmenting with the expansion of the settlements. The
ideal of a static society having been put away, progress was assumed
to be the first law of nature, and innovation was accepted as the sign
and seal of progress. It was our first great period of exploitation,
and from it emerged, as naturally as the cock from the mother egg, the
spirit of romance, gross and tawdry in vulgar minds, dainty and refined
in the more cultivated. But always romance. The days of realism were
past, and it was quietly laid away with the wig and smallclothes of an
outgrown generation.

Unfortunately economic romance is more imperious in its demands than
literary romance. Its dreams follow objective desires, and in America
of those days of new beginnings the desires of diverse economic groups
conducted straight to antagonistic imperialisms. The major interests
of the three great sections of the country differentiated more and
more sharply. The East was discovering its Utopia in an industrial
capitalistic order. With the flocking of immigrants to the factories
began the extraordinary expansion of the cities and the movement of
centralization that was eventually to transform America from a rural
to an urban society, supplanting the farmer by the business man and
disintegrating the traditional psychology. The new manufacturing and
the new finance were subjecting an agrarian people to the dislocations
and readjustments implied in the industrial revolution, the outcome of
which no man could foresee. The reaction of this new industrialism upon
the South was immediate. With the improvements in textile manufacturing
came greater demands upon the new southern staple, and an agriculture
that had long been static with its traditional crops of indigo, rice,
and tobacco, began to look forward confidently to a Utopia founded on
cotton, and conceived an imperialistic dream of expanding fields of
white bolls and black slaves, reaching into Mexico and embracing the
West Indies. The new South left off apologizing for slavery and hoping
for its ultimate extinction. Slavery had become enormously profitable
and it proposed to exploit the negro as frankly as New England was
exploiting the Irish immigrant, but more humanely if possible, in
something of the patriarchal spirit.

Meanwhile in the Inland Empire was arising an economics that looked
with little favor on the imperialisms of eastern capitalism or southern
slavery; an economics equalitarian in temper, decentralizing in
impulse; nourished on the idealism of the Declaration of Independence,
but interpreting it to mean the natural right of every free citizen to
satisfy his acquisitive instinct by exploiting the national resources
in the measure of his shrewdness. Democratic in professions, it was
middle-class in spirit and purpose. Discovering the inflowing tide of
immigration to be favorable to speculation, it sought its Utopia in
county-seat towns where land holdings mounted in value with every new
wave. No narrow horizons bounded a realm that stretched to the Pacific
and into the remote Northwest, and no stodgy ways of money-getting
could satisfy men whose imaginations ranged through such spaces. This
country was theirs to do with as they chose, and if eastern capitalism
or southern slavery interfered with their inalienable rights, their
Sharp’s rifles were at hand for defense. In the vast territory drained
by the Mississippi--the “Valley of Democracy,” a recent writer has
chosen to call it--was conceived what may be accounted the most
romantic dream that ever visited the native mind of America. It
impressed de Tocqueville, who discovered the poetry of America in this
romance of a moving frontier, in the vision that led the pioneer on his
conquering way westward, hewing at an interminable wilderness that was
matched only by his ambitions.

Such swift expansions, such mounting romanticisms of temper, must
inevitably provide themselves with correspondent philosophies to phrase
the new aspirations. The nineteenth century was not content to think in
the narrower terms of the eighteenth, but must refashion its thought to
suit the romantic style. The modes which it came to accept were for the
most part of European origin, adapted to new-world needs. From France
and England, and later from Germany, came variant schools of romantic
theory that at bottom were a common glorification of the ideal of
individualism; and this very diversity of interpretation made possible
in America an appeal to different classes and diverse interests, the
sum total of which was a many-sided contribution to social theory, but
a contribution which carried within it the seeds of later conflict.

The first stage in the romanticization of American thought resulted
from the naturalization of French revolutionary theory. Its devious
progress through the country can be traced fairly accurately. Landing
first in Virginia in the early seventeen-seventies, it met with a
hospitable reception from the generous planter society and spread
widely there the fashion of Physiocratic agrarianism. Traveling thence
westward into the Inland Empire it domesticated itself in frontier log
cabins under the guise of an assertive individualism, to issue later
as the coonskin democracy of the Jacksonian revolution. Eventually
reaching New England, the last haven and refuge of eighteenth-century
realism, it disarmed Yankee antagonism by assuming the dress of
Unitarianism and preached the doctrine of human perfectibility with
such conviction as to arouse the conscience of New England to an
extraordinary enthusiasm for reforming man and society. And coming
finally to New York it inoculated the mind of the emerging proletariat
with its doctrine of the rights of man, with Fourieristic and other
Utopias, and turmoiled contemporary politics with equalitarian Locofoco
programs. No other philosophy assumed so many and such attractive
disguises, or wrought such changes in American ideals, as this French
romanticism with its generous humanitarian impulses. The ground was
ready for the seed it was to sow, and if in the judgment of a hostile
philosophy the crop turned out to be tares, increasing thousands
believed it to be excellent wheat, to the growing of which America was
to be dedicated henceforth.

The rival philosophy, which came to view with increasing dislike the
doctrines of French romanticism, was of English middle class origin
and sprang from the long struggle of that class to loose the hands of
the landed gentry from control of the state. Phrased persuasively by
Adam Smith, it embodied the principle of liberalism as that principle
was understood by men of affairs. It conceived of a social Utopia that
must result if economic forces were given free play; if governmental
restrictions on trade were done away with and individual enterprise
were free to buy and sell in the open market. Springing from the
same root of individualism that brought forth French romanticism, it
flowered in an economics that denied the aspirations of the French
school. Assuming as its determining principle the common instinct of
acquisitiveness, it set up the economic man as the criterion of conduct
and proposed to reorder society to the single end of trade. Thus
sanctioned and given free rein, the principle of acquisitiveness set
forth on its triumphant march through western civilization. Accepted by
the English middle class as the ultimate social philosophy sufficient
to all needs, it presented to willing eyes the ideal of exploitation as
the goal of social progress.

But transported to America, the new philosophy soon discovered
unforeseen obstacles in its path. The acquisitive instinct was here
enormously strengthened by the vast unpreëmpted resources lying
all about, but unfortunately those resources were too great or too
speculative to be exploited by individual effort. Capital was wanting,
and unless collective funds were available, exploitation must be
slow and inadequate. There was need of the state to further the
opening up of western lands and to throw its guardianship about an
infant industrialism. Roads and canals could not wait on individual
enterprise; tariffs and subsidies could flow only from the government.
Hence arose a modification of _laissez faire_, from which resulted
the theory that a democratic state stands _in loco parentis_ to
the economic interests of its citizens, and should guarantee the
progressive well-being of strategic groups on whose prosperity
depended the common well-being. It was this modification of the
English philosophy that the Whig party came to embody in its platform,
and which by pooling the interests of western speculators, eastern
financiers and New England industrialists, sponsored the “American
Plan,” a curiously ingenious scheme to milk the cow and divide the milk
among those who superintended the milking.

Meanwhile in the imperialistic South was arising a distinctive
philosophy, native to the special conditions imposed by slavery, that
was to set it apart from both eastern and western economics and draw it
inevitably into a narrowing isolation. Frankly defensive in purpose,
rejecting alike French equalitarianism and English individualism, it
sought to justify the institution of slavery by an appeal to realism
and square it to the theory of democracy by analogy with northern
industrialism. The conception of a Greek democracy, which was the
last citadel of the southern mind, was a skillful compromise between
the antagonistic principles of aristocracy and democracy, the most
romantic ideal brought forth by our golden age of romance. Assuming
the middle-class principle of exploitation as the creative source of
every civilization, it proposed to erect a free state on the basis of
a slave proletariat after the model of ancient Athens. A democracy,
it argued, is possible only among equals. In every society hitherto
the inevitable inequality between economic classes has nullified every
democratic program. Master and man, exploiter and exploited, are
necessarily opposed in vital economic interests; and this potential
clash, this fundamental antagonism of classes, has been intensified
by the rise of industrialism. Exploitation has been brutalized by the
impersonal wage-system, and the proletariat has been reduced to sodden
and embittered beasts. If now as honest realists we recognize frankly
that equality cannot exist between inferior and superior races, if
we accept the inevitable proletarian status of the negro, if finally
we concede the truism that the lifelong relations between master and
slave are more humane than the temporary relations between wage-giver
and wage-earner, we shall concern ourselves less with a romantic
equalitarianism and more with a rational conception of a democracy of
equals that may conceivably erect a civilization worthy of the name.

It was an ingenious theory, but unfortunately it left out of account
the ambitions of the middle class, and it was this class that in the
end destroyed it. Whether they will it or not, imperialisms have a
way of clashing with rival imperialisms. Reality persists though
romance may deny it, and in their several programs the three diverse
sections of America were driving blindly to a collision. In that bitter
collision the dream of the South was destroyed. With the overthrow of
the aristocratic principle in its final refuge the ground was cleared
of the last vestiges of the eighteenth century. Thenceforth America was
to become wholly middle class, and such romance as it might bring forth
was to be of another sort.

The literature of this extraordinarily vigorous period we are now
to deal with, not in the narrow field of _belles lettres_ alone but
in the outlying fields of social and political philosophies. The
difficulties in the way are many. To endeavor to penetrate critically
to the intellectual core of a period, to weigh this romance in
realistic scales, to take off the outer wrappings and lay bare the
inner truth, is no May-day undertaking. The critic finds himself at
every turn confronted by reputations distorted by contemporary praise
or censure. In the formal biographies written in that golden age of
myth-making, criticism too often gave way to eulogy. Our fathers wrote
like gentlemen, but unfortunately too often they believed that in
preparing a biography a gentleman was under obligation to speak well of
the dead. No blemishes were to be recognized, no disagreeable truths
to find a place in their immaculate pages. In consequence scarcely a
single commentary of the times is to be trusted, and the critic is
reduced to patching together his account out of scanty odds and ends,
or else settling down to do a series of full-length portraits, in which
work, quite evidently, he will not get far. The inadequacies of the
present study I am painfully conscious of: its omissions, its doubtful
interpretations, its hasty generalizations, its downright guesses;
but in the present lack of exact knowledge of the history of American
letters, I do not see how such inadequacies can be avoided.




                         Contents [Volume Two]


  Introduction: Delimitations of period; romance and economic
  change; differentiating imperialisms of East, South, West; romantic
  philosophies: Physiocratic agrarianism, French equalitarianism,
  English _laissez faire_; a counter-philosophy--slavery and a
  Greek democracy                                                    iii


                     Book I: The Mind of the South

  The mind of the South old-fashioned. Two germinal sources: Virginia,
  from which derived Kentucky and Tennessee; South Carolina,
  from which derived the Black Belt                                    3


                                 Part I

                        The Virginia Renaissance

  I. The Old Dominion: The mother of the agrarian West.
  Transition from middle-class to plantation ideals.
  Increasingly libertarian                                             5

  II. The Heritage of Jeffersonianism

    I. Jeffersonianism an expression of native conditions.
    Interpreted in terms of Physiocratic agrarianism,
    natural rights. Terminable nature of compact the
    source of states-rights doctrine. Struggle between
    capitalistic and agrarian economics. Virginia the
    leader of the latter movement                                     10

    II. John Taylor--Agrarian Economist: Leader of the
    young Republicans. His works. Theory founded
    in Physiocratic doctrine. Aristocratic origins of the
    political state. Examination of the principles of John
    Adams, Hamilton--social classes derive from exploitation.
    Danger of a paper aristocracy. His philosophy
    summarized                                                        14

  III. John Marshall--Last of the Virginia Federalists:
  His strategic position. Middle-class sympathies;
  intellectual qualities. A politician on the bench.
  Two fixed ideas: sovereignty of the federal state;
  sanctity of private property. His decisions Federalistic.
  Two main groups: sovereignty of the judiciary;
  irrevocable nature of contract. The Yazoo Fraud
  case. An arch conservative                                          20

  IV. The Older Plantation Mind

    I. Plantation backgrounds: The literary renaissance
    followed English romantic movement. Kennedy’s
    _Swallow Barn_ and the rise of the plantation tradition           28

    II. William Wirt: The man--embodiment of eighteenth-century
    culture. _The British Spy_--characteristics.
    _Life of Patrick Henry_--solution of the problem.
    Later shift in political sympathies                               30

    III. Nathaniel Beverley Tucker--A Virginia Fire-eater.
    His parochialism; his pessimism. _The Partisan
    Leader_--a dramatization of Calhoun’s philosophy;
    the note of romantic extravagance. Hatred of democracy--appeal
    to South Carolina                                                 35

  V. Adventures in Romance

    I. William Alexander Caruthers and the transition to
    romance. _The Kentuckian in New York_, a contribution
    to intersectional good will. An appreciation of
    northern qualities; a criticism of slavery. _The Cavaliers
    of Virginia_, the new spirit of romance. His slight
    reputation                                                        41

    II. John Pendleton Kennedy--A southern Whig: The
    man--Jeffersonian backgrounds; influence of Edward
    Gray. Turned protectionist, accepted the doctrine
    of progress. A romantic; an amateur. _Swallow
    Barn_--an idyl of plantation life--slavery. _Horse-Shoe
    Robinson; Rob of the Bowl_--cavalier romance. _Quodlibet_--a
    Whig satire of Jacksonianism. His later
    career                                                            46

    III. Edgar Allan Poe: Relations to southern environment--his
    prejudices against New England. Aloofness from
    Virginia ideals. A problem for abnormal psychology
    and belletristic criticism. An artist and a critic                57


                                Part II

                       The Renaissance of Slavery

  I. Southern Imperialism: Shift in attitude towards
  slavery--consequences to Jeffersonian democracy. The Black
  Belt--reasons why cotton became king. Reaction of
  the South to imperialism. Jefferson Davis--his
  character                                                           61

  II. Winds of Political Doctrine

    I. Three streams of thought: Virginia humanitarianism,
    western individualism, Carolina imperialism. Increasing
    dominance of the third. Rise of a defensive
    strategy; appeal to the Constitution                              67

    II. John C. Calhoun--Realist. His influence--destroyed
    Jeffersonianism for the new South. A southern Puritan.
    His early career--a nationalist. The year 1828
    a turning-point--recognition of the danger of democracy
    to slavery. Two lines of defense: states rights,
    constitutional checks. Amplification of the second by
    extension of the principle of the veto. Failure of
    existing checks to protect minorities. Fallacy in the
    conception of democratic majorities--an obscuring
    of the economic basis of politics. Doctrine of the
    concurrent majority. Conception of democracy--an
    attack on theory of natural rights. His objective a
    Greek democracy. Likeness to John Adams                           69

    III. Alexander H. Stephens--Constitutionalist: The man--passion
    for freedom under law. His localism expressed
    in states rights. A confirmed liberal--fear of extra-legal
    powers. His _Constitutional View of the War
    between the States_. Theory of the terminable nature of
    compact--doctrine of good will. A political thinker,
    rather than economic. Position on slavery                         82

    IV. Francis Lieber--A New-Modeled Federalism: A German
    liberal influenced by English constitutional
    practice and the common law. His doctrine of historical
    evolution. Liberty founded in institutional self-government.
    A _laissez-faire_ conception of the political state               93

  III. The Dream of a Greek Democracy

    I. Difficulty of the southern position. A reply to northern
    industrialism--civilization and labor exploitation.
    Contrast between wage-slavery and black slavery--certain
    advantages of the latter. Southern replies to
    _Uncle Tom’s Cabin_                                               99

    II. William J. Grayson: _The Hireling and the Slave_ as a
    southern document. A contrast: the wretchedness
    of the wage-slave in industrial centers; the contentment
    of the black slave on the plantation. His attack
    on Abolitionists                                                 103

  IV. Adventures in _Belles-Lettres_

    I. Old Charleston: The capital of the planters--aristocratic,
    Puritan, Victorian. Traditional home of Federalism.
    Culture old-fashioned. A distinguished
    society                                                          109

    II. William Crafts--Charleston Wit: A southern Robert
    Treat Paine, seeking to domesticate Boston culture
    in Charleston. His work                                          112

    III. Hugh Swinton Legaré--Intellectual: A southern
    Puritan. His career. A legal scholar, interpreting
    politics in terms of the common law. A lexolater,
    contemptuous of political philosophers. A juridical
    romantic. Accepted the economics of _laissez faire_
    and capitalism. Pessimistic in regard to the South.
    Hostile to Nullification and Calhoun. The weakness
    of slavery                                                       114

    IV. William Gilmore Simms: A plebeian snubbed by
    Charleston, yet loyal to the Charleston parochialisms.
    A realist hampered by the current romanticisms.
    The most virile figure of the old South. A rich
    and generous nature--likeness to Fielding. The
    picaresque note in his work. Reasons for his exploitation
    of “blood-pudding.” Lieutenant Porgy. His
    two major themes: his special frontier compared with
    Cooper’s; his revolutionary tales. His treatment of
    the Indian. _The Yemassee_, compared with Cooper.
    Later life                                                       125


                                Part III

                        The Romance of the West

  I. New Worlds

    I. The Inland Empire and Jeffersonianism. Romance and
    social change. Rise of the middle class, and clash of
    philosophies. Economic origins of western Whiggery               137

    II. Henry Clay: The embodiment of Whiggery. Reason
    for his shift from Jeffersonianism. His theory of
    paternalism                                                      141

  II. Two Spokesmen of the West

    I. Andrew Jackson--Agrarian Liberal: The rise of western
    equalitarianism. Federalist contempt for a Democrat.
    Jackson our first great popular leader. Characteristics.
    Early drift towards middle-class position;
    reaction to agrarianism. Repudiation of Whiggery.
    Hatred of aristocracy. His attitude toward the Bank
    a return to the economics of John Taylor. His attitude
    towards the state a modified Jeffersonianism. His
    influence on American democracy. Effect on later
    Whig strategy                                                    145

    II. Lincoln--Free-Soil Liberal: Liberalism and the Declaration
    of Independence. A Jeffersonian who came to
    the defense of natural rights. Equalitarianism and
    _laissez faire_. The problem of free soil--a realist
    seeking to reconcile them. His “divided house”
    position an appeal to political realism. Good will
    versus coercive sovereignty. The prose of his speeches.
    Lincoln and the myth-makers                                      152

  III. The Frontier in Letters: Romance and the Inland
  Empire. Two main conceptions: Boone and the
  Dark and Bloody Ground; Crockett and frontier
  humor                                                              161

    I. The Romantic Frontier                                         162

    II. The Realistic Frontier

      (1) Augustus Longstreet and the Georgia Frontier:
      The native realism of Georgia life. A frontier
      plebeian who developed middle-class qualities.
      A follower of Calhoun, but at bottom a Jeffersonian
      agrarian. With the rise of Abolitionism abandoned
      natural-rights philosophy. _Georgia Scenes_--the
      note of realism                                                166

      (2) The Davy Crockett Myth: The popular appeal of
      the _Narrative_ and the rise of the Crockett myth.
      Origin at Washington. Three stages: frontier
      waggery; anti-Jackson spleen; the Alamo adventure.
      A Whig attempt to catch the coonskin
      vote--a by-product of Jacksonian methods. The
      beginnings in _Sketches and Eccentricities_. Effect
      on Davy. _The Tour_ and the _Life of Martin
      Van Buren_. Conjectural authorship. How Davy
      was made a Whig. The _Exploits and Adventures_.
      _The Narrative_--the real Davy a wastrel                       172


                  Book II: The Mind of the Middle East

  A product of two centers: Philadelphia, New York. Lack of
  intellectual backgrounds                                           183

  I. The Old Capital

    I. Philadelphia the capital of the older American culture.
    Its contributions to the Revolutionary debates. Its
    economic prospects curtailed by topography. Its
    decline with the removal of the national capital                 185

    II. Brockden Brown and French liberalisms--influence
    of Godwin and Mary Wollstonecraft. Explanation
    of their appeal. _Alcuin; A Dialogue._ _Arthur Mervyn_,
    a study in Godwinianism. _Wieland_ and the “blood-pudding”
    school. Influence on later fiction in America                    188

    III. Robert Montgomery Bird: His contributions to the
    romantic drama. _Nick of the Woods_--a realistic
    treatment of the Indian. A contribution to the myth
    of western humor                                                 190

  II. The New Capital

    I. New York an economic rather than a cultural capital.
    Reasons for its rise. The older Knickerbocker world
    disintegrating. Stephen Van Rensselaer and John
    Jacob Astor                                                      193

    II. Intellectual backgrounds: Lack of creativeness. Political
    divisions. Emergence of the boss--Martin Van
    Buren and Thurlow Weed                                           195

    III. James Kent: The last of the old Federalist school.
    His political theory--a disciple of Fisher Ames. His
    _Commentaries on American Law_                                   197

    IV. Beginnings of the renaissance: _Salmagundi_; _The Croaker
    Papers_. Fitz-Greene Halleck. His views--attitude
    towards the proletariat. _Connecticut_; _Fanny_. The
    last of the Wits                                                 199

  III. Two Knickerbocker Romantics

    I. Washington Irving: His detachment. A _flâneur_. His
    years abroad. Reaction to the Reform Bill. An
    incipient liberal. Rediscovery of America. The
    mission to Madrid. Contrast with Cooper. Political
    principles--drift towards the middle class. _A Tour
    of the Prairies_, _Astoria_, _Life of Washington_. His early
    and late work contrasted                                         203

    II. James Kirke Paulding: His origins--a son of the
    people, distrustful of the middle class. Defense of
    America against the English critics. His idealism.
    _The Backwoodsman_; _The Puritan and his Daughter_.
    His rejection of English “blood-pudding” romantic.
    A Jeffersonian: _Letters from the South_ an echo of John
    Taylor’s agrarianism; opposed Clay’s American Plan;
    satirized Clay in _Koningsmarke_. _Westward Ho!; The
    Dutchman’s Fireside._ An amateur in letters                      212

    IV. James Fenimore Cooper--Critic: The problem of
    Cooper. A barometer of his generation. Troubled by
    the transition from an aristocratic to a capitalistic
    order--lingered between worlds. His Tory origins--Judge
    William Cooper. Abandoned Federalism yet
    ill content with Democracy. Effect of his European
    travels. Likeness to John Adams--hated all cant.
    Two phases of his criticism: the older Federalist
    theories; the fallacies of capitalism. _The Monikins_--an
    attack on the stake-in-society theory. _The Redskins_--an
    attack on capitalistic exploitation. A
    romanticized eighteenth century his refuge against
    the vulgarities of Jacksonianism and capitalism.
    _Home as Found_ and _The Redskins_ as studies in social
    criticism. His love of the wilderness and hatred of
    the frontier. The anti-rent trilogy. Picture of the
    squatter. His growing realism--_Wyandotté_. His
    later political philosophy--an ethical interpretation
    of sovereignty. Failure of the critics to understand
    Cooper                                                           222

  V. Some Contributions of New England

    I. William Cullen Bryant--Puritan Liberal: Injustice
    done him by neglect of his journalistic work. An
    original mind. Transition from Federalist to Democrat.
    Influence of the English economists--an
    English liberal. Never a Jeffersonian, but anti-Whig.
    Influence of William Leggett and Parke Godwin.
    Attitude towards the labor movement. Defense of
    free speech. A critic of the rising capitalism                   238

    II. Horace Greeley--Yankee Radical: A practical man
    seeking a way out of the confusions of the times. His
    early life; defense of protectionism. His working
    back to Jeffersonianism. Interest in Fourierism.
    Champion of the farmer and the wage-earner. His
    “Vote Yourself a Farm” policy. Interest in the
    proletariat--interpretation
    of slavery. Coöperation. An idealist                             247

    III. Herman Melville--Pessimist: The source of his pessimism
    in life itself--effect of frustrations. His ancestry:
    the Gansevoort strain; the Melville strain. Contrast
    between mother and son; effect of his marriage.
    Stages toward pessimism marked by _Typee_, _Mardi_,
    _Moby Dick_, _Pierre_. Transcendentalism and reality.
    His democracy. A critic of America. Spiritual
    dissatisfactions--_Clarel_                                       258


                   Book III: The Mind of New England

  The New England renaissance the last expression in America of
  eighteenth-century revolutionary thought. Given a native ethical
  bias. Twin tendencies of earlier New England. Static conditions
  of life--the renaissance a movement of liberalism, shaped
  by the Puritan strain                                              271


                                 Part I

                       The Twilight of Federalism

  I. The Passing of the Tie-Wig School

    I. Old Boston: Conservatism of temper--a reaction from
    the revolutionary enthusiasm of ’76. Emphasized by
    refusal to entertain French romantic theories. The
    renaissance delayed a generation. The home of the
    stake-in-society principle; opposition to democracy              275

    II. Fisher Ames and the Tie-Wig School: The spokesman
    of Boston Federalism. A conservative, given to pessimism.
    His political philosophy an adaptation of
    English Whiggery to the Calvinistic conception of
    stewardship; based on an absolute morality. Prosperity
    and the Saints--the end of government to protect
    property; hence it must be strong and coercive. Fear
    of faction. A repository of aristocratic prejudice               279

    III. Robert Treat Paine, Jr.--Wit: The last of the
    eighteenth-century Wits. His verse. A Tory--attitude
    towards the French Revolution. His prose. Contempt
    for Jacobin doctrine                                             288

  II. Winds of Political Doctrine

    I. Changing economics after 1812--rise of industrialism.
    A new spirit of nationalism. Danger of agrarianism,
    particularism. Rise of the Whig party--middle-class
    capitalistic. Menace of the new southern school of
    states rights. Need of a new nationalistic theory of
    the Constitution                                                 296

    II. Work begun by Joseph Story: A Massachusetts Republican.
    Characteristics of New England Republicanism.
    His shift to Whiggery. His _Commentaries
    on the Constitution_: derived from the common law and
    _The Federalist_. His view of the compact--interpretation
    of “We the people”                                               299

    III. Daniel Webster--Realist and Constitutionalist: Contrasted
    with Emerson--English in temperament.
    Two periods of intellectual development: an eighteenth-century
    realist before 1825; a legalist afterwards.
    A disciple of Harrington. Two early speeches:
    _The Basis of the Senate, The First Settlement of New
    England_--an elaboration of the economic basis of
    politics. His economic theory--_laissez faire_. Shift
    to protectionism due to changing economics of his constituents.
    His reply to Hayne. His constitutional
    theory in _The Constitution not a Compact_--his debt to
    Story. His position on slavery--_The Seventh of
    March Speech_. Effect on his reputation. Comment
    of liberals. The Dartmouth College case. His failure             304


                                Part II

                         The Rise of Liberalism

  I. The Renaissance: The movement of liberalism more
  pronounced in New England because long restrained.
  Ethical rather than economic; German rather than
  French. Many-sided but rebellious                                  317

  II. Liberalism and Calvinism

    I. The stir in the church. French romanticism and
    Unitarianism. The conservative reaction. The
    dilemma of Calvinism--efforts to escape the horns of
    dogma. The growth of rationalism. The philosophy
    of Unitarianism--a recovery of the principle of primitive
    Congregationalism. Elements of conservatism                      321

    II. William Ellery Channing: A spiritual nature, concerned
    with two cardinal ideas: God’s love, man’s excellence.
    Slow clarification of his thought. Major
    tenets derived from Rousseau and the English Arians.
    Attitude toward slavery. Theory of the political
    state--approximation to the position of Jefferson. On
    freedom of speech--the vital principle of Unitarianism           328

  III. Liberalism and the Social Conscience

    I. The Social Mind: The Puritan conscience individual
    rather than social. Influence of Unitarianism in
    awakening a sense of social responsibility. Beginnings
    of reform                                                        339

    II. Perfectionism: An extreme expression of ethical
    radicalism. John Humphrey Noyes, a Yankee Fifth
    Monarchy man. His doctrines--expression in Conventions           342

    III. Brook Farm: An attempt at an economic solution of
    social maladjustments. Influence of transcendentalism.
    Attitude of certain transcendentalists. Hostility
    to Fourierism                                                    346

    IV. Abolitionism: The awakening of the New England
    conscience to the evil of slavery. The Abolitionists a
    remnant in Israel--their characteristics                         350

  IV. Certain Militants

    I. William Lloyd Garrison: A flinty character. His early
    life. _The Liberator._ A primitive Hebraist--his antagonisms.
    His political theory founded on the Declaration
    of Independence. A Perfectionist. Nullified the
    Constitution. The strength and weakness of his
    methods                                                          352

    II. John G. Whittier--Puritan-Quaker: The religion of
    the Inner Light. A primitive Christian--a Come-outer.
    Significance of _Leaves from Margaret Smith’s
    Journal_. The politician amongst the Abolitionists.
    Reasons for his break with Garrison. Not a political
    thinker. His Abolitionist verse. His later verse. An
    anachronism in industrial New England                            361

    III. Harriet Beecher Stowe--A Daughter of Puritanism:
    Her Calvinist heredity. A sympathetic student of
    New England psychology. Intellectual antecedents.
    _Old-Town Folks_; _Poganuc People_. _The Minister’s
    Wooing_ a defense of the Calvinist clergy. Her contact
    with slavery--_Uncle Tom’s Cabin_; _Dred_                        371


                                Part III

                        The Transcendental Mind

  I. The Genesis of Transcendentalism: An expression
  of metaphysical Utopianism. Idealism long starved in
  New England. Derived from Unitarian doctrine of
  the open mind. German idealism and native impulses.
  A glorification of conscience and will--romantic.
  The note of mysticism. The outcome a
  movement of criticism                                              379

  II. Ralph Waldo Emerson--Transcendental Critic: His
  theory of transcendental criticism. The early Emerson--an
  ascetic. Influence of first trip abroad--_Nature_.
  The gist of Emersonianism. Reasons for the
  contrast between the real and ideal. Estimate of
  democracy; theory of the political state--the ethical
  absolute--a transcendental Jeffersonianism. Theory
  of economics--bias towards Physiocratic conception.
  A critic of contemporary America--its materialisms.
  Attitude towards reform                                            386

  III. Henry Thoreau--Transcendental Economist: His life-business
  to explore the meaning of wealth. His life an
  experiment in values. A Concord man who “signed
  off.” A Hellenist interpreting spiritual values. The
  problem of economics stated. Significance of _Walden_--suggestions
  of William Morris. The challenge of
  slavery: _Civil Disobedience_. Compared with Godwin’s
  _Political Justice_--doctrine of individual syndicalism.
  Admiration for John Brown. The extremest expression
  of eighteenth-century individualism                                400

  IV. Theodore Parker--Transcendental Minister: His characteristics:
  a fighting man, a revolutionary. Sermon
  on _The Transient and Permanent in Christianity_--marks
  the second stage of Unitarianism. His studies
  in higher criticism; his doctrine. His conception of
  human perfectibility--evolutionary. A primitive
  democrat; a political critic. Attack on current
  materialisms--criticism of Webster. A modern                       414

  V. Margaret Fuller--Rebel: An embodiment of transcendental
  rebellions. The contradictions in her
  character as explained by Freudian psychology. Her
  training--a victim of sex. Contemporary analysis of
  her character. An intellectual child of eighteenth-century
  romanticisms--influence of Goethe. Transcendentalism--Brook
  Farm. _Woman in the Nineteenth
  Century_ and feminism. Work as a critic.
  Career in Europe. Influence of Jean Jacques. The
  price of her rebellions                                            426


                                Part IV

                 Other Aspects of the New England Mind

  I. The Reign of the Genteel

    I. Brahminism and the genteel in letters--a refined
    ethicism. Dislike of realistic methods. Lowell’s
    position                                                         435

    II. Brahminism and history: The New England school:
    Ticknor, Jared Sparks--methods of the latter. Bancroft’s
    _History of the United States_--an attempt at a
    democratic interpretation. Prescott, Motley, Parkman--followers
    of the romantic school. Parkman
    considered                                                       437

    III. Longfellow: Influence of Germany. A poet of the
    library--his aloofness--his translations. The slavery
    poems. Characteristics                                           439

  II. Nathaniel Hawthorne--Skeptic: A temperament detached,
  rationalistic, unhopeful, skeptical about
  Utopias. Neither transcendental nor Unitarian in
  philosophy, but curious concerning evil. Intellectually
  unlocalized--his aloofness from romantic Salem. Like
  Jonathan Edwards in probing the psychology of sin.
  Tendency to symbolism and allegory. His intellectual
  poverty--revealed in _American Notes_. Brook
  Farm and _The Blithedale Romance_--reasons for his
  interpretation of Hollingsworth and Margaret Fuller.
  The sterility of his later years                                   442

  III. The Authentic Brahmin

    I. Oliver Wendell Holmes--Beacon Street Wit: Decline
    of his reputation. Holmes and Paine as wits. A child
    of the eighteenth century turned romantic. A
    rationalist--hatred of Calvinism. Defense of Boston--a
    Brahmin rebel defending free thought. Attack on
    equalitarianism--dislike of the plutocracy--indifferent
    to proletarian problems. His heroes respectable.
    An amateur--a minor figure                                       451

    II. James Russell Lowell--Cambridge Brahmin: Of
    the true Brahmin line. His intellectual confusions.
    Influence of his Tory heritage--the Lowells. His
    course determined by environment and certain dominant
    personalities. Three periods of his intellectual
    life: the Maria White period and his immersion in current
    radicalisms--reflections in his verse and prose;
    the professorial period--immersion in scholarship--his
    shortcomings as a critic--as a political writer; the
    ambassadorial period--influence of Godkin--resurgence
    of Brahmin conservatism--fear of democracy--of
    agrarian and proletarian movements--concern at
    political corruption--failure to understand its causes--faith
    in civil service reform. His escape to London--the
    final Lowell an English liberal                                  460

  Conclusion: Effects of the Civil War on earlier
  romanticisms--destruction of the slave economy; strengthening of
  the rival agrarian and capitalistic economies. Certain
  anachronisms--eighteenth-century liberalism--local home
  rule--submerged by movement of consolidation. Romantic literary
  schools became obsolete. The sovereignty of the middle class
  and the emergence of realistic criticism                           473

  Bibliography                                                       475

  Index                                                              483




Book One • The Mind of the South


To those who follow the main-traveled road of American experience, as
we know it today, the mind of the old South seems curiously remote.
It is so archaic, so wholly apart from all present-day ambitions, as
to appear singular. Yet the continental highways we now travel so
familiarly, it must be remembered, were not the highways of an earlier
America. It is the North that has changed, and not the South, and the
nationality that sits so easily upon us would have seemed ominous to
the simpler world that determined the ideals of the Old Dominion. The
southern mind has grown old-fashioned, but it is native and of long
and honorable descent. It derived its singularity from the eighteenth
century in which it took shape; and it retained the clear impress of
its origins long after the eighteenth century had become an anachronism
in America. It was primarily political, of the French rather than
the English school; but it was economic also, out of Quesnay and Du
Pont de Nemours rather than Adam Smith, with a frank bias towards the
Physiocratic agrarianism that was so congenial to the needs and temper
of a plantation society; and this political agrarianism, parochial in
its outlook rather than national, suffices to explain the singularity
of the southern mind in the eyes of a later industrialized America.

Simple and homogeneous in the early years of the nineteenth century,
it nevertheless carried the seeds of disruption within it. Beneath the
surface of this common political agrarianism disintegrating forces
were at work, that were to produce broad cleavages of thought and lead
to sharp differences of outlook and polity. An old South and a new
South dwelt side by side, and to the West lay a frontier that took
particular form as it came under the determining influence of one
or the other. Virginia and South Carolina were the germinal centers
of southern culture, from which issued the creative ideas that gave
special forms to the brood of frontier states. Kentucky and Tennessee
were the intellectual heirs of Virginia; Alabama and Mississippi were
the intellectual heirs of South Carolina. Of these two schools of
thought that looked in different directions and sought different ends,
Jefferson and Calhoun were the intellectual leaders; and the contrasts
in their philosophies--the rejection by the latter of equalitarian
idealism, and the substitution of economic realism--mark the diverse
tendencies which in the end disrupted the South. Jackson and Lincoln
were followers of the Jeffersonian school; Jefferson Davis finally
went with Calhoun; and Henry Clay, lacking an adequate philosophy,
wavered between them. The differences between these men were open
and patent, and any analysis of the mind of the South, any attempt
to understand the conflict of tendencies that marked the development
of southern thought between 1800 and 1860, must give due weight to
such differences. The problem, therefore, instead of being single is
threefold, and involves an examination of the mind of Virginia, the
mind of South Carolina, and the mind of the new West from the Ohio
River to the Gulf.




Part One: The Virginia Renaissance




