Chapter II • The Mind of the American Tory


So nearly forgotten by later generations is the American Tory of
Revolutionary times that it will be well to examine the genus with some
care; for only by understanding the great authority inhering in his
traditional leadership can we measure his power to thwart the ambitions
of the republicans. In numbers the Tories were a very small minority;
unendowed with wealth and position they would have been negligible; but
as members of the local gentry they enjoyed great prestige which was
highly serviceable to the royal cause. Although native born they aped
the English aristocracy, and reproduced on a less magnificent scale
the manners of the English landed families. Less arrogant than their
old-world models, certainly much less corrupt in their politics, they
exuded the same aristocratic prejudices and the same narrow sympathies.
Their most cherished dream was the institution of an American nobility,
with the seal of royal favor set upon their social pretensions. They
were the embodiment of the aristocratic eighteenth century, in a world
instinctively hostile to all aristocracies. Out of a numerous company
of distinguished Tories, three will serve for consideration--Thomas
Hutchinson, Royal Governor, Daniel Leonard, lawyer, and Jonathan
Boucher, minister.


I • Thomas Hutchinson • Royal Governor

The career of the last royal governor of Massachusetts affords a
suggestive study in the relation of material prosperity to political
principles. Descended in the fourth generation from the Antinomian
enthusiast, Mistress Anne Hutchinson, whom all the authorities of
Boston could neither terrify nor silence, but who suffered contumely
and exile rather than submit her will to official censors, Thomas
Hutchinson reveals in his stiff conservatism the common change that
follows upon economic well-being. The House of Hutchinson had long
since abandoned all unprofitable radicalisms and had taken to the safer
business of acquiring property and respectability; in which work it
had by God’s blessing greatly prospered, until it came to be reckoned
the first house in the province. With growing wealth political honors
multiplied. The grandfather of the governor had been the first Chief
Justice of the Common Pleas, Commander of the Forces, Assistant,
and Councilor; and at his death in 1717 he was as eminent a citizen
as Chief Justice Sewall, the diarist. The governor’s father, Thomas
Hutchinson, Sr., devoted more attention to his calling of merchant than
to politics, nevertheless he sat in the Council for twenty-five years,
and was a colonel in the provincial militia. With the advent of Thomas
Hutchinson upon the scene, the respectability of the house was assured,
abundant wealth had been accumulated, and the path of political
preferment was open. The little colony was eager to confer honors on
so promising a son. He was ambitious and thrifty, and he coveted the
distinction and the material rewards which officeholding brought. No
Boston gentleman of his day had a sharper eye for the main chance. He
added office to office, and at one and the same time he was Member of
the Council, Judge of Probate, Chief Justice, and Lieutenant Governor;
and such other offices as he could not himself possess he maneuvered to
get into the hands of his sons, and brothers-in-law, and dependents.
One of those brothers-in-law, Samuel Mather, son of Cotton Mather,
who refused to follow his kinsman into the Tory camp, called him “an
avaritious man”; and avaricious of power, even more than of money, he
certainly was.

With his abundant offices and honors, there was every temptation
to conservatism. Unless there was hidden in him some lingering
idealism, some seed of the ancestral radicalism to sprout and grow
into discontent, Thomas Hutchinson was marked for a reactionary.
And unhappily in his conventional soul there was not the faintest
spark of idealism. The enthusiasm of Mistress Anne was washed clean
out of the Hutchinson blood, leaving only the native stubbornness;
which stubbornness, dominating a character cold, formal, arrogant,
dogmatic, unimaginative, self-righteous, was finally to play havoc
with Thomas Hutchinson’s good fortune. The son of a merchant, he was
a careful, methodical soul, who studied how to save and invest; in a
later generation he would have been a great banker, but in his own he
preferred to invest in politics. How suggestive of Yankee thrift is
such an entry as this:

  All the time he was at College he carried on a little trade by
  sending ventures in his father’s vessels, & kept a little paper
  Journal & leger, & enterd in it every dinner, supper, breakfast,
  & every article of expense, even of a shilling; which practice
  soon became pleasant; & he found it of great use all his life....
  Before he came of age, he had, by adventuring to sea from two or
  three quintalls [hundredweight] of fish, given him by his father,
  when about 12 years old, acquired four or five hundred pounds
  sterling.[202]

After a number of years in his father’s countinghouse, learning
the ways of eighteenth-century trade, he abandoned the mercantile
career and entered politics at the age of six-and-twenty. From May
31, 1737, when he first took his place in the House of Deputies
as one of the “Boston Seat,” to June 1, 1774, when he quitted his
country home at Milton to take ship for London and exile, he was a
power in the political life of Massachusetts, reaching eventually
the highest station. During that long period of thirty-seven years
he was a spokesman of the New England gentry, always on the side of
government, never in the opposition. That he ever critically examined
the foundations of his political creed, there is nothing in the printed
record to indicate. He had some of the tastes of the book-lover and
scholar. He was deeply interested in the Puritan past, and his _History
of Massachusetts Bay_ was based on a wide knowledge of manuscript
sources which he had been at great pains to collect. But in spite of a
praiseworthy care for accuracy and impartiality, he lacked the creative
imagination to reconstruct the past. He had pretty much freed his
mind from religious bigotry, but he could not rid himself of a narrow
partisanship, and his treatment of the agrarian movement was grossly
unfair. His shortcomings as a political thinker were more striking. His
knowledge of the political classics was of the slightest. When Samuel
Adams made use of the natural-rights theory, Hutchinson’s comment
would indicate that he had no acquaintance with the theory and had not
even read Locke.[203] He was little given to intellectual interests,
and ill at ease in dealing with general principles. He possessed the
mental qualities of a lawyer rather than a speculative thinker, and his
long immersion in office contracted a mind naturally sterile to the
routine habits of an administrator. He hardened early, and thereafter
he was incapable of changing his views or liberalizing his sympathies.
Consistency he erected into a fetish and once he had taken a position
he would not budge from it. He did not understand the liberal America
that was rising about him--neither the economic forces that were
creating it nor the spokesmen who represented it; and he saw no reason
for change. The House of Hutchinson had prospered under existing
conditions, and other houses would prosper likewise, he believed,
if they were equally honest and diligent. So he went his tactless,
unintelligent way, barking his shins on every liberal tendency of the
times, and hating the men who gave him trouble.

Hutchinson, in short, was a complete Tory, and if we would understand
him and his class, we must first take into account the current Tory
philosophy. Compressed into a sentence it was the expression of the
will-to-power of the wealthy. Its motive was economic class interest,
and its object the exploitation of society through the instrumentality
of the state. Stated thus, the philosophy does not appear to advantage;
it lays itself open to unpleasant criticism by those who are not
its beneficiaries. In consequence, much ingenuity in tailoring
was necessary to provide it with garments to cover its nakedness.
Embroidered with patriotism, loyalty, law and order, it made a very
respectable appearance; and when it put on the stately robe of the
British Constitution, it was enormously impressive. The Tory theory
of the British Constitution may well be regarded as a masterpiece of
the gentle art of tailoring. Government by king, lords, and commons it
asserted, approximated the ideal of a “mixt government,” embracing the
total wisdom of the realm, ruling in the interests of all, avoiding
the evils of class domination, and chastising the refractory only for
the common good. Gentlemen might well praise the “glorious British
Constitution.” It was their little jest at the expense of the English
people, who were content to be exploited by them.

In this game of political pretense Hutchinson willingly shared. He
knew that Parliament did not represent the English people; that it was
controlled by a group of landed gentlemen with mercenaries in their
pay; and yet in reply to repeated charges he revealed no hint of the
truth, but reiterated the familiar Tory interpretation in the face of
shrewd enemies who knew that he was insincere. In private among other
gentlemen, Hutchinson was frank enough. He knew what was at stake
in America--whether political control should remain in the hands of
“gentlemen of principle and property,” with the assistance of English
Tories, or whether it should pass into the hands of the majority. And
so while declaiming against mobs, and preaching loyalty to the best of
kings, he secretly busied himself with influential persons in devising
methods to frustrate the Whig ambitions. Moreover in dealing with his
enemies he was a thorough realist. In his comment on American Whigs and
their political methods, he set down many a shrewd and just estimate
of their actions and motives. But in defense of the English ministry
he refused to face reality. He quibbled and misrepresented and denied,
stooping to dirty politics to hold his party together and strengthen it.

At the moment when Hutchinson assumed the duties of governor the
situation was tense. Bernard had muddled things sadly, and “the
rage against him became, at length, so violent, that it was judged
necessary to recall him,”[204] and he slipped off to England to receive
a baronetcy and a pension. But he had brought the commonwealth to
the parting of the ways, and Hutchinson found himself in a difficult
position. The roots of the trouble are laid bare in the following
affidavit of Bernard:

  In the Province of Massachusetts Bay, when civil authority
  was reduced so low as to have nothing left but the form of a
  government, and scarce even that, an enquiry into the causes of so
  great a weakness in the governing power was unavoidable; and there
  was no entering upon such an enquiry, without observing upon the
  ill effects of that part of the constitution of that government,
  whereby the appointment of the Council is left to the people, to be
  made by annual election; and yet the Royal Governor, in all Acts
  of prerogative, is subject to the controul of the Democraticall
  Council. This solecism in policy has been as hurtful in practice
  as it is absurd in theory, and it is the true cause of the extreme
  imbecility of the power of the crown in this government, at times
  when the exertion of it is most wanted. This is not an observation
  of a new date; it is of many years standing; ... ever since he has
  felt the effects which the popular constitution of the Council
  has had upon the Royalty of the government, which is above three
  years ago; within which time, he has seen the King deprived of
  the service of every man at the Council Board, who has resolution
  enough to disapprove the opposition to the authority of the King
  and the Parliament, and their supremacy over the _American_
  Colonies. This, and this only, is the foundation of the charge
  of their endeavouring to overthrow the charter; whereas his real
  desire has been, that the charter should have a more durable
  stability, by means of a necessary alteration, without which, he
  is persuaded it cannot have a much longer duration; as the abuse
  of the appointment of the Council now prevailing, must oblige the
  Parliament to interfere sooner or later.[205]

The more thoughtfully one considers this frank statement the more
clearly it appears what grounds for party dissension lay in the
“solecism” of a constitution whereby the “Royal Governor, in all Acts
of prerogative,” was “subject to the controul of the Democraticall
Council.” It would not be easy to patch up a working compromise between
an absentee prerogative and the local democratic will; one or the
other must be sovereign; and because the terms of the charter enabled
the democracy to nullify the prerogative, Bernard concluded that the
charter must be revised and the abuse corrected. In this Hutchinson
agreed, and from the imperial point of view not without reason. “By
an unfortunate mistake,” he wrote in apology to Gage, “soon after
the charter, a law passed which made every town in the Province a
corporation perfectly democratic.” With every passing year the mistake
was becoming more unfortunate, and the vital problem before government,
in the opinion of Hutchinson, was how to correct this unfortunate
mistake, together with other like mistakes, with such happy skill as
to check the democratic branch without arousing popular resentment. On
this reef Hutchinson foundered.

As early as 1764 the meddlesome Bernard had proposed to the home
government a complete remodeling of colonial governments on the English
Tory plan; and by way of suggestion he forwarded some proposals looking
to the eventual consolidation of the several colonies under a single
royal government, the erection of a house of lords as a balance to the
popular party and a comprehensive tax policy. It was one of numerous
suggestions then being made for incorporating America into the British
Empire, and extending the imperial power over the continent. Bernard’s
bias is sufficiently revealed in the following:

  86. There is no government in America at present, whose powers
  are properly balanced; there not being in any of them, a real
  and distinct third legislative power mediating between the king
  and the people, which is the peculiar excellence of the British
  constitution.

  87. The want of such a third legislative power, adds weight to the
  popular, and lightens the royal scale; so as to destroy the balance
  between the royal and popular powers.

  88. Although America is not now ... ripe enough for an hereditary
  nobility; yet it is now capable of a nobility for life.

  89. A nobility appointed by the king for life, and made
  independent, would probably give strength and stability to the
  American governments, as effectually as an hereditary nobility does
  to that of Great Britain.[206]

It is not known to what extent Hutchinson indorsed so ambitious and
comprehensive a plan. For years he had been Bernard’s understudy, and
supported him in all his policies; but being cautious by nature and
attached to local custom, he probably would have rejected the plan
of continental consolidation unless his personal ambition had been
enlisted. Hosmer’s attempt to clear his skirts[207] is not convincing.
Recalling that Hutchinson yielded invariably to royal or ministerial
suggestions, no matter how contrary to local custom, there is no reason
to believe that he would have objected to any coercive program, which
provided adequately for the colonial Tories.

In another matter that touched the political life of Massachusetts
to the quick, Hutchinson was deeply engaged. The source of the power
of the popular party lay in the democratic town meeting. In earlier
days the Tories had made no objection to it, for it was amenable to
control by the “better sort of people.” But under the skillful politics
of Samuel Adams and his fellows, it had become the chief instrument
of opposition, and Hutchinson was determined to cut its claws. On so
delicate a matter, however, it was only to the ministry that he could
speak frankly; he must not appear to be laying a plot against an
institution so long established as a part of the political machinery
of the commonwealth. Under date of March 26, 1770, he wrote to the
secretary of Lord Hillsboro:

  There is a Town Meeting, no sort of regard being had to any
  qualification of voters, but all the inferior people meet together;
  and at a late meeting the inhabitants of other towns who happened
  to be in town, mixed with them.... It is in other words being under
  the government of the mob. This has given the lower part of the
  people such a sense of their importance that a gentleman does not
  meet with what used to be common civility, and we are sinking into
  perfect barbarism.... If this town could be separated from the rest
  of the Province, the infection has not taken such strong hold of
  the parts remote from it. The spirit of anarchy which prevails in
  Boston is more than I am able to cope with.[208]

Writing to Hillsboro on April 19, 1771, he complained:

  In these votes and in most of the public proceedings of the town of
  Boston, persons of the best character and estate have little or no
  concern. They decline attending Town Meetings where they are sure
  to be outvoted by men of the lowest order.[209]

A month later, writing to his old crony, ex-Governor Bernard, he
suggested a remedy which in one form or another he was constantly
holding before the ministry, as an inducement to act:

  The town of Boston is the source from whence all the other parts
  of the Province derive more or less troubled water. When you
  consider what is called its constitution, your good sense will
  determine immediately that it never can be otherwise for a long
  time together, whilst the majority which conducts all affairs, if
  met together upon another occasion, would be properly called a mob,
  and are persons of such rank and circumstance as in all communities
  constitute a mob, there being no sort of regulation of voters
  in practice; and as these will always be most in number, men of
  weight and value, although they wish to suppress them, cannot be
  induced to attempt to do it for fear not only of being outvoted,
  but affronted and insulted. Call such an assembly what you will,
  it is really no sort of government, not even a democracy, at best
  a corruption of it. There is no hope of a cure by any legislative
  but among ourselves [_i.e._, ministerial supporters] to compel the
  town to be a corporation.[210] The people will not seek it, because
  every one is sensible his importance will be lessened. If ever a
  remedy is found, it must be by compelling them to swallow it, and
  that by an exterior power,--the Parliament.[211]

In such advice--the destruction of the democratic machinery by an
“exterior power” in order that control of government should lie
beyond the reach of the popular will--we may discover ample grounds
for democratic dissatisfaction with the governor. Hutchinson believed
that when matters of state were settled by gentlemen over their wine,
good government resulted; but when discussed by common people over
their cider, the door was thrown wide open to anarchy. His particular
_bête noire_ was the mob, by which name he designated any gathering
that had not received his gracious permission to assemble. It was his
shortsighted willingness to arm himself with external authority against
his fellow countrymen, that filled the years of his administration
with so much bitterness. The more he lost ground, the more anxiously
he pleaded for help from the ministry. When certain of his private
letters came to the hands of Franklin and were sent home, Hutchinson
was put in a rage. He had long been fearful of such a diplomatic
leak and urged secrecy, for if his private correspondence should
become public, he explained, “I have no security against the rage
of the people.”[212] Much ink was used by his friends in declaiming
against the infamy of making public a gentleman’s private letters,
and Hutchinson characterized it as an “affrontery” such as “was
never known before.” That such private correspondence was in effect
official correspondence, in that it aimed at shaping parliamentary
policy towards Massachusetts, was ignored by these outraged gentlemen.
Diplomats who plan privately rarely like to be read publicly,
especially when the public reads how it is being bought and sold.

Very likely the Assembly overstated the case in declaring that “there
has been, for many years past, measures contemplated, and a plan
formed, by a set of men, born and educated among us, to raise their own
fortunes, and advance themselves to posts of honor and profit, not only
to the destruction of the charter and constitution of this province,
but at the expense of the rights and liberties of the American
colonies.”[213] Hutchinson was too cautious and too conservative to
seek any revolutionary end; at the same time he was too yielding to
make a stand against any encroachment that had legal sanction. From
his narrow mind no help could be expected touching the great matter of
imperial federation. In seeking a way out of the difficulties in which
the British Empire was daily becoming entangled, the royal governor
could discover no wiser plan than the abridgment of fundamental
privileges which a hundred and fifty years of slow growth had made the
peculiar possession of the colonies. The unhappy conclusion towards
which the American Tories were drifting he set forth in words which
were to become the most notorious he ever penned.

  I never think of the measures necessary for the peace and good
  order of the colonies without pain. There must be an abridgment of
  what are called English liberties. I relieve myself by considering
  that in a remove from a state of nature to the most perfect state
  of government, there must be a great restraint of natural liberty.
  I doubt whether it is possible to project a system of government in
  which a colony 3000 miles distant from the parent state shall enjoy
  all the liberty of the parent state. I am certain I have never
  yet seen the projection. I wish the good of the colony when I wish
  to see some further restraint of liberty rather than the connexion
  with the parent state should be broken; for I am sure such a breach
  must prove the ruin of the colony.[214]

Later writers, forgetful of Hutchinson’s self-seeking record-and of
his Tory philosophy, have inclined to leniency in judging him for
his stand on this crucial point. But in spite of his wig and scarlet
broadcloth robes he was only an unintelligent politician, who served
the hand that fed him. No better commentary could be asked than is
found in the caustic remark of the keenest Englishman of his day on
the ministerial policy. In a letter of April, 1777, Horace Walpole
asked, “What politicians are those who have preferred the empty name
of _sovereignty_ to that of _alliance_, and forced subsidies to the
golden ocean of commerce?” Hutchinson was stubborn rather than wise.
He would make no compromise in the matter of sovereignty; there could
be no lawful will but the will of Parliament. “I know of no line that
can be drawn between the supreme authority of Parliament and the total
independence of the colonies,” he replied to the Assembly, when it was
struggling with the idea of federation.[215] When the Council and House
were outlining a plan of imperial union, and seeking to demonstrate
that the “subordinate authorities” of the colonies were sovereign
within their fields, and “that, in fact, two such powers do subsist
together, and are not incompatible”; the governor with patient finality
explained to them the true “nature of supreme power,”

  ... and urged, as an undeniable principle, that such a power is
  essential in all governments, and that another power, with the
  name of subordinate, and with a right to withstand or control the
  supreme in particulars, is an absurdity--for it so far ceases
  to be subordinate, and becomes itself supreme; that no sensible
  writer upon government ever denied what he asserted; and whilst the
  council continued to hold, that two supreme powers were compatible,
  it would be to no purpose to reason upon the other parts of their
  message to him, or to deny what they adduced from a principle so
  contrary to reason.[216]

Hutchinson’s position as the King’s representative soon became so
difficult that a wiser man would have resigned. He was constrained
to be the executive of a policy of government by ministerial
instructions. Again and again he vetoed a measure, or dissolved the
legislature, or took action contrary to the spirit of the charter;
and the sole justification which he pleaded was a secret letter of
instructions, the terms of which he refused to make public, and the
object of which must be judged by his acts. “So long as he continued
commander-in-chief,” he replied to the House in one of their perennial
wranglings, “he should think himself bound to conform to every
signification of his majesty’s pleasure.” To the denunciations of the
popular party he remained outwardly indifferent, strong in the supposed
integrity of his official purpose. In time, he believed, the evil
spoken of him by ambitious men would be forgotten, and his course would
find vindication. The words of Bernard might well have been his:

  He denies, that the opinion of the whole people of that Province
  can now be taken and ascertained, labouring as it does at present,
  under the baneful influence of a desperate faction, who by raising
  groundless fears and jealousies, by deluding one part of the
  people, and by intimidating the other part, has destroyed all real
  freedom, not only of action, but even of sentiment and opinion.
  But the Respondent doubts not but that his Administration has been
  approved by the generally of the best and most respectable men of
  the Province.[217]

In spite of Hutchinson’s endeavors to build up a prerogative party
the drift of public opinion went steadily against him until he was
convinced that he stood almost alone. “He was not sure of support from
any one person in authority,” he commented stoically, in telling of
the tea troubles. The Council, the Assembly, the very constables were
against him. Yet he went his way obstinately; he would fulfill to
the last word the instructions of his superiors. The ministry might
be unwise, but better the legal folly of Parliament than the madness
of the democracy. To encroach upon the royal prerogative, Hutchinson
believed was to endanger the nice balance of the constitution. He was
convinced that “the present easy, happy model of government” was as
near perfect as the ingenuity of Englishmen could devise; that the
welfare of America was dependent upon a proper subordination of the
colonies to the mother country; and that the popular party was plotting
treason against their country and their king. The third volume of
his history is a long argument to demonstrate the wisdom of his own
and Bernard’s administrations. The liberal governor, Thomas Pownall,
Hutchinson disliked, partly because of his easy familiar ways, but
chiefly because he was not a prerogative man.[218] But if Pownall
had been in Hutchinson’s place, the history of the relations of
Massachusetts and England would have run very differently.

It was his ingrained snobbery which, more than anything else, brought
about his undoing. The aristocratic governor never differed with a
lord, and rarely agreed with a commoner. It was intolerable to him that
common fellows should dispute his reasoning or sit in judgment upon
his official acts. It was their duty as loyal subjects to obey without
question the mandates of the King’s appointed spokesmen; and when
town-meeting resolutions, put through by mechanics and petty tradesmen,
criticised his conduct, or refused to accept the decision of the
supreme court that the “Boston massacre” was not legally a “massacre,”
he saw in such acts only the madness of the mobocracy. That the people
should suspect the probity of his majesty’s judges was painful to him.
As partisan bitterness increased, he became acutely suspicious of all
who disagreed with him, and shut his mind against every argument. The
debates and resolves in House and Council “abounded with duplicity
and inconclusive reasonings.” “The disingenuity and low craft, which
appeared in so many of the messages, resolves, and other publick
instruments,” he commented, descended “to the level and vulgarity of a
common newspaper essay.”[219] To the leaders of the popular party, the
group of keen debaters and parliamentarians who kept him constantly on
the defense, he attributed an artful malignancy. The fathers of the
Revolution do not appear to advantage in the pages of his history. The
Otises had gone over to the opposition because the father had been
disappointed on the occasion of Hutchinson’s elevation to the coveted
chief-justiceship. John Hancock’s “ruling passion was a fondness for
popular applause.... His natural powers were moderate, and had been
very little improved by study.” John Adams was a man whose “ambition
was without bounds.... He could not look with complacency upon any man
who was in possession of more wealth, more honours, or more knowledge
than himself,” and he went over to the opposition because of a slight
upon him by refusal of a place on the bench. For Samuel Adams, his
most relentless enemy, Hutchinson’s hatred was boundless. He had
defaulted as collector of taxes and for equivalent of his arrears of
public money he had set up as defender of the public liberties, and he
“made more converts by calumniating governors, and other servants of
the crown, than by strength of reasoning.” His main business in life
was “robbing men of their characters.”

It is unlikely that time will bring any vindication of the later career
of Thomas Hutchinson. He was a stiff-necked official of scrupulous
principle, whose principles were grossly reactionary. He was sincerely
attached to the great ideal of imperial unity, but he conceived of
that unity as embodied in the coercive sovereignty of the crown and
parliament, with Tory gentlemen as exclusive administrators. Samuel
Adams was not unjust in declaring, “It has been his principle from a
boy that mankind are to be governed by the discerning few; and it has
ever since been his ambition to be the hero of the few.” Courteous
and conscientious, with very considerable administrative ability, it
was his misfortune to defend a social philosophy alien to the rough
individualism of his fellow countrymen. He would think only in terms
of imperial centralization, and they would think only in terms of
local home rule. He conceived of the political state as a private
preserve for gentlemen to hunt over, and they conceived of it as a free
hunting-ground for all. He never understood the assertive, capitalistic
America that was rising about him, and in joining issue with it he
destroyed himself. “If we were not mad,” he lamented, “I have no doubt
we might enjoy all that liberty which can subsist with a state of
government.” It was the complaint of the Tory upon a democracy that
preferred self-rule to the blessings of a trusteeship, which, like a
lawyers’ squabble, consumed the estate in fees. Quite evidently the
“mobility,” in the days of Thomas Hutchinson, was running into madness,
for it demanded greater liberty than was compatible with a “state of
government” sanctioned by crown officials--a fact which the royal
governor grieved over but was helpless to restrain.


II • Daniel Leonard • Tory Lawyer

Probably the most finished prose writer, certainly one of the most
cultivated minds, among the notable group of American Loyalists, was a
young man of excellent family, who if events had turned out otherwise
would have made a much greater name for himself. Daniel Leonard was a
Harvard graduate and a member of the Boston bar, an effective speaker,
of some weight in commonwealth politics, and aligned with Hutchinson,
Sewall, and the crown party. In temperament and taste he seems to have
been conspicuously aristocratic. He delighted in fine clothes and
set up his coach and pair to drive from his countryseat to Boston--a
gesture of opulence that excited the laughter of sober people, and led
Mercy Warren to introduce him into her comedy, _The Group_, under the
name of Beau Trumps. According to John Adams, who was a decided gossip,
it was this cavalier love of display that led to his political undoing,
overcoming his native sympathy with the party of revolution.

  He wore a broad gold lace round the rim of his hat, he made his
  cloak glitter with laces still broader, he had set up his chariot
  and pair and constantly traveled in it from Taunton to Boston. This
  made the world stare--it was a novelty. Not another lawyer in the
  province, attorney or barrister, of whatever age, reputation, rank,
  or station, presumed to ride in a coach or chariot. The discerning
  ones soon perceived that wealth and power must have charms to
  a heart that delighted in so much finery, and indulged in such
  unusual expense. Such marks could not escape the vigilant eyes of
  the two arch-tempters, Hutchinson and Sewall, who had more art,
  insinuation, and address, than all the rest of their party.[220]

Under the pen name of “Massachusettensis,” Leonard published a series
of weekly letters addressed to “the Inhabitants of the Province of
Massachusetts Bay,” running from December 12, 1774, to April 3, 1775,
a fortnight before the affair at Lexington. They were begun soon after
the adjournment of the Continental Congress, and may be taken as the
final statement of the Tory argument. They were exceedingly skillful
partisan pamphlets, adapted with great adroitness to current prejudices
and old loyalties. Their main appeal was to the psychology of the
colonial, and if the springs of that psychology had not been sapped
by the rising liberalism, the appeal would have been extraordinarily
persuasive. Probably the King’s cause was never presented more
convincingly, and the American Tories were delighted with the
letters. “On my return from Congress,” said John Adams, “I found
the Massachusetts Gazette teeming with political speculations, and
Massachusettensis shining like the moon among the lesser stars.”[221]
He at once replied to them under the pen name “Novanglus,” beginning
with a slashing attack in which the seventeenth-century republicans
are called in to refute Leonard, and then reciting some plain facts
about the British government and its American spokesman, which somewhat
tarnished the latter’s eulogies. But he soon strayed off into abstract
disquisition, and the controversy was brought to an abrupt end with the
news from Lexington.

As in most Loyalist pamphlets, Leonard’s appeal was primarily to
the law and the constitution, and it is tagged with references to
statutes like a proper lawyer’s brief. But underlying the argument is a
political philosophy which fairly represents the current Tory theory.
The immediate purpose of the Letters was to make the rebellious spirit
of the colonial Whigs toward their lawful sovereign appear both wicked
and groundless, dangerous to the peace and well-being of society and
inspired by the personal ambitions of demagogues. This major purpose
involved him in two main arguments: first, on the heinousness of
rebellion in general; and second, on the special heinousness of the
Whig leaders. Leonard’s political philosophy is implied rather than
elaborated. With other American Loyalists he evaded broad principles;
nevertheless his total argument rests on a philosophical foundation too
well known to be glossed over. He derived immediately from Hobbes, and
he follows the _Leviathan_ in his exaltation of the sovereign state.
Men in a state of nature, he argued, live in a condition of anarchy,
with the hand of all against all. Amid such chaos civilization is
impossible, and the common need of security for person and property
impelled men to erect the coercive state as an instrument of social
protection. It first arose and has since been maintained from the
necessity of holding in check the spirit of anarchy which continually
threatens from the ambitions of designing men. This is the great danger
that lies always in wait, ready to destroy society. Government is a
guarantee of the protection of the weak against the strong, and every
friend of law and order must enlist his loyalty on the side of the
lawful prince against all who would foment rebellion; for rebellion is
the mischief-maker that unlooses all the evils of Pandora’s box.

This was no more than the familiar stock-in-trade of the Tory,
nevertheless Leonard becomes quite terrifying in describing the evils
of sedition:

  Rebellion is the most atrocious offence, that can be perpetrated
  by man, save those which are committed more immediately against
  the supreme Governor of the Universe who is the avenger of his
  own cause. It dissolves the social band, annihilates the security
  resulting from law and government; introduces fraud, violence,
  rapine, murder, sacrilege, and the long train of evils, that riot,
  uncontrouled, in a state of nature. Allegiance and protection are
  reciprocal. The subject is bound by the compact to yield obedience
  to government, and in return, is entitled to protection from it;
  thus the poor are protected against the rich; the weak against
  the strong; the individual against the many; and this protection
  is guaranteed to each member, by the whole community. But when
  government is laid prostrate, a state of war, of all against all,
  commences; might overcomes right; innocence itself has no security,
  unless the individual sequesters himself from his fellowmen,
  inhabits his own cave, and seeks his own prey. This is what is
  called a state of nature.[222]

The “seeds of sedition” having been sown, they spring up and bring
forth fruits of death; the “people are led to sacrifice real liberty to
licentiousness, which gradually ripens into rebellion and civil war.”

  And what is still more to be lamented, the generality of the
  people, who are thus made the dupes of artifice, and the mere
  stilts of ambition, are sure to be losers in the end. The best
  they can expect, is to be thrown neglected by, when they are no
  longer wanted; but they are seldom so happy; if they are subdued,
  confiscation of estate and ignominious death are their portion;
  if they conquer, their own army is often turned upon them, to
  subjugate them to a more tyrannical government than that they
  rebelled against.[223]

Leonard then proceeds to supplement the Hobbesian argument by an
elaborate appeal to the history of English law, and discovers ample
sanction in a recital of a long list of statutory enactments and
court decisions against the evil of sedition. As treason is the
gravest social crime, so it has always been visited with the severest
punishments. He states the history of legislation against treason, and
points out how the statutes have been construed to reach so far as to
embrace the gathering of private men in a warlike manner, with a design
to redress public grievances or to better their economic condition. He
makes a parade of the brutal laws of feudal times, and the decisions
of Tudor and Stuart judges, justifying those pronouncements as a
necessary defense of society against sedition-mongers and their
subversive ambitions. By a natural transition he brings the argument
home to his American readers. The aims and methods of the Whigs, he
contends, constitute a clear violation of the law of treason. They are
playing with the gallows, with their Committees of Correspondence--“the
foulest, subtlest, and most venomous serpent that ever issued from the
eggs of sedition,” and the imperative need of the hour was to put a
stop to all treasonable thought and action.

  I saw the small seed of sedition, when it was implanted; it was, as
  a grain of mustard. I have watched the plant until it has become
  a great tree; the vilest reptiles that crawl upon the earth, are
  concealed at the root; the foulest birds of the air rest upon its
  branches. I now would induce you to go to work immediately with
  axes and hatchets, and cut it down, for a twofold reason; because
  it is a pest to society, and lest it be felled suddenly by a
  stronger arm and crush thousands in the fall.[224]

From the first major proposition, that all sedition is heinous, Leonard
passed to his second, that the sedition of the American Whigs was
peculiarly wicked, for it was grounded in no injustice on the part of
England. If loyalty is the highest social virtue, that loyalty might
justly be claimed by Great Britain as her due. “Has she not been a
nursing mother to us, from the days of our infancy to this time? Has
she not been indulgent almost to a fault?” The Whigs, he asserted
broadly, have been patching together their supposed grievances out of
cloth that never came from an English loom. It is the shoddiest of
homespun, mean, and shameful.

  We had always considered ourselves, as a part of the British
  empire, and the parliament, as the supreme legislature of the
  whole. Acts of parliament for regulating our internal policy were
  familiar. We had paid postage agreeable to act of parliament, ...
  duties imposed for regulating trade, and even for raising a revenue
  to the crown without questioning the right, though we closely
  adverted to the rate or quantum. We knew that in all those acts of
  government, the good of the whole had been consulted, and whenever
  through want of information any thing grievous had been ordained,
  we were sure of obtaining redress by a proper representation of
  it. We were happy in our subordination; but in an evil hour, under
  the influence of a malignant planet, the design was formed of
  opposing the stamp-act, by a denial of the right of parliament to
  make it.[225]

  Our patriots exclaim, “that humble and reasonable petitions from
  the representatives of the people have been frequently treated
  with contempt.” This is as virulent a libel upon his majesty’s
  government, as falsehood and ingenuity combined could fabricate.
  Our humble and reasonable petitions have not only been ever
  graciously received, when the established mode of exhibiting
  them has been observed, but generally granted. Applications of
  a different kind, have been treated with neglect, though not
  always with the contempt they deserved. These either originated in
  illegal assemblies, and could not be received without implicitly
  countenancing such enormities, or contained such matter, and
  were conceived in such terms, as to be at once an insult to his
  majesty, and a libel on his government. Instead of being decent
  remonstrances against real grievances, or prayers for their
  removal, they were insidious attempts to wrest from the crown, or
  the supreme legislature, their inherent, unalienable prerogatives
  or rights.[226]

The prerogative might not be argued, according to Leonard, nor the
sovereignty of parliament discussed, for any such comment was “an
insult to his majesty, and a libel on his government.” The illegal
Continental Congress had done both and thereby proved itself seditious.

  The prince, or sovereign, as some writers call the supreme
  authority of a state, is sufficiently ample and extensive to
  provide a remedy for every wrong, in all possible emergencies and
  contingencies; and consequently a power, that is not derived from
  such authority, springing up in a state, must encroach upon it,
  and in proportion as the usurpation enlarges itself, the rightful
  prince must be diminished; indeed, they cannot long subsist
  together, but must continually militate, till one or the other be
  destroyed.[227]

The true animus of the Whig attack upon the nice balance of the British
constitution Leonard professed to discover in a dangerous republican
ambition. From the beginning there had been an excess of the democratic
element in the charters and practice of many of the colonies; and this
overbalance must in the end be rectified.

  Our council boards are as destitute of the constitutional authority
  of the house of lords, as their several members are of the noble
  independence, and splendid appendages of peerage. The house of
  peers is the bulwark of the British constitution, and through
  successive ages, has withstood the shocks of monarchy, and the
  sappings of democracy, and the constitution gained strength by the
  conflict.[228]

Lacking a peerage, which Leonard regrets, but which will come with
time, American political practice is less stable than the English,
more exposed to “the sappings of democracy”; but necessary steps have
already been taken to stabilize it. The hands of the royal governor and
judges have been strengthened against the democratic House, and “town
meetings are restrained to prevent their passing traitorous resolves.”
The ideal towards which America must travel as fast as circumstance and
the colonial temper will permit, is the wise balance of the English
government, with local powers vested in colonial lords and commons,
supervised by the King and the Imperial Parliament. In the midst of
these present agitations, wickedly fomented by Whig smugglers--“a
smuggler and a whig are cousin germans, the offspring of two sisters,
avarice and ambition”--it should be remembered that “the terms whig
and tory have been adopted according to the arbitrary use of them in
this province, but they rather ought to be reversed; an American tory
is a supporter of our excellent constitution, and an American whig a
subverter of it.” To bring these American subverters of the glorious
British constitution to a sense of their obligations, Leonard refers
them to the words of James Otis written ten years before:

  It is a maxim, that the king can do no wrong; and every good
  subject is bound to believe his king is not inclined to do any. We
  are blessed with a prince who has given abundant demonstrations,
  that in all his actions, he studies the good of his people, and
  the true glory of his crown, which are inseparable. It would
  therefore be the highest degree of impudence and disloyalty, to
  imagine that the king, at the head of his parliament, could have
  any but the most pure and perfect intentions of justice, goodness
  and truth, that human nature is capable of. All this I say and
  believe of the king and parliament, in all their acts; even in that
  which so nearly affects the interests of the colonists; and that a
  most perfect and ready obedience is to be yielded to it while it
  remains in force. The power of parliament is uncontroulable but
  by themselves, and we must obey. They can only repeal their own
  acts. There would be an end of all government, if one or a number
  of subjects, or subordinate provinces should take upon them so
  far to judge of the justice of an act of parliament, as to refuse
  obedience to it. If there was nothing else to restrain such a step,
  prudence ought to do it, for forcibly resisting the parliament and
  the king’s laws is high treason. Therefore let the parliament lay
  what burdens they please on us, we must, it is our duty to submit
  and patiently bear them, till they will be pleased to relieve
  us.[229]

The argument comes back finally to a threat; sovereignty rests not on
good will but on coercion. The insincerity and unreality of the Tory
appeal are only too patent. Those old pleaders were true to their
breeding and their interests, for they regarded fact as little as
a modern diplomat. They ignored or denied open and plain evidence.
Nowhere, perhaps, does the weakness of Leonard’s argument become
more evident than in his refusal to admit the theoretical right of
revolution. He professed allegiance to a king whose claim to the crown
rested on revolution, and was justified by the apostle of Whiggery,
Locke. But nowhere does he refer to Locke, and not until he was
prodded by John Adams, who insisted that the Whig principles were “the
principles of Aristotle and Plato, of Livy and Cicero, and Sydney,
Harrington and Locke,” did he concede that any other interpretation of
revolution than the Hobbesian, was justifiable. In his last paper, of
April 3, 1775, he replied to Adams thus:

  I hold the rights of the people as sacred, and revere the
  principles, that have established the succession to the imperial
  crown of Great Britain, in the line of the illustrious house of
  Brunswick; but that the difficulty lies in applying them to the
  cause of the whigs ... for admitting that the collective body
  of the people, that are subject to the British empire, have an
  inherent right to change their form of government, or race of
  kings, it does not follow, that the inhabitants of a single
  province, or of a number of provinces, or any given part under a
  majority of the whole empire, have such a right. By admitting that
  the less may rule or sequester themselves from the greater, we
  unhinge all government.[230]

By such logic does he whittle away the doctrine of the right of
revolution. As a lawyer Daniel Leonard discovered a distinction between
the Continental Congress of 1774 and the Revolutionary Convention
of 1689, which rendered the former treasonable and the latter
glorious. But the rising liberalism of America could see no such nice
distinction, and a year later the brilliant young lawyer was forced to
withdraw to Halifax. He was rewarded by a grateful King with the post
of chief justice of Bermuda, lived to be nearly ninety, and died in
London in 1829, one of the last of the exiled Loyalists.


III • Jonathan Boucher • Tory Priest

The extremest expression of American Toryism came not unfittingly from
an Anglican priest. The English church has always been the mother
of loyalty, and Jonathan Boucher of Virginia and Maryland was the
spiritual son of a notable line of bishops and priests who upheld the
royal prerogative through evil times and good, throwing the august
sanction of religion about the monarchical state. A fearless, capable,
outspoken man was this English-born southerner, taking counsel of
his own thought, not over-tolerant of those who differed with him,
holding himself _in loco parentis_ to his parishioners, and exacting
obedience from them. He was another Increase Mather, with the same love
of domination, the same directness of purpose and strength of will. A
man of conspicuous parts and equally conspicuous position: not only a
clergyman, but a gentleman of affairs, owner of a large plantation and
many slaves, concerned with public business and a volunteer statesman:
a sort of unofficial adviser and secretary to draft provincial laws.
Above all of independent mind. He would truckle to no man, and he
subjected the opinions of his neighbors to the same scrutiny that he
gave his own. For the popular orator and the demagogue he had frank
contempt, and mass prejudices and mob power held no terrors for him.

There was both courage and futility in his free, outspoken career.
He refused to be intimidated or turned aside by popular disfavor.
“For more than six months I preached, when I did preach, with a pair
of loaded pistols lying on the cushions; having given notice that if
any one attempted, what had long been threatened, to drag me out of
the pulpit, I should think myself justified in repelling violence by
violence.” One day he promptly knocked down a burly blacksmith who
had been set on him, but there came a time when his church was filled
with armed men, and his friends, fearing for his life, held him back
forcibly from mounting the pulpit. That episode marked the end of his
career in America. He had plainly become obsolete, and he was driven
home to his native England. There as an old man, he published in 1797
thirteen sermons, preached in America between 1763 and 1775, with
an historical preface, under the title, _A View of the Causes and
Consequences of the American Revolution_, and dedicated to his old
neighbor and friend, General Washington.

The political philosophy of Jonathan Boucher, as elaborated in
these discourses, is frank and unequivocal. It is the voice of
seventeenth-century Cavalier England, speaking to an alien people, bred
up in another philosophy of government. Church and state, the Bible and
the British constitution, the divine authority of God and the divine
authority of the _status quo_, have got themselves curiously fused--and
confused--in the mind of this disciple of Laud. It was the result
not of ignorance but of conviction. When the revolutionary movement
began to make a stir about him, the parish priest took the situation
seriously and set about preparing himself to cope with it. Before then
he had been no student of political theory, but now he turned to his
books. “With sincerity in my heart, and my Bible in my hand,” he said,
“I sat down to explore the truth ... to read and study what had been
collected and laid down on the subject of government by writers ...
who got their materials ... from the only pure sources of information,
the law of God, and the law of the land.”[231] The restriction in his
choice of writers is suggestive of his bias; it eliminated at one
stroke the main body of political speculation, not only the English
thinkers of the preceding century, but the continental followers of the
natural-rights school. Actually, however, Boucher did not limit himself
so narrowly, for he refers frequently to Locke, and he was fairly
familiar with the main doctrines of the revolutionary philosophy. But
his most cherished discovery was Sir Robert Filmer’s _Patriarcha_,
and having digested Filmer’s quaint theory, thenceforth he remained a
confirmed patriarchist. The absurd jumble of Hebraic precedent and Tory
prejudice which Filmer had laboriously put together and which Locke had
knocked to pieces, was wholly convincing to this belated advocate of
divine right, who proceeded to wipe the dust off the precious volume
and expound its doctrines to an amazed congregation.

The single and sacred duty of the subject, Jonathan Boucher was
convinced, is faithful obedience to the powers that are set over him.
Those powers derive from God and are instituted for the subject’s good.
It follows, therefore, that the unpardonable sin is rebellion against
lawfully constituted authority. “The doctrine of _obedience for
conscience sake_,” he asserted, “is ... the great _cornerstone_ of all
good government.”[232] With Daniel Leonard he makes much of it, but he
appeals rather to the sanctions of religion than to the law.

  Obedience to Government is every man’s duty, because it is every
  man’s interest; but it is particularly incumbent on Christians,
  because ... it is enjoined by the positive commands of God....
  If the form of government under which the good providence of God
  has been pleased to place us be mild and free, it is our duty to
  enjoy it with gratitude and with thankfulness.... If it be less
  indulgent and less liberal than in reason it ought to be, still it
  is our duty not to disturb the peace of the community, by becoming
  refractory and rebellious subjects, and _resisting the ordinances
  of God_.[233]

  Those great and good men, who, _like wise master-builders_,
  have from time to time so _fitly framed together_ our glorious
  Constitution, well knew that _other sure foundation no man could
  lay_ than ... obedience, not only _for wrath_, but _for conscience
  sake_.[234]

Because this spirit of obedience was openly flouted in America, where
every influence made for rough individual liberty, Jonathan Boucher
feared for the future. Loose principles were abroad, notions of popular
sovereignty under the majority will, that must give “rise to a low and
unworthy opinion of government,” unless the people were recalled to
their duty. Particularly dangerous, he thought, was “that loose notion
respecting government, which has long been disseminated among the
people at large with incredible industry, namely, that all government
is the mere creature of the people, and may therefore be tampered with,
altered, new-modelled, set up or pulled down, just as tumultuous crowds
of the most disorderly persons in the community (who on such occasions
are always so forward to call themselves _the people_) may happen in
some giddy moments of overheated ardour to determine.”[235]

The unhappy results of such evil principles Boucher saw spread
through America. With the insidious undermining of respect for
law and government, the vicious conception of republicanism made
its appearance. “Everything in America had a republican aspect,”
he commented in after years; and he agreed with Bernard that “the
splitting America into many small governments weakened the governing
power, and strengthened that of the people.”[236] If Parliament had
been wise enough to consolidate government in America, drawing it to a
single head, and investing it with dignity and authority, the country
would not have become, like revolutionary France, “a mean and odious
republic.” As a minister and a loyal British subject, Jonathan Boucher
would not seduce the American people “by any flowery panegyrics on
liberty. Such panegyrics are the productions of ancient heathens and
modern patriots: nothing of the kind is to be met with in the Bible,
nor in the Statute Book. The word _liberty_, as meaning civil liberty,
does not, I believe, occur in all the Scriptures.”[237]

  To respect the laws, is to respect liberty in the only rational
  sense in which the term can be used; for liberty consists in
  subserviency to law. “Where there is no law,” says Mr. Locke,
  “there is no freedom.”... True liberty, then, is a liberty to do
  everything that is right, and the being restrained from doing
  anything that is wrong.[238]

The evils which flow from disrespect for authority carry much further
than the unsettling of the political _status quo_; they end by
overturning the entire social order. If any group or class rejects
the divine plan according to which God has set each in its due place,
society as a whole is involved in strife that may lapse into anarchy.
It was an unhappy scene, prophesying an unhappier future, that the
minister beheld in contemporary America.

  There never was a time when a whole people were so little governed
  by settled good principles.... Both employers and the employed,
  much to their mutual shame and inconvenience, no longer live
  together with anything like attachment and cordiality on either
  side; and the laboring classes, instead of regarding the rich as
  their guardians, patrons, and benefactors, now look on them as so
  many overgrown colossuses whom it is no demerit in them to wrong.
  A still more general ... topic of complaint is, that the lower
  classes, instead of being industrious, frugal, and orderly (virtues
  so peculiarly becoming their station in life) are become idle,
  improvident, and dissolute.[239]

With social morality thus dangerously undermined, the Americans were
a natural prey to demagogues, who filled the land with their clamor
of patriotism and liberty. The situation in Virginia was peculiarly
dangerous by reason of long-standing debts to English merchants which
the planters were unable to pay; they found themselves in consequence,
impaled on the horns of an unhappy dilemma, “to be loyal and be ruined,
or to rebel and be damned.”[240]

Instructed by the colonial troubles, Jonathan Boucher elaborated a
theory of the true origin and purpose of government, a theory taken
straight out of Filmer, which he expands thus:

  As soon as there were some to be governed, there were also some to
  govern.... The first father was the first king: and ... it was thus
  that all government originated, and monarchy is the most ancient
  form.[241]

  The glory of God is much concerned, that there should be good
  government in the world: it is, therefore, the uniform doctrine
  of the Scriptures, that it is under the deputation and authority
  of God alone that _kings reign and princes decree justice_. Kings
  and princes (which are only other words for supreme magistrates)
  were doubtless created and appointed, not so much for their own
  sakes, as for the sake of the people committed to their charge: yet
  they are not, therefore, the creatures of the people. So far from
  deriving their authority from any supposed consent or suffrage of
  men, they receive their commission from Heaven; they receive it
  from God, the source and original of all power.[242]

Instituted by God and functioning under divine sanction, government
becomes, therefore, a divine instrument, for the security of which He
is greatly concerned: “Everything our blessed Lord either said or did,
pointedly tended to discourage the disturbing a settled government.”
“Unless we are good subjects, we cannot be good Christians.” Jesus
“thought it would be better, both for Judea in particular, and for
the world in general, that ... the people should not be distracted
by a revolution, and ... that there should be no precedent to which
revolutionists might appeal.” “The only very intolerable grievance in
government is, when men allow themselves to disturb and destroy the
peace of the world, by vain attempts to render that perfect, which
the laws of our nature have ordained to be imperfect.” “To suffer
nobly indicates more greatness of mind than can be shown by acting
valiantly.”[243] Jonathan Boucher was the high Tory of the Tory cause
in America. He refused to strike his flag to the pirate craft of
republicanism; he would not truckle to newfangled notions; but stood up
stoutly to be counted for God and the King. In laying bare the heart
of Toryism, he unwittingly gave aid and comfort to the detested cause
of liberalism. It is reasonable to assume that such militant loyalty
to the outworn doctrine of passive submission was a real disservice to
the ministry, for it revealed the prerogative in a light peculiarly
offensive to American prejudices. What a godsend to the liberals was
such doctrine on the lips of so eminent a divine!


Footnotes

[202] _Diary and Letters_, Vol. I, pp. 46-48.

[203] See Hosmer, _Life of Samuel Adams_, p. 259.

[204] Hutchinson, _History of Massachusetts Bay_, Vol. III, p. 255.

[205] “Answer of Bernard to the Petition of the House of
Representatives to the King,” in _Works of Samuel Adams_, Vol. I, pp.
365-367.

[206] Quoted in John Adams, _Novanglus_, Second Letter.

[207] See his _Life of Thomas Hutchinson_.

[208] Quoted in _ibid._, p. 189.

[209] _Ibid._, p. 206.

[210] Hutchinson assumes the act of incorporation will lay restrictions
upon the right of suffrage and the powers of the town meeting.

[211] _Ibid._, pp. 206-207.

[212] _Ibid._, p. 199.

[213] _Resolves of the House of Representatives of Massachusetts Bay_,
June 16, 1773.

[214] _Ibid._, p. 436. Compare the view of Van Tyne, _The Causes of the
War of Independence_, p. 85.

[215] Speech of January 6, 1773.

[216] _History of Massachusetts Bay_, Vol. III, pp. 381-382.

[217] _Answer of Bernard to the Petition of the House of
Representatives._

[218] For Hutchinson’s statement of the Tory case, see Vol. III, pp.
352-355.

[219] _History of Massachusetts Bay_, Vol. III, p. 399.

[220] _Works_, Vol. X, pp. 194-195; quoted in Tyler, _Literary History
of the American Revolution_, Vol. I, Chapter XVI.

[221] Preface to _Novanglus and Massachusettensis_, 1819.

[222] Letter of February 6, 1775, in _Novanglus and Massachusettensis_,
pp. 187-188.

[223] _Ibid._, pp. 152-153.

[224] Letter of January 2, in _ibid._, p. 159.

[225] Letter of December 19, in _ibid._, p. 147.

[226] Letter of March 27, in _ibid._, pp. 217-218.

[227] _Ibid._, p. 219.

[228] Letter of January 9, in _ibid._, p. 171.

[229] Letter of January 23, in _ibid._, p. 181.

[230] _Ibid._, p. 225.

[231] _A View of the Causes, etc._, p. 591.

[232] _Ibid._, p. 309.

[233] _Ibid._, pp. 507-508.

[234] _Ibid._, p. 306.

[235] _Ibid._, p. 313.

[236] _Ibid._, p. xliv.

[237] _Ibid._, p. 504.

[238] _Ibid._, pp. 509 and 511.

[239] _Ibid._, p. 309.

[240] _Ibid._, Preface, p. xlii.

[241] _Ibid._, p. 525.

[242] _Ibid._, p. 534.

[243] _Ibid._, pp. 535, 538, 542, 543.




