Chapter V • Margaret Fuller • Rebel


The fame of Margaret Fuller has waned greatly since her vivid
personality was blotted out in the prime of her intellectual
development. Misunderstood in her own time, caricatured by unfriendly
critics, and with significant facts of her life suppressed by her
friends out of a chivalrous sense of loyalty, the real woman has been
lost in a Margaret Fuller myth and later generations have come to
underestimate her powers and undervalue her work. Yet no other woman
of her generation in America is so well worth recalling. She was
the completest embodiment of the inchoate rebellions and grandiose
aspirations of the age of transcendental ferment; for to the many
grievances charged against the times by other New England liberals, she
added the special grievance of the stupid inhibitions laid upon women.
Transcendental radical and critic, like Emerson and Thoreau and Parker,
she was feminist also; and to the difficult business of freeing her
mind from the Cambridge orthodoxies, she added the greater difficulty
of freeing her sex.

The written record that Margaret Fuller left is quite inadequate to
explain her contemporary reputation. In no sense an artist, scarcely
a competent craftsman, she wrote nothing that bears the mark of high
distinction either in thought or style. Impatient of organization and
inadequately disciplined, she threw off her work impulsively, not
pausing to shape it to enduring form. Yet she was vastly talked about,
and common report makes her out to have been an extraordinary woman
who creatively influenced those with whom she came in contact. Like
Alcott, her power lay in brilliant talk. Her quick mind seems to have
been an electric current that stimulated other minds to activity, and
created a vortex of speculation wherever she passed. Hungry for ideas,
intellectually and emotionally vibrant, she caught her inspirations
from obscure impulses of a nature thwarted and inhibited from normal
unfolding; and in her sensitive oscillations she was often drawn
away from polar principles to which she would later swing back. There
was quite evidently a fundamental unrest within her, a conflict of
impulses, that issued in dissatisfaction; and this contradiction was
aggravated by intense emotions, which both quickened her mind and
distorted it.

A product of Cambridge bookishness, Margaret Fuller was both a wonder
and a riddle to a generation that made little account of the psychology
of sex. She was commonly looked upon as an intellectual monstrosity,
the most fearful of Yankee bluestockings, and a later Bostonian has
gone so far as to suggest that she was “an unsexed version of Plato’s
Socrates” (Wendell, _Literary History of America_, p. 300). But to
present-day psychology her character is an extraordinarily suggestive
document, and a recent critic has read her seeming contradictions
like an open book.[464] Before Miss Anthony’s penetrating analysis
the Margaret Fuller myth vanishes, and a very real, natural, and
unfortunate woman takes its place. She came of vigorous stock,
independent, outspoken, opinionated. Her grandfather was a clergyman
who was unfrocked by his church for being lukewarm in the Revolutionary
War. Her father, Timothy Fuller, and her four uncles, worked their
way through Harvard. In Timothy Fuller there was a large measure of
Puritan grimness and severity that locked the door on the passions of
his heart, that none might know of them; yet there seems to have been
a volcano in the man who held off the world so brusquely. The rebel
was strong in him. The Fullers were not of Brahmin stock and had no
wish to please their social superiors. While a Harvard undergraduate,
Timothy Fuller turned Jeffersonian republican and lost his place as
first honor man by joining in an undergraduate protest against certain
hated regulations. As a lawyer and politician he repudiated respectable
Federalism, and although he was representative in Congress for four
terms and enjoyed certain other offices, his non-conformity in the end
cost him dear. No doubt he had counted on that, for he was stubborn oak
that might break but would not bend. The tragedy of Margaret Fuller’s
life seems to have been sketched before in the life of Timothy Fuller.

To an extraordinary degree the daughter was the child of the father,
in ideas and sympathies as well as blood. Like him she was a rebel,
but for the daughter to turn rebel involved greater hazards than
for the father. Her sex was a heavy handicap, for the experience of
Fanny Wright and Lucretia Mott had revealed that American chivalry
had definite bounds; it did not shield the woman who ventured beyond
the pale. Yet considering her blood and training, how could she help
thus venturing into freer fields without? From her earliest years her
father treated her as a comrade and gave her the training of a boy. In
her studies he dealt with her as James Mill dealt with his brilliant
son. Perhaps it was a mistake to force her into the rigid groove of
classical learning when she should have been playing with her dolls.
From it she got very unusual acquisitions, but overstimulation broke
her health, and isolation turned her mind in upon itself and made her
the victim of somnambulism and freaks of imagination. The result was
the development, on one side of her nature, of a female counterpart
of Cotton Mather--precocious, domineering, moody, visionary, given to
long hours of greedy reading, gorging herself on books and well-nigh
ruining her intellectual digestion as well as her health. Against this
unfortunate overstimulation her vigorous nature struggled for years,
and never quite successfully. Her emotions were forever embroiling
her intellect. To conceive of her as sexless is curiously to miss the
point of her emotionalism. She was rather the victim of sex. Her ardent
friendships with other women, her flashes of mystical experience, her
fondness for children, her love of luxury and creature comforts, her
eager love affair with James Nathan who unchivalrously found safety in
flight, her friendship with Mazzini and her more intimate friendship
with Count Ossoli, that ended in an unconventional marriage after her
situation rendered it necessary--such reactions can be explained on
no other hypothesis. Her ardent nature was the victim of disastrous
frustrations, rendered the more acute by premature development. If
she had married early, as Harriet Beecher did, and her excessive
energy had been turned into domestic channels, her life must have been
less tragic, whatever the effect might have been on her intellectual
development.

The acutest contemporary analysis of her contradictory character is
that given by her friend William Henry Channing, who found his clue in
the clash between endowment and environment:

  Here was one fond as a child of joy, eager as a native of the
  tropics for swift transition from luxurious rest to passionate
  excitement, prodigal to pour her mingled force of will, thought,
  sentiment, into the life of the moment, all radiant with
  imagination, longing for communion with artists of every age in
  their inspired hours, fitted by genius and culture to mingle as an
  equal in the most refined circles of Europe, and yet her youth and
  early womanhood had passed away amid the very decent, yet drudging,
  descendants of prim Puritans. Trained among those who could have
  discerned her peculiar power, and early fed with the fruits of
  beauty for which her spirits pined, she would have developed into
  one of the finest lyrists, romancers and critics, that the modern
  literary world has seen. This she knew; and this tantalization of
  her fate she keenly felt. (_Memoirs of Margaret Fuller Ossoli_,
  by R. W. Emerson, W. H. Channing, and J. F. Clarke, Vol. II, pp.
  36-37.)

This disastrous clash between endowment and environment is strikingly
exemplified in her delight in Europe when at thirty-four she found
herself there--in her admiration for Georges Sand, and in particular
the extravagance of her love for Rome, where her starved heart found
satisfactions she had long dreamed of. “Italy receives me as a
long-lost child, and I feel myself at home here,” she wrote in 1847;
and a few weeks later, “I find how true was the lure that always drew
me towards Europe. It was no false instinct that said I might here
find an atmosphere to develop me in ways I need. Had I only come ten
years earlier! Now my life must be a failure, so much strength has
been wasted on abstractions, which only came because I grew not in the
right soil” (_ibid._, Vol. II, p. 225). She was too eagerly pagan to be
satisfied with either Puritan or Yankee Cambridge. The pale ethicism of
New England was thin gruel for such an appetite for life. Even Emerson
she found cold, and her stomach rebelled at the food he throve on. But
this was only half the story; the other half was this:

  But the tragedy of Margaret’s history was deeper yet. Behind the
  poet was the woman,--fond and relying, the heroic and disinterested
  woman. The very glow of her poetic enthusiasm was but an outflush
  of trustful affection; the very restlessness of her intellect was
  the confession that her heart had found no home. A “book-worm,”
  a “dilettante,” a “pedant,” I had heard her sneeringly called;
  but now it was evident that her seeming insensibility was virgin
  pride, and her absorption in studying the natural vent of emotions,
  which met no object of life-long attachment. At once, many of her
  peculiarities became intelligible. Fitfulness, unlooked-for changes
  of mood, misconceptions of words and actions, substitutions of
  fancy for fact ... were now referred to the morbid influence of
  affections pent up to prey upon themselves. And, what was still
  more interesting, the clue was given to a singular credulousness,
  by which, in spite of her unusual penetration, Margaret might be
  led away blindfold. As this revelation of her ardent nature burst
  upon me, and ... I saw how faithful she had kept to her life
  purposes,--how patient, gentle, and thoughtful of others, how
  active in self-improvement and usefulness, how wisely dignified she
  had been,--I could not but bow to her in reverence. (_Ibid._, Vol.
  II, p. 37.)

The inchoate rebellions in her heart were stimulated and given form by
her reading. From the English, French, and German romantics she drew
much of her intellectual food. The long hours spent with her father
over Jefferson’s letters were the best of preparation for Rousseau
and Mary Wollstonecraft, and French romanticism provided an excellent
introduction to the German. Her emotions were in high ferment when she
came upon the German school, and she yielded her heart to it without
reserve. Novalis, Richter, above all Goethe, became a passion and
swept her along the path that Hedge and James Freeman Clarke were
following. For years she gathered materials for a life of Goethe, but
a feeling of self-distrust held back the project. Her love for him was
the great literary enthusiasm of her life. “It seems to me,” she wrote
in 1832, “as if the mind of Goethe had embraced the universe.... I am
enchanted while I read. He comprehends every feeling I have ever had
so perfectly, expresses it so beautifully; but when I shut the book,
it seems as if I had lost my personal identity; all my feelings linked
with such an immense variety that belongs to things I had thought
so different” (_ibid._, Vol. I, p. 119). Later, with more critical
analysis of Goethe, she found her enthusiasm modifying; she was
repelled by his calm, aloof intellectuality;[465] but she never wavered
in loyal recognition of his commanding powers.

Her romantic idealism was in full career when the transcendental
movement caught her up and put its stamp upon her. It came as an
emotional appeal to the vague aspirations of a life inadequately
motivated, and she threw herself eagerly into the new philosophy
and became the most hectic of its expounders. The intellectual
foundations of her transcendentalism were so slight in comparison
with the equipment of Hedge and Parker as scarcely to justify her
pretentions to their fellowship. But what she lacked in knowledge of
Kant and Fichte she made up in enthusiasm, and none questioned her
right to speak for the group. The editorship of the _Dial_ provided a
convenient safety valve for her energy, but it neither absorbed her nor
sufficed to satisfy her limitless desires. She needed to espouse a
cause more concrete and dramatic, personal in its demands, calling for
high sacrifice. Abolitionism was at hand, but it repelled her by its
narrow dogmatisms. Garrison was never a hero of hers. She regarded him
with “high respect” for his “noble and generous” course; but “he has
indulged in violent invective and denunciation till he has spoiled the
temper of his mind” (“Frederick Douglass,” in _Life Without and Life
Within_, p. 122). Later, when she was in Europe, she looked back half
regretfully at her indifference to the movement.

  How it pleases me here to think of the Abolitionists! I could never
  endure to be with them at home; they were so tedious, often so
  narrow, always so rabid and exaggerated in their tone. But, after
  all, they had a high motive, something eternal in their desire and
  life. (_Memoirs_, Vol. II, p. 229.)

Even Brook Farm repelled her as much as it attracted her. Though
she loved many of the members, bore her share in the discussions
preliminary to its establishment, and often visited there, she would
not join the venture. She had had enough of farm life at Groton. To
open a road to Utopia with a common plow was, perhaps, too prosaic a
business for her romantic nature, and when the Fourier Phalanx was
introduced she grew skeptical. Fourierism seemed to her too mechanical
a conception, in spite of her sympathy for the humanitarian spirit that
lay behind it. As she looked back upon it from the vantage point of her
French experience, she modified her judgment somewhat, although the old
transcendental bias that Emerson had voiced still colored her views.

  The more I see of the terrible ills which infest the body politic
  of Europe, the more indignation I feel at the selfishness or
  stupidity of those in my own country who oppose an examination of
  these subjects,--such as is animated by the hope of prevention.
  Educated in an age of gross materialism, Fourier is tainted by its
  faults; in attempts to reorganise society, he commits the error
  of making soul the result of health of body, instead of body the
  clothing of the soul; but his heart was that of a genuine lover
  of his kind, of a philanthropist in the sense of Jesus; his views
  are large and noble; his life was one of devout study on these
  subjects, and I should pity the person who, after the briefest
  sojourn in Manchester and Lyons, the most superficial acquaintance
  with the population of London or Paris, could seek to hinder a
  study of his thoughts, or be wanting in reverence for his purposes.
  (_Ibid._, Vol. II, p. 206.)

It was in part from Fourier, certainly from the collectivistic
theories discussed so generally by the transcendental group, that
she received her equipment for the cause which, more than any other
except the dramatic Roman revolution, appealed to the deeper rebellions
of her soul. She had dealt much with the woman question in her
“Conversations,” and in 1844 she published _Woman in the Nineteenth
Century_, a work that made a great stir in America. The “little book
was the first considered statement of feminism in this country”
(Katharine Anthony, _Margaret Fuller_, p. 80), and its novelty was
emphasized by its boldness. The question of woman’s place had emerged
sharply from the Abolition movement, when the appearance of women on
the platform had aroused opposition even from radical reformers, and
Angelina Grimké had encountered insults when she spoke at Abolition
meetings. But Margaret Fuller was the first since Mary Wollstonecraft,
fifty years before, to undertake a reasoned defense of the claims of
woman to emancipation from man-made custom. It was a somewhat shocking
book to fling at respectable Boston bluestockings--male as well as
female--for not only did she discuss equality of economic opportunity
and equality of political rights for women, but she went further and
spoke frankly about sex equality, marriage, prostitution, physical
passions--pretty much everything that was taboo in Boston society. It
was a bold thing to do, needing more courage even than to engage in a
Fourieristic onslaught upon the conventions of private property. Only a
first-class rebel would have had the temerity to offer such morsels to
wagging tongues.

This was her parting shot at a world that had done its best to stifle
her. Thenceforth her field was to broaden out immensely. In 1844 she
went to New York to live in the family of Horace Greeley and write
critical reviews for _The Tribune_--a shift that marked the beginning
of her intellectual maturity, the end of her mystical sentimentalism.
She was thirty-four years of age, and she plunged vigorously into the
work of criticism, never perhaps very successfully, certainly never
with high distinction. Her judgments were penetrating and individual,
she awakened some Cambridge animosities by her comment on certain
Cambridge poets, but she was not a notable critic. A fine craftsmanship
she never attained. A light touch she could never command. Nevertheless
the experience was sobering. Honest, practical Horace Greeley, with
his pugnacious fondness for social reform, was an excellent antidote
to Concord transcendentalism; and an awakening sociological interest
discovered ample opportunities in New York for the expression of her
mother-instinct. She took to her stormy bosom the inmates of Sing Sing
prison, the poor and outcast of the city. At last she went to Europe,
fell in with Mazzini, and found a cause dramatic enough and real enough
to satisfy her rebellious instincts. She was profoundly stirred by the
Roman revolution, took charge of one of the hospitals, and spent her
strength freely. On the tragic failure of the revolt she started home
with her husband and child, only to perish on the sandy shores of Fire
Island--a fate she did not turn her finger to escape. Perhaps it was
well. She had only too good reason to be fearful of her reception and
of the future. Tongues that had wagged before would certainly have
risen to a virtuous gabble over her misadventure in Italy. On the whole
one must be glad that her friends refused to permit her good name to
be thrown to the gossips. Why shouldn’t gentlemen lie stoutly if by so
doing they can cheat the salacious?

A sensitive emotional nature offers the best of social barometers,
and Margaret Fuller’s tragic life, despite its lack of solid
accomplishment, was an epitome of the great revolt of the New England
mind against Puritan asceticism and Yankee materialism. She was the
emotional expression of a rebellious generation that had done with
the past and was questioning the future. Not a scholar like Theodore
Parker, not a thinker like Thoreau, not an artist like Emerson, she was
a ferment of troubled aspiration, an enthusiasm for a more generous
culture than New England had known--the logical outcome of the romantic
revolution which, beginning with Channing’s discovery of humanitarian
France, and leading thence to idealistic Germany, was to break the
indurated shell of life in New England, and release its conscience and
its mind. She was the spiritual child of Jean Jacques even more than of
Goethe--a fact that she eventually came to realize. Writing from Paris
in 1847, she said:

  To the ... Chamber of Deputies, I was indebted for a sight of the
  manuscripts of Rousseau, treasured in their library. I saw them and
  touched them,--those manuscripts just as he has celebrated them,
  written on fine white paper, tied with ribbon. Yellow and faded
  age has made them, yet at their touch I seemed to feel the fire
  of youth, immortally glowing, more and more expansive, with which
  his soul has pervaded this century. He was the precursor of all we
  most prize. True, his blood was mixed with madness, and the course
  of his actual life made some _detours_ through villainous places;
  but his spirit was intimate with the fundamental truths of human
  nature, and fraught with prophecy. There is none who has given
  birth to more life for this age; his gifts are yet untold; they are
  too present with us; but he who thinks really must often think with
  Rousseau, and learn him ever more and more. Such is the method of
  genius,--to ripen fruit for the crowd by those rays of whose heat
  they complain. (_Memoirs_, Vol. II, pp. 206-207.)

The rebel pays a heavy price for his rebellions, as Margaret learned to
her cost. She suffered much in her daily life, but it was her art that
suffered most. She was evidently a far richer nature than her printed
works reveal. Intense in her extravagant demands upon life, a radical
humanitarian in all her sympathies and instincts, generous in response
to whatever was fine and high, living unduly an inner life as became a
daughter of Puritanism--Margaret Fuller was too vivid a personality,
too complete an embodiment of the rich ferment of the forties, to be
carelessly forgotten. The deeper failure of her career--its vague
aspirations and inadequate accomplishment--was a failure that may be
justly charged against the narrow world that bred her. Perhaps no
sharper criticism could be leveled at New England than that it could do
no better with such material, lent it by the gods.


Footnotes

[464] See Katharine Anthony, _Margaret Fuller, A Psychological
Biography_.

[465] See _Life Without and Life Within_, pp. 23-60.




Part IV: Other Aspects of the New England Mind




