Chapter 4.

[167] For a statement of the doctrine, see Sermon XXXIV, “God’s
Sovereignty,” in _Works_, New York, 1847, Vol. IV, p. 548.

Edwards unconsciously admits that the doctrine of sovereignty was
reactionary. “From my childhood up, my mind had been full of objections
against the doctrine of God’s sovereignty, in choosing whom He would to
eternal life, and rejecting whom He pleased, leaving them eternally to
perish and be everlastingly tormented in hell.” Later he came to regard
such repugnance as the sinful expression of the natural man. As he saw
further, his mind “apprehended the justice and reasonableness of ...
God’s absolute sovereignty and justice with respect to salvation ...
as much as of anything that I see with my eyes; at least it is so at
times. But I have often, since that first conviction, had quite another
sense of God’s sovereignty than I had then. I have often hid not only
a conviction, but a delightful conviction. The doctrine has very often
appeared exceedingly pleasant, bright, and sweet.... But my first
conviction was not so.” Quoted in Allen, _Jonathan Edwards_, pp. 37-38.

[168] Sermon XXVII, in _Works_, Vol. IV, p. 438.

[169] See Sermon IX, in _Works_, Vol. IV, p. 226. The argument is
unfolded in the following propositions: “Every crime or fault deserves
a greater or less punishment, according as the crime is greater or
less.” “A crime is more or less heinous, according as we are under
greater or less obligations to the contrary.” “Our obligations to
love, honor, and obey any being, is in proportion to its loveliness,
honorableness, and authority.” “But God is a being infinitely lovely,
because he hath infinite excellence and beauty.” “So that sin against
God, being a violation of infinite obligations, must be a crime
infinitely heinous, and so deserving of infinite punishment.”

[170] See in particular Sermon XI. “The Eternity of Hell Torments”;
Sermon XII, “When the Wicked shall have filled up the measure of their
Sin, wrath will come upon them to the uttermost”; Sermon XIII, “The End
of the Wicked contemplated by the Righteous; or, The Torments of the
Wicked in Hell, no occasion of grief to the Saints in Heaven”; Sermon
XV, “Sinners in the Hands of an Angry God,” in _Works_, Vol. IV.

[171] According to Edwards there were four regular stages: (1) the
first stirrings, when the sinner is brought under conviction that he is
lost; (2) the realization of God’s justice, that he merits damnation;
(3) the breaking in of the light, the first “gracious discoveries”
of God’s mercies; (4) peace after the storm, the joy of assurance of
salvation. For a fuller statement, see Allen, _Jonathan Edwards_, pp.
133-160.




Chapter III • Benjamin Franklin • Our First Ambassador


There was a singularly dramatic fitness in the life and career of
Benjamin Franklin. America has never been more worthily represented
at old-world capitals than by this unpretentious commoner, drawn from
the stock of the plain people. A plebeian in an aristocratic age, he
was nevertheless, by common consent, first among colonial Americans in
qualities of mind and heart. A wit and philosopher, rich in learning,
charming in manners, ripe in the wisdom of this world, resourceful
in dealing with men and events, he was one of the most delightful as
he was one of the greatest men produced by the English race in the
eighteenth century.

“Figure to yourself,” he wrote in his seventy-second year, “an old man,
with gray hair appearing under a marten fur cap, among the powdered
heads of Paris. It is this odd figure that salutes you, with handfuls
of blessings.” An odd figure indeed in such a setting, but a figure
that captured the imagination of Paris, as it has since captured the
imagination of America; so novel as to seem romantic--a charming rustic
philosopher who might have stepped out of the pages of Rousseau. And
so the French aristocracy patronized _le bon homme_, and laughed with
him at the affectations of this preposterous world, and made much of
him for the zest that it discovered in a novel sensation. It was the
same odd figure that had stood at the bar of the House of Commons and
matched his intelligence against that of celebrated English lawyers;
the same figure that had been called in council by the great Pitt--who
thought himself too great to learn anything even from Franklin; that
had been lashed by the scurrilous tongue of Wedderburn; that had seen a
thousand bribes dangled before him by Lord Howe and other gentlemen--a
figure that seems strangely out of place in that old-fashioned Tory
world, with its narrow sympathies and narrower intelligence. And yet
considered in the light of social revolutions, what other figure in
eighteenth-century Europe or America is so dramatically significant?
The figure of the self-made democrat, with some three millions of his
fellows at his back, and countless other millions to come, who was
entering on a world-wide struggle for political mastery, the end of
which no one can yet foresee? His presence in the councils of gentlemen
was a tacit denial of their hitherto unquestioned right of supremacy.
It was a rare personal triumph; but it was far more significant than
that, it was the triumph of a rising class and a new social ideal.

Although Franklin’s origins, whether Boston or Philadelphia, were
narrowly provincial, his mind from early youth to extreme old age was
curiously open and free, and to such a mind the intellectual wealth
of the world lies open and free. From that wealth he helped himself
generously, to such good effect that he early became an intellectual
cosmopolitan, at ease with the best intellects and at home among the
diverse speculative interests of the eighteenth century: the sane and
witty embodiment of its rationalism, its emancipation from authority,
its growing concern for social justice, its hopeful pursuit of new
political and economic philosophies, its tempered optimism that trusted
intelligence to set the world right. No other man in America and few in
Europe had so completely freed themselves from the prejudice of custom.
The Calvinism in which he was bred left not the slightest trace upon
him; and the middle-class world from which he emerged did not narrow
his mind to its petty horizons. He was a free man who went his own
way with imperturbable good will and unbiased intelligence; our first
social philosopher, the first ambassador of American democracy to the
courts of Europe.

Fortune was kind to Franklin in many ways: kind in that it did not
visit upon him the fate that befell his elder brother Ebenezer, of whom
Sewall noted, “Ebenezer Franklin of the South Church, a male-infant
of 16 months old, was drowned in a Tub of Suds, Febr. 5, 1702/3”;
kind also in that it set him in a land where opportunity waited upon
enterprise, and where thousands of kindred spirits were erecting a
society that honored such qualities as he possessed. In England he must
have remained middle-class, shut in by a wall of prejudice; but in
colonial America he found a congenial environment. Like Samuel Sewall,
he swam easily in the main current of colonial life, won increasing
honors, until--as he naïvely remarked--he came more than once to stand
before kings. How fortunate he was is revealed by contrast with the
career of his great English counterpart and fellow spirit, Daniel
Defoe, whose _Essay on Projects_--a classic document of the rising
middle class--might well have been Franklin’s first textbook.

The earliest literary representative of the English middle class, Defoe
preached the same gospel of social betterment. With his head full of
projects for the advancement of trade and the material well-being of
his fellows, he preached the new gospel of practical efficiency to a
generation of wits, going so far as to assert that the ideal statesman
should be sought, not among gentlemen but among merchants, whose
training in business affairs had made them shrewd judges of men and
capable in dealing with practical matters. But the London of Queen
Anne was not a place in which to rise by preaching efficiency. Defoe’s
day had not yet come in England, and in spite of great abilities and
arduous labors he remained a Grub Street hack, the servant and not
the counselor of aristocratic politicians. Instead of coming to stand
before kings--like the more fortunate Franklin--he stood often before
constables; instead of cracking his joke and his bottle at Will’s
Coffee House, he was forced to study the ways of the unprosperous at
Bridewell. But if he failed in his ambition to get on, he found a
certain solace in the vicarious realization of his ideal. Robinson
Crusoe, the practically efficient man making himself master of his
environment, was the dream of Daniel Defoe; Franklin was the visible,
new-world embodiment of that dream.

It was Franklin’s supreme capacity for doing well the things which
his fellow Americans held in esteem, that enabled him to rise out of
obscurity to a position of leadership. Before he should be intrusted
with the confidence of his fellow citizens, he must prove himself
worthy of such confidence, and even in colonial America the task was
far from easy. In the wealthier communities society was exclusive and
select--nowhere more so than in Philadelphia--and it could not be
expected to view with approval the advancement of a printer-tradesman,
especially if he were a member of the plebeian anti-Proprietary
party. It was an evidence of Franklin’s discretion that he removed
from Boston, where neither his father’s chandlery shop, nor his
brother’s baiting of the ruling gentry, would serve his purpose. In
Philadelphia, free from family entanglements, he bent himself to the
task of securing a competence, understanding how easily the wheel
turns on a well-greased axle; and by the time he had come to his
early forties he had kept his shop so well that henceforth it would
keep him. He was ready to do his real work in the world; and in the
choice of that work he revealed the curious _flair_ for the timely that
was so characteristic. His extraordinary successes in the field of
civic betterments gained him the good will of the commonalty, and his
experiments in natural philosophy won the approbation of the gentry.
Interest in scientific inquiry, particularly in physics, had spread
widely in England since the founding of the Royal Society, and to be an
authority on magnetism was as evident a mark of breeding in Georgian
England as discriminating judgment in the matter of manuscripts and
mistresses had been a sign of culture among Florentine cinquecentists.
In establishing a reputation as a natural philosopher, therefore,
Franklin not only was acquiring dignity at home, but he was providing
himself with a sure passport to European favor. And it was the seal
of European approval that finally won for Franklin the grudging
recognition of the first families of Philadelphia. A few held out
against him and to the day of his death regarded him with disapproval;
but in the end his personal charm prevailed with all but a handful of
elderly Tory ladies. So delightful a wit and so useful a citizen could
not be dismissed as a pushing tradesman.

Franklin first entered politics as a member of the popular party, then
engaged in a bitter struggle with the Proprietors over tax matters,
defense of the frontier, and other questions of acute popular concern.
There was the usual colonial alignment between the backcountry yeomanry
and the town gentry; between the agrarian and mercantile interests;
and the dispute had reached a point where the yeomanry determined to
appeal to the King to convert the commonwealth into a Crown Colony. As
one of the leaders of the popular party, Franklin was singled out for
attack. A bitter election went against him, and he lost his seat in the
Assembly, only to be chosen Colonial Agent to England, there to begin
his long diplomatic career. Probably no other attack which Franklin
suffered was so coarse or vindictive as this assault by the Proprietary
party, led by the first gentlemen of Philadelphia, John Dickinson
among them. Unpleasant as the experience was, it proved of service to
Franklin, for it taught him how quickly the hornets would be about the
ears of anyone who disturbed the nest of official perquisites; and this
was worth knowing to a colonial diplomat on his first mission to a
court and parliament where yellow jackets were uncommonly abundant.[172]

He was nearly threescore when he set out on his diplomatic mission,
which beginning modestly as temporary agent of the anti-Proprietary
party of Pennsylvania, was to broaden immensely as the American
difficulties increased, until he became in the eyes of all the
world the spokesman of the colonial cause; first at London to King,
Parliament, and people, and later at Paris to all Europe. It was
a mission of discussion and argument, curiously illuminating to
a colonial bred in a simple, decentralized world. Before he went
abroad Franklin had been a democrat by temperament and environment;
when he returned he was a democrat by conviction, confirmed in his
preference for government immediately responsible to the majority
will. Centralized Tory governments had taught him the excellence
of town-meeting ways. At London he discovered widespread political
corruption. It was a world flyblown with the vices of irresponsible
power. The letters of Franklin are full of the scandal of bribe-taking
and pension-mongering, of gross parliamentary jobbery. The elections
of 1768 were a debauch, the brisk bidding of Indian nabobs sending the
market price of parliamentary seats up to four thousand pounds. “It
is thought,” he wrote on March 13, “that near two millions will be
spent on this election; but those, who understand figures and act by
computation, say the crown has _two millions in places and pensions_ to
dispose of, and it is well worth while to engage in such a seven years
lottery, though all that have tickets should not get prizes.”[173]
To expect such a government to be swayed by appeals to justice or
abstract rights was plain folly, Franklin very quickly learned. The
colonial goose was there to be plucked, and gentlemen who gained their
livelihood by skillful plucking would not easily be denied. “To get
a larger field on which to fatten a herd of worthless parasites, is
all that is regarded,” wrote the celebrated London physician, Dr.
Fothergill, to Franklin.[174] Even war with the colonies might not seem
undesirable to some, for “an auditor of the exchequer has sixpence in
the pound, or a fortieth part, of all the public money expended by the
nation, so that, when a war costs forty millions, one million is paid
to him.”[175]

It was a bitter experience for one who had grown up in respect for
England and veneration for English traditions. Franklin was not a
man of divided loyalties, and his love of the old home was deep and
sincere. He had many warm friends there, and the idea of American
separation from the empire was profoundly repugnant to him. It was not
till he was convinced beyond hope that America could expect from the
English government nothing but ignoble dependence that he accepted the
idea of independence. Again and again he complained bitterly of “the
extreme corruption prevalent among all orders of men in this rotten
old state.”[176] “I wish all the friends of liberty and of man would
quit that sink of corruption, and leave it to its fate.” “I do not
expect that your new Parliament will be either wiser or honester than
the last. All projects to procure an honest one, by place bills, etc.,
appear to me vain and impracticable. The true cure, I imagine, is to
be found in rendering all places unprofitable, and the King too poor
to give bribes and pensions. Till this is done, which can only be by
a revolution (and I think you have not virtue enough left to procure
one), your nation will always be plundered, and obliged to pay by
taxes the plunderers for plundering and ruining. Liberty and virtue
therefore join in the call, +COME OUT OF HER, MY PEOPLE+!”[177] “The
people of England ... are just and generous,” wrote his friend David
Hartley, member of Parliament, “and, if it were put to the sense of
the people of England, you would not be left in any doubt whether it
was _want of will_, or _want of power_, to do you justice. You know
the blot of our constitution, by which, to our disgrace, and to your
misfortune, a corrupt ministry, sheltered by Parliamentary influence,
are out of our immediate control. A day of account may come, when the
justice of the nation may prevail; and if it comes not too late, it
may prove a day of reconciliation and cordial reunion between us and
America.”[178] He is blind indeed who cannot see in such experience
the explanation of Franklin’s later efforts in Pennsylvania and in the
constitutional convention to keep government in America responsive to
the will of the people.

During the long years of his ambassadorship, so rich in intellectual
opportunity, Franklin was intimately concerned with economics and
politics, and he found in them subjects congenial to his talents. By
temperament he was what we should call today a sociologist. He cared
little for abstract reasoning, but much for social betterment; and this
led him to examine critically current economic theory in the light
of present fact. All his life economics was a major interest with
him, and his several contributions entitle him to be regarded as our
first important economist, the only one indeed before the nineteenth
century. His chief guides in this little explored field seem to have
been Sir William Petty, the statistician of the Restoration period, in
his younger days, and the French Physiocrats in later years. He was
the first American to abandon the traditional mercantile school--a
generation before other American thinkers had repudiated it; and he was
the first to ally himself with the rising school of _laissez faire_.

In the year 1729, when he was just turned twenty-three, Franklin
entered the field of economics with a pamphlet entitled _A Modest
Inquiry into the Nature and Necessity of a Paper Currency_. It is a
curiously suggestive work, not only for the light which it sheds on his
economic views, but on his social and political sympathies. It marks
his early alignment with the agrarian party, to which he adhered to
the end of his life. From the days when Samuel Sewall first confronted
the question of land-banks in the Massachusetts legislature till the
British government forbade all issues of bills of credit, the currency
question was bitterly debated in the several colonies. It was primarily
a class issue, in which the town merchants and money lenders found
themselves outvoted by the agrarian debtors and small men. Little light
had come from those debates on the nature of money and its social
functions; but much heat had been engendered over the supposed question
of honest versus dishonest money. With this cheap fallacy Franklin was
not concerned; but he was greatly concerned in this and in later papers
in expounding the quantitative theory of money, the nature of credit,
and the important fact, overlooked by the hard-money men, that gold and
silver are themselves commodities, fluctuating in value with supply and
demand. This first pamphlet, Franklin afterward remarked, “was well
received by the common people in general; but the rich men disliked it,
for it increased and strengthened the clamor for more money; and, they
happening to have no writers among them that were able to answer it,
their opposition slackened, and the point was carried by a majority in
the House.”[179]

By much the most interesting idea in the pamphlet, however, is the
elaboration of the labor theory of value. Commenting on this, McMaster
says in his _Life of Franklin_:

  Bad as were his notions of political economy, his pamphlet
  contained one great truth,--the truth that labor is the measure of
  value. Whether he discovered, or, as is not unlikely, borrowed it,
  he was the first openly to assert it; and his it remained till,
  forty-seven years later, Adam Smith adopted it and reaffirmed it in
  “The Wealth of Nations.”[180]

Unfortunately the biographer’s knowledge of the history of economic
thought was as faulty as, in his judgment, were Franklin’s economic
principles. In his _Treatise of Taxes_, written in 1662, Sir William
Petty--whom Franklin in many ways greatly resembled--clearly elaborated
the principle of labor-value;[181] it was restated by Vauban in 1707,
in his _Projet d’une disme Royale_, by Hume in 1752, and later by the
Physiocrats; and when Adam Smith wrote it was pretty widely known.
There can be little doubt where Franklin got it. The similarity between
his work and that of Sir William Petty is too evident to escape
comment. But that does not lessen the significance of the fact that a
self-trained provincial of three and twenty should have read Petty’s
work, seized upon the salient idea and turned it to effective use,
years before economic students generally were acquainted with it. All
his life Franklin took up ideas like a sponge, and what he took he
incorporated with the solid results of his own observations.

During his stay in England Franklin came in close contact with the
body of Physiocratic writings, which seem to have greatly stimulated
his interest in economic thought. The school was at the height of
its influence between the years 1763 and 1772, and had pretty well
undermined the position of the mercantilists. They were the founders
of modern social science and their teachings contained in germ the
liberal doctrine of economics in its entirety. In their emphasis upon
free trade and _laissez-faire_ competition, on the police theory of
the state, on property, security, liberty, on the natural laws of
association and self-interest, and especially in their emphasis on land
as the sole source of wealth, they presented a system of economics that
fitted American conditions as Franklin understood those conditions. In
one important point--their acceptance of an absolute prince--Franklin
broke with them wholly; but their preference for agriculture over
manufacturing and commerce accorded with his deepest convictions.
America was notably happy and contented in comparison with Europe, and
America would remain happy and contented, he believed, so long as land
was abundant and her farmers remained freeholders. The new middle-class
gospel of industrialism he profoundly distrusted. He shared Goldsmith’s
concern over the destruction of the English peasantry and the creation
of a degraded proletariat. Manufacture and trade developed only
where free land was inadequate or the peasants were dispossessed;
industrialism sprang from the national poverty and was nourished by it.
Writing in 1760 he said:

  Unprejudiced men well know, that all the penal and prohibitory
  laws that were ever thought on will not be sufficient to prevent
  manufactures in a country, whose inhabitants surpass the number
  that can subsist by the husbandry of it.... Manufactures are
  founded in poverty. It is the number of poor without land in a
  country, and who must work for others at low wages or starve, that
  enables undertakers to carry on a manufacture, and afford it cheap
  enough to prevent the importation of the same kind from abroad, and
  to bear the expense of its own exportation. But no man, who can
  have a piece of land of his own, sufficient by his labor to subsist
  his family in plenty, is poor enough to be a manufacturer, and work
  for a master. Hence while there is land enough in America for our
  people, there can never be manufactures to any amount or value.[182]

Nine years later, in his _Positions to be Examined, concerning National
Wealth_, he stated the Physiocratic theory thus:

  There seem to be but three ways for a nation to acquire wealth. The
  first is by _war_, as the Romans did, in plundering their conquered
  neighbors. This is _robbery_. The second by _commerce_, which is
  generally _cheating_. The third by _agriculture_, the only _honest
  way_, wherein man receives a real increase of the seed thrown into
  the ground, in a kind of continual miracle, wrought by the hand of
  God in his favor.[183]

Franklin’s prejudice against trade somewhat lessened in after years,
as he considered the economic need of free exchange of commodities.
In 1774, two years before the publication of _The Wealth of Nations_,
he collaborated with George Whately in writing a pamphlet entitled
_Principles of Trade_, that suggests Adam Smith. Franklin was
acquainted with Smith, had visited him, and doubtless had discussed
with him the theory of _laissez faire_, division of labor, use of
machinery, and other principles of the new school, but no mention of
him is made.[184] The central doctrine is thus elaborated:

  Perhaps, in general, it would be better if government meddled no
  farther with trade, than to protect it, and let it take its course.
  Most of the statutes, or acts, edicts, _arrêts_, and placarts
  of parliaments, princes, and states, for regulating, directing,
  or restraining of trade, have, we think, been either political
  blunders, or jobs obtained by artful men for private advantage,
  under pretense of public good. When Colbert assembled some wise
  old merchants of France, and desired their advice and opinion,
  how he could best serve and promote commerce, their answer, after
  consultation, was, in three words only, _Laissez-nous faire_: “Let
  us alone.” It is said by a very solid writer of the same nation,
  that he is well advanced in the science of politics, who knows the
  full force of that maxim, _Pas trop gouverner_: “Not to govern too
  much.” Which, perhaps, would be of more use when applied to trade,
  than in any other public concern. It were therefore to be wished,
  that commerce was as free between all the nations of the world, as
  it is between the several counties of England; so would all, by
  mutual communication, obtain more enjoyments. Those counties do not
  ruin one another by trade; neither would the nations. No nation was
  ever ruined by trade, even seemingly the most disadvantageous.[185]

As a colonial, long familiar with the injustice of Navigation Laws,
Boards of Trade, and other restrictions in favor of British tradesmen,
Franklin agreed with Adam Smith on the principle of free trade; but
with later developments of the _laissez-faire_ school--its fetish of
the economic man and its iron law of wages--he would not have agreed.
Plugson of Undershot was no hero of his, and the social system which
Plugson was creating would have seemed to him as vicious as the old
system with its “bad, wasteful, plundering governments, and their mad
destructive wars.” In his later speculations he was rather the social
philosopher than the economist, puzzled at the irrationality of society
that chooses to make a pigsty of the world, instead of the garden
that it might be if men would but use the sense that God has given
them. “The happiness of individuals is evidently the ultimate end of
political society,”[186] he believed, and a starvation wage-system was
the surest way of destroying that happiness.[187] In one of the most
delightful letters that he ever wrote, Franklin commented on the ways
of men thus:

  It is wonderful how preposterously the affairs of this world are
  managed. Naturally one would imagine, that the interests of a few
  individuals should give way to general interest; but individuals
  manage their affairs with so much more application, industry, and
  address, than the public do theirs, that general interest most
  commonly gives way to particular. We assemble parliaments and
  councils, to have the benefit of their collected wisdom; but we
  necessarily have, at the same time, the inconvenience of their
  collected passions, prejudices, and private interests. By the
  help of these, artful men overpower their wisdom and dupe its
  possessors; and if we may judge by the acts, _arrêts_, and edicts,
  all the world over, for regulating commerce, an assembly of great
  men is the greatest fool upon earth?...

  What occasions then so much want and misery? It is the employment
  of men and women in works, that produce neither the necessaries
  nor conveniences of life, who, with those who do nothing, consume
  necessaries raised by the laborious.... Look round the world, and
  see the millions employed in doing nothing, or in something that
  amounts to nothing, when the necessaries and conveniences of life
  are in question. What is the bulk of commerce, for which we fight
  and destroy each other, but the toil of millions for superfluities,
  to the great hazard and loss of many lives?... It has been computed
  by some political arithmetician, that, if every man and woman would
  work for four hours each day on something useful, that labor would
  produce sufficient to procure all the necessaries and comforts of
  life, want and misery would be banished out of the world, and the
  rest of the twenty-four hours might be leisure and happiness.[188]

But the immediate problem of Franklin as representative of the colonies
at St. James’s, was political--how to reconcile the antagonistic
ambitions of the sundered bodies of Englishmen; and the solution which
he set forth with admirable clearness, bears the impress of a mind
intent upon the reality behind parchment pretense. While lawyers were
befogging the issue with legal quibble, and politicians were proving
the unconstitutionality of the forces stirring in eighteenth-century
America, Franklin was more concerned with adjusting imperial policy to
existing fact. On one side were the colonies, in which the practice of
local self-government had taken deep root; whether the practice was
sanctioned by their charters or the British constitution was beside the
question. On the other side was the British parliament, serving as a
legislative body for its proper constituency, the people of the British
Isles. Over both colonies and parliament, providing an effective but
ungalling tie to bind the parts together, was the King, to whom both
paid willing allegiance. So long as England was content to maintain the
_status quo_, the colonies, Franklin believed, would remain loyal to
the empire; but if the ministry persisted in its program of extending
parliamentary sovereignty over the colonies, the outcome must be one of
two things, federation or separation.

To the principle of federation Franklin was an early and faithful
friend. The conception of a federal union of the several colonies was
slowly spreading in America, and no other colonial had done so much
to further it; in his well-known Plan of Union he had sketched the
outlines of a federal constitution; what was more natural, therefore,
than for him to think in terms of a Federated British Empire, as a
statesmanlike solution of the present perplexities. The plan involved
two problems: first, an inquiry into the nature and constitution
of an imperial parliament, and second, provision for an equitable
representation of the several divisions of the empire. The present
difficulties had arisen out of the ambition of the British parliament
to assume sovereignty over the colonial legislatures, thereby reducing
them to a dependent status; those difficulties would be settled only
by constitutional recognition of local rights and local sovereignties.
“The British state,” he argued, “is only the Island of Great Britain,”
and if by reason of familiarity with local needs, “the British
legislature” is “the only proper judge of what concerns the welfare of
that state,” why does the principle not hold for the several colonial
legislatures?

  Here appears the excellency of the invention of colony government,
  by separate, independent legislatures. By this means, the remotest
  parts of a great empire may be as well governed as the centre;
  misrule, oppressions of proconsuls, and discontents and rebellions
  thence arising, prevented. By this means, the power of a king
  may be extended without inconvenience over territories of any
  dimensions, how great soever. America was thus happily governed in
  all its different and remote settlements, by the crown and their
  own Assemblies, till the new politics took place, of governing it
  by one Parliament, which have not succeeded and never will.[189]

In this dream of a British Empire Franklin was far in advance of
his time. On both sides of the ocean selfish and unimaginative men
stood ready to thwart all such proposals; little Englanders and
little colonials in vast numbers were concerned with more immediate
and personal interests than those of the English race. Nevertheless
Franklin was convinced that the gods, if not the Tories, were on the
side of the colonies. The enormous increase in material strength that
the years were swiftly bringing to America was an augury of good hope;
the legitimate demands of America would be granted when America had
grown too strong to be denied, which must be shortly. In the meantime
it was the duty of Englishmen, British and colonial alike, to endeavor
“with unfeigned and unwearying zeal to preserve from breaking that
fine and noble China vase, the British empire.” It was the traditional
policy of “protract and grow strong”--a wise and sane policy--and
Franklin clung to it until he was convinced of its utter futility.
One other choice remained--separation; and he made that choice sadly,
understanding better than most what it involved.

The years which followed were filled to the brim for Franklin as well
as for America. Ideals changed and principles clarified swiftly;
but his social philosophy was founded on too wide and sobering an
experience with men and governments, to sway with every gusty passion
of the times. He had been a democrat from his youth up and in those
critical first days of independence, when the forces of agrarianism
were taking possession of state governments, he threw in his lot
with them, and joined heartily in the stimulating work of providing
a democratic constitution for Pennsylvania. During the later years
of reaction following the peace, when so many Revolutionary leaders
endeavored to stay the agrarian movement and undo its work, he saw
no cause to lose faith in government immediately responsive to the
majority will. He was a forerunner of Jefferson, like him firm in the
conviction that government was good in the measure that it remained
close to the people. He sat in the Constitutional Convention as one of
the few democrats, and although he was unable to make headway against
the aristocratic majority, he was quite unconvinced by their rhetoric.
For years he had been an advocate of unrestricted manhood suffrage,
annual parliaments,[190] and a single-chamber legislature; and when he
heard eloquent young lawyers argue that a single-chamber legislature,
responsive to a democratic electorate, must lead to mob legislation,
and that good government required a carefully calculated system of
checks and balances, he remarked:

  It appears to me ... like putting one horse before a cart and the
  other behind it, and whipping them both. If the horses are of equal
  strength, the wheels of the cart, like the wheels of government,
  will stand still; and if the horses are strong enough the cart will
  be torn to pieces.[191]

When in 1790 it was proposed to substitute a bicameral system for the
single-chamber in Pennsylvania, Franklin came to the defense of the
simpler, more democratic form, with a vivacity little staled by years:

  Has not the famous political fable of the snake, with two heads and
  one body, some useful instruction contained in it? She was going
  to a brook to drink, and in her way was to pass through a hedge, a
  twig of which opposed her direct course; one head chose to go on
  the right side of the twig, the other on the left; so that time was
  spent in the contest, and before the decision was completed, the
  poor snake died with thirst.[192]

Both his economic principles and his views on government have been
condemned by Federalistic critics as tainted with populism. They both
sprang from the same root of agrarian democracy. Whether Franklin
or his critics more adequately represented the larger interests of
eighteenth-century America is beside the present question; it is enough
to note that all such criticism is leveled primarily at Franklin’s
democratic philosophy as a thing in itself undesirable, if not
dangerous.

Franklin may often have been wrong, but he was never arrogant, never
dogmatic. He was too wise and too generous for that. In the midst
of prosperity he never forgot the unprosperous. All his life his
sympathy went out to whoever suffered in person or fortune from the
injustice of society: to the debtor who found himself pinched by the
shrinking supply of currency; to the black slave who suffered the most
elementary of wrongs; to impressed seamen; to the weak and wretched
of earth. He was a part of that emerging humanitarian movement which,
during the last half of the eighteenth century, was creating a new
sense of social responsibility. True to his Physiocratic convictions,
Franklin was social-minded. He was concerned not with property or class
interests, but with the common welfare; and in his quick sympathy for
all sorts and conditions of men, in his conviction that he must use
his talents to make this world better and not exploit it, he reveals
the breadth and generosity of his nature. Reason and work, in his
pragmatic philosophy, are the faithful handmaids of progress, of which
war, whether public or private, is the utter negation. After long
years of thought he rendered a judgment which later experience has not
reversed,--“there is no good war and no bad peace.”

It is to little purpose that certain shortcomings of Franklin are dwelt
upon. “There is a flower of religion, a flower of honor, a flower of
chivalry, that you must not require of Franklin,” said Sainte-Beuve;
a judgment that is quite true and quite obvious. A man who is less
concerned with the golden pavements of the City of God than that the
cobblestones on Chestnut Street in Philadelphia should be well and
evenly laid, who troubles less to save his soul from burning hereafter
than to protect his neighbors’ houses by organizing an efficient
fire-company, who is less regardful of the light that never was on
sea or land than of a new-model street lamp to light the steps of the
belated wayfarer--such a man, obviously, does not reveal the full
measure of human aspiration. Franklin ended as he began, the child
of a century marked by sharp spiritual limitations. What was best
in that century he made his own. In his modesty, his willingness to
compromise, his openmindedness, his clear and luminous understanding,
his charity--above all, in his desire to subdue the ugly facts of
society to some more rational scheme of things--he proved himself a
great and useful man, one of the greatest and most useful whom America
has produced.


Footnotes

[172] “You know,” wrote Franklin to his wife on the eve of his
departure, “that I have many enemies ... and very bitter ones; and
you must expect their enmity will extend in some degree to you.” He
was forced to slip away and get secretly on board the vessel. His
activities were reproved thus by a certain Tory lady:

  Oh! had he been wise to pursue
    The track for his talents designed,
  What a tribute of praise had been due
    To the teacher and friend of mankind.

  But to covet political fame
    Was in him a degrading ambition,
  The spark that from Lucifer came,
    And kindled the blaze of sedition.

  (In _Works_, Vol. VII, p. 267.)

In Sargent’s _Loyal Verses of Joseph Stansbury and Doctor Jonathan
Odell_, these verses are attributed to a less likely source.

[173] _Works_, Vol. VII, p. 398.

[174] _Ibid._, Vol. V, p. 81.

[175] _Ibid._, Vol. II, p. 428. A good deal of light is thrown upon the
ways of the ministry in Franklin’s account, _Negotiations in London_.
See in particular pp. 37, 68, 76 of Vol. V, where Lord Hyde and Lord
Howe exhibit special solicitude for his advancement. His letters tell
of successive attempts to approach him, and among his works is a
little skit in which he speaks of himself thus: “Your correspondent
_Brittannicus_ inveighs violently against Dr. Franklin, for his
ingratitude to the ministry of this nation, who have conferred upon
him so many favors. They gave him the post-office of America: they
made his son a governor; and they offered him a post of five hundred a
year in the salt-office, if he would relinquish the interests of his
country; but he has had the wickedness to continue true to it, and is
as much an American as ever. As it is a settled point in government
here, that every man has his price, it is plain they are bunglers in
their business, and have not given him enough.” (_Works_, Vol. IV, pp.
534-535.)

[176] _Ibid._, Vol. VIII, p. 146.

[177] _Ibid._, Vol. VIII, pp. 215, 505.

[178] _Ibid._, Vol. VIII, p. 177.

[179] _Works_, Vol. II, p. 254.

[180] P. 64.

[181] See _Economic Writings of Sir W. Petty_, Cambridge Press, Vol. I,
pp. 43-51.

[182] _Works_, Vol. IV, p. 19.

[183] _Ibid._, Vol. II, p. 376.

[184] _Ibid._, Vol. II, p. 438.

[185] _Ibid._, Vol. II, p. 401.

[186] _Ibid._, Vol. II, p. 323.

[187] See “Reflections on the Augmentation of Wages, etc.,” in _Ibid._,
Vol. II, p. 436.

[188] “On Luxury, Idleness, and Industry,” in _Ibid._, Vol. II, pp.
448-451.

[189] _Works_, Vol. IV, p. 282. For Franklin’s views on American
representation in Parliament, see Vol. VII, pp. 315, 329.

[190] See the pamphlet indorsed _Some Good Whig Principles_, of the
probable date of 1768-69, in _Works_, Vol. II.

[191] _Works of Thomas Paine_, edited by Moncure D. Conway, Vol. IV, p.
465.

[192] In “Queries and Remarks Respecting Alterations in the
Constitution of Pennsylvania,” in _Works_, Vol. V, p. 167.




Part Two: The Awakening of the American Mind • 1763-1783




