Chapter I • The Old Capital


I

In the year 1800 one might well have expected Philadelphia to retain
indefinitely its proud ascendency as the cultural capital of America.
For decades no other colonial city had come near to rivaling it as a
pleasant center of wealth and refinement. Its society was accounted the
politest and most agreeable in America, and during the Revolutionary
War young British officers had found its hospitable drawing-rooms
an agreeable substitute for London clubs. It had long prided itself
on its culture and it was on chatty terms with the fine arts, with
books and music and painting, with actors and plays and playhouses.
It was the recognized center of the publishing business, and its busy
presses turned out books and magazines and newspapers for remote
colonial readers. Ambitious young men were drawn to it as by a magnet,
and Matthew Carey from Ireland and William Cobbett from England
were outstanding figures amongst the many who found Philadelphia as
attractive as Franklin had earlier found it. Certainly it was the least
provincial spot in America in 1800, managing to keep abreast of the
latest English fashions in letters as well as smallclothes; and when
the supercilious Tom Moore favored the city with his presence in the
summer of 1804, he found there the companionship which in some measure
compensated for the meanness of the rest of America, where he professed
to see:

  One dull chaos, one unfertile strife,
  Betwixt half-polish’d and half-barbarous life,
  Where every ill the ancient world can brew
  Is mixed with every grossness of the new.[418]

The pronounced intellectual stir expressed itself not only in
_belles lettres_, and in the scientific experiments of Franklin
and Rittenhouse, but more adequately still in politics. Political
disputation would seem, indeed, to have been the common Philadelphia
passion. Party forces were more equally divided than in Boston. From
the beginnings of the Revolutionary disputes Philadelphia had produced
notable disputants on both sides--pamphleteers like Joseph Galloway
and John Dickinson, and satirists like Joseph Stansbury and Francis
Hopkinson. In the succeeding decades partisan pens had augmented rather
than abated their vigor. During Washington’s administration the French
Revolution shook Philadelphia as it shook no other American city, and
the fierce battle between Federalist and Jacobin was waged with amazing
fury and limitless invective. The deadly journalistic duel between
Freneau and Fenno in their two _Gazettes_ was reflected in the equally
bitter duel of couplets between Matthew Carey and William Cobbett. If
Philadelphia was not more catholic than Boston, it was at least better
informed on party questions, for clever writers were daily flinging
their arguments at its head. So long as the political capital of the
nation remained in Philadelphia the city was clearly the place for the
young American to sharpen his wits, inform his mind, and quicken his
literary enthusiasm.

Economically the future of the city seemed equally bright. A younger
generation of speculative merchants had taken the place of the older
conservatives, and great fortunes were being made with a rapidity
before unknown. When title to the western lands passed from the crown
to the new republic, Philadelphia merchants took the lead in land
speculation, and Robert Morris entered upon a spectacular career that
profoundly impressed his generation. The city became the chief center
of land speculation to which western and southern investors looked.
Economic opportunities increased with the setting up of the new
government, and the stir of national politics increased the general
activity. With the establishment of the Bank, Philadelphia became the
financial capital of the country, receiving and disbursing the monies
of the government and attracting outside funds for investment. The
decade of the nineties was its golden age. Then came the removal of the
seat of the Federal government to Washington, and the gay little city
underwent a swift eclipse. It was an unwilling victim to the topography
of the North American continent. Between it and the Inland Empire,
on which rested its future economic expansion, lay the Appalachian
mountain range. To be sure, the opening of the Pittsburgh turnpike
seemed to promise that Philadelphia should become the shipping port
for the Ohio valley; but the law of gravity sent the produce of the
back-country downstream to New Orleans, rather than upstream to the
East. Mountains were a serious barrier then to cheap transportation,
and in consequence the contributory hinterland to Philadelphia was
narrowly restricted, and with the rise of the more fortunately situated
New York her economic ascendency was lost past recovery.

A like unforeseen fate overtook the cultural aspirations of the
ambitious little city. In the year 1799 Timothy Pickering, Secretary
of State in Adams’ cabinet, invited to Philadelphia as his secretary
Joseph Dennie, a young Boston lawyer who had achieved a wide reputation
as a writer of Addisonian essays; and with his coming the literary
vigor of Philadelphia flared up in a last brilliant blaze. He
established _The Port Folio_, gathered a club of congenial spirits, and
gained an extraordinary reputation throughout the country at large.
Dennie was a fierce Federalist who hated French Jacobinism with more
than the ardor of his party, and he was encouraged by Tom Moore, who
wrote,

  Long may you hate the Gallic dross that runs
  O’er your fair country and corrupts its sons.

But with the swift decay of Federalism Dennie’s own fortunes fell into
a like decay, and with the suspension of _The Port Folio_ in 1809 the
golden age of Philadelphia came to a definite end. Though it long
retained its primacy as a publishing center, and though later _Godey’s
Lady’s Book_ became almost a national institution, its intellectual
vigor lessened, and its literary leadership passed to other cities. It
succumbed to the tastes of Victorianism and became the acknowledged
home of “female genius” that for years fed the American reading public
on cambric tea. It enjoyed no such renaissance as came to Boston and
Charleston, and ambitious young writers abandoned it for more promising
fields. While other cities were caught up in the swirl of romantic
expansion that followed the War of 1812, Philadelphia remained content
with the ways of the eighteenth century, immersed in an old-fashioned
culture. With its geographical position disqualifying it to reap the
harvest of the westward movement, and with no Merrimac falls to invite
industrial development on a great scale, its fate was sealed. It had
been a delightful capital for an older America, but it was too narrowly
environed, too straitened in potential resources for exploitation, to
become the capital of a more expansive and ambitious generation.


II

Yet it enjoyed a brief moment of literary creativeness before the hand
of fate finally settled upon it. In the twilight of the eighteenth
century the new liberalisms that were turmoiling Europe found their
way to Philadelphia, and for the moment it seemed as if the city were
to lead the thought of America in its venture into new fields. It was
a convenient port for the unloading of foreign romanticisms, and under
the stimulus of national politics the demand for such commodities was
greatly increased. Certainly in no other American city did the French
upheaval quicken so sympathetic a ferment, and with this ferment came
a more romantic spirit in letters. The English pre-romantics found
there responsive readers. In the verse of young Philadelphians began to
appear a note of the vague, the mysterious, the melancholy, echoes of
Gray and Cowper and Ossian, as a pleasant relief from vigorous satire
as practiced by the Hartford Wits. But it was in the field of fiction
that the new spirit most adequately revealed itself, and particularly
in the work of a young Philadelphian who had broken wholly with the
Federalism that immured the sympathies of young poets like William
Cliffton, and welcomed the romantic philosophies then being formulated
by radical thinkers in France and England.

Brockden Brown was fortunately spared the fate that might well have
been his if circumstances had not determined otherwise. As a boy he
had meditated epics on romantic historical figures, inspired perhaps
by Dwight and Barlow; but from so profitless a career he was saved by
an early introduction to overseas fashions. By William Godwin and Mary
Wollstonecraft he was influenced as profoundly as was young William
Ellery Channing a few years afterward, and with like results. Later
generations have too carelessly forgotten how persuasive to young
intellectuals, a century or more ago, was the philosophy of Godwin. To
generous minds there was something vastly attractive in his confident
appeal to reason and justice; and to a new world and a new venture
in government it came with double appeal. How could the republican
experiment better justify itself than by establishing justice in
the new social order--justice for men and justice for women who had
too long suffered under narrow handicaps? It was certainly an ideal
worth serious consideration--particularly since the French school had
suggested that the germinal source of social injustice must be sought
in institutions rather than in the nature of man. It was natural enough
for gentlemen who profited by social wrong to charge that injustice was
inherent in human nature--that man’s innate selfishness was to blame
for the ills of society. But the new thinkers were of an inquiring turn
of mind, and under their critical scrutiny the old conception was seen
to rest on a perversion of fact. Gentlemen had got the cart before the
horse. The crying evils of civilization, when analyzed, were traceable
to vicious environment, to social and political maladjustments; not
to human nature. The mind of the infant is plastic. Very well. If it
is molded by social environment, why is it so often misshapen and
perverted to base purposes, if institutions are not at fault? why may
it not be molded to nobler ends under more beneficent institutions?
Reason is a common possession; the ideal of justice is a common ideal.
The evil genius that has hitherto thwarted their benevolent work is
the overgrown political state, debased to selfish ends. Once let the
beneficent sway of social instincts supersede the exploiting machinery
of the political state, and reason must conduct to justice. The heart
of man is sound. Let it be free to follow its natural promptings and
war must give way to peace, the selfish struggle of classes disappear
in a common brotherhood.

To an ardent young American like Brockden Brown, with the Hamiltonian
struggle for power before his eyes, such a philosophy must have come
with immense appeal. America confronted a future unmortgaged to the
past; why should it repeat the old follies and mistakes that had
reduced Europe to its present level? Here the pressure of vicious
institutions was light as yet. Here the appeal to reason and justice
was less hampered by selfish preëmptions. Let social commendation be
bestowed on the uncorrupted heart, on generous impulses, on native
integrity of character. Let education be a natural unfolding of humane
instincts, not a sharpening of wits to overreach one’s fellows. Let
rewards go to frank, outspoken truth, rather than to chicanery and
deceit. Inspired by such sentiments, Brockden Brown proposed to
make fiction serve social ends. He would spread the gospel of Mary
Wollstonecraft and Godwin by means of popular tales. The views of
the former he elaborated in _Alcuin; A Dialogue_, which in the year
1798 presented for the consideration of the American people the
Wollstonecraft feminism in such passages as this:

  Marriage is an union founded on free and mutual consent. It
  cannot exist without friendship. It cannot exist without personal
  fidelity. As soon as the union ceases to be spontaneous, it ceases
  to be just. This is the sum. If I were to talk for months I could
  add nothing to the completeness of the definition.

But it is in _Arthur Mervyn_ that he gives his fullest pronouncement
of what he conceives must be done in America. He takes his hero fresh
from the plowtail, one of nature’s noblemen, and traces his triumphant
course through the thick of sordid intrigue to a happy end. Generous
in instincts, impulsive in sociability, responsive to suffering,
hating injustice, loving the pure and disinterested, Arthur Mervyn
is a Godwinian figure drawn to captivate the imagination with the
social ideal. It is not so much the plot of the story that reveals
the enormous influence of Godwin--patent as the likeness is to _Caleb
Williams_, but rather the expansive nature of the title hero, whose
instincts bid him espouse justice, and whose life is an implied
criticism of all that is sordid and mean.

With the political romanticism of his work was joined a literary
romanticism that likewise came from England, where it was muddying
the stream of English fiction and turning it aside from the vigorous
realism of the middle eighteenth century. The movement that Paulding
dubbed the “blood-pudding school” was one of the by-products of the
romantic development that ran a far more disastrous course in America
than in England, distorting the growth of native fiction for half
a century. It was perhaps unfortunate for the American novel that
_Wieland_ should have been Brockden Brown’s most finished work, for
it contributed in consequence more powerfully to the spread of the
melodramatic. Lacking his strain of rationalism, other writers reveled
increasingly in the luridly picaresque, till the popular taste was so
debauched that Gilmore Simms found it well-nigh impossible to struggle
against it. For this of course Brown was not to blame; yet his gross
romanticisms of manner persisted long after his Godwinian romanticisms
had faded out of the popular mind, if indeed they ever found lodgment
there.


III

Brockden Brown’s career was in a sense symbolic of the fate of his
native city--a few brilliant years and then a swift decline. Death cut
him down before he fulfilled his promise. Something of a like fate
befell his most brilliant successor, Robert Montgomery Bird, probably
the ablest man of letters that Philadelphia produced. Caught up by
the romantic movement at the beginning of his precocious career, he
plunged into dramatic writing and from 1830 to 1834, between the ages
of twenty-four and twenty-eight, he wrote four plays for Edwin Forrest,
one of which, _The Gladiator_, met with extraordinary success, both
in this country and in England; and another, _The Broker of Bogota_,
kept the stage for years. At the age of thirty he gave over the writing
of plays and turned to other fields. The explanation of so unusual a
course, according to a recent historian, is not far to seek. He had
been overreached by Forrest, and after parting with his manuscripts
to the actor, the playwright found himself in the condition of the
farmer who after shipping his potatoes to market discovers himself to
be in debt to the commission merchant.[419] That he determined to try
a different crop was natural enough, but unfortunate for the American
drama.

Of his subsequent ventures into the field of romantic fiction, one at
least was an extraordinary success, rivaling if not surpassing _The
Gladiator_ in popular favor. _Nick of the Woods, or the Jibbenainosay_
still remains one of the few outstanding tales of the Kentucky
settlement. Published in Philadelphia in 1837, it has been reissued in
successive editions, more than twenty in all down to the present. It
was translated into German in 1838, into Dutch in 1877, and into Polish
in 1905. There is abundant reason for its popularity. It is a story of
calculating revenge, done with extraordinary vividness and set against
a romantic background. A frontier Quaker, trusting in the spirit of
good will, finds his non-resistance futile; he is set upon by Indians,
his family murdered before his eyes, and himself scalped and left for
dead beside his burnt cabin. Recovering, he sets forth on a fierce
career. Under the mask of a non-resistant, so effectively worn as to
awaken the contempt of the frontier Indian-haters, he became a hunter
of men, and his secret passages through the wilderness leave no other
trail than the marked bodies of slaughtered warriors. The Jibbenainosay
is an uncanny figure who strikes with appalling suddenness, a Nemesis
that fills the hearts of border Indians with terror and turns their
dreams to nightmares--one of the most striking and fearful figures
in our early fiction. The Indians whom he pursues so remorselessly
are depicted as thorough savages. In describing them Bird has put all
his romanticisms aside. There is no sentimentalizing of the noble
red man in the brisk pages of _Nick of the Woods_; the warriors are
dirty drunken louts, filled with an unquenchable blood-lust, whom
the frontiersman kills with as little compunction as he would kill a
rattlesnake. The ugly feud that so long soiled the Border is depicted
with almost startling frankness, and through its worst phases moves the
figure of Bloody Nathan, professing to be a man of peace whilst cutting
an appalling lot of notches in his gun, an epileptic who perhaps
deceives even himself.

If one likes stirring action that is certain to end in blood-letting,
there is good foraging in _Nick of the Woods_, despite its excesses
of conventional romance. And there is much else as well. Bird had
evidently studied his western materials with some care, and he did
his part to popularize certain conceptions that literature had come
to associate with the Ohio valley. The character of Ralph Stackpole
is clearly suggestive of the wild antics supposed to be common to the
river boatmen. “The history of this wild scape-gallows,” says Bird,
“his prowess in the pin-fold and the battle-field, his adventure on
the beech-tree, and his escape from the meshes of the law, with other
characteristic events not included in our relation, are recollections
still cherished in some parts of Kentucky, and made the theme of many
a gleesome story.” But what seems more suggestive today is Bird’s
conscious attempt to reproduce the new type of western humor that
found its expression in the Davy Crockett myth. Perhaps the wild
extravagance of Ralph Stackpole’s vocabulary goes back to Mike Fink,
perhaps it derives from Davy himself; at any rate the mode had spread
so widely by 1837 that this Philadelphia man of letters had come to
believe that such was the indigenous form of humor in the new West of
the Ohio valley, and he took particular pains to draw the irrepressible
Ralph with vigorous touches. A pronounced romantic, Bird unconsciously
contributed his mite to the myth of western humor.


Footnotes

[418] Quoted in Oberholtzer, _Literary History of Philadelphia_, p. 178.

[419] See A. H. Quinn, _A History of the American Drama, etc._, pp.
244-248.




