Chapter III • The Dream of a Greek Democracy


I

The pronounced drift of southern thought, in the years immediately
preceding the Civil War, towards the ideal of the Greek democracy, has
been too carelessly forgotten by later times. It was no vagrant eddy
but a broadening current of tendency. In its blend of romanticism and
realism it fitted exactly the temper of the plantation mind, imparting
a fine idealism to shiftless realities and setting a generous goal to
be achieved by somewhat inadequate agencies. A humane and cultivated
democracy, set free from the narrow exactions of economics to engage
in the higher work of civilization, was a conception worthy of the
generous southern mind, a conception that does not suffer by contrast
with the northern dream of an exploitative industrialism. That it was
an impossible dream does not lessen its significance as an expression
of the best southern aspiration in the days when slavery was on the
defensive.

It is plain enough now that this drift of thought resulted from the
need of clarifying the logic of the situation, by bringing into harmony
two seemingly irreconcilable facts, the system of negro slavery and the
rising spirit of white democracy. The feudal principle, which lurks in
the background of all slave systems and which was peculiarly congenial
to the plantation temper, was confronted on every side by the stubborn
democracy of the yeomanry. A hundred miles beyond Charleston the feudal
spirit encountered the leveling individualism of the frontier; and this
passion for equality, that grew fiercer with every remove westward,
was a stumbling-block in the way of the planter aristocracy. Caught
thus between the two forces of a Jeffersonian democracy and a slave
economy, southern thought found in the Greek ideal the most natural
compromise. Since manual labor was black, a white skin was a guarantee
against serfdom, and the common race prejudice was accounted sufficient
to draw even the poor whites to the support of slavery. The sharp
cleavage between the races provided the basis for the conception of
a common white democracy of the master class, every member of which
shared in the supremacy of the race and was free to enjoy the profits
of negro exploitation. The enterprising small farmer might rise to
be a gentlemanly planter, providing his children with leisure to fit
themselves for citizenship in the commonwealth and assist in the great
work of creating a southern civilization. The Greek ideal, in short,
met the double need of southern economics and southern prejudices, and
made its appeal even to the frontier spirit of equalitarianism.

A native growth and rooted deep in southern realities, the new
conception emerged in response to the changing times. It may be
considered the plantation counterpart of northern industrialism,
marking the reaction of the southern mind to the economic revolution
in western civilization. With their diverse economics, North and South
were facing in different directions, and the Greek ideal was as natural
in Charleston as industrial feudalism was natural in Lowell. Created
in part as an ingenious measure of defense, it provided an excellent
counter offensive against alien critics by turning the light of
inquiry upon the bases of capitalism and thrusting upon the attention
of godly Puritans the dependence of culture upon exploitation. The
new industrialism was creating a new philosophy of labor, and this
philosophy the southern apologists seized upon and turned to their
special ends. They accepted certain of the capitalistic premises,
but they interpreted those premises in a spirit of drastic realism,
deducing conclusions disconcerting to the apologists of industrialism.
In defending the plantation system they attacked the factory system; in
upholding black slavery they attacked wage slavery; and in this game
of the pot and the kettle the exploitative root of both systems was
nakedly exposed.

The major premise of the new southern philosophy was identical with
that of northern capitalism, namely, that every civilization rests
on labor exploitation. However quaintly they might embroider this
fact with romantic patterns, they saw it clearly and deduced from
it the conclusion that the North was indulging in a vicious fallacy
in confusing wage labor with free labor. In every industrialized
society, they pointed out, free labor is an anachronism; where it
exists it is a hold-over from a simpler social order. The development
of industrialism tends to draw all labor into its capacious maw, and
the labor surplus that results from evicting the peasant from the
land creates a competitive labor market that speedily reduces the
laborer to the status of a wage-slave. Since slavery, then, in some
form is the inevitable counterpart of modern civilization, the question
that presses on the conscience of every enlightened and generous
observer is the question of the relative well-being of the slave under
the different systems. Upon this question the southern apologists
turned their shrewdest analysis. They examined the condition of the
proletariat in the English mill towns; they commented on the callous
exploitation of the textile workers in Massachusetts; they assessed the
waste in the labor turnover under the factory system; they considered
the seeds of class war sown by industrialism and pointed out the
insecurity of society under a system of capitalistic irresponsibility.
In their estimate of the social evils of industrialism they concurred
in the findings of Carlyle and antedated much of the criticism of
Ruskin. The huge mass of unpalatable fact which they uncovered was the
same mass that inspired George Ripley and Albert Brisbane and Horace
Greeley to seek a way out by the path of coöperative commonwealths.

But in the hands of these apologists the argument was turned to the
narrower end of proving that the southern field-hand fared better than
the northern mill-hand. They recognized both systems as capitalistic,
established in labor exploitation; but they proved to their own
satisfaction that the southern was far humaner, more truly social. In
the South, they pointed out, there was no waste in the labor turnover,
no ugly labor scrap-heap, no ruthless efficiency in using up the human
material. The master was responsible to society for the treatment and
conduct of his slaves, and the southern conscience was far tenderer
in the matter than the northern. The workers were never troubled by
uncertain means of subsistence. The young were free from care, the
old and infirm were adequately provided for. Living conditions were
commonly pleasant, and the personal relations between master and
slave kindly and loyal. When every argument against slavery had been
urged it still remained true that the patriarchal tie that existed
on the plantation was more humane than the cash-nexus of capitalism.
In this fundamental matter Carlyle was right; and right also in his
insistence on the need of capable masters. The South was fortunate in
its system. On the self-sufficient plantations there was many an Abbot
Sampson directing his little world wisely and humanely; collectively
these Abbot Sampsons formed a capable and socially responsible ruling
class worthy of their trust. The economic returns of a wage-slave
industrialism might be greater, but the returns in civilization were
far less.[406]

Such, in brief, was the reaction of the southern mind in the early
fifties to the challenge of an industrializing generation. It was not
till the publication of _Uncle Tom’s Cabin_ in 1851 that southern
apologists were fully aroused to the need of counter propaganda. They
had been moving slowly towards the conception of a Greek democracy
under the leadership of Calhoun, but now under the sharp prod of
Abolitionism they turned militant. Facts were collected and arguments
clarified, and the war was carried home to New England. In three
years following _Uncle Tom_, according to a recent student, fourteen
pro-slavery novels appeared together with other matter.[407] Much of
the material made use of in these stories was conveniently assembled
in a work entitled _Pro-Slavery Argument_, published in 1852, a
collaboration by Professor Dew of William and Mary College, Chancellor
Harper of the Supreme Court of South Carolina, Governor Hammond of
South Carolina, and Gilmore Simms. The first reviewed the Scriptural
authority for slavery; Chancellor Harper drew from Hobbes the familiar
argument that “a state of nature is a state of war”; Simms elaborated
the patriarchal theory; but Governor Hammond developed the more
significant argument of the degradation of the wage-slave, an argument
elaborated at considerable length in another work entitled _Letters
on Slavery_, in which he presented the results of his investigation
of English factory conditions. The novels that Miss Tandy comments
upon have been pretty much forgotten, but the titles of some of them
sufficiently reveal the lines of attack. L. B. Chase’s _English Serfdom
and American Slavery_ (1854), J. W. Page’s _Uncle Robin in His Cabin
in Virginia and Tom without One in Boston_ (1855), and S. H. Elliott’s
_New England Chattels_ (1858) quite evidently reflect the new southern
philosophy. If the South were attacked, it was not without weapons to
defend itself.


II • William J. Grayson

Of this very considerable literature of defense, _The Hireling and
the Slave_ presents in convenient compass the most telling southern
arguments, and reveals in its sharp contrast of realism and romanticism
the common southern temper. Its author, William J. Grayson, was a
cultivated South Carolinian who had served two terms in Congress and
for years was collector of the Port of Charleston. He was widely
read, was familiar with contemporary English writers on economics,
and possessed a fluent pen. He had published “an elaborate heroic
poem entitled _The Country_,” in which he had sung “the praises of
rural life and agricultural pursuits” (Introduction to Grayson’s
_Life of James L. Petigru_), and a volume entitled _Chicora and other
Poems_, the title work of which was a romantic poem celebrating the
primitive virtues of the Indian. Politically he was affiliated with
the anti-Calhoun party of Unionists. His closest friend was James L.
Petigru, a sketch of whose life he wrote as a last labor of love,
during the unhappy days of the Charleston siege. He did not go so far
as Petigru in refusing to have any part in a war that he opposed, but
the tragedy of it cut him to the quick. He was no Fire Eater, but a
southern moderate--a gentleman of old-fashioned tastes whose views
may be taken as those of the cultivated Charleston group to which he
belonged, of Petigru, of Legaré, of Alfred Huger.

_The Hireling and the Slave_, published in 1856 when Grayson was
sixty-eight and dedicated to Petigru, is a poem in heroic couplets of
approximately 1600 lines, divided into two parts. The first part draws
a realistic picture of the life of the wage-slave, the second paints an
idyllic picture of the life of the bond-slave. In this second part the
spirit of romance holds high carnival; the descriptions are done with
gusto and the rural pleasures that fall to the lot of the negro provide
a striking contrast to the mean environment of the factory worker.
About this contrast are grouped the lesser arguments: the hypocrisy of
the Yankee Abolitionist, the sentimentalism of English humanitarians,
the wisdom of providence in providing masters to protect the negro from
destruction by a superior race and train him through apprenticeship
in slavery to carry the blessings of civilization to Africa. The
heroic couplet was deliberately adopted to offer “some variety to
the poetic forms that are almost universally prevalent.” “The poetry
of the day is, for the most part,” Grayson remarked, “subtile and
transcendental in its character”; yet “the school of Dryden and Pope is
not entirely forgotten,” and “the most fastidious appetite may tolerate
an occasional change of diet, and exchange dainties now and then for
plainer fare” (_The Hireling and the Slave_, Preface, pp. xiv-xv). The
poem seems to have been popular in the South, and a southern reviewer
declared that “it ought to be on every man’s mantel” (_Life of James L.
Petigru_, p. vii).

In the preface Grayson discusses the subject of slavery with a
candor somewhat unusual, acknowledging its evils, yet discovering
compensations. As an expression of intelligent southern opinion on a
question in which the passions of the country were becoming deeply
engaged, his views deserve quotation. Slavery, he says,

  ... is that system of labor which exchanges subsistence for work,
  which secures a life-maintenance from the master to the slave, and
  gives a life-labor from the slave to the master. The slave is an
  apprentice for life, and owes his labor to his master; the master
  owes support, during life, to the slave. Slavery is the Negro
  system of work. He is lazy and improvident. Slavery makes all work,
  and it insures homes, food, and clothing for all. It permits no
  idleness, and it provides for sickness, infancy, and old age. It
  allows no tramping or skulking, and it knows no pauperism.

  This is the whole system substantially. All cruelty is an abuse;
  does not belong to the institution; is now punished, and may be in
  time prevented. The abuses of slavery are as open to all reforming
  influences as those of any civil, social, or political condition.
  The improvement in the treatment of the slave is as marked as in
  that of any other laboring class in the world.... If slavery is
  subject to abuses, it has its advantages also. It establishes
  more permanent, and, therefore, kinder relations between capital
  and labor. It removes what Stuart Mill calls ‘the widening and
  imbittering feud between the class of labor and the class of
  capital.’ It draws the relation closer between master and servant.
  It is not an engagement for days or weeks, but for life. There
  is no such thing with slavery as a laborer for whom nobody cares
  or provides. The most wretched feature in hireling labor is the
  isolated, miserable creature who has no home, no food, and in whom
  no one is particularly interested. _This is seen among hirelings
  only._ (_Ibid._, Preface, pp. vii-viii.)

The principle on which Grayson bases his argument is the principle that
civilization rests on labor exploitation, but as a good churchman he
attributes the evil to God and discovers the children of Adam to be
suffering from the primeval curse--“Slave, hireling, help--the curse
pursues him still.” More specifically the thesis which he defends
is this, “The state of the hireling and the slave [is] the same
substantially--the condition hard labor, the reward subsistence;” and
the conclusion which he draws is that the slave obtains a larger return
for his labor than the factory hand. The picture he paints of the
condition of the wage slave of England is Hogarthian in its details:

  There, unconcerned, the philanthropic eye
  Beholds each phase of human misery;
  Sees the worn child compelled in mines to slave
  Through narrow seams of coal, a living grave,
  Driven from the breezy hill, the sunny glade,
  By ruthless hearts, the drudge of labor made,
  Unknown the boyish sport, the hours of play,
  Stripped of the common boon, the light of day,
  Harnessed like brutes, like brutes to tug, and strain,
  And drag, on hands and knees, the loaded wain:
  There crammed in huts, in reeking masses thrown,
  All moral sense and decency unknown,
  With no restraint but what the felon knows,
  With the sole joy that beer or gin bestows,
  To gross excess and brutalizing strife,
  The drunken hireling dedicates his life:
  Starved else, by infamy’s sad wages fed,
  There women prostitute themselves for bread,
  And mothers, rioting with savage glee,
  For murder’d infants spend the funeral fee;
  Childhood bestows no childish sports or toys,
  Age neither reverence nor repose enjoys,
  Labor with hunger wages ceaseless strife,
  And want and suffering only end with life;
  In crowded huts contagious ills prevail,
  Dull typhus lurks, and deadlier plagues assail,
  Gaunt Famine prowls around his pauper prey,
  And daily sweeps his ghastly hosts away;
  Unburied corses taint the summer air,
  And crime and outrage revel with despair.

  (_Ibid._, pp. 24-25.)

Grayson does not stint his facts but traces the wretchedness of the
wage-slave through all the phases of his misery to provide a background
for the happier lot of the bond-slave. It is an unlovely picture, done
with considerable vigor, from which one turns gladly to contemplate
life on the southern plantation.

    And yet the life, so unassailed by care,
  So blessed with moderate work, with ample fare,
  With all the good the starving pauper needs,
  The happier slave on each plantation leads;
  Safe from harassing doubts and annual fears,
  He dreads no famine in unfruitful years;
  If harvests fail from inauspicious skies,
  The master’s providence his food supplies;
  No paupers perish here for want of bread,
  Or lingering live, by foreign bounty fed;
  No exiled trains of homeless peasants go,
  In distant climes, to tell their tales of woe:
  Far other fortune, free from care and strife,
  For work, or bread, attends the Negro’s life,
  And Christian slaves may challenge as their own,
  The blessings claimed in fabled states alone--
  The cabin home, not comfortless, though rude,
  Light daily labor, and abundant food,
  The sturdy health that temperate habits yield,
  The cheerful song that rings in every field,
  The long, loud laugh, that freemen seldom share,
  Heaven’s boon to bosoms unapproached by care,
  And boisterous jest and humor unrefined,
  That leave, though rough, no painful sting behind;
  While, nestling near, to bless their humble lot,
  Warm social joys surround the Negro’s cot,
  The evening dance its merriment imparts,
  Love, with its rapture, fills their youthful hearts,
  And placid age, the task of labor done,
  Enjoys the summer shade, the winter sun,
  And, as through life no pauper want he knows,
  Laments no poor-house penance at its close.

  (_Ibid._, pp. 50-51.)

Convinced of the righteousness and humanity of slavery Grayson turns
with scorn upon the Abolitionists and their meddlesome interference
with the beneficent ways of Providence. With a few dexterous turns
of the spit he browns each one nicely like a roasted goose. His
descriptions strip off the gay plumage and reveal the naked fowl. He
makes a good job of it, as witness these bits:

    There supple Sumner, with the Negro cause,
  Plays the sly game for office and applause;
  What boots it if the Negro sink or swim?
  He wins the Senate--’tis enough for him....
  He heeds nor court’s decree nor Gospel light,
  What Sumner thinks is right alone is right....

    There Greeley, grieving at a brother’s woe,
  Spits with impartial spite on friend and foe....
  To each fanatical delusion prone,
  He damns all creeds and parties but his own,
  Brawls, with hot zeal, for every fool and knave,
  The foreign felon and the skulking slave; ...
  And faction’s fiercest rabble always find
  A kindred nature in the Tribune’s mind;
  Ready each furious impulse to obey,
  He raves and ravens like a beast of prey....

    There Seward smiles the sweet perennial smile,
  Skilled in the tricks of subtlety and guile;
  The slyest schemer that the world e’er saw;
  Peddler of sentiment and patent law;
  Ready for fee or faction to display
  His skill in either, if the practice pay....

  (_Ibid._, pp. 38-40.)

As he contemplates Mrs. Stowe his full wrath is stirred. He does not
spare her sex. Southern chivalry serves the pure and good in lovely
woman, not the malignant and selfish. An unsexed woman is hateful to
it, and after extolling the true womanliness of Florence Nightingale,
angel of mercy, Grayson pays his compliments to the Yankee propagandist
thus:

    Not such with Stowe, the wish or power to please,
  She finds no joy in gentle deeds like these;
  A moral scavenger, with greedy eye,
  In social ills her coarser labors lie;
  On fields where vice eludes the light of day,
  She hunts up crimes as beagles hunt their prey;
  Gleans every dirty nook--the felon’s jail,
  And hangman’s mem’ry, for detraction’s tale,
  Snuffs up pollution with a pious air,
  Collects a rumor here, a slander there;
  With hatred’s ardor gathers Newgate spoils,
  And trades for gold the garbage of her toils.

    In sink and sewer thus, with searching eye,
  Through mud and slime unhappy wretches pry;
  In fetid puddles dabble with delight,
  Search every filthy gathering of the night;
  Fish from its depths, and to the spacious bag
  Convey with care the black, polluted rag;
  With reeking waifs secure the nightly bed,
  And turn their noisome stores to daily bread.

  (_Ibid._, pp. 42-43.)

_The Hireling and the Slave_, is vigorous propaganda, carefully
documented and pointed with modern instances, the work of an
intelligent and humane writer who might be blind to certain evils in
slavery but whose eyes were open to the social ills that grew rankly
in the muck of industrialism. Outside of the South few in America had
as yet come to understand so much--a handful of New England idealists,
Parker and William Henry Channing and Emerson and Wendell Phillips,
and Orestes Brownson, and a handful of Utopians, Albert Brisbane and
George Ripley and Horace Greeley. The inadequacy of southern thought
was identical with that of northern: blinded by sectional economic
interests, they saw only half the truth. They beheld the mote in a
brother’s eye, but considered not the beam that was in their own.


Footnotes

[406] The same argument was made use of by northern supporters of
slavery. Gordon Bennett’s _New York Herald_, for example, “printed a
description of slum life in Liverpool, remarking that compared with the
English laborer, ‘the slave lived like a prince.’ He had his cabin,
neat, clean, and weather-proof: he had his own garden patch, over which
he was lord paramount; he was well fed, well lodged, well clothed, and
rarely over-worked; sleek, happy, contented, enjoying his many holidays
with gusto, he lived to a great age” (quoted in Allan Nevins, _The
Evening Post: A Century of Journalism_, p. 271).

[407] See Jeannette Reid Tandy, “Pro-Slavery Propaganda in American
Fiction in the Fifties,” _South Atlantic Quarterly_, January-March,
1922. See also Francis Pendleton Gaines, _The Southern Plantation_,
