Chapter III • Victorian Realism


It was not till the eighties that the movement of realism in fiction
began to excite wide interest, and then began a brisk and often
acrimonious discussion of the merits and shortcomings of the new
technique that filled the pages of the literary magazines. The
prejudices against it were many and robust. To most Victorians realism
meant Zola, sex, and the exploitation of the animal, and all the
pruderies of the Age of Innocence rose up in protest against defiling
letters with such themes. The judgment of Aldrich’s on realism--“A
miasmatic breath blown from the slums”--was a characteristic Yankee
echo of Tennyson’s condemnation, “wallowing in the slough of
Zolaism.” All the high priests of the genteel rallied to combat such
a desecration of literature, and when it knocked at the door of a
respectable magazine in the person of Stephen Crane’s _Maggie_ the
editor could do nothing else than turn it into the street. In the
late nineties, when _Jude the Obscure_ appeared in one of the family
magazines, even the great reputation of Hardy was reckoned a poor
excuse for such an offense to morality.

American taste was still romantic, and from his villa at Florence, F.
Marion Crawford regularly sent forth heavy romances that were regarded
as contributions to our literature. In defense of his wares he threw
into the discussion of realism a compact little volume, _The Novel;
What It Is_, in which he defined the novel as a pocket drama, the chief
interest of which lies in the plot--a retort courteous to Howells’s
contention that plot is childish and a story ends well that ends
faithfully; wedding bells at the end are of no interest to grown men
and women, but rather what life brings after the wedding bells. To the
aid of Crawford came the brilliant Scot, Robert Louis Stevenson, the
literary idol of America in the nineties, whose brave tales were on
every center-table. A confirmed romantic, Stevenson could not resist
breaking a lance in the cause, and his _Humble Remonstrance_ was a
persuasive defense of the perennial appeal of romance.

But in spite of protests the spirit of realism spread quietly through
the lesser works of fiction and the high-flown romantic was laid
away in the grave of John Esten Cooke. The new realism was a native
growth, sprung from the soil, unconcerned with European technique. In
its earlier expression it inclined to a romantic or idyllic coloring,
but as it developed it came to rely more and more on the beauty of
truth. This primitive realism issued chiefly from the local color
school of the short story, but it was supplemented by the sociological
school. The influence of Lowell and the _Atlantic Monthly_ on the
development of the realistic short story had been encouraging, and in
the next decade that development was to go forward swiftly. With the
exploitation of local materials came a sharp division on sectional
lines, and as Howells pointed out, America was soon parceled out
geographically into local groups. Edward Eggleston in southern Indiana,
George Washington Cable in New Orleans, Charles Egbert Craddock in
eastern Tennessee, James Lane Allen in Kentucky, Octave Thanet in
Arkansas, Sarah Orne Jewett and Mary Wilkins Freeman in New England,
were representative of the new concern for local truth in fiction that
was to tell against the romantic. In fixing attention on narrow and
homely fields they were turning towards realism, for the charm of their
work lay in fidelity to the _milieu_, the exact portrayal of character
and setting. With the spread of an interest in the local the vogue
of the strange and the remote declined and a quiet sobriety of tone
displaced the romantic. The way was being prepared for a more adequate
realism. “Nothing could testify with more force,” said H. H. Boyesen in
1894, “to the fact that we have outgrown romanticism than this almost
unanimous desire, on the part of our authors, to chronicle the widely
divergent phases of our American civilization.”[730]

But that waited upon profound changes in the American outlook on
life. In the seventies and eighties conditions were not ripe for it
and the naturalism that in France, Russia, Germany, and Scandinavia,
was carrying everything before it, was still alien to the American
temper. It was not so much that it offended our innate Puritanism
as that it seemed to us belied by the open facts of American life.
The psychology of the dispersion still marked us. Although we were
feverishly building great cities we were still emotionally a country
people, far from urban-minded. We still thought in terms of the slack
earlier freedoms, uncritical of our ways, untroubled about the future.
For the American born before the Civil War, naturalism was impossible;
his mind had not been shaped by the industrial city or come under the
dominion of science. The traditional outlook on life was unchanged; he
still clung to the old moralities, the old verities, the old faith in
the goodness of life in America. The intellectual revolution must be
gone through with before naturalism should be at home in America, a
native expression of native conditions; and it would then be a vehicle
only for writers born and bred in the new city environment. In the
meanwhile--in the genial years when the earlier optimisms still veiled
the harsher realities of science and industrialism--the movement of
realism got under way in the work of two distinguished craftsmen who,
bred up in Victorian culture, interpreted life in terms of the middle
and upper classes.[731]


II • Henry James and the Nostalgia of Culture

There is a suggestion of irony in the fact that one of our earliest
realists, who was independent enough to break with the romantic
tradition, should have fled from the reality that his art presumably
would gird itself up to deal with. Like his fellow spirit Whistler,
Henry James was a lifelong pilgrim to other shrines than those of his
native land, who dedicated his gifts to ends that his fellow Americans
were indifferent to. Life, with him, was largely a matter of nerves.
In this world of sprawling energy it was impossible to barricade
himself securely against the intrusion of the unpleasant. His organism
was too sensitive, his discriminations too fine, to subject them to
the vulgarities of the Gilded Age, and he fled from it all. He early
convinced himself that the American atmosphere was uncongenial to the
artist.[732] The grotesqueries of the frontier irruption, the crude
turmoil released by the new freedoms, were no materials to appeal to
one in search of subtleties, to one who was a lover of nocturnes in
gray. And so, like Whistler, he sought other lands, there to refine a
meticulous technique, and draw out ever thinner the substance of his
art.

The explanation of the curious career of Henry James, seeking a
habitation between worlds and finding a spiritual home nowhere, is
that he was never a realist. Rather he was a self-deceived romantic,
the last subtle expression of the genteel, who fell in love with
culture and never realized how poor a thing he worshiped. It was the
first mistake of Henry James that he romanticized Europe, not for its
fragments of the medieval picturesque, but for a fine and gracious
culture that he professed to discover there. With the naïveté of the
Age of Innocence he assumed that an aristocratic society--shall we
say that of Mayfair or the Quartier Saint Germain?--is a complex of
subtle imponderables that one comes to understand and embody only
through heritage; and it was an assumption even more romantic that
these imponderables were so subtly elusive as to escape any but the
subtlest art. Like Edith Wharton he erected this suppositious culture
into an abstract _tertium quid_, something apart from social convention
or physical environment, something embodied in the choicer spirits of
a class that for generations presumably had cherished them. Born of
an unconscious inferiority complex in presence of a long-established
social order to which he was alien, this romanticization of European
culture worked to his undoing, for it constrained the artist to a
lifelong pursuit of intangible realities that existed only in his
imagination. The gracious culture that James persistently attributed
to certain choice circles in Europe was only a figment of his romantic
fancy--a fact that after long rambling on the Continent and nearly
forty years’ unbroken residence in England, he came finally to
recognize. It was this failure to find the substance of his dream that
imparted to his work a note of wistfulness. He had quitted the land of
his birth to seek his spiritual home elsewhere, yet increasingly he
came to question the wisdom of his act. He suffered the common fate of
the _déraciné_; wandering between worlds, he found a home nowhere. It
is not well for the artist to turn cosmopolitan, for the flavor of the
fruit comes from the soil and sunshine of its native fields.

The spirit of Henry James marks the last refinement of the genteel
tradition, the completest embodiment of its vague cultural aspirations.
All his life he dwelt wistfully on the outside of the realm he wished
to be a free citizen of. Did any other professed realist ever remain
so persistently aloof from the homely realities of life? From the
external world of action he withdrew to the inner world of questioning
and probing; yet even in his subtle psychological inquiries he remained
shut up within his own skull-pan. His characters are only projections
of his brooding fancy, externalizations of hypothetical subtleties.
He was concerned only with _nuances_. He lived in a world of fine
gradations and imperceptible shades. Like modern scholarship he came
to deal more and more with less and less. It is this absorption in the
stream of psychical experience that justifies one in calling Henry
James a forerunner of modern expressionism. Yet how unlike he is to
Sherwood Anderson, an authentic product of the American consciousness!


III • William Dean Howells and the Realism of the Commonplace

From such nostalgia, that left a note of wistfulness in his pages,
William Dean Howells was saved by his frank and undivided loyalties.
Intellectually and emotionally he was native to the American soil, and
however widely he might range he remained always a conscious American.
He had no wish to Europeanize his mind; he felt no secret hankerings
for the ways of Mayfair or the culture of the Quartier Saint Germain.
The homely American reality satisfied the needs of his art, and he
accepted it with the finality of Walt Whitman. If he failed to depict
it in all its sprawling veracity, if much of its crude robustness never
got into his pages, the lack was due to no self-imposed alienation, but
to the temperament of the artist and the refined discretions of his
environment.

The current school of realism is inclined to deal harshly with Howells.
His quiet reticences, his obtrusive morality, his genial optimism,
his dislike of looking ugly facts in the face, are too old-fashioned
today to please the professional purveyors of our current disgusts.
They find his writings as tedious as the gossip of old ladies. To
their coarser palates his respectable commonplace is as flavorless as
biscuit and tea. Yet it must not be forgotten that for years he was
reckoned new-fashioned. Whatever may be one’s final judgment on his
work it is certain that for twenty years he was a prophet of realism to
his generation, the leader of a movement to turn American literature
from the path of romanticism and bring it face to face with the real
and actual. It was not his fault that the ways of one generation are
not those of another, and it is well to remember that if his realism
seems wanting to a generation bred up on Theodore Dreiser, it seemed
a debasement of the fine art of literature to a generation bred up on
Thomas Bailey Aldrich. Realism like dress changes its modes.

The Howells we know best was not a simple child of the frontier, like
Mark Twain, whom all could laugh with and love because the sallies
of his wit awakened a native response. He did not remain completely
native to the older folk-ways. He was rather a composite of the ideals
reckoned excellent by the post-war generation--an American Victorian,
kindly, urbane, tolerant, democratic, accepting America as a land that
God’s smile rests on, and convinced that here, wedded to a generous
democracy, culture must eventually produce offspring finer than the
world has hitherto known. Bred up in the mystical Swedenborgian faith,
he shrank from all fleshliness and loved purity with the devotion
of a Galahad. A child of the Ohio frontier, he retained to the
last the western feeling of democratic equality. An adopted son of
Brahmin Cambridge, he immersed himself in culture--Italian, English,
Yankee--and served the ideal of excellence with a lifelong devotion;
a reverent pilgrim to the shrine of truth, he followed such paths as
his generation knew to lay his art at the high altar. In all these
things--in his ample culture, his kindly democracy, his high standards
of workmanship--as well as in the instinctive reverences of a clean
and sweet nature, he was an embodiment of the best in American life, a
child of Jacksonian democracy who made use of his freedoms to serve the
excellent cause of culture.

But he was much more than that, and if the critics who are wont to
damn his Victorian squeamishness would penetrate to the inner core of
Howells they would discover an intellectual, alert and sensitive to
changing currents of thought, seeing with his own eyes, pursuing his
own ends, who wrought out for himself a culture that was individual
and native. If he was not, like Henry Adams, plagued with an itch
of curiosity, he traveled widely in the realm of the mind. Culture
meant to him open-mindedness, familiarity with diverse schools of
thought, a willingness to venture upon the unorthodox and to defend
the unpopular. He was never a child of the Gilded Age. He was unsoiled
by its vulgarity, unconcerned with its sordid ambitions. Neither at
heart was he a child of Brahmin culture. He loved Lowell and Norton
and Godkin and Aldrich, and he wanted to be approved by them; but he
ranged far more widely than they, into places they thought indiscreet.
The mature Howells came to stand apart from Brahminism, dissatisfied
with a literary Toryism, convinced that a sterile genteel tradition
could not suffice the needs of American literature. His very drift
toward realism was a negation of the Brahmin influence. On the whole
it was unfortunate that he lived so long in the Cambridge atmosphere.
The New England influence may not have been a factor in shaping his
too leisurely technique, but certainly it postponed the day of his
intellectual release. If he had removed to New York a decade earlier,
before his literary method hardened into rigidity, his technique might
have changed with his more radical intellectual outlook and become the
vehicle of a more adequate realism than he ever achieved.

But the significant thing is that the mind of Howells refused to
imprison itself in Brahmin orthodoxies, but set forth on perilous
expeditions while Lowell and Norton were discreetly evading the
intellectual heresies raging outside their libraries. While Henry James
was moving towards aristocratic Mayfair, Howells was journeying towards
the proletarian East Side. The scientific revolution seems early to
have washed in upon him, undermining the theological cosmos of his
youth and turning him into a liberal freethinker. His scientific views
very likely came to him secondhand, through the medium of literature;
but with his wide reading in Continental fields--Spanish, French,
German, Scandinavian--he could not fail to become saturated with the
evolutionary view then permeating all current letters. In this he was
only following with John Fiske and Henry Holt and Henry Adams the path
of a new orthodoxy; nevertheless in applying the scientific spirit to
fiction and espousing an objective realism, he quite definitely broke
with Brahmin tradition. And when, under the guise of fiction, he turned
to social questions, and wove into the placid texture of his work the
vexing problem of social justice, he ventured on perilous ground where
his Brahmin friends would not follow. To espouse the teachings of
Herbert Spencer was one thing, to espouse the teachings of Karl Marx
was quite another.

Howells came late to an interest in sociology, held back by the strong
literary and aesthetic cast of his mind. But in the eighties, when
he had reached middle life, he was no longer able to ignore or evade
the economic maladjustments of the Gilded Age. The social unrest that
was coming to bloody issue in strikes and lockouts gave him acute
concern, and slowly under pressure of a sensitive social conscience
there began a quiet intellectual revolution that was to transform the
detached observer of the American scene into a Marxian socialist.
A democrat, a lover of his kind, a just soul endowed with a tender
conscience, an idealist who dreamed of a brotherhood of free men who
should create in America a civilization adequate to human needs, what
else could he do? He loved peace but war was all about him. And so
in the mid-afternoon of life he turned to the work of spreading the
gospel of social democracy in the America of the Gilded Age. He had no
private or personal causes to serve. He had not, like Godkin and Dana,
given hostages to fortune in the shape of a newspaper or magazine; he
had no call to be partisan to his own interests. He was free to plead
the cause of justice in his own way and at his own time. It is easy
for the later radical to sneer at him as a parlor socialist who talked
well but carefully refrained from disturbing the capitalistic machine
from which he drew his income; but that is to ignore the courage of the
artist in confronting a hostile world. He stood stoutly for the rights
of workingmen that the passions of the times swept rudely away. When
the Haymarket Riot in Chicago brought its shameful hysteria, and all
respectable America was crying for blood, Howells was one of the few
intellectuals who spoke for justice, one of the few who held aloof from
the mob spirit, thereby bringing on his head a wave of criticism. It
was a brave thing in 1886 to speak for the “Chicago anarchists.”

But it was not till his removal to New York, where he found himself
at the center of the great revolution, that he set about seriously
studying the ways of plutocracy. For the student of Cambridge society
it involved a mental upheaval. The urbanity of his literary-manner
conceals for most readers the intensity of emotion that underlies
his quiet style; yet it is clear enough that having examined the
ways of private capitalism and considered its works, he rejected it.
Thenceforth to the end of his life he hated the thing and quietly
preached against it. His affections went back fondly to the earlier
agricultural order that had shaped his youth, and in the character
of Dryfoos, in _A Hazard of New Fortunes_, he suggests the moral
degeneration that he believed followed in the train of the substitution
of a speculative capitalist economy for the wholesomer agrarian
economy. But though, remembering his frontier youth, he might prefer
the older ways, he was realist enough to understand that capitalism
was the order of his generation, and he turned eagerly to explore the
new proletarian philosophies that came out of Germany. Howells was
the first distinguished American man of letters to espouse Marxian
socialism. For a cultivated American in the Gilded Age to sympathize
with proletarian theory and to proclaim himself a socialist, was enough
to excite amazement in his fellows. In the eighties American social
thought was still naïve and provincial. Old-world theories were as
alien as old-world institutions, and in spite of the wide interest
aroused by _Looking Backward_ the intelligent American in 1890 knew as
little about Marxianism as he knows today about Bolshevism.

The doubts and hesitations that troubled Howells during these years
of changing outlook, are skillfully dramatized in _A Hazard of New
Fortunes_. The story of the removal of the Marshes from New England to
New York, told with more than usual leisureliness, is the story of the
transition from the peacefulness of his earlier literary life to the
anxieties of his later thought. Slowly into a story of the familiar
Howells commonplace comes the note of social dissension. Antagonistic
social philosophies meet and clash, and the movement draws inevitably
to the great climax of the strike that brings tragedy into the scene.
Of the mood that grew upon him as he wrote he afterwards said:

  It became, to my thinking, the most vital of my fictions; through
  my quickened interest in the life about me, at a moment of great
  psychological import. We had passed through a period of strong
  emotioning in the direction of humaner economics, ... the rich
  seemed not so much to despise the poor, and the poor did not
  so hopelessly repine. That shedding of blood which is for the
  remission of sins had been symbolized by the bombs and scaffolds of
  Chicago, and the hearts of those who felt this bound up with our
  rights, the slavery implicated in our liberty, were thrilling with
  griefs and hopes hitherto strange to the average American breast.
  Opportunely for me there was a great street-car strike in New York,
  and the story began to find its way to issues nobler and larger
  than those of the love-affairs common to fiction.[733]

The years of unrest marked by the great agrarian revolt were years of
great intellectual activity for Howells, during which his thought
ripened and mellowed. His own liberal spirit drew to him the liberal
spirits of the younger generation, and he became the counselor and
friend of many of the young rebels of the day. His sympathy went out
to all who were concerned at the injustice of the world. He questioned
the right of none to uphold his creed, nor sought to impose his own
beliefs upon others. As he watched the great struggle of the times his
heart was always on the side of the weak and exploited. Very likely he
knew little about the economics of money and finance, over which rival
partisans were quarreling savagely, but he understood the human side of
the farmers’ problem and it was always the balance in the human ledger
that weighed with him.

He was a friend of Hamlin Garland and rejoiced when _Main-Travelled
Roads_ was given to the world, writing for it an introduction warmly
and tenderly sympathetic. As an artist he grew concerned lest under
the stimulus of B. O. Flower the zeal of the propagandist should
submerge the art of the story-teller; but he had no quarrel with the
“causes” that were fermenting in the mind of the young Populist, and
would not lessen one whit the ardor of his social faith. Throughout
the passionate campaign of 1896, that brought most of his friends to a
blind and scurrilous partisanship of the gold standard, his heart kept
his mind just and his sympathy for the unrequited producers served as
counterbalance to the shrill vituperation of his friend Godkin. He had
thought too long and too honestly to be moved by the _claque_ of the
press.

It was in the black days of the panic of ’93 that he seems to have
brooded most thoughtfully over the ways of capitalistic America, and
in the following year he published _The Traveller from Altruria_, the
first of his two Utopian romances in which he subjected the system of
capitalism to critical analysis. It is a clever book that quite disarms
the reader. Howells delivers no broadside attack on the capitalistic
system, and he suggests its mean and selfish exploitation with such
genial urbanity, such sly satire, as to arouse no sleeping lions. The
concern in his heart is belied by the twinkle in his eye. He hints that
the Altrurian critic is only the figment of a dream, and he smilingly
suggests the sources of the Altrurian commonwealth in the long line of
Utopian dreamers from Plato and Sir Thomas More to Bellamy and William
Morris. But the urbanity is only a mask. Protected by it Howells
delivers many a shrewd thrust at the ways of capitalism. American
democracy does not show to advantage under his analysis. The Altrurian
comes upon the canker of social injustice in every chink and cranny
of life--a canker that is slowly destroying democratic America; and
Howells takes a sly pleasure in contrasting our democratic professions
with our plutocratic practice. There is a delightful irony in his
attack on the professional classes--the professor, the minister, the
writer--for their quick defense of the exploiting classes. What may
we expect of the science of economics, he suggests, when our academic
economists are only apologists for the existing order?

_The Traveller from Altruria_ is a shrewd analysis of American life set
against a Marxian background, and in forecasting the future Howells
follows the Marxian law of concentration. The Age of Accumulation,
with its gigantic monopolies gathered in ever fewer hands, prepared
the way for a new order when industrialism, grown overbig, falls into
the control of the state as naturally as the harvest is gathered
into the granary. There was no need of a class war. When the times
were ripe political means sufficed, for the democracy retained the
effective weapon of the vote. Thirteen years later Howells completed
his Utopian venture with _Through the Eye of the Needle_, in which
he sketches in fuller detail the order of life in Altruria. It was
not till men learned that coöperation is a better social cement than
competition, altruism than egoism, that the new order was possible; and
in this later work he depicts the kindly, rational society that emerged
when men left off fighting each other and turned to working together
instead. On every page the influence of William Morris is revealed--not
only in the rejection of an urban society founded on the machine and a
return to a decentralized anarchistic order, but in the emphasis on the
psychology of work and the satisfactions that spring from free creative
labor. _Through the Eye of the Needle_ is curiously reminiscent of
_News from Nowhere_ and suggests how sympathetically Howells followed
English social thought in its reaction against industrialism.

It was while he was thus engaged that he put into compact form his
speculations on the theory of realism. For more than a decade he had
been the most distinguished advocate of realism in America, and for
longer still his successive novels had revealed to a critical world
what substance and form he believed the realistic novel should possess.
The immediate sources of his theory are obscure, though it is clear
enough that the work of Jane Austen was a creative influence. From
the school of French and Russian naturalism, then at the height
of its vigor, he drew back in repulsion, and it was not till after
his technique was matured that Tolstoi became an influence in his
intellectual life. It is reasonable to assume that his realism was a
native growth, the result of temperament unfolding through quiet years
of reading in the English classics. A quizzical observer with the
gift of humor is not likely to run into romanticism, and a youthful
passion for Pope and Heine is not the best preparation for it. His
intense dislike of the romantic, that led him to an inadequate and
partial conception of it, seems to have sprung from certain instinctive
feelings and convictions that strengthened with the years: a deep and
sincere love of truth, a native sympathy with the simple homely phases
of life, a quiet loyalty to American fact, and a sharp distrust of the
aristocratic spirit. Endowed with such feelings he came to ascribe
his own partisanships to literary methods; the romantic became for
him the aristocratic, and the realistic became the democratic. As an
American he was content to take the common stuff of life, as he found
it in America, and depict it in unpretentious sincerity. Plain American
life was not only worthy of literature, he was convinced, but the only
material worthy of American literature. The path to the universal runs
as directly through the commonplace American parlor as through the hall
of the medieval baron or the drawing-room of Mayfair.

In _Criticism and Fiction_ (1894), Howells ascribes the rise of modern
realism to the twin sources of science and democracy. From science it
derives its passion for truth, for “realism,” he asserts, “is nothing
more and nothing less than the truthful treatment of material.” “We
must ask ourselves before we ask anything else, Is it true?--true to
the motives, the impulses, the principles, that shape the life of
actual men and women.” The question, what is essential truth, that
has been the apple of discord amongst the realists, Howells answers
in democratic fashion by appealing to the average. The “foolish man,”
he says, “wonders at the unusual, but the wise man at the usual.” The
realist, therefore, will deal objectively with the usual and common
rather than with the unusual or strange, and in so doing he draws
closer to the common heart of humanity, and learns the respect for
simple human nature that is the source and wellspring of democracy.
In delineating truthfully the prosaic lives of common people realism
reveals the essential dignity and worth of all life. The romantic,
on the other hand, is aristocratic. “It seeks to withdraw itself,
to stand aloof; to be distinguished and not to be identified.” “The
pride of caste has become the pride of taste,” and romance is the last
refuge of the aristocratic spirit that, defeated elsewhere, has taken
refuge in culture. Not aloofness, but comradeship, is the need of the
world; not distinction, but identity. Realism is the child of democracy
because the realist is one who “feels in every nerve the equality of
things and the unity of men,” and the great artist is one with a talent
“robust enough to front the everyday world and catch the charm of its
work-worn, care-worn, brave, kindly face.”

To this characteristic conception that realism is democratic Howells
adds certain other dicta that to his own generation seemed as true
as to ours they seem doubtful: that art must serve morality, that
it must teach rather than amuse, and that truthfulness to American
life requires a note of cheerfulness. Art cannot flout the “eternal
amenities,” Howells asserted, for “morality penetrates all things, it
is the soul of all things.” Nor can it stand aloof, disdaining the
office of teacher, for unless it “tends to make the world better and
kinder” it is empty and futile; and it can do this only “from and
through the truth.” But the truth that will uplift society does not
dwell in the kennel and pigsty; it will not be come upon by exploring
the animal in man, or in wrapping the shroud of pessimism about life.
In America at least, realism must concern itself with the “large
cheerful average of health and success and happy life,” for after
all “the more smiling aspects of life” are “the more American.” From
such postulates Howells developed his familiar technique, which in
minimizing plot, rejecting the unusual and strange and heroic, reduced
his stories to the drab level that bores so many of his readers, and
evokes the criticism that in elaboration of the commonplace he evades
the deeper and more tragic realities that reach to the heart of life.

The criticism is just. More than any other thing this concern for
the usual weakens Howells’s work and renders it trivial. He does not
probe the depths of emotional experience. Neither the life of the
spirit nor the passions of the flesh is the stuff from which he weaves
his stories. The lack--and allowing for all his solid excellence it
remains grave--sprang in part from his own timid nature that recoiled
from the gross and the unpleasant, and in part from the environment in
which he perfected his technique. For years he lived in an atmosphere
of complacent convention, a society dominated by women, culture, and
conscience. Cambridge and Boston in the seventies and eighties were
still in the Age of Innocence greatly concerned with erecting defenses
against the intrusion of the unpleasant, reverencing the genteel
in life and letters, soberly moral and making much of the eternal
verities. In such a world of refined manners and narrow outlook what
should the realist do but report faithfully of what he saw and heard?
And so Howells, perforce, became a specialist in women’s nerves, an
analyst of the tenuous New England conscience, a master of Boston
small-talk. It was such materials that shaped his leisurely technique
until it falls about his theme with the amplitude of crinoline.

Through these chronicles of the Age of Innocence runs a persistent note
of the neurotic. There are more scruples to a page of Howells than in
any other writer except Henry James--for the most part filmy cobwebs
invisible to the coarser vision of a later generation. The action
percolates through the sand of small-talk, welling up from the tiniest
springs and stopped by the smallest obstruction. Like Franklin’s
two-headed snake his characters are in danger of dying from thirst
because of much argument over the right path to water. It is hard to
weave a substantial fabric from such gossamer threads, and when in
_The Rise of Silas Lapham_ endless pages are devoted to the ethical
subtleties of a woman’s accepting the hand of a man who the family had
believed was in love with her sister, or when in _April Hopes_ the
fantastic scruples of a neurotic girl are elaborated with a refinement
of art worthy of a Fra Angelico Madonna, the stuff is too filmy to wear
well. Commonplace men and neurotic women are poor materials from which
to fashion an adequate realism, and with the passing of the Age of
Innocence the scruples of Howells went out of fashion.

The fault, in part at least, must be traced to the artist’s deep
reverence for New England. From his youth he had cherished an exalted
notion of the sufficiency of New England culture, and had accepted its
parochialisms as ultimate standards. To a bookish lad, inclined to be
too consciously literary, such loyalty to a declining school could
only accentuate his native aloofness from life. His four years at
Venice had been given over to an ardent pursuit of culture, as culture
was understood by Lowell and Norton. It was the natural impulse of a
sensitive mind, conscious of its limitations, reveling for the first
time in the wealth that had been denied his frontier boyhood. His
poetic _Venetian Days_ was an infallible passport to Boston favor,
and when after his return he was taken up by the _Atlantic_ group he
carried with him to Boston an unconscious inferiority complex that did
his genius an evil turn. It was natural for the self-taught western
youth to be reverent in presence of the great of earth; but it is not
well for the artist to be humble in the presence of his masters. Unless
he is something of a rebel, given to questioning the dogmas of the
schools, he will never ripen into creative originality.

An inferiority complex is a common mark of the frontier mind that
finds itself diffident in presence of the old and established, and
Howells suffered from it greatly. For years his keen eyes lacked their
usual shrewdness in judging Boston ways, and to the end of his life he
overestimated the greatness of the men to whom his youthful loyalty
had gone out. Not only did he accept Lowell and Holmes and Longfellow
at the Boston rating, but he regarded the lesser group of cultivated
Boston gentlemen with partial eyes. It would have been far better
for his art if like Hamlin Garland he had never been received within
the charmed circle; if he had had to make his way alone. To justify
his acceptance Howells felt that he must prove himself as completely
Bostonian as the best, and in consequence he sloughed off his western
heritage, perverted his genius, and shaped his realism to the slender
materials discovered in Back Bay drawing-rooms. The genteel tradition
was in the way of strangling his realism.

Subjected to such refinements his realism in the end became little more
than technique--a meticulous transcription of New England conventions,
the casual action submerging itself in an endless stream of talk. No
doubt Howells was true to what he saw; certainly no one has ever fixed
more exactly the thin substance of the Age of Innocence. Nevertheless
the fidelity of his observation, the refinement of his prose style,
and the subtlety of his humor that plays lambently about the edges
of his words, do not compensate for the slightness of his materials.
The record he has left is not that of a great soul brooding over the
meaning of life, puzzled, uncertain, yet tender toward the victims that
fate has seized and crushed. He was restrained by too many inhibitions
to deal frankly with natural human passions. He felt deeply and
tenderly, but he was too diffident to let himself go. It is likely
that Howells never realized the inadequacy of his temperament and the
futility of his method to any serious realism. Even in his acutest
study _A Hazard of New Fortunes_, which comes upon brutal economic
reality, the story is entangled in a mass of minute detail and never
quite breaks through. The indecisions, the repetitions, the whimsical
descriptions, the drifting talk, are all true to life, but they are
not essential or vital truth. The real issue toward which the story
moves--the problem of social justice and the contrasting systems of
wage-slavery, bond-slavery, and social democracy--is obscured in a
welter of asides and never quite reaches the front of the stage. He is
more effective in such works as _Indian Summer_, when he deals with
characters on vacation who play whimsically with love, and in _April
Hopes_, when he dwells fondly on the infinitely eloquent trivialities
of young love-making. In such studies the minute fidelity to word and
gesture, the humorous playing with invisible scruple, is a pleasant
substitute for solider material.

Howells had real gifts, of which he made the most. Refinement, humor,
sympathy--fidelity to external manner and rare skill in catching the
changing expression of life--a passion for truth and a jealous regard
for his art: he had all these qualities, yet they were not enough
to make him a great realist. He belonged to the Age of Innocence
and with its passing his works have been laid away. He has had no
followers to keep his method alive. If one may hazard an explanation
of the lot that has befallen him, it would be this. Howells the
artist mistook his calling. He was not by temperament a novelist. He
lacked the sense of drama, a grasp of the rough fabric of life, the
power to deal imaginatively with the great and tragic realities. His
genius was rather that of a whimsical essayist, a humorous observer
of the illogical ways of men. He was an eighteenth-century spirit--a
subtler Goldsmith--set down in another age and an uncongenial world.
In his later years he must have come to realize this, for more and
more he turned to the essay form. There his quiet humor and shrewd
observation fitted his sinuous prose style to a nicety. In such sketchy
autobiography as _My Literary Passions_, and more whimsically in such
genial travel essays as _Certain Delightful English Towns_, his refined
art arrived at its most perfect expression. Not an original genius like
Mark Twain, far from a turbulent soul like Herman Melville, Howells
was the reporter of his generation--the greatest literary figure of a
drab negative age when the older literary impulse was slackening, and
the new was slowly displacing it. He marks the transition between the
earlier idealism and the later naturalism. A humane and lovable soul,
he was the embodiment of all that was kindly and generous in an America
that was not wholly given over to the ways of the Gilded Age--an
America that loved beauty and served culture even amidst the turmoil of
revolution.


Footnotes

[730] _Literary and Social Silhouettes_, p. 73.

[731] The first subsection of this chapter in the Contents is entitled
“William James and Pragmatism.” None of this appears in the manuscript,
and it seems likely that Professor Parrington planned to transfer the
subject to a later part of the book. The numbering is, however, left as
it is given in the Contents.--_Publisher._

[732] “Civilization at its highest pitch was the master passion of his
mind, and his preoccupation with the international aspects of character
and custom issued from the conviction that the rawness and rudeness
of a young country were not incapable of cure by contact with more
developed forms.” Pelham Edgar, _Henry James, Man, Author_, pp. 40-41.

[733] Quoted in “The Social Consciousness of William Dean Howells,”
_New Republic_, Vol. 26, p. 193.




Book Two • The Old and the New: Storm Clouds


The quarter-century between the panic of 1873 that rudely disturbed
the revelry of the Great Barbecue, and the campaign of 1896 that
broke the agrarian opposition to capitalism, was marked by a fierce
agrarian attempt to nullify in America the law of concentration. The
silent drift toward plutocracy was too evident to escape comment even
in the Gilded Age, and the ideal of plutocracy was too repugnant to a
people drenched in Jeffersonian and Jacksonian prejudices to escape
bitter hostility. The pursuit of wealth was an accepted democratic
right, but it was assumed to be a fair race and no favors. The use
of the political state by greater wealth to lay handicaps on lesser
wealth had not been in the reckoning, and the law of progress that
diminished the number of beneficiaries from the national policy of
preëmption and exploitation had not been so interpreted. Something was
wrong with a progress that augmented poverty as it increased wealth,
and with the alarmist cry in their ears--the rich are growing richer
and the poor poorer--the untutored democracy of the seventies and the
eighties turned to question the drift of tendency that quite evidently
was transforming a democratic people into a vast engulfing plutocracy.
An older agrarian America was confronted by a younger capitalistic
one, and the conflict of ideals and purposes was certain to bring on a
bitter debate.

In the fierce struggle that turmoiled the politics of three decades
the democracy went into battle as ill-equipped intellectually as it
had been a hundred years before in the struggle over the Constitution.
It was reaping the harvest of the long Jacksonian slackness that,
content with the vote, had given no thought to the ultimate program
of democracy but had suffered the lawyers to have their way. The
Enlightenment had long since been submerged by Whiggish ambitions, and
since the days of the Abolition Movement there had been no serious
consideration of political theory. The success of the Jacksonian
revolution had brought about its undoing. The abstract principle of
democracy having won common acceptance, it was assumed to be competent
to shift for itself. But unfortunately a supposedly democratic state
was functioning under a Constitution designed to thwart democracy,
and, interpreted by lawyers, it buttressed the rights of property far
more securely than the rights of man. Within this fundamental law
capitalism had long been entrenching itself. Its stronghold could not
be taken by frontal attack and its flanks were protected by the courts
that had assumed the high prerogative of voiding statutory enactments
by judicial decree. As a result in no other country was capitalism so
safeguarded from hostile attack; it plowed its fields and gathered its
harvests secure from disturbance.

Unfortunately the political state did not realize that it was not
in reality the democracy it professed to be. The most intelligent
liberalism of the times, failing to take into account the economic
basis of politics, was satisfied to spend its energy in Civil Service
Reform and similar tinkering with the political machinery, convinced
that it was only necessary to recover the old aristocratic sense of
responsibility in political agents to perfect a democratic government.
Not till another generation did liberalism come to understand that the
democratic program was still largely unfulfilled, and set about in all
earnestness to complete it; but that did not happen till the philosophy
of democracy had been far more adequately explored and the simple faith
of Jacksonianism had been instructed by the experience of other lands.
Popular discontent with the drift toward plutocracy was intensified
by the successive economic crises that marked the transition from
agrarianism to capitalism. The gospel of progress, it seems, had
not taken due account of the price that must be paid in social
disturbances, and the breakdowns of 1873-1879 and 1887-1896 with their
harsh dislocations aroused a spirit of revolt that issued in broad
popular movements. Those movements spun the thread of liberalism that
runs through the years from the Gilded Age to the World War--a thread
woven of the earlier liberalism that came from the frontier, and the
new collectivistic theories that came from Europe. In the eighties and
nineties it was still largely native agrarian, but in the early years
of the new century it drew heavily on the proletarian philosophies of
Europe--seeking to apply old-world experience to American problems.
Through it all runs increasingly a note of sobering realism. After a
hundred years political romanticism was slowly dying in America.




Part One: The Middle Border Rises




