Chapter IV • Certain Militants


I • William Lloyd Garrison

The flintiest character amongst the New England militants, curiously
enough, was the son of an immigrant family, brought to Newburyport
and abandoned by a shiftless father. William Lloyd Garrison was not
an offspring of generations of New England Puritanism, but a waif
thrown by chance on the bleak shores of Massachusetts, and left to
shift pretty much for himself. Born in Newburyport, half English and
half Irish, with a heritage that promised ill, he was disciplined in
the sternest of schools. His capable Irish mother had a bitter time
providing for her three fatherless children, and the son suffered
the privation and found the help that were the mixed portion of the
destitute of old New England. Like Horace Greeley he ate the bread of
poverty and grew strong on it. There was iron in his nature, and the
narrow means that drove his father to drink and desertion, that sent
his brother adrift, that broke his mother and killed his sister, only
strengthened his will and toughened his fiber. As a lad he was put to
the cobbler’s bench to learn the trade that Whittier was learning at
Haverhill; later he was apprenticed to a carpenter and cabinetmaker. In
both trades he was unhappy, and it was not till a freak of fate turned
him over to a friendly printer that he found himself. For seven years
he stuck to his case, and at the end of the apprenticeship he was not
only a first-rate practical printer, but with some little knowledge of
books and master of a vigorous and serviceable prose style. With the
amazing capacity for self-training so characteristic of the Yankee, he
had picked up a sort of education and was ready to do whatever work in
the world should come to hand.

Chance threw in his way the job of village editor, and inclination
plunged him into politics. His political opinions, which he embraced
more ardently than intelligently, were faithful reflections of current
Massachusetts partisanship. He was quite ignorant of political
principles and the economics that determined political parties, and
with unconscious naïveté he espoused the cause of Boston commercialism.
He was a dogmatic, unquestioning Whig. Clay was his idol, General
Jackson his abomination; and his first political speech was in support
of Harrison Gray Otis, the discredited boss of the old Federalist
machine. But this was only a vagary of youthful hero worship.
Enthusiasm for reform was already setting up a ferment in his ardent
soul and preparing him for quite other alliances. The unhappy fate of
his father was a lesson that he took home, and he interested himself
in the temperance movement then just getting under way, serving for
a time as editor of a small temperance paper. Shortly thereafter he
stumbled upon his life work. Benjamin Lundy, a homespun hero of the
Society of Friends, had long been publishing intermittently his _Genius
of Universal Emancipation_, and in the itinerant work of begging
support he fell in with Garrison. The two discovered kindred interests
and they entered into a compact to go forth together to fight the
dragon of slavery. They sought out the den of the beast in Baltimore
and delivered their blows lustily; with the result that Garrison was
indicted by the grand jury for printing the name of a Newburyport
merchant who was picking up some honest dollars in the coastwise slave
traffic, and spent seven weeks in jail. On his release he returned
to Boston to replenish a lean purse, and January 1, 1831, he issued
the first number of _The Liberator_, a little paper that was to make
a mighty stir in the world during a long period of hand-to-mouth
existence.

Never was there a more foolhardy venture, judged by the wisdom of this
world. With no following, no weapon but a borrowed font of type in
a mean little print-shop, no money or credit, he flung his defiance
at the entrenched enemy with the courage of uncalculating youth. A
prospectus issued in the fall of 1830 thus set forth the purpose of the
venture:

  I shall assume, as self-evident truths, that the liberty of a
  people is a gift of God and nature:--That liberty consists in an
  independency upon the will of another:--That by the name of slave
  we understand a man who can neither dispose of his person or goods,
  but enjoys all at the will of his master:--That no man can have a
  right over others, unless it be by them granted to him.... That
  that which is not just is not law; and that which is not law,
  ought not to be in force:--That he who oppugns the public liberty,
  overthrows his own.... That there is no safety where there is no
  strength, no strength without union, no union without justice, no
  justice where faith and truth are wanting:--That the right to be
  free is a truth planted in the hearts of men, and acknowledged so
  to be by all that have hearkened to the voice of nature.... _Vide
  Algernon Sidney’s Discourses on Government--the Declaration of
  American Independence--the Constitutions and Bills of Rights of the
  several States, etc., etc._ (_Life of William Lloyd Garrison, by
  his Children._ Vol. I, p. 200.)

This pronouncement was amplified in the salutatory address in the first
number, as follows:

  Assenting to the “self-evident truth” maintained in the American
  Declaration of Independence, “that all men are created equal, and
  endowed by their Creator with certain inalienable rights--among
  which are life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness,” I shall
  strenuously contend for the immediate enfranchisement of our slave
  population.... I am aware that many object to the severity of my
  language; but is there not cause for severity? I _will_ be as
  harsh as truth, and as uncompromising as justice. On this subject,
  I do not wish to think, or speak, or write, with moderation ...
  urge me not to use moderation in a cause like the present. I am
  in earnest--I will not equivocate--I will not excuse--I will not
  retreat a single inch--+AND I WILL BE HEARD+. (_Ibid._, Vol. I, pp.
  224-225.)

The young man just turned twenty-six who thus marked out the path
he was to follow for thirty-five years was an extraordinarily
single-minded and rugged character. His like has too rarely appeared in
America. Arrogant, dictatorial, intolerant, he might be, as his warmest
friends admitted; but it is a foolish judgment that will dismiss him
thus. Unyielding as granite, sheer Yankee will driven by a passionate
energy, he was born for hazardous leadership. He was a man utterly
unacquainted with fear. Lied about daily, threatened, bullied, charged
with every sin in the Decalogue and every crime on the statute-book, he
could not be coerced nor intimidated nor turned aside from his purpose.
An ascetic who cared nothing for ease or preferment; a pacifist who
fought only with the sword of the spirit; a stern moralist prophesying
wrath upon a nation of mockers, and pronouncing doom upon a people
that had forgotten God, he was an agitator fashioned after the ancient
Hebraic pattern. The stature of such a man cannot be measured by
conventional standards. Outwardly a somewhat prosaic Baptist, deeply
religious and in his younger days bigotedly orthodox, he was in reality
a spiritual child of the Old Testament, a modern Puritan on whom had
fallen the mantle of the Prophets. New England Calvinism never bred so
Puritan a soul. Hebraism was in his marrow--its noble austerity, its
consuming passion. He daily walked with righteousness and communed
with conscience. He carried God’s scales into the market place. He
would not accept his law of men. Constitutions and statutes were vain
and foolish pronouncements to him if he judged them to be contrary to
the divine enactments. He counted property in negroes and cotton as
nothing when weighed in the balance of justice. A human soul, whether
in black skin or white, was of far greater worth in his eyes than all
the warring kingdoms of this world. As fully as John Humphrey Noyes he
reëmbodied the root-and-branch righteousness of English Commonwealth
times. Others might lash the sins of his generation with whips; he
would scourge them with nettles and scorpions. He would raise such a
clamor about men’s ears that the drowsiest must awake. He would light
such a fire in the slave market of America that the evil thing should
be consumed as stubble in the white flame of righteousness.

Such primitive Hebraism, quite evidently, is calculated to make
troublesome citizens who are certain to get themselves heartily
disliked by those who approve of the world as it is. Any invasion of
the devil’s realms will create an uproar, for the devil is prompt
to defend his own. Righteousness may prophesy in the gates, but the
buying and selling of the poor goes on as usual. Amongst comfortable
folk conscience is rarely at home when justice knocks at the door;
it is gone a-visiting, or is busy, or is waiting upon Caesar, or is
gone forth to pray. Comfortable folk do not like clamor, even from
the prophets, and are content to leave justice to God with the hope
that He will not disturb business. If the tithes are duly paid, it is
a mean and censorious God that will ask how the money was got. Hence
comfortable folk, north as well as south, did not like Garrison; and
not liking him they were zealous to damn him. He was made out to be
a bogy man, busily engaged in stirring up Nat Turner insurrections,
inciting peaceful and contented slaves to discontent, flouting the
Constitution and seeking to disrupt the Union. His righteousness was so
great a stumbling-block that he was held to be an atheist by eminent
formalists who knew of righteousness only by hearsay, and learned
of God only from report. It was reckoned to him a major sin that he
forgot his manners, for must not the Lord’s work be carried on in
seemly fashion, and the money-changers be scourged from the temple
politely? “The first movement here at the North, was a rank onset
and explosion,” said the eminent Dr. Bushnell. “The first sin of this
organization was a sin of ill manners. They did not go to work like
Christian gentlemen.... The great convention which met at Philadelphia
drew up a declaration of their sentiments ... by which they willfully
and boorishly cast off the whole South from them” (Garrison, _William
Lloyd Garrison_, Vol. II, p. 132, Note). What could be done with
a fellow who insisted that the devil is rarely put in a quake by
courteous treatment, and who had never learned that the Hebrew prophets
bore themselves like Christian gentlemen? That he spoke with plebeian
directness was unquestionably true.

  These are your men of “caution,” and “prudence,” and
  “judiciousness” [he exclaimed in a speech at Philadelphia, May 14,
  1838]. Sir, I have learned to hate those words. Whenever we attempt
  to imitate our great Exemplar, and press the truth of God, in all
  its plainness, upon the conscience, why, we are very imprudent;
  because, forsooth, a great excitement will ensue. Sir, slavery will
  not be overthrown without excitement, a most tremendous excitement.
  (_Ibid._, Vol. II, p. 215. Note.)

If clerical gentlemen disliked Garrison, gentlemen of State Street
disliked him much more heartily, and being the responsible custodians
of law and order, they upheld existing institutions in their own way.
Your Tory is always a Fascist at heart, and the Boston Tories naturally
adopted the principle of direct action. Unpleasant things happened
to Garrison in consequence. He was denounced at a most respectable
meeting in Faneuil Hall, “at which Washington was cheered for being
a slave-holder.” He was mobbed in his print-shop by “gentlemen of
property and standing from all parts of the city,” and was thrown into
jail by a timid mayor to save his life. Not since the days of Tom Paine
had such unmeasured vituperation been poured out on the head of an
American. It would seem that it was a perilous business to defend the
downtrodden or to remind church-members of the injunction “to undo the
heavy burdens and let the oppressed go free.” When conscience throws
down the gauntlet to economics it is certain to get some hard knocks.
It is ill-trained for a rough and tumble contest; its scruples will
not permit it to hit below the belt. But the Tory suffers no handicap
of scruple and plants his blows where he can. On the occasion of an
Abolition convention announced to be held within the shadows of Wall
Street, Bennett’s _New York Herald_ exemplified the sweetness and
light of the commercial mind in such pronouncements as this:

  What business have all the religious lunatics of the free states
  to gather in this commercial city for purposes which, if carried
  into effect, would ruin and destroy its prosperity?... Public
  opinion should be regulated. These abolitionists should not be
  allowed to misrepresent New York.... When free discussion does not
  promote the public good, it has no more right to exist than a bad
  government that is dangerous and oppressive to the common weal.
  It should be overthrown. On the question of the usefulness to the
  public of the packed, organized meetings of these abolitionists,
  socialists, Sabbath-breakers, and anarchists, there can be but
  one result arrived at by prudence and patriotism. They are
  dangerous assemblies--calculated for mischief, and reasonable
  in their character and purposes.... That half-a-dozen madmen
  should manufacture opinion for the whole community, is not to be
  tolerated. (_Ibid._, Vol. III, pp. 283-284.)

In consequence of which appeals to “prudence and patriotism” the
meeting was broken up, public opinion was judiciously regulated,
and the Bible and Constitution vindicated by a Bowery mob under the
leadership of a ward-heeler. It was from the impact of such ruthless
opposition that Garrison’s strategy took form; and it was direct and
uncompromising and outspoken--as sternly logical as Calhoun’s. There
were no shades in his thinking but only black and white, righteousness
and sin. Expediency was not in his vocabulary. He was as narrow as he
was intense. The catholic intellectual interests of the times touched
him but little. Transcendentalism lay quite outside his world of
thought. He was a religious soul rather than a speculative intellect,
and he measured all things by the principles of primitive Christianity.
As a young man he preferred the Calvinism of Lyman Beecher to the
Unitarianism of Channing, but later he came to perceive the intimate
relation between the major premises of Unitarianism and his social
ideals. It is idle to seek a political philosopher in a Hebrew
moralist. His somewhat naïve political conceptions were an amalgam of
French equalitarianism and Yankee perfectionism. The Declaration of
Independence was his one political textbook, in the light of which
he judged Congressional enactments and interpreted the Constitution.
With Channing he assumed an ethical sanction for natural rights, and
this assumption conducted straight to the doctrine of the higher law.
As early as 1830 his conscience was prepared to appeal from laws and
statutes to ethics, on the principle that “that which is not just is
not law.” By 1837 he had accepted the philosophy of spiritual anarchism
as set forth in the new gospel of perfectionism, and from this flowed
naturally the doctrines of Nullification and disunion.

With amazing frankness Garrison published his views to friends and
enemies, bringing all the hornets of conservatism about his ears. A
furious discussion arose within the Abolition ranks on the question of
loyalty to the political state, and the scandal of Garrison’s Fifth
Monarchy doctrine spread far. What that doctrine was he was at great
pains to make clear. Writing to Henry C. Wright on the Quaker doctrine
of non-resistance, he insisted on the sinfulness of all force whether
in a private or public capacity, and then asserted:

  Human governments will remain in violent existence as long as men
  are resolved not to bear the cross of Christ, and to be crucified
  unto the world. But in the Kingdom of God’s dear Son, holiness and
  love are the only magistracy. It has no swords, for they are beaten
  into ploughshares--no spears, for they are changed into pruning
  hooks--no military academy, for the saints cannot learn war any
  more--no gibbet, for life is regarded as inviolate--no chains,
  for all are free. And that kingdom is to be established upon the
  earth, for the time is predicted when the kingdoms of this world
  will become the kingdoms of our Lord and of his Christ. (Garrison,
  _William Lloyd Garrison_, Vol. II, p. 149.)

From such premises he deduced the conclusion that government is a cross
that God permits men to endure as punishment for their sins. When they
shall voluntarily quit their sins political government will cease.

  Human governments “are the results of human disobedience to the
  requirements of heaven; and they are better than anarchy just as a
  hailstorm is preferable to an earthquake, or the small-pox to the
  Asiatic cholera.” From the silence of the Bible as to the _form_ of
  such governments, he inferred not that each might claim a divine
  sanction, “but that the kingdom which Christ has established on
  earth is ultimately to swallow up or radically to subvert all other
  kingdoms.”... “Shall we, _as Christians_, applaud and do homage
  to human government? or shall we not rather lay the axe at the
  root of the tree, and attempt to destroy both cause and effect
  together?” Foolish are the speculations about the best form of
  human government: “What is government but the express image of the
  moral character of a people?” (_Ibid._, Vol. II, pp. 150-151.)

This is of course undiluted perfectionism, in which Garrison was
the most ardent of believers. Prosaic political theory had lost all
significance for him; he had got himself drunk on the new wine and was
in no mood to listen to the counsels of expediency. Like John Humphrey
Noyes he declared war upon the existing political state. He voluntarily
disfranchised himself. He raised the banner of “disloyalty” in the
_Liberator_, and summoned the Abolitionists to separate themselves
from the unclean government that protected the sin of slavery. That
the Constitution recognized the hateful system was sufficient proof to
Garrison that the Constitution itself was unclean. Let it be consumed
by its own iniquity. In 1843 he began an uncompromising attack upon
it by nailing to the masthead of the _Liberator_ his famous phrase,
“A Covenant with Death and an Agreement with Hell,” to which he soon
added the words, “No Union with Slaveholders.” He broke with many of
his oldest friends, with Whittier and Gerrit Smith and James Birney,
assailing them bitterly for meddling with third-party movements in
the hope of curing the evil by political action. There followed,
in consequence, a whirlwind and tempest of debate that brought a
disastrous schism upon the Abolition movement. Cries of disloyalty and
sedition filled all ears; but Garrison was indifferent to the storms
that gathered about his head. He would go forward though he went alone.
With every advance of the slave power his hatred of the Constitution,
under cover of which its advances were made, grew more bitter. He
outran southern fire eaters in advocacy of Nullification and secession.
It became his daily work to undo the labors of Webster and bring the
fundamental law into common contempt. The doctrine of no compromise
with sin made no account of the complexities of social problems--the
immediate, root-and-branch eradication of slavery or immediate
dissolution of the Union, were his alternatives. “We dissolved the
Union by a handsome vote, after a warm debate,” wrote Edmund Quincy
in 1843; “the question was ... wrapped up by Garrison in some of his
favorite Old Testament Hebraisms by way of vehicle, as the apothecaries
say” (_ibid._, Vol. III, p. 88).

It was at a Fourth of July meeting, following the Anthony Burns affair
of 1854, that Garrison made use of the striking appeal that attests his
extraordinary boldness and skill as an agitator. After contrasting the
principles of the Declaration of Independence and the present state of
the Republic, he went on:

  He should now proceed to perform an action which would be the
  testimony of his own soul, to all present, of the estimation in
  which he held the pro-slavery laws and deeds of the nation.
  Producing a copy of the _Fugitive Slave Law_, he set fire to it,
  and burnt it to ashes. Using an old and well-known phrase, he said,
  “And let all the people say, Amen”; and a unanimous cheer and shout
  of “Amen” burst from the vast audience. In like manner Mr. Garrison
  burned the decision of Edward G. Loring in the case of Anthony
  Burns ... the multitude ratifying the fiery immolation with shouts
  of applause. Then, holding up the U. S. Constitution, he branded it
  as the source and parent of all the other atrocities,--“a covenant
  with death and agreement with hell”--and consumed it to ashes on
  the spot, exclaiming, “So perish all compromises with tyranny!
  and let all the people say, Amen!” A tremendous shout of “Amen”
  went up to heaven in ratification of the deed, mingled with a few
  hisses and wrathful exclamations from some who were evidently in a
  rowdyish state of mind, but who were at once cowed by the popular
  feeling. (_Ibid._, Vol. III, p. 412.)

In such fashion did this disciple of the gospel of peace carry the
war into Macedonia. The law of conscience had come into collision
with the law of the land, and he followed conscience. For Garrison
majority votes held no mandate. He had come to regard the political
state as the mother of all mischiefs; for behind this thing of shreds
and patches he saw unscrupulous politicians whose profession was the
deceiving of simple minds, befogging moral issues with their myths and
cults--their appeals to patriotism and the Constitution--and bringing
the law of God into contempt. It was the spiritual bondage of the North
that held the negro in slavery, Garrison had come to believe, and to
free the conscience of the North was the great duty devolving upon the
Abolitionists. With his intense single-mindedness he saw no other duty,
and in doing that duty he would use no other weapon than the sword of
the spirit. It is fortunate, perhaps, that the prophet knows so little
of the resourcefulness of the market place on which he pronounces
judgment, or his zeal might suffer abatement. Slavery was not destroyed
by the conscience of Massachusetts, but by the economics of free
labor. The free-soilers were more dangerous to it for they fought with
material weapons; and old John Brown of Ossawatomie, more Hebraic even
than Garrison, was a sterner realist, who took care to load his Sharp’s
rifle while girding on the sword of the spirit. From the prophet to
the soldier is but a step, from the sword of the spirit to musket and
ball, from conscience to the Emancipation Proclamation. Single-minded
men--the Garrisons and John Browns--marshaling the discontent of
their generation, sometimes do succeed in removing mountains; but
unfortunately they leave a great scar, and the débris litters the
whole countryside. Other mountains may even arise from the waste of
the leveling. After the Emancipation Proclamation came the Fourteenth
Amendment, and out of that came the triumphant gospel of “due process
of law.” The devil understands the ways of the world too well to become
discouraged at a temporary set-back, for if righteousness succeed in
breaking the bonds that bind a generation, he knows that the market
place carries an ample stock of new cords to replace those that are
broken.


II • John G. Whittier • Puritan Quaker

If Garrison was the flintiest character amongst the militant
Abolitionists, Whittier was certainly the gentlest. Among many lovable
men he was perhaps the most lovable. Bred in a faith that had never
been dominant in New England, he escaped the induration that was the
price the New England conscience paid for its hard dogma. No thick
shell of Calvinism incrusted for him the soul of humanitarian religion.
In the Society of Friends righteousness was not daily twisted into
unloveliness, nor the beauty of holiness forgotten; and in consequence,
it was easier for him than for his Calvinist neighbors to fashion his
life upon the principles of the New Testament, and set Christ above the
Prophets.

Whittier’s family escaped many temptations by following quiet paths to
their own ends. Prosperity had never wooed the Massachusetts Quakers
away from the simple life, as it had done with so many Philadelphia
Friends, but a narrow domestic economy and social non-conformity
had nourished their religion of peace and good will. Long before
Channing discovered the religion of love in the teachings of French
humanitarianism, the early Quakers had found that primitive gospel in
the byways of Carolinian England, and had brought it to the new world.
There they had borne testimony in their daily lives to the excellence
of Christian fellowship, and there they had suffered the reproaches
and the blows of bigoted conformists. Their faith had been tried in
the fires of persecution, and the Society of Friends had justified
its use of that most excellent of sectarian names. In the sincerity
of their equalitarian fellowship the Quakers were the friends of
humanity, of the poor and the outcast of this world. Their religion
was of the week-day as well as the Sabbath. With its mystical doctrine
of the inner light--of the Holy Spirit that speaks directly to the
soul without the intermediation of priest or church--it unconsciously
spread the doctrine of democracy in an autocratic world. It interpreted
literally the principle that members of the Christian fellowship are
equals in the sight of God and in each other’s eyes--that on earth
there is neither high nor low but a common brotherhood in Christ.
It quietly set aside the pretentions of priestly hierarchies, and
substituted the principle that religion is a matter that lies with the
individual and God. Naturally a “hireling ministry” could not look
with favor on such doctrine, and the sharp hostility it aroused in
theocratic New England, sprang from the realization that the ideals
of the Quaker fellowship were dangerous to the ideals of a priestly
theocracy. The autocratic rulers of Massachusetts Bay could see little
good in the democracy of the Friends.

As became a Quietist, the master passion of Whittier’s life was
ethical. He was neither a transcendental nor a Utopian visionary, but a
primitive Christian, an apostle of good will and a friend of justice.
Sprung from a long line of New England yeomen, wholly of the soil,
simple in wants, quietly independent, he was the last lineal expression
in our literature of the primitive faith, the last authentic echo of
the spiritual democracy of the seventeenth century. A thorough Yankee
in character, the Yankee never dominated him. As a young man, to be
sure, he temporized with his Quakerism and dreamed fond dreams of
worldly ambition. The stirrings of youthful romance awakened the desire
to be a Byronic poet, and a Yankee knack with politics led him to
meddle with the hope of representing his district in Congress. He was
hand-in-glove with the time-serving Caleb Cushing, and the temptations
of political intrigue almost led to his backsliding; but he soon put
the devil behind him and gave security for his better behavior by
coming out for the cause of Abolitionism. That was the end of his hopes
of political preferment, and the more surely to burn his bridges he
published in 1833, at his own cost, a little Abolition tract entitled
_Justice and Expediency_, which was reissued by Lewis Tappan in a great
edition and scattered broadcast. The same year he attended as delegate
the National Anti-Slavery Convention at Philadelphia, and subscribed
his name to its pronouncement. Thenceforth for over thirty years he
gave his best strength to the cause, writing abundantly in prose and
verse, serving as editor of Abolition publications, and suffering the
unpleasant experiences common to the group, at one time being hunted by
a mob and stoned.

This deliberate alignment with an unpopular cause, this calm response
to the summons of conscience, was the fruit of his Quaker training.
It was no new experience for the Quaker to dissent. The Whittier
family had been Come-outers for generations, sacrificing material
well-being for their faith, and he had grown up in dissent. The long
struggle for democratic freedom in Massachusetts was a familiar story
to him. The record had come down by word of mouth and stories of
early persecutions were fireside tales in the Whittier household. His
ancestors had lived in the hard old Puritan theocracy, and yet detached
from it; and this detachment had rendered them shrewdly critical and
sensitive to injustice. With their quiet dissent from what the Quaker
conscience regarded as unrighteous, and their practical nullification
of unjust authority, Whittier was in full sympathy. His intimate
knowledge of early Massachusetts history had taught him certain things
which official historians had overlooked, the chief of which was that
dissent had been the ally and friend of freedom in New England. From
his youth up he had been a loving student of the old annals, of those
intimate narratives that preserve the voice and manner of the past;
and as he discovered how often persecution had left its stain on the
record, he was drawn to consider the superstitious aberrations of a
people supposedly devout. In middle life he gathered up in _Leaves from
Margaret Smith’s Journal of Massachusetts Bay, 1678-79_, materials that
he had long been collecting, and which, interpreted by a sympathetic
imagination, provides a surprisingly vivid account of life in New
England in the second generation.

All in all, it is Whittier’s most notable achievement in prose. Pieced
together out of old records, it is authentic as the yellow documents
from which it was drawn. The soft light of romance lies upon its
pages, sobered by historical fact and tempered by creative sympathy.
Loving yet critical, quite devastating at times in its implications,
it is an amazingly intimate narrative. The mind of Puritan New England
is uncovered in these unpretentious pages, and it does not show to
advantage. There was many a knot and seam in the old Puritan life,
much that was mean and ugly woven into the honest web. The Puritan
proneness to Quaker-baiting--aggravated to be sure by the ill manners
of the Ranters; their vulgar credulity that encouraged witch-hunting;
their callous treatment of the Indian and negro; their hardness of
nature that made them grasping and censorious: such knots and seams
in the Puritan character did not escape Whittier’s eye, but they
appear in the sketches of avaricious deacons, sour women, intolerant
magistrates--the Deacon Doles and Goody Lakes and Roger Endicotts,
whose bigotry tyrannized over the better natures of the community.
Whittier sifted his materials carefully to gather up what good wheat
there might be, yet the showing it must be confessed is but paltry.
Honest Robert Pine who will have none unjustly treated, good Mr.
Russ who counsels moderation in dealing with the unhappy victims of
mob suspicion. Captain Samuel Sewall who speaks up bravely for the
outcast--these are the remnant in Israel, the generous minority that
cannot leaven the dour and credulous mass. Yet even they are not heroic
figures to Whittier. His heroes are the Come-outers, and in particular
Peggy Brewster--reminiscent evidently of his great-grandmother, the
Quakeress Mary Peaslee, who married Robert Whittier in 1694--who is the
good Samaritan of the Puritan neighborhood, and whose loving-kindness
wins a reluctant good will that stops short of toleration of her
non-conformity.

Such intimate studies in the psychology of persecution were a liberal
education, and Whittier would have been no Quaker had he not learned
his lesson. He was justified in not thinking well of the social
conscience of respectable New England. Religious conformity, he
had come to understand, had not kept alive the torch of freedom in
Massachusetts, nor had Puritan righteousness befriended justice. Not
the great of earth but the simple may be counted on to do God’s work.
So taking his lesson to heart he quietly put aside ambition, and like
Peggy Brewster numbered himself among the remnant. Like her he would
be a Come-outer and bear his testimony against the uncleanness of the
American people in this matter of negro slavery. Not with musket and
ball would he fight, like old John Brown; but with the sword of the
spirit. The solution must lie with the conscience of the American
people. As a Friend, a man of peace, he would not deal harshly with
the supporters of slavery; he would not counsel violence. But as
a Yankee with a gift for politics, he would use political means to
jog a slothful conscience and marshal its forces. And so Whittier
became the politician amongst the Abolitionists. He proved himself a
skillful lobbyist. He was active in getting up petitions to Congress.
He supported John Quincy Adams and put pressure on the slippery Caleb
Cushing. He advocated the policy of boring from within the old parties,
but when such methods proved futile he became an active leader in
the third party movement. He was an early supporter of the Liberal
party--that in 1844 drew enough votes from Clay in New York to defeat
him for the Presidency--of the Free-Soil party, and later of the
Republican party.

It was this insistence upon the use of political methods that brought
about the unhappy break with Garrison. Immediately it was no more
than a difference over tactics, but it was embittered by a wide
cleavage of political theory. With Garrison’s conversion to spiritual
anarchism the Abolition movement was sundered by a division between
the perfectionists and the political actionists. The principle of
non-voting and of refusing allegiance to the Constitution aroused
strong opposition, and Whittier went with Birney and Gerrit Smith,
with Jonathan Sewall, John Pierpont and the Tappans in rejecting the
perfectionist policy. His political common sense turned naturally to
political agencies to accomplish his ends. “Moral action apart from
political” seemed to him an “absurdity.” But when he applied the Quaker
principle of Come-outism, and advocated separate party alignment.
Garrison attacked him with his habitual intolerance. The latter feared
a third party movement as certain to provide a rallying cry for the
commercial interest to muster the mob to its support, and overwhelm
the minority with the unthinking and selfish mass. “All political
minorities,” he argued, “are more or less liberal,” and by throwing
the Abolition strength to such organized minorities, the movement
would be “feared and respected by all political parties” (Garrison,
_William Lloyd Garrison_, Vol. II, pp. 310-311). The wisest strategy,
he believed, was to seek to hold the balance of power between the old
parties--rewarding friends and punishing enemies--while laboring to
arouse the conscience of America, for ballots without conscience were
the enemies of justice.

Whittier was no such root-and-branch spirit as Garrison, and in
the political field he was a practical, somewhat prosaic Yankee,
little given to abstract speculation, skillful in minor strategical
skirmishes, inclined to opportunism. He belonged to no school of
political thought. His equalitarianism came as a heritage from his
Quaker religion rather than from political theory. To prepare himself
for his work he read Milton and Burke. The pamphlets of the great
Puritan appealed to him as the voice of the moral fervor of a heroic
age, but Milton’s aristocratic republicanism he seems to have examined
no more critically than Burke’s Whiggish legalism. Neither held
anything in common with Quaker equalitarianism. Rousseau and Tom Paine
and Jefferson, with whom he certainly would have sympathized, he seems
not to have been acquainted with. In Whittier’s New England they were
in ill repute, and the young Whittier was as naïvely provincial in
his political partisanship as was Garrison. Economics had no part in
his thought, and the economic interests that divided Federalism and
Anti-Federalism he seems never to have understood. Though sprung from
six generations of farmers who tilled the same acres, he reveals no
sympathy with agrarianism. He swallowed Clay and the American System
without a qualm, and as a young editor he wrote with pride of the
developing industrialism of Massachusetts. Neither in politics nor
in economics was he a rebellious soul. He was conscience rather than
intellect. He felt rather than thought. Only a moral issue could draw
him into strife, and even in such contests he was ill equipped to lead
the prosaic debates. His moral indignation found its natural expression
in verse, and he early took his place as the poet of the Abolition
movement, distilling into ready lyrics the emotion of the moment.

A great, even a noteworthy poet, Whittier certainly was not. Compared
with Whitman he is only a minor figure. Among the better known American
poets Bryant alone is so narrow in range and barren in suggestion. His
austere and meager life bred too little sensuousness of nature and
too few intellectual passions. An over-frugal watering of the wine of
paganism had left the New England character thin. The sap of humor that
ran so boisterously through the veins of the West, exuding a rough wit
from Davy Crockett to Mark Twain, was quite gone out of the Yankee
blood. His homely imagination was unquickened by a hearty village life
as was the case with the English Bunyan and the Scotch Burns. He had
become a bundle of Yankee nerves, responding only to moral stimuli.
The comment of Whitman sums up the Quaker poet adequately:

  Whittier’s poetry stands for morality ... as filtered through the
  positive Puritanical and Quaker filters; is very valuable as a
  genuine utterance.... Whittier is rather a grand figure--pretty
  lean and ascetic--no Greek--also not composite and universal enough
  (doesn’t wish to be, doesn’t try to be) for ideal Americanism.
  (Carpenter, _Life of Whitman_, p. 293.)

Never a great artist, rarely a competent craftsman, he wrote for the
most part impassioned commonplace, with occasional flashes that are not
commonplace.

The high-water mark of lyric indignation was reached in the lines to
Webster. Written at white heat, they have the passionate directness
of Thoreau’s prose. Like other Abolitionists, Whittier had clung
to his hopes of Webster in spite of frequent signs of the latter’s
backsliding. He did not sufficiently appreciate the economic
alliances that tied Webster to State Street, and he underrated his
presidential ambitions. But when the blow came with the Seventh of
March Speech, it staggered him--not alone the defection of Webster,
but the demonstrative approval of his wealthy constituents. For having
“convinced the understanding and touched the conscience of a nation,”
Webster was formally thanked by some seven hundred addressers from
the most respectable circles of Massachusetts--great men like Rufus
Choate, George Ticknor, W. H. Prescott, President Jared Sparks and
Professor Felton of Harvard, Moses Stuart and Leonard Woods of Andover
Theological Seminary. It was an hour of profound discouragement that
laid bare what colossal difficulties stood in the way of Abolitionism.
“The scandalous treachery of Webster and the _backing_ he has received
from Andover and Harvard,” wrote Whittier to Garrison, “show that we
have nothing to hope for from the great political parties and religious
sects” (William Sloane Kennedy, _John G. Whittier_, p. 113).

The scathing lines of _Ichabod_ were read throughout the North, and
they must have rankled in Webster’s heart. Even Whittier was troubled
by their severity and thirty years later he wrote a second Webster
poem which he set beside _Ichabod_ in his collected works. _The Lost
Occasion_ is a testimony to the kindliness of Whittier’s Quaker heart
that did not love to offend; but no kindliness of memory could change
or soften the just verdict of the lines:

  Of all we loved and honored, naught
    Save power remains;
  A fallen angel’s pride of thought,
    Still strong in chains.

  All else is gone; from those great eyes
    The soul is fled:
  When faith is lost, when honor dies,
    The man is dead!

  Then, pay the reverence of old days
    To his dead fame;
  Walk backward, with averted gaze,
    And hide the shame!

If Whittier was ill acquainted with the Boston of State Street
and the Back Bay, and the Cambridge of Harvard culture, he knew
intimately the Massachusetts of the village and the farm, and the
overwhelming repudiation of Webster and the Whig party, following
the Seventh of March Speech, would seem to have justified his lyric
confidence expressed in the vigorous heptameters of _Massachusetts to
Virginia_. For those who lived in the social world of Commissioner
Loring--professor of law at Harvard--and Rufus Choate, it was hard
not to think that Massachusetts had come to degenerate days. The fine
old-school Federalist, Josiah Quincy, commenting on the Boston that
watched Sims returned to slavery, wrote:

  When the [Fugitive Slave] law passed, I did think the moral sense
  of the community would not enforce it; I said that it never
  would be. But now I find that my fellow-citizens are not only
  _submissive_ to, but that they are earnestly active for, its
  enforcement. The Boston of 1851 is not the Boston of 1775. Boston
  has now become a mere shop--a place for buying and selling goods;
  and I suppose, also, of _buying and selling men_. (Garrison,
  _William Lloyd Garrison_, Vol. III, p. 328.)

And Lowell, living in the same mean atmosphere, wrote:

  Massachusetts, God forgive her,
    She’s akneelin’ with the rest,
  She, thet ough’ to ha’ clung ferever
    In her grand old eagle-nest.

  (_Biglow Papers_, Part I, 1.)

But Whittier professed to think better of the conscience of New
England. A strong pride of the commonwealth runs through the lines
that name over the towns of Massachusetts, from “free, broad
Middlesex,” westward and northward to the hills of Hampshire:

  And sandy Barnstable rose up, wet with the salt sea spray;
  And Bristol sent her answering shout down Narragansett Bay!
  Along the broad Connecticut old Hampden felt the thrill,
  And the cheer of Hampshire’s woodmen swept down from Holyoke Hill.

  The voice of Massachusetts! Of her free sons and daughters,
  Deep calling unto deep aloud, the sound of many waters!
  Against the burden of that voice what tyrant power shall stand?
  No fetters in the Bay State! No slave upon her land!

When at last the long controversy was over and release from the
struggle came to Whittier, his poetry grew richer and mellower. He was
not made to be a fighter, and it was with a sigh of relief that he
turned to the Elysian fields he had dreamed of, while he was turning
with his plow the rough stubble of a cause. Looking back upon those
arduous days, he sketched half whimsically his own portrait in _The
Tent on the Beach_.

    And one there was, a dreamer born,
      Who, with a mission to fulfill,
    Had left the Muses’ haunts to turn
      The crank of an opinion-mill,
    Making his rustic reed of song
    A weapon in the war with wrong,
  Yoking his fancy to the breaking-plough
  That beam-deep turned the soil for truth to spring and grow.

    Too quiet seemed the man to ride
      The wingéd Hippogriff Reform;
    Was his a voice from side to side
      To pierce the tumult of the storm?
    A silent, shy, peace-loving man,
    He seemed no fiery partisan
  To hold his way against the public frown,
  The ban of Church and State, the fierce Mob’s hounding down.

    For while he wrought with strenuous will
      The work his hands had found to do,
    He heard the fitful music still
      Of winds that out of dream-land blew.
    The din about him could not drown
    What the strange voices whispered down;
  Along his task-field weird processions swept,
  The visionary pomp of stately phantoms stepped.

    The common air was thick with dreams,--
      He told them to the toiling crowd;
    Such music as the woods and streams
      Sang in his ear he sang aloud;
    In still, shut bays, on windy capes,
    He heard the call of beckoning shapes,
  And, as the gray old shadows prompted him,
  To homely moulds of rhyme he shaped their legends grim.

Many excellent things he did in those quiet later years; old time
pictures like _Snowbound_, with its homely fireside economy long since
buried under the snows of forgotten winters; vigorous tales like
_Abraham Davenport_; ballads like _Skipper Ireson’s Ride_, that have
something of the spirit of the primitive. He had given thirty years of
his life to the cause of social justice, and surely none would grudge
him in old age his rambles in pleasanter fields. It was well that he
could turn to the past, for the America of the new exploitative age,
the New England of Lowell and Lawrence, he never understood. Black
slavery he understood, but wage slavery he comprehended no more than
did Garrison. To the end he remained a primitive soul, ill equipped to
understand a materialistic philosophy of society. There is something
pathetic in his _Songs of Labor_. His economics, like his democracy,
was of a bygone time, having no kinship with a scrambling free-soilism
or a rapacious capitalism. There is scant room in this world for the
Friend with his unmilitant dream of the fellowship. With his passion
for freedom, established in the gospel of righteousness, the Quaker
Whittier was fast becoming an anachronism in industrial New England
that was concerned about very different things. How old-fashioned he
had become is suggested by certain lines that phrase his greetings
to later times. Spare, somewhat halting in rhythm, yet transparently
sincere, they constitute an apologia that New England need feel no
shame for.

    Yet here at least an earnest sense
  Of human right and weal is shown;
    A hate of tyranny intense,
    And hearty in its vehemence,
  As if my brother’s pain and sorrow were my own.

    O Freedom! if to me belong
  Nor mighty Milton’s gift divine,
    Nor Marvell’s wit and graceful song,
    Still with a love as deep and strong
  As theirs, I lay, like them, my best gifts on thy shrine!


III • Harriet Beecher Stowe • A Daughter of Puritanism

No more Puritan mind than Mrs. Stowe’s ever contributed to the
literature of New England. Her remarkable native gifts were
unconsciously given specific shape by a rigid environment. For years
the artist in her struggled to subdue the moralist, and never quite
succeeded. Before she dipped her pen in ink her mind had taken its
set. She could not hope to escape being a preacher. Daughter of a
minister and wife of a minister, with brothers and sons ministers,
she lived all her life in an atmosphere of religion. She was baptized
in creeds and prattled the language of sermons as the vernacular of
childhood. Born at a critical time for the old New England faith, her
youth was passed amid the storm clouds of the Unitarian controversy,
in an atmosphere charged with electricity. Connecticut was the very
citadel of the Edwardean orthodoxy, and Litchfield was as rugged in
its faith as the hills it nestled among; and when the old-school
Calvinism of Boston was in danger of utter rout, it naturally turned
to a Connecticut Daniel to save the venerable cause. Stout old Lyman
Beecher was a host in himself. Son of a Connecticut blacksmith and
himself brought up at the forge before he quitted it to seek learning
at Yale College under Timothy Dwight, able, kindly, practical, with
pronounced literary tastes and a capable pen, he was a stalwart
Edwardean, militantly conservative, who damned our perverse human
nature with incontrovertible logic. Harriet was eight years old
when Channing preached his Baltimore sermon, and fourteen when her
father was summoned to Hanover Street Church, Boston. Her childish
heart had already been given to Baxter’s _Saint’s Rest_, and her
imagination awakened by Cotton Mather’s _Magnalia Christi Americana_.
Theocratic New England lay enveloped for her in a haze of romance, more
fascinating than any Sir Walter had woven about the Scottish Highlands;
she had discovered there noble figures and heroic deeds to kindle
an ardent hero worship. At fourteen she was converted--too easily
it seems, for she could not demonstrate to the satisfaction of her
spiritual counselors that she had been sufficiently under conviction
of sin. Thereafter to the end of her life the greatest of all dramas
for her was the drama of the soul concerned with the great business of
salvation.

The surest clue to Mrs. Stowe’s literary secret is to be found in
her sympathetic understanding of the spiritual life of Puritan New
England. She was a lifelong student of New England psychology, with
its “profound, unutterable, and therefore unuttered melancholy” that
resulted from open-eyed contemplation of grim fact. The past that
lay bleak and stern behind the sober present she understood as few
others did. Before her sympathetic eyes it fell into just proportions,
and quite naturally she became the historian of her people. The
autobiographical material that fills her later work--her husband’s
recollections in _Old-Town Folks_, and her own in _Poganuc People_--is
much more than autobiography; it is intimate history of New England,
written by one who in distilling her own experience was writing
the chronicle of a race. In a brilliant chapter of the former work
she gives a remarkable analysis of the intellectual development of
Puritan New England, and provides the setting against which her own
intellectual life should be placed. To overlook it is to miss the most
suggestive commentary on her work that has ever been written.

This daughter of Puritanism traces her intellectual antecedents
back to the long struggle of Puritan rationalism with feudal custom
and medieval ideas. The old English Puritans, “by nature the most
reverential and most loyal portion of the community,” in destroying the
divine-right sovereignty of King Charles, were impelled to transfer
that sovereignty to a higher King. In pulling down the temporal, they
erected a divine sovereignty; and their passionate attachment to the
new Sovereign was the natural response to “the pleading and yearning
within them of a faculty robbed of its appropriate object, and longing
for support and expression.” But the theologies to which they yielded
intellectual allegiance were a “legacy from past monarchical and
medieval ages.” To free themselves from this unhappy legacy, and create
a democratic theology, was an arduous work that needed two hundred
years to accomplish; and not until the Revolution spread a new social
philosophy through America, did the work go forward rapidly. Wanting
such a democratic philosophy Puritan New England wandered in the old
theological fogs. It was Jonathan Edwards who first turned the New
England mind to rationalism, and began that long “controversy” that
was to unsettle so much. But unhappily the rationalism of Edwards
was turned aside to reactionary ends, and his _Treatise on True
Virtue_ was “one of the strongest attempts to back up by reasoning
the old monarchical and aristocratic ideas of the supreme right of
the king and upper classes.” Nevertheless he set all New England to
rationalizing, and it was this severe discipline that carried her
people soberly through the Revolutionary War, and preserved them from
the excesses which followed the Revolution in France. And it was this
same discipline that prepared them for the eventual re-discovery of
the humanity of Jesus and the democracy of his religion. New England
had been struggling towards democracy through the bog of its feudal
theology; it became consciously democratic with the appearance of the
new theology (_Old-Town Folks_, Chapter XXIX).

This rationalistic bias of eighteenth-century New England suffices to
explain for Mrs. Stowe the stern temper and angular individuality of
the old Puritan Yankee. Her particular hero and saint was Jonathan
Edwards, and her lesser hero and saint was Samuel Hopkins; and in both
it was the courageous rationalism that appealed to her. In them, and
more particularly in the former, she discovered the creative force that
quickened a religion that was falling into dead formalism, that gave
it fresh vitality and made it the central fact of everyday New England
life. Across the world of her youth lay the shadow--or the light--of
the great Edwards, and the great Hopkins was his intellectual heir.
In another chapter of _Old-Town Folks_ she sketches the Edwardean
influence in bold outline.

  The ministers of the early colonial days of New England, though
  well-read, scholarly men, were more statesmen than theologians.
  Their minds ran upon the actual arrangements of society, which were
  in great measure left in their hands, rather than on doctrinal and
  metaphysical subtleties. They took their confession of faith just
  as the great body of Protestant reformers left it, and acted upon
  it as a practical foundation, without much further discussion,
  until the time of President Edwards. He was the first man who began
  the disintegrating process of applying rationalistic methods to the
  accepted doctrines of religion, and he rationalized far more boldly
  and widely than any publishers of his biography have ever dared to
  let the world know. He sawed the great dam and let out the whole
  waters of discussion over all New England, and that free discussion
  led to all the shades of opinion of our modern days. Little as he
  thought it, Waldo Emerson and Theodore Parker were the last results
  of the current set in motion by Jonathan Edwards. (Chapter XIX.)

In this flood let loose by the metaphysical saw of Jonathan Edwards,
Mrs. Stowe found the material for her New England tales. In no other
pages does one realize so fully the tremendous, vital significance
of religion to the children of Puritanism, nor appreciate how narrow
a course their lives ran between the farm and the meeting-house. A
domestic economy and a parochial theology absorbed their energies,
and they took on sharp and angular imprints from a severe routine.
It was a school of discipline that created individual character,
and Mrs. Stowe possessed a loving eye for the odd and original. She
delighted in emphasizing the theological differences that ran through
Yankee families, giving little twists to character, and rising to the
tongue in scraps of confirmatory Scripture. Large-hearted, motherly
Grandmother Badger, in _Old-Town Folks_, was a stern Calvinist who
daily threw predestination in the face of her easy-going Arminian
husband, and exchanged syllogisms in a Sabbath-day “battle of the
Infinities” with her son from Yale. Theology provided the staple of
talk in the farmer’s kitchen; it was the axis on which turned the
simple country life. _Old-Town Folks_ and _Poganuc People_ are cross
sections of old New England, with its lingering prejudices in favor of
rank,[454] its Arminian Parson Lothrop in wig and gold cane, and its
Calvinist Dr. Cushing hostile to all democratic Jacobinism, its country
yokels, its stubborn yeomen who parade their independence by voting the
democratic ticket openly in the face of gentlemanly Federalists, its
sharp contrasts of a stately old order and a somewhat bumptious new,
yet with the hard New England granite snugly laid up and bonded with
the mortar of religion--a strange dead world that emerges distinctly
through the haze of Victorian sentiment. For Mrs. Stowe was a child
of her own romantic generation as well as a daughter of Puritanism,
and it was easy for her to discover suggestions of Utopia in a world
where minister and people mingled theology with their corn-huskings and
apple-bees.

Between these sketches and the Abolition novels stands _The
Minister’s Wooing_, with its Puritan heroine bleached into pure
holiness under the cold sunshine of Hopkinsian theology, and its
unworldly minister who demonstrated the sincerity of his creed of
disinterested benevolence--of willing to be damned for the glory of
God--by voluntarily yielding his betrothed to an earlier lover. It
is a love story without sex, as befits the wooing of a Puritan nun
by her spiritual father, set against a Yankee background of capable
housekeeping and dignified tea-drinking, subdued to proper decorum by
religion, and touched with tragedy by the shadow of damnation that
falls on the unregenerate--a world in which the beauty of holiness is
somewhat pale and austere, and where disinterested benevolence finds a
thin and obdurate soil to strike root in. Mrs. Stowe was drawn to the
theme, very evidently, by the impulse of her two Utopian enthusiasms,
her interest in Abolition and her affection for the ways of old New
England. Such romance as blossomed under those bleak skies she loved
to gather into a Yankee nosegay, and in her sympathetic hands the old
slave-running Newport becomes almost lovable and human. She might
find the theology hard, but she forgave the sermon out of love for
the preacher. As the historian of the human side of Calvinism she
tempered dogma with affection. In unsympathetic print those old sermons
were almost unbelievably harsh and ungainly; as theologians those
bewigged preachers were dry as the chips of last year’s woodpile; but
as husbands and fathers and neighbors, they were usually kind and
unselfish and helpful. Her father Lyman Beecher was an arid dogmatist
on the Lord’s Day, but on week-days he fished and hunted rabbits and
went nutting with his sons, made garden or smoked hams, or helped a
neighbor with plowing or haying, and was an unusually capable and
cheery member of a busy little world. In the light of such domestic
exegesis the bleakness of his theology was softened, and the dogmatic
theologian became a very human person.

Thus instructed Mrs. Stowe found no difficulty in discovering the human
side of Dr. Samuel Hopkins, or understanding how the hard doctrine
might cover the gentlest of souls--that the very intensity of devotion
to the logic of a stern creed betokened a depth of religious sincerity
that would find issue in generous deeds. A thinker who can dig from
the harsh soil of Calvinism the doctrine of disinterested benevolence
will discover a tender conscience in his own bosom. One might hazard
a guess, indeed, that the story of Samuel Hopkins was an unconscious
defense of the New England ministers against the sharp charges of
the Abolitionists that the clergy were half-hearted in the cause or
openly hostile. With her conviction of the unselfish nobility of their
lives, Mrs. Stowe must have taken a secret pleasure in revealing the
good Doctor as a forerunner of the Abolitionists, and in pointing
out that the crabbed logician of the Edwardean school, the theologian
immersed in the abstractions of a grotesque system, was nevertheless
a light set upon a hill, a primitive Christian with heart overflowing
with loving-kindness, who understood the iniquity of slavery and
turned shepherd to the outcast to his own hurt. The figure of the
unworldly minister is drawn with loving hand and his angularities made
less rugged. His noble spirituality shrivels and consumes the mean
excuses of his slave-running parishioner; it spreads quietly over
the countryside, and his daily life is a sermon that quickens hearts
that his theology leaves cold. There is preaching aplenty in the
book--quite too much for later stomachs; but it scarcely detracts from
the significance of the story as a document of Puritan New England,
revealing how a tender conscience was stirring beneath the crabbed
exterior of the old Calvinism.

In the light of such antecedents and such training Mrs. Stowe’s
passionate concern over slavery becomes easily comprehensible. Her
Puritan conscience was quickened by her warm human sympathies. She had
come close to the hateful thing during the years spent at Cincinnati,
where the Abolition sentiment of the Lane Seminary students aroused
such bitter opposition that President Lyman Beecher was forced to
approve the decision of the trustees to forbid any discussion of
slavery, with the result that so great a hegira of students took
place from Lane to Oberlin that the seminary was forced to close.
Only the fact that two miles of Ohio mud provided defensive outworks
saved the building and the houses of the teachers from the hands of
the Cincinnati mob. She had visited in Kentucky; she had been to the
slave markets; she had seen her father and brother aid runaway slaves
by means of the underground railway. A profound sense of the iniquity
of the system oppressed her, and when the Fugitive Slave Bill came
to fill up the measure of her wrath, she poured out her heart in
_Uncle Tom’s Cabin_. Despite its obvious blemishes of structure and
sentimentalism it is a great human document that stripped away the
protective atmosphere from the sacred institution, and laid bare its
elementary injustice. It brought the system home to the common feeling
and conscience. The strong religious coloring emphasized the Abolition
argument that slavery trafficked in Christian souls, and rendered it
hateful to every humanitarian instinct. It was noble propaganda, and
the humor and pathos, the passion for social righteousness, still
linger in its pages to make a later generation wonder that our fathers
should so long have tolerated this evil thing.

Five years later she published _Dred, A Tale of the Great Dismal
Swamp_, a thoughtfully elaborated statement of the complex problem,
with a suggested solution that only thrust into relief the fact that it
had indeed become an irrepressible conflict--the same solution that had
been hinted at thirty years before in Kennedy’s _Swallow Barn_, namely,
a system of paternalistic emancipation, based on the historical analogy
of the extinction of English villeinage, the slaves to be treated as
wards by the masters and educated for gradual emancipation. It was a
feudal solution of a feudal problem, but it took higher humanitarian
ground than human nature can, and Mrs. Stowe recognized the complex of
passion and interests in which the problem was involved, by removing
her southern emancipationist to Canada to try his experiment. More
striking, perhaps, is the shift from the Christian pacifism of _Uncle
Tom’s Cabin_ to the economics of _Dred_. The former had made appeal
to the humanitarianism of the North; the latter proposed to appeal to
the self-interest of the South. The slave states, Mrs. Stowe’s heroine
argued, were being ruined by slavery, and if they were to expect a sane
economic future, they must destroy the wasteful system. The contrast
between Yankee thrift under free labor and plantation shiftlessness
under slave labor had been pointed out by Whittier in his _Justice and
Expediency_ as early as 1833 and by Caruthers in his _Kentuckian in
New York_ in 1834--statements that perhaps drew Mrs. Stowe’s attention
to the economic phases involved; nevertheless the recognition of the
complexity of the problem, and the attempt to deal with it adequately,
lessened the popular appeal of _Dred_. The book is more skillfully
done than _Uncle Tom_, it is far richer in background material--in
vivid sketches of poor whites, of revivalist preachers, of plantation
life--it provides in Old Tiff a delightful study of the negro servant
and it suggests the perennial fear of a negro uprising; but it lacks
the singleness of appeal that makes for telling propaganda. It was not
its melodrama that hindered its success. The public had swallowed that
in _Uncle Tom_ with a hearty appetite. It was rather the dissipation
of dramatic interest, the want of a striking figure to capture the
imagination and sympathy. It is a better sociological study but a
weaker story.

It was hard for the New England conscience to quit the pulpit and turn
artist; and it was particularly hard for Mrs. Stowe with her ardent
nature and multiplying domestic cares. She could bring her soul under
discipline but not her art. She never trained herself in craftsmanship,
never learned restraint, but suffered her pen to range freely as her
emotions directed. The creative instinct was strong in her but the
critical was wholly lacking. Richly endowed though she was her work
has suffered the fate that pursues those who forget that beauty alone
survives after emotion subsides.


Footnotes

[454] “It’s a hard struggle for our human nature to give up titles and
ranks, though,” said Miss Mehitable. “For my part, I have a ridiculous
kindness for them yet. I know it’s all nonsense; but I can’t help
looking back to the court we used to have at the Government House in
Boston.” (_Old-Town Folks_, Chapter VI.)




Part Three: The Transcendental Mind




