Chapter II • The Democracy of the Age of Innocence


I • Capitalistic Encroachments

With its heritage of Jacksonianism it was natural for the agrarian
movement to attempt to carry further the exploration of the democratic
principle, seeking to complete the program that had been left
unfulfilled by the Fathers. There were few as yet who questioned
the finality of democracy as a political system or its adequacy to
all social needs. The growing evils of American life were traced
unhesitatingly to an imperfect democratic control of the forces of
exploitation. If the plutocracy were making gains at the expense of the
plain people it was due to defective governmental machinery, and the
immediate problem was the readjustment of that machinery. There must be
an extension of democratic control over the economics of society. The
great principle of _laissez faire_, that had proved so useful in the
earlier struggle against aristocratic paternalisms, was become a shield
and buckler for the plutocracy that was rising from the freedoms of a
let-alone policy. To curb the ambitions of that plutocracy and preserve
the democratic bequest for the common benefit of all, was therefore the
immediate problem of the times.

To this end two things remained to be achieved: to wrest possession
of the government from the hands of the plutocracy that was befouling
it, and to use it for democratic rather than plutocratic ends. The
difficulties in the way were many. Entrenched behind the checks and
balances of a complex constitution the plutocracy could not easily be
dislodged from power; even if it were driven out of the legislative
and executive branches of government it would find aid and succor in
the judiciary, where a masterful corporation law was interpreted by a
bench tender toward all property rights, and jealous of its sovereign
prerogative of reviewing all legislative enactments. A surprising
change had come over the attitude of the governing class towards
democracy. Having gained control of the machinery of government the
plutocracy found no cause to quarrel with a situation wholly to its
liking. It had mastered the gentle art of guiding the majority will,
and secure--as it believed--in its control of the political state,
it counted on an indefinite continuation of the policy of preëmption
and exploitation. From such a group, whether in Wall Street or at
Washington, no new theories of government were to be expected. Business
men wanted to be let alone. They clung to the anarchism of the
Enlightenment and were stout in defense of the principle of individual
initiative. So late as 1916 a group of confirmed individualists
reissued Spencer’s _Man Versus the State_, with an introduction by
Elihu Root, to combat the rising spirit of governmental control. They
regarded the American system of government as adequate and final, and
wanted no subversive changes. The Constitution had been completed by
the post-war enactments that fixed the status of the negro, and for a
generation thereafter--except for the silent changes wrought by the
judiciary--it remained static. East of the Allegheny Mountains popular
interest in political theory had come to an end. A group of academic
thinkers like John W. Burgess and Woodrow Wilson, an occasional
intellectual like Brooks Adams, isolated radicals like Johann Most
and small Marxian groups in Chicago and New York, and leaders of the
new proletarian movement like Terence V. Powderly, were still acutely
concerned about political theory; but these men and their theories
counted for little in the stodgy mass of capitalistic America. The
political phase had passed over into the economic; politics was wholly
divorced from reality.

But throughout the Middle Border and on to the Pacific Coast the
spirit of political democracy was alive and vigorous. There the older
frontier Jacksonianism still lingered. For upwards of a half a century
creative political thinking in America was largely western agrarian,
and from this source came those democratic ideas that were to provide
the staple of a later liberalism. The conscious objective of this great
movement was to complete the work begun by Jacksonianism, and create a
political machinery that should enable the democracy to withstand the
shock of the Industrial Revolution. Many thinkers contributed to the
work--U’Ren of Oregon, Jerry Simpson of Kansas, Tom Watson of Georgia,
“Coin” Harvey of Arkansas, General Weaver of Iowa, Ignatius Donnelly
of Minnesota, Henry D. Lloyd of Chicago, to name a handful out of the
mass--homespun realists who have been forgotten by a later generation,
but whose labors were given to the necessary work of refashioning
the political machinery of America, and whose program provided the
materials for the later Progressive party. They were commoners, men of
the people, unversed in the dogmas of the schools, idealists who drew
their inspiration from the Declaration of Independence; they spoke
for an older America that feared the rising plutocracy, and they were
casting about for ways and means to cut its claws. From their labors
came the Greenback Movement, the Farmers’ Alliance, Populism; and from
them came in turn the Progressive Movement that reaped what they had
sown.


II • Third-Party Movements

It is, perhaps, not extreme to interpret the political history of
America since 1790 as largely a struggle between the spirit of the
Declaration of Independence and the spirit of the Constitution, the one
primarily concerned with the rights of man, the other more practically
concerned with the rights of property. The humanitarian idealism of the
Declaration has always echoed as a battle-cry in the hearts of those
who dream of an America dedicated to democratic ends. It cannot be long
ignored or repudiated, for sooner or later it returns to plague the
councils of practical politics. It is constantly breaking out in fresh
revolt. When the major parties have grown callous and indifferent to
the wishes of the common people, it has reformulated its principles in
third-party platforms. Without its freshening influence our political
history would have been much more sordid and materialistic. With the
exception of such sporadic outbursts as Antimasonry and Knownothingism,
the third-party movements of the nineteenth century were democratic
movements, inspired by a sense of social justice, founded on the
Declaration of Independence, and promulgated to recall the American
people to their heritage of idealism. The Locofoco party, the Freesoil
party, the early Republican party, the Greenback party, the Populist
party, the Progressive party, however they differed in immediate
programs, have had a common objective, namely, to set man above
property as the great object of governmental concern, and preserve in
America the democratic principle of equal opportunity.

Despite the fact that they failed in their immediate objectives they
served the larger purpose of reminding the major parties that America
professes to be a democratic country, and that party platforms must be
brought to square with that fact. Thus interpreted the history of party
struggle since 1790 falls into three broad phases: the Jeffersonian
movement that established the ideal of political democracy; the
Jacksonian movement that established equalitarianism crudely in
practice; and the successive third-party movements that attempted, in
successive reactions, to regain such ground as had been lost, to extend
the field, and to perfect the machinery of democratic government. Since
the rise of the slavery controversy the major parties, allied with
masterful economic groups, have persistently ignored the Declaration
of Independence, and repudiated in practice the spirit of democracy.
To prevent if possible so grave a treason to our traditional ideals,
to assert the rights of the common man against the encroachments of
a class, has been therefore the common mission of the third-party
movements. The significance of their somewhat scanty success is
something the thoughtful American may interpret as he will.

Since Civil War days, discontent has been endemic in the Middle Border,
and it has broken out in three great political upheavals: the Greenback
movement of the seventies; the Populist movement of the eighties and
nineties; and the Non-Partisan League movement of the second decade
of the present century. Issuing from a profound resentment at the
exploitation from which the farmer suffered, they mark a persistent
drift away from the old Jacksonian individualism and an advance toward
a socialized conception of the political state. Disciplined by hard
times the farmers were learning a lesson from capitalistic Whiggery;
if the political state had proved serviceable to business why should
it not prove serviceable to agriculture? Why should not a democratic
state consider the producers as well as the middleman? Why should it
not provide a national currency, a national system of transportation,
a democratic banking system, a standard system of grain-grading,
public elevators, crop insurance, and the like? Why should the farmer
be squeezed at every turn by private companies who did badly what the
state could do well? By 1917, in short, the Middle Border had got far
from the simple individualism of earlier days and was well advanced
toward state socialism; and it was only the ruthless opposition of the
business interests, that had no wish to see their private preserves
thus rudely invaded, that put a stop to the movement.

Back of all these agrarian programs was the greater problem of the
popular control of the political state. How could the undisciplined
majority hold in check the disciplined minority? How could poverty meet
wealth on an equal footing? The control of politics had fallen into
the hands of the machine, and the machine served property interests.
Legislatures were bought and sold like corner lots; senatorships went
to the highest bidder; judges were more responsive to the wishes of
bankers than to those of farmers. To break the power of the machine
there must be an extension of democratic control, and to that end
new machinery must be provided. Hence the vast agrarian concern
with political machinery. From the agrarian agitation--supplemented
by proletarian and middle-class recruits--has come the Australian
ballot, the Initiative and the Referendum, the Recall, the Direct
Primary, and popular election of Senators. The only important agrarian
principle that has not been adopted is the principle of proportional
representation. If agrarianism lost its great battle over the currency,
it won the battle over the income tax. Nullified by a scandalous court
decision after it had been long accepted, the income tax was finally
established by the tedious method of constitutional amendment--an
outcome that owed much to the Middle Border. In casting up the accounts
of American democracy, the largest sums must be credited to the Middle
Border, as in earlier years they were credited to the Jacksonian
frontier. Whether the new machinery is useful or merely cumbersome,
there is much disagreement, but it is agrarian in origin and it came
from an honest attempt to democratize American politics.[764]


Footnotes

[764] The Contents here calls for a third section on the “Populistic
Program” (see p. xxxiv for details) and a fourth on “William Jennings
Bryan.”--_Publisher._




