Chapter II • Winds of Political Doctrine


I

Into the complacent little Boston of Fisher Ames and Robert Treat Paine
came the Embargo, the War of 1812, and the industrial revolution to
upset its static order and destroy its snug provincialism. The old
Federalism with its Hartford Convention and plans for New England
secession went the way of mortality, carrying with it to the grave the
old pessimism and the old spleen. The jealous isolationist policy was
quietly forgotten in Boston; the gospel of secession was preached no
more; George Cabot and Timothy Pickering gave way to other leaders; and
provincial Boston joined with Kentucky and Tennessee in extolling a
romantic nationalism. It sent to Washington a new spokesman, who joined
with Henry Clay in a paternalistic program of national expansion, and
took command of the forces combating the rising separatism of the South
Carolina school. By the year 1830 Boston had traveled far from the
times of the Hartford Convention.

The sufficient explanation of so striking a change is to be found,
of course, in the changing economics of Massachusetts. The Embargo
had proved a major disaster to New England shipping; and the Boston
merchants, counting their losses from idle and dismasted ships,
water-logging at the wharves, found just cause for hating the policy of
the administration. But if the shipping business was brought face to
face with tragedy, the manufacturing interests stumbled upon unexpected
prosperity. With British imports cut off, the home market offered a
tempting opportunity to Yankee enterprise. The familiar story of the
swift rise of New England industrialism need not be recounted here. It
is enough to remark that with the growth of domestic manufactures a
new group of economic leaders appeared, and the policy of New England
shifted from pro-mercantilism to pro-industrialism. It was a difficult
choice at first between the antagonistic claims of the Boston merchant
and the Lowell manufacturer; between the carriers of foreign goods who
demanded free trade, and the makers of domestic goods who demanded a
protective tariff. The traditional view of New England was strongly
for free trade. In 1807 a Federalist lawyer asserted it to be “an
unalienable right,” and in 1820 Judge Story asked, “Why should the
laboring classes be taxed for the necessaries of life?”[433] The tariff
bill of 1824 got only one vote from Massachusetts; but in the four
years between the passage of that act and the “Tariff of Abominations”
of 1828, Massachusetts went over definitely to industrialism.
Thenceforth she was to be the leader in the movement looking to
governmental paternalism, substituting the expansive Federalism of
Hamilton for the restrictive Federalism of Fisher Ames, and becoming in
consequence whole-heartedly nationalistic.

Equally significant, though less observed, was the changed attitude of
Massachusetts towards the great republican experiment. Gone was the
older generation, with its face turned to the past and its heart bound
up with the patriarchal ideals of a decadent squirearchy. Gone also
were the disturbant fears of democracy. The menace of Daniel Shays,
that had put the old Federalists in a rage at democracy, was long since
forgotten; and the nervous panic over French Jacobinism, that had
upset New England for a decade, had subsided. In the light of longer
experience with its ways democracy was seen to be far from terrifying.
The hobgoblin of faction that had benightmared the dreams of Fisher
Ames was discovered to be only a bogey to frighten naughty boys.
Massachusetts had kept off the agrarian reef, despite war and economic
unrest, and with her new constitution of 1820 property interests
were as secure as any old Federalist could have wished. Gentlemen of
principle and property were still in control of the state; and if less
emphasis was laid on principle and more on property--if less regard
seemed to be paid to gentlemen of breeding and manners, and more to
assertive self-seeking--business was no less secure than in the good
old days, and its profits were greater. And so, master of its looms and
a growing home market, New England industrialism regarded genially the
great western movement, fostered by a benevolent paternalism, confident
of extending its markets with every mile of westward expansion. To
encourage the development of the West and South by a Federal policy
of internal improvement became, therefore, common business foresight,
provided of course that the Constitution should follow population and
safeguard business interests against local agrarianism and the menace
of particularism.

By the year 1830 both dangers lay black against the political horizon.
The triumph of Jackson had enthroned the agrarian menace at Washington
and produced such a scrambling of frightened interests--such a rattling
among the old bones of Federalism and scurrying among the young limbs
of industrialism--as the country had not seen for many a year. Henry
Clay appealed to his followers in the West, and Webster marshaled his
adherents of the East, and from the coalescing of these incongruous
elements emerged the Whig party to do battle with Old Hickory. It was
a patchwork army at best. In the hour of peril, principles go by the
board. The Whig party was lineal heir of the old Federalism, but it
denied its philosophical patrimony. It substituted expediency for the
old economic realism, and began and ended intellectually bankrupt. Its
bitter and unseemly squabbles over the Bank and tariff, its platitudes
of patriotism and its pose of disinterestedness, the venom of its
personal attack upon Jackson, were the earmarks of a policy of shallow
opportunism that failed to make use of such victories as fell to its
lot, for the simple reason that it could never agree on what to do.
Such cohesive power as held it together--aside from petty antagonism to
Jackson--was the vague assumption that the well-being of the American
people was dependent on governmental patronage; the belief that each
economic group and section must receive its special favor, and that
through tariffs and bonuses and internal improvements the country as a
whole must prosper. Of this principle of special favors--a return to
the seventeenth century from which eighteenth-century liberalism was a
reaction--the American System of Henry Clay was the chief expression,
and it remains the most significant bequest of the Whig party to our
political history.

The Whig party was the first attempt of our rising middle class to
erect a political platform in accordance with middle-class ideals,
and its failure was due to the fact that the time was not ripe for
undisputed middle-class control. The merchant aristocracy of the North
was overthrown, but the planter aristocracy of the South was still to
be reckoned with; and its particularistic ambitions in the end wrecked
the Whig coalition of the West and East. By 1820 a revolutionary change
had taken place in the political philosophy of the plantation school.
From an ardent nationalism Calhoun was leading his followers back to
the earlier doctrine of states rights; and New England industrialism
found itself confronted with the doctrine which the Hartford junto
had played with, but now with far more drive behind it. The slave
economy was entertaining imperialistic dreams, and to effect its ends
was building up a new constitutional philosophy. Southern writers
had long been at work, and the weight of their authority was behind
the new particularism. _Rawle on the Constitution_, a states-rights
exposition, was the official textbook on civics at the United States
Military Academy, and from it, while a student at West Point, Jefferson
Davis declared that he first imbibed states-rights principles. Other
authoritative southern works that were widely read were John Taylor’s
two studies: _Construction Construed and Constitutions Vindicated_
(1820), and _New Views of the Constitution of the United States_
(1823); some years later came Henry St. George Tucker’s _Lectures
on Constitutional Law_ (1843); and these were only preliminary to
Calhoun’s searching exposition in his _Disquisition on Government_ and
_An Inquiry into the Nature of the Constitution of the United States_.

To meet this theory of particularism there was need of a resurgent
Federalism, with a new nationalistic interpretation of the
Constitution. The compact theory of the Federal state must be refuted
by the organic theory; the conception of federated commonwealths must
yield to the conception of a coalescing sovereignty. The old battle
must be fought over again with fresh arguments. The sanctity of the
Constitution must be asserted, but that sanctity must be thrown over
a nationalistic rather than a particularistic interpretation. It must
be shown that despite the vehement protestations of southern loyalty,
a particularistic Constitution was a denial of loyalty and must end
in the destruction of the national union. For this difficult business
New England was as yet unprepared. The old Federalist arguments were
obsolete, and many of those Federalists had been deep in the Hartford
Convention. The new industrialism must provide its own theory, and
it was fortunate in discovering two men whose combined learning and
eloquence proved equal to the task.


II

The name of Webster has been so closely associated with the movement
of constitutional nationalism as to overshadow the just fame of one
who has many claims to be regarded as the intellectual leader of the
school. Joseph Story was a Salem lawyer whose reputation, considerable
as it is, is scarcely commensurate with his influence on our later
constitutional development. Of the same Harvard class with William
Ellery Channing, he dabbled in polite letters as a young man, but
went into the law, entered politics, became Associate Justice of the
Supreme Court, and for a time was Dane professor of law at Harvard.
He came of radical stock. His father, a physician at Boston till he
removed to Marblehead, was a militant Revolutionary Whig, one of
the score or so of Indians who made up the Boston Tea Party, and a
leader amongst the group of Sons of Liberty who seized and gagged the
sentinels and carried off two brass fieldpieces from the Common where
the British commander had posted them to overawe the town. The son grew
up an ardent republican. As a very young man he became an outstanding
leader of the unfashionable party, then in the minority, and suffered
certain humiliations on account of his political opinions; on one
occasion, according to Theodore Parker, being “knocked down in the
street, beaten, and forced to take shelter in the house of a friend,
whither he fled, bleeding, and covered with the mud of the street”
(_Additional Speeches_, Vol. I, p. 178). Of these youthful heresies
few indications appeared in his later life. Republican though he might
be, he was utterly devoid of any radical tendencies, and when he took
his seat on the Supreme Court bench he was speedily drawn into the
powerful orbit of John Marshall, shared the latter’s views on all major
constitutional questions, and turned Whig. He became a close friend
of Webster and from 1816 to 1842 he was his chief adviser on knotty
legal, constitutional, and international questions. “From that deep and
copious well of legal knowledge,” Parker asserts, Webster drew freely
“whenever his own bucket was dry” (_ibid._, p. 170).

This shift from Republican to Whig came about quite naturally. New
England liberalism, it must be remembered, produced no intellectual
leaders till late, and no clear-cut political philosophy. Though it
nominally accepted the leadership of Jefferson it never was won over to
the Physiocratic economics or states-rights principles of the Virginia
school. Story was at no time a Jeffersonian, but rather an eager and
avowed disciple of Washington, “little infected with Virginia notions,
as to men or measures.” In his _Autobiography_ he wrote:

  The republican party then and at all other times embraced men of
  very different views on many subjects. Nay, a Virginia republican
  of that day, was very different from a Massachusetts republican,
  and the anti-federal doctrines of the former state then had and
  still have very little support or influence in the latter state,
  notwithstanding a concurrence in political action upon general
  subjects. I was at all times a firm believer in the doctrines of
  General Washington, and an admirer of his conduct, measures and
  principles.... I read and examined his principles, and have made
  them in a great measure the rule and guide of my life. I was and
  always have been a lover, devoted lover, of the constitution of the
  United States, and a friend to the union of the states. I never
  wished to bring the government to a mere confederacy of states; but
  to preserve the power of the general government given by all the
  states, in full exercise and sovereignty for the protection and
  preservation of all the states. (Story, _Life and Letters of Joseph
  Story_, Vol. I, p. 128.)

That he had as little sympathy with the Physiocratic economics of
Jefferson is apparent from his early activities in furthering the new
paper system. While a member of the Massachusetts legislature, as a
young man, he was active in pressing for bank franchises, and upon the
establishment of the Merchants’ Bank of Salem he became its president.
Like Washington and Marshall he espoused the new gospel of capitalism,
with none of the agrarian prejudices of the landed gentry to hold him
back. He was the political twin of the great Chief Justice, and a Whig
in spirit long before Webster. “I seem to myself,” he remarked late in
life, “simply to have stood still in my political belief, while parties
revolved about me; so that, although of the same opinions now as ever,
I find my name changed from Democrat to Whig, but I know not how or
why” (_ibid._, Vol. I, p. 546). Though somewhat naïve the comment is
just. Anti-federalism in Massachusetts would seem to have been largely
a capitalistic protest against the narrow tie-wig Federalism; and
while Joseph Story sat upon the Supreme Court bench, adapting legal
principles to the new needs of business, the country was moving forward
to the middle-class philosophy that he had early come to hold.

In the year 1833 he published his _Commentaries on the Constitution_,
the fruit of long labors, which was at once accepted throughout
the North as a classical authority, and which has held its ground
pretty well since. In method and temper, as well as objective, the
exposition of Story stands in sharp contrast to that of the southern
school. In its particularism the latter appealed to the history of the
Constitution in the making, and to French romantic philosophy; whereas
the former followed English constitutional theories to nationalistic
ends. Story was steeped in the Common Law and his thinking reveals the
strong influence of Blackstone. In passing through the mind of the
great Tory commentator, English constitutional theory had received a
pronounced Tory bias, and something of this remains after filtering
through the mind of Story. The ideal of a strong and efficient
political state, with its corollaries of a coercive sovereignty, of the
duties of a subject rather than the rights of a citizen, of loyalty
to government rather than concern for political justice, derives
immediately from English theory and practice. Much likewise he took
from the older Federalists: their fear of an encroaching legislative
power; their concern at faction; their faith in checks and balances
to restrain the majority will. But his chief inspiration came from
the spirit of the Common Law--that subtle influence that Jefferson so
greatly feared. His legalism was inveterate; the final, authoritative
answer to all questions he discovered in the decision of the courts.
Against such a mind, deeply read in the law and with scanty knowledge
of economics and political theory, the waves of liberal and romantic
thought broke impotently. His reasoning may be convincing to a lawyer,
but to the historian his exposition is often weak, his data inadequate,
and his conclusions not infrequently contrary to fact.

In building his argument Story drew his materials freely from _The
Federalist_, from the writings and decisions of Marshall, and from
Blackstone. The backbone of the work is Hamilton and Marshall, from
whom he quotes constantly, supplemented by a host of decisions by
Federalist judges. With its pronounced bias _The Commentaries_ must
be regarded as a partisan document, which like _The Federalist_ has
grown in authoritativeness with the triumph of its party principles.
Its surprising weakness on the historical side has come to be
overlooked since the downfall of southern particularism, but during
the debates that preceded the Civil War the work was sharply handled
by southern historians, and in his _Constitutional View of the War
between the States_ Stephens quite demolished Story’s feeble attempt
at an historical justification of the anti-compact theory. The weight
of historical evidence, to present-day students, would seem to be on
the side of the states-rights argument, although in certain aspects
both sides were innovators: Story in overleaping the period of French
ascendency when the Constitution took shape, and going back to the
older English tradition; and the compact school in reasserting the
compact theory at a time when the spirit of nationalism was undermining
it. Story seems to have been conscious of his weakness, for he
expressly repudiates the method of interpreting the work in the light
of contemporary testimony at the time of its formulation. In so doing
he not only violates the principle that a document is to be construed
in the light of the common understanding when it was drawn; but with
naïve inconsistency, he constantly appeals to _The Federalist_, pretty
much ignoring the opposition pamphlets, and interprets the Constitution
in accord with its commentary. But for the most part he clings to the
strict letter of the document. He lightly brushes aside the whole
compact argument by asserting dogmatically that the phrase, “We the
people of the United States,” must be understood in its simple literal
sense, and that thus interpreted, the Constitution is seen to derive
immediately from the individual citizens acting in their sovereign
capacity without the intermediation of the state governments. The
dispute long waged furiously about this point and Story’s analysis
touches only the fringe of the argument.

Very likely it is presumptuous for one who is not a lawyer to express
an opinion, yet these celebrated _Commentaries_ seem today very little
more than a new-modeled Federalism, adapted to changing conditions.
Underneath the somewhat crabbed and narrow legalism is a common-sense
realistic political philosophy, an embodiment of English constitutional
tradition as it grew up under a Tory régime, that reveals scant
sympathy with French romantic theories. The work is an unconscious
testimony to the tenacious hold of the English Common Law on the legal
mind of America, as well as to the rising spirit of nationalism. It
did much to strengthen both. It was a triumph of the lawyer over the
historian and political philosopher, and it marks the beginning of the
lawyer’s custodianship of the fundamental law. In spite of its somewhat
petty legalism and prosaic common sense, a note of veneration for the
great document runs through the tedious pages, constituting the work at
once both a commentary and a eulogy.


III • Daniel Webster • Realist and Constitutionalist

A far solider mind, strongly realistic and broadly philosophical, acute
in analysis and with great powers of imagination, was the mind of the
distinguished leader of the New England Whigs. Not the equal of Story
as a lawyer, he was far superior as a political thinker. No man more
richly endowed in mind and person has played a part on the stage of
our public life, and in spite of gross shortcomings in character and
the betrayal of his own promise, Webster retains an aura of the heroic
about him. He was a great man, built on a great pattern, who never
quite achieved a great life.

In Emerson and Webster were completely embodied the diverse New
England tendencies that derived from the Puritan and the Yankee: the
idealistic and the practical; the ethical and the rationalistic; the
intellectual revolutionary, ready to turn the world upside down in
theory, planting at the base of the established order the dynamite of
ideas, and the soberly conservative, understanding the economic springs
of political action, inclined to pessimism, neither wishing for Utopian
change nor expecting it. The physical contrast was as striking as the
mental. The child of the Puritan was slender, nervous, with a lambent
energy that played freely in a rarefied atmosphere; the child of the
Yankee was massive, solid, somnolently heavy till an idea awakened his
faculties, a lover of the fleshpots, careless of conventional morals,
rankly physical, and yet with an assured stateliness of manner, a slow
imagination that expanded majestically and a rich eloquence that moved
forward by regular stages to a great objective. Emerson was the child
of a long line of ministers, and ministerial in his unworldliness;
Webster was a Yankee squire, the descendant of some fox-hunting master
of broad English acres, who by a freak of fortune had got born into the
family of a New Hampshire yeoman. No Englishman was ever more English
than he. He loved the substantial things of life: his Marshfield farm;
his cattle and horses and crops; his rides afield and the return to
good dinners and rich wines. Nothing is more characteristic or more
likable--more redolent of the natural Webster--than his concern for
agricultural improvements. His homely talk on _The Agriculture of
England_, filled with facts that had come under his observant eye,
reveals a side that is too little known. It is an English country
squire talking to his neighbors about the homely things they all care
for; and when after long years and disappointed ambition and utter
weariness, he returned to his Marshfield farm to die, it was his cattle
and his fields that offered a last solace to the broken man.

Webster’s intellectual development falls into distinct and rather
sharply defined periods. Before 1825 his mental processes were still
under the dominion of the solid, rationalist eighteenth century, with
its realistic politics and its _laissez faire_ economics. With the
emergence of the constitutional disputes at the end of the twenties,
when the lawyers and historians were busy at their commentaries, he
came increasingly to take a legalistic view of government. During the
acrimonious forties, with slavery dividing the country into hostile
camps, he was bitten deeply by presidential ambitions, and thenceforth
to the end of his life he was little more than a politician--a rôle for
which he was singularly ill-fitted, and which brought bitterness and
disillusion to his last days. Since his death both earlier and later
phases of his career have fallen into the background, and the middle
period of constitutional interpretation has stamped itself indelibly
upon his fame. Yet in many respects the solid reasoning of the
political philosopher is more valuable than the stately but somewhat
ill-grounded declamation of the defender of the Constitution; and his
just fame is increased rather than lessened by recalling his earlier
contribution to our institutional development.

Webster was a sound political scholar, if not an outstanding creative
thinker. He was of the distinguished line of political realists, from
Harrington through Locke and Burke, to Hamilton, Madison and John
Adams. He derived equally from seventeenth-century liberalism and
eighteenth-century Federalism. He was widely read in the political
classics, and his vigorous mind laid hold upon major principles
and examined them closely. His intellectual master was the acute
thinker of the English Commonwealth period, James Harrington, whom
he pronounces “one of the most ingenious of political writers,” and
to whose suggestive doctrine of economic determinism he returns
persistently. That Harrington was not the originator of the doctrine
he was well enough read to have discovered; but he pays him high
tribute as the thinker who gave the doctrine form and currency. It
is the substantial realism of the _Oceana_ that appealed to a mind
thoroughly indoctrinated with political realism, before the rise of
manhood suffrage and the spread of equalitarianism had brought a
change in American political theory. Both his major premises and his
mode of reasoning bear the impress of the classic English school. In
the year 1820, within a single week, he made two speeches, which as
expositions of his political philosophy are the most illuminating he
ever uttered, and which should stand side by side: the _Basis of the
Senate_, delivered before the Massachusetts Constitutional Convention,
and the Plymouth speech on _The First Settlement of New England_. They
supplement each other and together give an admirable elucidation of
the stake-in-society principle that embodied a conviction he never
abandoned. They are compact of Harrington, Montesquieu and John
Adams--the last authentic expression of the old Federalism, before the
democratic storms had driven it into new roadsteads and whipped its
flag from the halyards where it had long waved.

In his admirable argument Webster accepts as axiomatic the theory
of division of powers, with the attendant machinery of checks and
balances. He accepts equally the familiar view of eighteenth-century
liberalism, that the legislature as the self-conscious custodian of the
popular will is certain to prove the engrossing member of government
whose ambition is most to be feared. To expect a stable balance between
Senate and House when their characters are undifferentiated by diverse
modes of selection--a result that must follow from choosing both on the
numerical majority principle--seems to him the judgment of political
inexperience. The wiser method, he believed, was to seek counsel of the
philosophers and the clear teachings of history. The first, Webster
insisted, have rightly laid down the principle of a stake-in-society as
the true measure of political justice:

  I take the _principle_ to be well established, by writers of the
  greatest authority. In the first place, those who have treated of
  natural law have maintained, as a principle of law, that, as far as
  the object of society is the protection of something in which the
  members possess unequal shares, it is just that the weight of each
  person in the common councils should bear a relation and proportion
  to his interest. Such is the sentiment of Grotius, and he refers,
  in support of it, to several institutions among the lesser states.
  (“The Basis of the Senate,” in _Works_, Vol. III, pp. 13-14.)

At the basis of the stake-in-society principle is the doctrine of
economic power as the controlling factor in determining the form
and scope of the political state. In support of this doctrine of
determinism Webster appeals to Harrington:

  It is his leading object, in his _Oceana_, to prove, that power
  _naturally_ and _necessarily_ follows property. He maintains that
  a government founded on property is legitimately founded; and
  that a government founded on the disregard of property is founded
  in injustice, and can only be maintained by military force. “If
  one man,” says he, “be sole landlord, like the Grand Seignior,
  his empire is absolute. If a few possess the land, this makes the
  Gothic or feudal constitution. If the _whole people_ be landlords,
  then it is a commonwealth.” “It is strange,” says an ingenious
  person in the last century, “that Harrington should be the first
  man to find out so evident and demonstrable a truth as that
  property being the true basis and _measure_ of power.” In truth,
  he was not the first. The idea is as old as political science
  itself. It may be found in Aristotle, Lord Bacon, Sir Walter
  Raleigh, and other writers. Harrington seems, however, to be the
  first writer who has illustrated and expanded the principle, and
  given to it the effect and prominence which justly belong to it. To
  this sentiment, Sir, I entirely agree. It seems to me to be plain,
  that, in the absence of military force, political power naturally
  and necessarily goes into the hands which hold the property. In my
  judgment, therefore, a republican form of government rests, not
  more on political constitutions, than on those laws which regulate
  the descent and transmission of property....

  The English Revolution of 1688 was a revolution in favor of
  property, as well as of other rights. It was brought about by men
  of property for their security; and our own immortal Revolution
  was undertaken, not to shake or plunder property, but to protect
  it. The acts which the country complained of were such as violated
  the rights of property. An immense majority of all those who had
  an interest in the soil were in favor of the Revolution; and they
  carried it through, looking to its results for the security of
  their possessions. (“The Basis of the Senate,” in _Works_, Vol.
  III, pp. 14-16.)

Harrington’s principle that “if the _whole people_ be landlords, then
it is a commonwealth,” Webster justified by appeal to American history.
The spontaneous birth of republican institutions out of colonial
experience he attributed to the wide diffusion of property. The land
tenure of primitive New England was the creative source of her popular
government.

  Their situation demanded a parcelling out and division of the
  lands, and it may be fairly said, that this necessary act _fixed
  the future frame and form of their government_. The character of
  their political institutions was determined by the fundamental
  laws respecting property.... The property was all freehold ...
  alienation of the land was every way facilitated, even to the
  subjecting of it to every species of debt. The establishment of
  public registries, and the simplicity of our forms of conveyance,
  have greatly facilitated the change of real estate from one
  proprietor to another. The consequence of all these causes has
  been, a great subdivision of the soil, and a great equality of
  condition; the true basis, most certainly, of a popular government.
  “If the people,” says Harrington, “hold three parts in four of the
  territory, it is plain there can neither be any single person nor
  nobility able to dispute the government with them; in this case,
  therefore, _except force be interposed_, they govern themselves.”
  (“The First Settlement of New England,” in _Works_, Vol. I, pp.
  35-36.)

Wholly English then, after the soundest English liberal tradition,
was Webster’s political philosophy in the year 1820, compact of sober
eighteenth-century realism, quite unaffected by French romantic
equalitarianism. The great principle to which he adhered was the
principle that government to be stable must be founded in men’s
interests; thus founded no cause is given for revolutionary upheavals.
“The disastrous revolutions which the world has witnessed, those
political thunder-storms and earthquakes which have shaken the pillars
of society to their very deepest foundations, have been revolutions
against property.” Such were Webster’s convictions on the eve of
those two great upheavals, the rise of Jacksonian democracy and the
rejuvenation of the slave economy, that unseated the authority of the
old school of political realism, and turned him aside from the plain
path to lose himself in a tangle of constitutional legalism.

English also was his economic theory, to which, like Franklin before
him, he gave close thought. In the year 1820 he was a frank disciple
of Adam Smith and the _laissez faire_ school. Mercantilism he derided
as exploded;[434] and Physiocratic agrarianism seemed to him unduly
hostile to commerce. He never concerned himself, like Franklin, with
humanitarian ends. His sympathies went strongly for free trade,
individual initiative, and a competitive order--sympathies which to
the end of his life he never wholly outgrew. In those early days the
mercantile interests commanded his loyalty far more readily than
the manufacturing interests. Next to his Marshfield farm he loved
a full-rigged ship, and the thought of Yankee skippers plowing the
seven seas in well-freighted bottoms fired his imagination and kindled
his patriotism. But if in the background of his thought he remained
_laissez faire_, with the necessary implications of a diminished
political state and reliance upon the law of supply and demand above
tariffs, bounties, and political regulations, unfortunately in the
foreground of expediency were the loud demands of his constituents for
protective tariffs, internal improvements, and a policy of governmental
paternalism. His economics came into collision with politics, and
under the drive of necessity he went reluctantly along the path which
Hamilton had marked out a generation before.

The change came between the years 1824 and 1825. In the earlier year
he aroused himself to a strong defense of _laissez faire_ economics in
opposition to Clay’s clever campaign cry, the American System; in the
later year he endeavored half-heartedly to defend New England interests
in the game of subsidies. He was honestly ashamed of the whole mess; to
Webster any tariff was a “tariff of abominations”; but his mouth was
stopped by the clamor of the Lowell textile masters.[435] But having
chosen his side, thereafter he defended his course vigorously, and
joined forces with Clay in extolling the principle of protection. The
same dubious shift is revealed in his changing attitude towards public
finance. In 1815 he was an old-fashioned Federalist in his preference
for a metallic currency and his belief that the public credit must rest
on the public income; bank paper, stocks, bonds, and other agencies of
the new finance he distrusted as likely to encourage speculation.[436]
Twenty years later he was the outstanding champion of the Bank in its
mortal quarrel with Jackson. In defending his public career before his
constituents in Faneuil Hall in 1842, he said: “The subject of currency
has been the study of my life, in preference to all other public
topics”; and the result of those studies had made him a confirmed
bullionist. Nevertheless when “Old Bullion Benton” proposed to restore
a metallic currency, Webster derided the plan on the ground that bank
money was necessary; and when the subtreasury system was established he
denounced it bitterly.[437] He was a partisan to the cause of the Bank,
and as its attorney he defended its case before the American public, as
he defended its cases before the Supreme Court. He was no longer a free
man but was deep in the subsidies of financial interests; nevertheless
his old realism convinced him--as it had convinced Hamilton--of the
necessity of shaping the public policy to the desires of the bankers.
He justified it not only on the grounds of economic determinism, but by
professing to discover in business the strong friend of national unity.
The planters and farmers were local and sectional in outlook, but the
“mercantile classes, the great commercial masses of the country, whose
affairs connect them strongly with every State in the Union and with
all the nations of the earth, whose business and profession give a sort
of nationality to their character”--these men, he argued, gave solidity
and stability to government--they were the cohesive force that bound
the whole together.[438] In serving such clients he was but serving a
greater cause.

After 1824 the earlier Webster with his solid understanding, his
frank realism, his honest exposition of fundamental principles,
slowly gave way to the lawyer, the politician, the opportunist of
the unhappy later years. With the change the last authentic voice of
the eighteenth century was silenced; the break with the old English
tradition was complete. Immediate, domestic issues muddied his thought,
and Webster and America plunged into a bitter partisanship produced
by the new alignments of an equalitarian agrarianism, a capitalistic
industrialism, and a feudal slavocracy. Federalism was dead and in its
stead was the Whig party, patched together of odds and ends, devoid
of principles, seeking only expediency; and of this party Webster
became an outstanding spokesman. It was an ignoble time, and his great
abilities were not substantial enough to save him from the common
meanness. Whoever wishes to understand how great was his fall need
only compare the speech of 1820 on “The Basis of the Senate” with the
“Declaration of Whig Principles and Purposes” of 1840 (_Works_, Vol.
II, p. 41).

To his contemporaries, however, his position was secure. His reputation
was extraordinary, and he seemed as fixed and brilliant as the north
star. After the reply to Hayne, his fame as the defender of the
Constitution was in every mouth. That celebrated speech, perhaps the
most celebrated in our congressional history, was delivered on the
January 26, 1830, and awakened an amazing response. Men were moved to
tears by its eloquence, and its circulation in pamphlet form exceeded
that of any other pamphlet since the founding of the government. It is
not a great constitutional argument, but it better served the purpose
of inspiring in the public a grandiose conception of national unity
under the organic law, than any reasoned statement could have done.
For political purposes rhetoric was more effective than historical
argument, and its sonorous sentences, and in particular the stately
conclusion, vastly appealed to the taste of the generation. Three
years later Webster applied himself more closely to the subtleties of
the question. Calhoun’s masterly argument with its exposition of the
theory of concurrent majorities could not be answered by rhetoric, and
on February 16, 1833, Webster spoke on “The Constitution not a Compact
between Sovereign States” (_Works_, Vol. III, p. 449). His argument is
strictly legal and rests on four theses: that sovereignty inheres in
the people; that as individuals acting collectively in their sovereign
capacity, they ordained and established the Constitution; that the
Constitution thus established is the supreme law of the land, acting
immediately upon the individual citizen and recognizing no intermediary
sovereign state; and that as an “executed contract” it is irrevocable
and final, with the necessary functions to construe its powers and
execute its will.

Of these four theses, two may be regarded as Webster’s chief
contribution to the great debate: the doctrine of immediacy, and the
doctrine of an executed contract. The latter, quite obviously, is no
more than Burke’s theory of the British constitution as founded on a
compact entered into following the Revolution of 1688, and as such,
by analogy from the Common Law, inviolable without the consent of
both parties to the instrument. As developed by Burke the theory is
somewhat tenuous, but as applied by Webster to the interpretation of
a written document it is extraordinarily plausible to the legal mind.
The doctrine of immediacy, on the other hand, would seem to have been
derived from Judge Story. The argument of Webster in expounding the
principle of immediate contact between the individual citizen and the
Constitution follows the argument of Story’s _Commentaries_ too closely
to escape comment. Theodore Parker explicitly states that Webster got
his argument from Story, and circumstances bear out his assertion. The
two men had long been close friends. Webster’s speech was delivered a
month after the _Commentaries_ was finished. In his earlier speeches
such principle found no place, and it is reasonable to suppose that,
confronted by the Calhoun resolutions, Webster should have turned to
the materials gathered by his learned friend and frequent adviser. Here
was his reply ready to hand, a mass of legal fact and constitutional
exposition, together with a clear and simple theory. Nearly a month
elapsed before Webster rose to speak, and then he threw _Story on
the Constitution_ at Calhoun’s theory of compact. Whether such an
interpretation is reasonable or not, the speech added greatly to
Webster’s reputation as an expounder of the Constitution.

In 1833 he stood at the meridian of his renown; thereafter the
westering sun of his fame went slowly down. He had come to evil
times when opportunism and compromise--so imperative if the country
were to hold together at all--seemed immoral to men who insisted
that righteousness be legislated upon America, and weakness to men
who demanded their pound of flesh. The black shadow of slavery fell
across his path, and despite his wish to avoid all controversy on the
subject, he could not evade the issue. It drove him into a corner, and
the sword of the Constitution that he sought to defend himself with
was turned in the end against him. Webster’s antipathy to slavery was
of long standing and he gave frank expression to it in his speeches.
The position which he finally came to assume, in face of the growing
abolition sentiment in Massachusetts, was taken deliberately and was
worthy of a lawyer. He would oppose the extension of slave territory,
but he would not interfere with slavery in the old slave states. The
Constitution, he argued, recognized slavery as existing in certain
commonwealths by virtue of state laws, but those laws did not run
beyond the confines of the state. The territories were under Federal
law, and no injunction was laid upon Congress to extend the laws or
institutions of any state or group of states over the territorial
domain. In his speech on “Exclusion of Slavery from the Territories,”
on August 12, 1848, he stated his position thus:

  It will not be contended that this sort of slavery exists by
  general law. It exists only by local law. I do not mean to deny
  the validity of that local law where it is established; but I say
  it is, after all, local law. It is nothing more. And wherever that
  local law does not extend, property in persons does not exist.
  Well, Sir, what is now the demand on the part of our Southern
  friends? They say, “We will carry our local laws with us wherever
  we go. We insist that Congress does us injustice unless it
  establishes in the territory in which we wish to go our own local
  law.” This demand I for one resist, and shall resist. It goes upon
  the idea that there is an inequality, unless persons under this
  local law, and holding property by authority of that law, can go
  into new territory and there establish that local law, to the
  exclusion of the general law. (_Works_, Vol. V, p. 309.)

It was the unfortunate Seventh of March Speech that proved Webster’s
undoing--this and the Fugitive Slave Bill in which he was deeply
implicated. The situation was desperately critical, Webster was
pessimistic, and this was a last gesture of reconciliation with the
South. Presidential ambitions and runaway slaves were stewing in a
common political pot with Abolition societies and northern mercantile
interests. Webster was puzzled, hesitated, emptied another glass of
the wine of the Constitution, and went for the Fugitive Slave Bill. It
was a tragic political mistake. To be sure a tremendous address was
presented to him, signed by the most respectable persons in Boston and
Cambridge, but it was an empty honor. Webster’s influence was gone,
never to be regained. There is something pathetic in his futile attempt
to stifle the New England conscience by ramming the Constitution down
its throat:

  Sir, the principle of the restitution of runaway slaves is not
  objectionable, unless the Constitution is objectionable. If the
  Constitution is right in that respect, the principle is right,
  and the law providing for carrying it into effect is right. If
  that be so, and if there is no abuse of the right under any law
  of Congress, or any other law, then what is there to complain of?
  (“Speech on the Compromise Measures,” in _Works_, Vol. V, p. 433.)

And there is something pathetic also in the hurt vanity of the old man
that his judgment should be questioned. His self-pride was offended
when the Abolitionists rejected his legal dogmatisms, and set up their
own dogmatisms. He regarded them as mischief-makers. “I am against
agitators, north and south,” he exclaimed petulantly. He recognized no
higher law than the Constitution and Blackstone, and he would suffer no
popular interference with Congress.

  Then, Sir, there are the Abolition societies, of which I am
  unwilling to speak, but in regard to which I have very clear
  notions and opinions. I do not think them useful. I think their
  operations for the last twenty years have produced nothing good
  or valuable.... They have excited feelings.... I cannot but see
  what mischiefs their interference with the South has produced ...
  everything that these agitating people have done has been, not to
  enlarge, but to restrain, not to set free, but to bind faster,
  the slave population of the South. (“Seventh of March Speech,” in
  _Works_, Vol. V, p. 357.)

  I desire to call the attention of all sober-minded men at the
  North, of all conscientious men, of all men who are not carried
  away by some fanatical idea or some false impression, to their
  constitutional obligations. I put it to all the sober and sound
  minds at the North as a question of morals and a question of
  conscience. What right have they, in their legislative capacity or
  any other capacity, to endeavour to get around this Constitution,
  or to embarrass the free exercise of the rights secured by the
  Constitution to the persons whose slaves escape from them? None at
  all; none at all. Neither in the forum of conscience, nor before
  the face of the Constitution, are they, in my opinion, justified in
  such attempt. (_Ibid._, p. 355.)

If the later Webster had no message for the conscience of New England,
neither had he any for the intelligence of New England. The realistic
Federalism that had listened to him in 1820 was gone, submerged by the
flood waters of the renaissance; and the current transcendentalism
seemed to him insubstantial and dangerous. The rising liberalism of
the forties left him wholly untouched; it could not leaven the heavy
materialism of his nature. He was quite unacquainted with the new
Massachusetts that was coming to expression; he had lived too long with
“the lawyers, the politicians, and rich merchants and manufacturers,”
to understand the greater world of Concord. While he had been living on
the subsidies of State Street, and contracting his mind to the compass
of a banker’s, the intellect of Massachusetts had become liberal. And
in becoming liberal it aroused him from indifference to hostility.
Writing to a friend in explanation of his refusal to visit Concord in
his later years, he said:

  Many of those whom I so highly regarded in your beautiful and quiet
  village have become a good deal estranged, to my great grief, by
  abolitionism, free-soilism, transcendentalism, and other notions
  which I cannot but regard as so many vagaries of the imagination.
  (Quoted in Sanborn, _Life of Thoreau_.)

But if he was scarcely acquainted with the little group of thinkers
and liberals--Emerson, Thoreau, Channing, Parker, Garrison, Phillips,
Edmund Quincy, Whittier, Lowell, Higginson, Harriet Beecher Stowe,
Margaret Fuller--they were well acquainted with him and took his
measure exactly. The intellect of Massachusetts--so long ignored by
Webster--had its revenge. Its voice carried farther than his, and it
painted his portrait in no flattering strokes. The fierce storm that
suddenly beat upon him broke the old man’s spirit. He had fed too long
on adulation to endure censure. No doubt that censure was severe, but
it was far juster than the earlier adulation had been. Whittier’s
_Ichabod_ is familiar to every American schoolboy. Lowell, then in his
liberal mood, characterized him as “a statesman who had communicated no
impulse to any of the great ideas of the century, as a statesman whose
soul had been absorbed in tariff, banks, and the Constitution, instead
of devoting himself to the freedom of the future.” Emerson, who had
long studied him critically, gave an extraordinarily just analysis of
his character:

  Mr. Webster is a man who lives by his memory, a man of the past,
  not a man of faith or of hope. He obeys his powerful animal
  nature;--and his finely developed understanding only works freely
  and with all its force, when it stands for animal good; that is,
  for property. He believes, in so many words, that government exists
  for the protection of property. He looks to the Union as an estate,
  a large farm, and is excellent in the completeness of his defence
  of it so far. He adheres to the letter.... What he finds already
  written, he will defend. Lucky that so much had got well written
  when he came. For he has no faith in the power of self-government.
  Not the smallest municipal provision, if it were new, would receive
  his sanction. In Massachusetts, in 1776, he would, beyond all
  question, have been a refugee. He praises Adams and Jefferson, but
  it is a past Adams and Jefferson, that his mind can entertain.
  A present Adams and Jefferson he would denounce. So with the
  eulogies of liberty in his writings,--they are sentimentalism and
  youthful rhetoric. He can celebrate it, but it means as much from
  him as from Metternich or Talleyrand. This is all inevitable from
  his constitution. All the drops of his blood have eyes that look
  downward. (“The Fugitive Slave Law.”)

To the transcendental mind Webster’s economic realism was peculiarly
repugnant, and it was this which inspired Theodore Parker’s critical
analysis of Webster’s career--the most scathing and explicit of
all contemporary estimates. What Parker discovers most hateful in
Webster’s career was his adherence to the principles of Federalism,
from the “Basis of the Senate” speech in 1820, to the New York speech
on November 18, 1850. The persistence of his economic realism was an
affront to the liberals of the humanitarian school that had moved
far from the position of Fisher Ames. Webster might do lip service
to humanitarian ideals, Parker asserted, but always he came back in
the end to his polar conception--“The great object of government is
the protection of property at home, and respect and renown abroad”
(_Works: Additional Speeches_, Vol. I, p. 220).

It was this same persistent realism that made Webster so useful to
the rising capitalism. His work in the Senate was supplemented by his
work in the court room. He was the greatest corporation lawyer of the
day, certain to be found defending vested interests, never on the side
of the leaner purse. Probably more than any other man except John
Marshall, he contributed to the work of bringing the Constitution under
the sovereignty of the judiciary. His most significant contribution,
certainly, was his argument in the celebrated Dartmouth College
case, delivered before the Supreme Court in 1818, which resulted in
one of the foundation decisions on which later has been erected the
solid structure of our corporation law.[439] By engrafting upon the
Constitution the principle that a contract lies beyond the reach of
legislative power to annul, the decision assured greater security for
private property than exists under any other judicial system in the
world. Alexander Hamilton could not have asked for more.

It was the singular ill fortune of Webster to have been born too late
to profit from the old mercantile Federalism to which his affections
were always attached, and too early to profit by the industrial
Federalism that came to greatness after the Civil War. If fate had
been kinder to him, and he had appeared on the political horizon a
generation earlier or a generation later, he would have reaped in far
greater abundance those high civic honors he so foolishly coveted. The
economic groups whom he served would have been in position to reward
a servant so conspicuously able and useful. As a contemporary of John
Adams he might have become a notable political philosopher--provided
always that he had not turned Tory as Emerson suggested. But unhappily
for his fame he was launched between tides on a stormy sea and his
stately bark foundered in the squall of Abolitionism.


Footnotes

[433] Quoted in Theodore Parker, _Daniel Webster: Additional Speeches_,
Vol. I, p. 195. Considerable information will be found in this
excellent study.

[434] See “The Tariff,” in _Works_, Vol. III, pp. 118-122.

[435] See his “Apology and Defense,” in _Works_, Vol. V, pp. 146, 240.

[436] See “The Bank of the United States,” _Works_, Vol. III, p. 35.

[437] See “Speech in Wall Street,” in _Works_, Vol. II, p. 55.

[438] See “The Landing at Plymouth,” in _Works_, Vol. II, pp. 204-205.

[439] Theodore Parker denied Webster credit for the argument, pointing
out that “the facts, the law, the precedents, the ideas, and the
conclusions of that argument, had almost all of them been presented by
Messrs. Mason and Smith in the previous trial of the case” (_Additional
Speeches_, Vol. I, p. 171). The statement is confirmed by Beveridge.




Part Two: The Rise of Liberalism




