Chapter IV • Theodore Parker • Transcendental Minister


Theodore Parker was described by one of his biographers as “the best
working-plan of an American yet produced,” and by a fellow minister as
“a conscience since Luther unsurpassed.” The two comments suggest still
another, that he was completely and adequately New England. Yankee
and Puritan contributed equally to his making. His rich and plastic
mind was two-sided: one-half was wholly English, practical, logical,
concrete, lucid; loving fact and tireless in its acquisition; master
of everyday affairs and competent in dealing with this world; the
other was emotional, mystical, idealistic, deeply and spontaneously
religious, living daily with God as a son with the Father, carrying
the sorrows of men in his heart and the wrongs of the world on his
conscience. One of the greatest of New England ministers, he was
shepherd as well as counselor, pastor as well as teacher. “I wish to
stand on the earth,” he said with true critical insight, “though I
would look beyond the stars. I would live _with men_, but think with
philosophers” (Weiss, _Life and Correspondence of Theodore Parker_,
Vol. I, p. 115). The generous amplitude of his nature was too large
for the narrow walls of a church; he took all Boston for his parish,
all New England for his congregation. Amazingly active and vital, he
consumed whole libraries in his pursuit of knowledge. “His mind,”
says Weiss, “was like the republican idea itself; it could afford to
be hospitable, but could not afford to be exclusive” (_ibid._, Vol.
I, p. 178). Conversant with many fields of knowledge, with a memory
extraordinarily retentive, he was master of many languages--nineteen
or twenty, according to Thomas Wentworth Higginson--and at home in the
most abstruse subjects. He spent his vast energy with the prodigality
of Cotton Mather, and he achieved what Cotton Mather with his inbred
parochialism could not achieve, an intellectual cosmopolitanism that
judged Boston by broader standards than it could gauge.

A first-class fighting-man was this child of yeoman New England--none
braver, not even Garrison, none more effective; and yet
tender-hearted, sympathetic, with the shrewd common sense of his
homespun forebears. The son of a Lexington farmer and mechanic,
self-trained, endowed with indomitable will, he came of the soundest
stock in Massachusetts. His grandfather was captain of the Minute Men
who faced the British troops on Lexington Common in April, 1775; and
a conscious pride of ancestry broke out frequently in his speech.
The words uttered before the Ministerial Conference in May, 1851,
in justification of his repudiation of the Fugitive Slave Law, were
characteristic: “I am not afraid of men, I can offend them. I care
nothing for their hate, or their esteem. I am not very careful of my
reputation.” He then goes on:

  I have had to arm myself. I have written my sermons with a pistol
  in my desk,--loaded, a cap on the nipple, and ready for action.
  Yea, with a drawn sword within reach of my right hand. This I
  have done in Boston; in the midst of the nineteenth century; been
  obliged to do it to defend the (innocent) members of my church,
  women as well as men! You know that I do not like fighting....
  But what could I do? I was born in the little town where the
  first bloodshed of the Revolution began. The bones of men who
  first fell in that war are covered by the monument at Lexington,
  it is “sacred to Liberty and the Rights of Mankind”; those men
  fell “in the sacred cause of God and their country.” This is the
  first inscription that I ever read. These men were my kindred. My
  grandfather drew the first sword in the Revolution; my fathers
  fired the first shot; the blood which flowed there was kindred to
  this which courses in my veins today. Besides that, when I write
  in my library at home, on the one side of me is the Bible which my
  fathers prayed over, their morning and evening prayer, for nearly
  a hundred years. On the other side there hangs the firelock my
  grandfather fought with in the old French war, which he carried
  at the taking of Quebec, which he zealously used at the battle of
  Lexington, and beside it is another, a trophy of that war, the
  first gun taken in the Revolution, taken also by my grandfather.
  With these things before me, these symbols; with these memories in
  me, when a parishioner, a fugitive from slavery, a woman, pursued
  by the kidnappers, came to my house, what could I do less than take
  her in and defend her to the last? (_Additional Speeches_, Vol. I,
  pp. 13-15.)

With his sensitive conscience visited by such memories--a child of ’76
living in the evil days of the Fugitive Slave Law, a devout freethinker
borne on the crest of transcendental thought--Theodore Parker became
the embodiment and epitome of the New England renaissance. More
completely perhaps than any other representative, he gathered up and
expressed the major revolutionary impulses of his time and world: the
idealistic theism implicit in the Unitarian reaction from Calvinism;
the transcendental individualism latent in the doctrine of divine
immanence; and the passion for righteousness, to make the will of God
prevail in a world where the devil quite openly kept his ledgers. He
was an eager and thorough iconoclast, impatient to break the false
images--the God of John Calvin with its slanders of human nature,
and the god of State Street with its contempt for justice--which New
England, he believed, had worshiped too long, forgetting the ideals of
the Revolutionary fathers. The mind and conscience of Boston seemed
to him stifled by the strait-jacket of respectability. Righteousness
like a fugitive slave, was driven into hiding, or must walk the open
streets with a Derringer in its pocket. As a free soul loving freedom,
and a righteous man loving righteousness, he believed a duty was laid
on him to cut away the strait-jacket, to shame the Boston that sold
the poor in the gates for a pair of shoes. He must labor to set free
the mind and conscience of Boston that they might go forth purified to
work a beneficent work in a world that is God’s and not the devil’s.
His attack was keen and unsparing; he laid on with gusto; he used
homely words; he was just rather than polite. Impatient of humbug and
self-seeking he dealt in searching criticism rather than conventional
eulogy. At his touch distinguished reputations shrank to the mean and
commonplace, and inflated dignitaries collapsed like a pricked balloon.
Intellectually honest, he spoke the truth he had been at immense
pains to gather, and in consequence those who suffered the sting of
his attack--ministers and lawyers and merchants and politicians, men
in high position, distinguished leaders of Boston society--were not
slack in crying out against him as a demagogue and agitator. Next to
Garrison he became the most hated man in New England; and something of
that contemporary hatred, fierce and unforgiving, clings to his name
still, coloring later estimates of his worth, hinting that his manners
were not on a level with his morals.[459] An extraordinarily vital and
interesting person, in short, was this Yankee preacher with his Puritan
conscience--this transcendental critic with his quiver full of facts;
one not to be ignored in casting up the accounts of the New England
renaissance.

With his memorable sermon _On the Transient and Permanent in
Christianity_, preached in May, 1841--a sermon that ranks in the
history of Unitarianism with Channing’s Baltimore sermon--the
Unitarian movement entered upon its second broad phase. It abandoned
supernaturalism established on the sufficient authority of the
Scriptures, and adopted the conception of an evolutionary theism, of
God progressively revealing himself to the developing faculties of
men and speaking through the conscience. Under Channing’s guidance
Unitarianism had abandoned the major dogmas of Calvinism--total
depravity, predestination, a God of wrath; it had shifted the emphasis
from stable will to boundless love; and by such teachings it had
captured the greater churches of Boston. By 1830 it had become securely
established as the religion of Boston respectability, with implied
bounds set to its intellectual liberalism. As the first ardor abated it
fell to defining the new orthodoxy, resting content with what already
had been won. It was against this new orthodoxy that held fast to the
old supernaturalism that Theodore Parker protested. “The defect of
the Unitarians was a profound one,” he pointed out; “ceasing to fear
‘the great and dreadful God’ of the Old Testament, they had not quite
learned to love the all-beautiful and altogether lovely [God] of the
universe.”[460] He would have no pausing of the movement of adventurous
thought, no settling back into the ruts of dogmatism; and so he threw
himself with immense energy into the work of liberating Unitarianism
from a premature orthodoxy.

For this work he was admirably equipped. The greatest scholar of
his generation of New England ministers, deep in German theology
and philosophy, with the latest results of higher criticism on his
study table, he was critically trained to separate historical fact
from ecclesiastical tradition, and establish his theology on a basis
of naturalism. He was at once scientific and transcendental. He had
translated De Wette’s _Introduction to the Old Testament_ and was
intimately acquainted with Strauss’s _Leben Jesu_. He knew the oriental
backgrounds of Hebraic thought, had studied comparative religion with
its suggestive record of taboos and fetishism, and was gathering
materials for a comprehensive history of religion from primitive times.
Intellectually acquisitive and curious, he far outran the less informed
and courageous of his Unitarian brethren. But he was far more than
a critic, he may well be accounted a religious genius. A convinced
intuitionist, he tested every authority by appeal to transcendental
experience. He frankly abandoned faith in the supernatural, with its
corollaries of miracles and its “fetishism of the Bible,” and was
far advanced in a theism that compensated for the supernatural by a
passionate love of God. Thus established in personal experience his
religion issued in conduct. Love of God was more to him than historical
faith embodied in an historical church; love to his fellow men was
more appealing than dogma. Hence the profoundly ethical quality of
his religion, warm, palpitating, generous, that set it apart from
the colder and austerer ethicism of the conventional Unitarians. The
spirituality of Channing was enriched in Parker by the ardency of his
loving nature.

The three major doctrines of his theism, as elaborated in his “Letter
to the Members of the Twenty-Eighth Congregational Society,” were the
infinite perfection of God, the adequacy of man to all his functions,
and the sufficiency of absolute, natural religion. In his elaboration
of these doctrines the controlling influence of transcendental thought
is everywhere apparent. A metaphysical optimism throws a golden light
on all his thinking. The trinitarian Godhead, equally with the devil,
vanishes in “the infinitely perfect God,” “immanent in the world of
matter, and in the world of spirit, the two hemispheres which to us
make up the universe”--a universe created “from a perfect motive, for a
perfect purpose, of perfect substance, and as a perfect means.” Hence
it follows in Parker’s logic, that

  there must be a complete solidarity between God and the two-fold
  universe which He creates. The perfect Creator is thus also a
  perfect providence; indeed, creation and providence are not
  objective accidents of Deity, nor subjective caprices, but the
  development of the perfect motive to its perfect purpose, love
  becoming a universe of perfect welfare. I have called God Father,
  but also Mother ... to express more sensibility, the quality of
  tender and unselfish love, which mankind associates with Mother
  more than aught else beside. (“Letter,” etc., in Weiss, Vol. II,
  pp. 470-471.)

The doctrine of the adequacy of man flows logically from the doctrine
of the immanence of God, but Parker was not content to rest it on
such basis alone. The conception of human perfectibility, as it
filtered down to him through different strata of thought, romantic
and idealistic, found a high sanction in his transcendentalism; but
his practical nature demanded that it be established if possible on
a scientific foundation. Anthropology must substantiate philosophy.
Parker was not convinced that it could be thus adequately established;
nevertheless he would travel the objective path as far as it might
lead. Darwin’s _Origin of Species_ was published after Parker was
seized with his fatal illness, yet in much of the latter’s thinking he
was groping his way toward some similar conception of “the unity of
life of the human race,” with its “progressive development” from “the
state of ignorance, poverty, and utter nakedness of soul and sense,
the necessary primitive conditions of the race, up to the present
civilization.” In the deep-buried scattered records of the past, slowly
being gathered together and interpreted by science, he found “proof of
time immense, wherein man, this spiritual Cosmos, has been assuming
his present condition, individual, domestic, social, and national,
and accumulating that wealth of things and thoughts which is the mark
of civilization.” The doctrine of human perfectibility might not be
capable of scientific proof, but it was more than a reasonable hope; it
was implicit in all the past.

  But this progressive development does not end with us; we have
  seen only the beginning; the future triumphs of the race must be
  vastly greater than all accomplished yet. In the primal instincts
  and automatic desires of man, I have found a prophecy that what
  he wants is possible, and shall one day be actual.... What good
  is not with us is before, to be attained by toil and thought, and
  religious life. (_Ibid._, Vol. II, pp. 471-472.)

Of this slowly and painfully evolving man with his expanding ideals,
religion Parker believed to be the highest ultimate expression; and
religion, as the eyes of men slowly open to larger truths, will be seen
to be answerable to the needs of daily life, to embody the highest
ideal of social excellence. The noblest religion he believed was
not supernatural, but natural. “The absolute religion which belongs
to man’s nature, and is gradually unfolded thence,” “is the idea of
humanity, dimly seen but clearly felt, which has flitted before the
pious eyes of men in all lands and many an age, and been prayed for
as the ‘Kingdom of Heaven.’” It is forever refashioning its ideal,
re-embodying its vision, in every devout soul, in every creative age.
“The religious history of the race is the record of man’s continual
but unconscious efforts to attain this ‘desire of all nations’”
(_ibid._, Vol. II, p. 475). But unhappily every new advance soon
crystallizes in dogmas and institutions; taboos and fetishisms are
quick to re-imprison the mind that struggles to be free. Old forms,
therefore, must be daily broken to make room for evolving experience.
Religion must be free; it must rise spontaneously from the depths
of life. Christianity has suffered grievously from a fetishism of
the Bible, from its worship of the supernatural, from an ungenerous
sectarianism beloved of “ecclesiastic skeptics,” who believe “there is
no place for the Christian Church or the Bible till they have nullified
the faculties which created both, and rendered Bible-makers and
Church-founders impossible.” Every age must write a new Bible out of
its God-given instincts, permeated with the divine love that is slowly
shaping society to the divine purpose.

  No more is the atheistic mocker or the ecclesiastic bigot
  commissioned to stop the human race with his cry, “Cease there,
  mankind, thy religious search! for, thousand-million-headed as
  thou art, thou canst know nought directly of thy God, thy duty,
  or thyself. Pause, and accept my authenticated word; stop, and
  despair!” (_Ibid._, Vol. II, p. 475.)

It was this ethical quality of his religion that kept Theodore Parker
so sensitive to wrongs and so generous in response to the call of
social justice. His religion quickened his social conscience and
summoned him to serve the plentiful reform movements of the day. With
Garrison and Wendell Phillips he organized the militants of Boston
radicalism. His political principles were simple and uncompromising,
woven from the strands of English and French libertarianism of the
seventeenth and eighteenth centuries--from Sidney, Locke, Rousseau,
the great leaders of the natural-rights school. One who accepted as
axiomatic the nobility of human nature and the perfectibility of man,
might be a political romantic, but he was certain to be a liberal.
Parker was a primitive democrat, whose democracy was bone of his bone
and flesh of his flesh. But the democracy that answered the needs of
his dream of the kingdom was, like Emerson’s and Channing’s, ethical
rather than political or economic--it was “the enactment of God’s
justice into human laws” (“The Nebraska Question,” in _Additional
Speeches_, Vol. I, p. 327). “The democratic idea has had but a slow
and gradual growth even in New England,” he pointed out; nevertheless
he was convinced that it was spreading, and “government becomes more
and more of all, by all and for all”[461] (_ibid._, p. 33). He hated
Federalism with an intensity equaling Jefferson’s, and ecclesiastical
Federalism that twisted the authority of the church to the side of
wealthy pewholders, using Scripture as a sanction for exploitation, he
denounced as scathingly as Garrison. The power of the political state
he feared, because he discovered the political state to be the friend
of the rich rather than the poor, of selfish advantage rather than of
God’s justice. With other Abolitionists he distrusted the machinery
of centralization that was being skillfully erected at Washington.
“Opposition to centralization of authority is very old in America,” he
remarked; “I hope it will be always young” (_ibid._, Vol. II, p. 29).
But he was no partisan to the rule of the majority, if it determined
contrary to his conscience. A transcendental individualist, he went
for the nullification of an immoral statute in the name of the Higher
Law.[462]

Parker was never blind to the economic basis of politics. He saw
so clearly, indeed, the close alliance between group interests and
governmental statutes, that his political activities were almost
wholly determined by that recognition. As a political critic he was
the shrewdest realist of his generation. He was one constituent whom
politicians talking for Buncombe could not befuddle. He was too deeply
read in American history, gifted with too keen historical insight,
to be impressed by the glittering rhetoric of the Rufus Choates. He
had his own views of the American government, and majestic appeals to
the Constitution left him cold. The Constitution, he asserted, “is
a provisional compromise between the ideal political principles of
the Declaration, and the actual selfishness of the people North and
South.” America was not a democracy. It had thrown off theocracy,
aristocracy, and monarchy, only to set in their places the “institution
of money--the master of all the rest.” The economic basis of society in
America he considered to be open and patent. In church and state, money
“is this day the strongest power of the nation.” He declined to be
deceived by party cries and platforms, either Whig or Democratic; both
parties served economics rather than justice.

  So there is a party organization about the dollar as its central
  nucleus and idea. The dollar is the germinal dot of the Whig party;
  its motive is pecuniary.... It sneers at the poor; at the many;
  has a contempt for the people. It legislates against the poor,
  and for the rich ... the few who are born with the desire, the
  talent, and the conventional position to become rich. “Take care
  of the rich, and they will take care of the poor,” is its secret
  maxim. Everything must yield to money.... With this party there
  is no Absolute Right, no Absolute Wrong.... There is Expediency
  and Inexpediency.... Accordingly a millionaire is reckoned by this
  party as the highest production of Society. He is the Whig ideal;
  he alone has attained “the measure of the stature of a perfect man.”

  The Democratic party appeals to the brute will of the majority,
  right or wrong; it knows no Higher Law.... There is ... no vital
  difference between the Whig party and the Democratic party; no
  difference in moral principle. The Whig inaugurates the Money got;
  the Democrat inaugurates the Desire to get money. That is all the
  odds.... There is only a hand rail between the two, which breaks
  down if you lean on it, and the parties mix ... a Democrat is but
  a Whig on time; a Whig is a Democrat arrived at maturity; his time
  has come. A Democrat is a young Whig who will legislate for money
  as soon as he has got it; the Whig is an old Democrat who once
  hurrahed for the majority--“Down with money! there is a despot!
  and up with the desire for it! Down with the rich, and up with
  the poor!” The young man, poor, obscure, and covetous, in 1812
  was a Democrat, went a-privateering against England; rich, and
  accordingly “one of our eminent citizens,” in 1851 he was a Whig,
  and went a-kidnapping against Ellen Crafts and Thomas Sims. (“The
  Nebraska Question,” in _Additional Speeches_, Vol. I, pp. 331-335.)

The America of Parker’s day was fast becoming middle class and Parker
knew it, and like Lincoln he did not disapprove. Honest thrift he found
wholly desirable, and wealth if it were honestly got. But speculation
dissociated from creative work he regarded with old-fashioned distrust.
“If a man fully pay in efficient, productive toil and thought, he is
entitled to all he gets, one dollar or many million dollars ... and
if his estate be but what he has thus actually and honestly paid for
with service given, equivalent to the service received, what he can
virtuously keep or humanely apply and expend, then it will never be
too large.”[463] But he believed there were other gods, and greater,
than the god of getting on; social justice was more desirable than
unearned increment; and he set his face like flint against the common
materialism of America. “I come to build up piety and morality; to
pull down only what cumbers the ground,” he said; but he had learned
that the temples of State Street were not easily leveled; that they
would not fall without a mighty crash. A less courageous man would
have hesitated, but Parker was utterly fearless. Boston he knew “was
a Tory town.” “The Mother city of the Puritans is now the metropolis
of the Hunkers” (_Additional Speeches_, Vol. I, p. 111). But the
spirit of ’76 was strong in him and he would “appeal from Boston drunk
with gold, and briefly mad with hate, to sober Boston in her hour to
come.” He would appeal from Whiggish Boston to Revolutionary Boston;
from State Street to Lexington common; from the Faneuil Hall of Rufus
Choate to the Faneuil Hall of Sam Adams. He would awaken the ancestral
idealism of Boston that slept uneasily under the spell of middle-class
ambitions--that had sold its Puritan heritage for southern trade
profits. Such an appeal Boston had never before listened to, ardent,
unsparing, the Hebraic and the Yankee vernacular curiously mingled; and
Boston writhed uncomfortably and pronounced the prophet ill-mannered.

  When the Fugitive Slave Bill passed, the six New England states lay
  fast asleep: Massachusetts slept soundly, her head pillowed on her
  unsold bales of Cotton and of woolen goods, dreaming of “orders
  from the South.” Justice came to waken her ... and she started in
  her sleep, and being frightened, swore a prayer or two, then slept
  again. But Boston woke,--sleeping, in her shop, with ears open, and
  her eye on the market, her hand on her purse, dreaming of goods for
  sale,--Boston woke broadly up, and fired a hundred guns for joy. O
  Boston, Boston! if thou couldst have known, in that thine hour, the
  things which belong unto thy peace! But no: they were hidden from
  her eyes. She had prayed to her god, to Money; he granted her the
  request, but sent leanness into her soul. (“The Boston Kidnapping,”
  in _Additional Speeches_, Vol. I, p. 89.)

But he offended the Boston code of good breeding even more seriously.
He became personal. He named names. Before vast congregations, in
printed books, he pronounced judgment on Bostonians respected in
the Back Bay, mighty in State Street. Boston gentlemen had never
before suffered such tongue-lashings. How mercilessly he excoriated
Commissioner Loring, judge of probate and Harvard professor, for
soiling his hands in the Anthony Burns case! How neatly he pricked
the empty culture of Edward Everett for his pro-slavery ardor--“a
Cambridge professor of Greek, he studied the original tongue of the
Bible to learn that the Scripture says ‘slaves,’ where the English
Bible says only ‘servants’!” (_Additional Speeches_, Vol. II, p. 115.)
What an utterly devastating attack he made on the great Webster for
the latter’s subserviency to local economic interests! Much honest
realism underlies that criticism, and much honest American history. The
“Nebraska Address” and the “Webster Address” are notable historical
documents, incisive analyses--rare in those romantic days--done by
one who has kept a shrewd eye on current politics, and understands
the hidden springs of party policy. Into the Webster address he put
his vast knowledge, his power of analysis, his frank idealism. It was
“a sad and dreadful day” when duty bade Theodore Parker speak on the
man whose uncommon powers he had long admired; but he did his work
thoroughly, refusing to shut his eyes to ugly fact, refusing to indulge
in commonplace eulogy. It was the eighteenth-century economic realism
of Webster that stirred the wrath of the transcendentalist--that and
the lapses from integrity. Parker’s text was found in Webster’s dictum
that “the great object of government is the protection of property at
home, and respect and renown abroad”; and how starkly it runs counter
to his own ideal of government, “the enactment of God’s justice into
human laws,” is laid bare in page after page of scathing commentary.
To the exacting ethics of Parker, Webster was wanting in principles;
he followed expediency rather than justice; and how surely expediency
digs pitfalls for its own undoing he discovered tragic illustration of
in the career of the great senator. It is a hard fate for a politician,
accustomed to the cheap praise of the gullible public, to fall into the
hands of a critic who is honest and searching; and Webster had too many
weak points to emerge from such an analysis with credit. It is probably
the most critical examination of Webster’s career that has ever been
made, and withal just.

Surprisingly modern, far more so than Channing, was this brilliant
preacher--impulsive, colloquial, natural, whose every arrow was
pointed with a fact and feathered to fly true; concerned more with
righteousness than with policy; hating the dull commonplace and empty
dignity of Tory ways; careless of convention, somewhat spectacular,
with a keen relish for combat--a vital, vivid man, the apostle of
conscience, the advocate of every unpopular cause. He possessed an
amazing gift of words, yet he was too impatient, too practical, to
become an artist; preferring immediate ends to more lasting reputation,
and spending himself with a free prodigality. He was always the speaker
rather than the writer and his printed pages bear the unmistakable
marks of impetuous oral discourse. Emerson accounted him one of
the four great men of the age. Whether or not that judgment holds,
whether he was too eager a militant to become a great transcendental
philosopher, the historian sees in Theodore Parker one of the greatest,
if not the last, of the excellent line of Puritan preachers.


Footnotes

[459] See Wendell, _Literary History of America_, p. 348.

[460] See “Letter to the Members of the Twenty-Eighth Congregational
Society of Boston,” in Weiss, _Life and Correspondence of Theodore
Parker_, Vol. II, Appendix II, p. 482. This account of his “Experience
as a Minister” constitutes a brief intellectual autobiography, of first
importance to the student of Parker.

[461] This phrase of Parker’s was probably the source of Lincoln’s
phrase.

[462] See “The Law of God and the Statutes of Men,” in _Additional
Speeches_, Vol. II, p. 181.

[463] Quoted in Weiss, Vol. II, p. 488.




