Chapter I • Samuel Sewall • Yankee


By good fortune an intimate record of daily life in old New England
has been preserved in abundant detail. The diary of Samuel Sewall
not only narrates the homely activities of Boston in the evening of
the theocracy, _antiquis moribus, prisca fide_, but it unconsciously
reveals the transformation of the English Puritan into the New England
Yankee. The sober Boston citizens who on the Sabbath droned Windsor and
York tunes, and took notes of long sermons, on week-days plied their
gospel of thrift with notable success. They loved the meetinghouse as
their fathers had loved it, but they were the sons and grandsons of
tradesmen, and true to their English instincts they set about erecting
a provincial mercantile society, dominated by the ideals of the little
capitalist. Of this rising world of mercantilism, Samuel Sewall was a
worthy representative. A Puritan magistrate and village capitalist, he
made full use of his opportunities to worship God, to thrive and to
rise. As the older ideal of theocratic stewardship is revealed in the
career of John Winthrop, the newer practice of incipient capitalism is
revealed in the life of Samuel Sewall.

The _Diary_ is a fascinating book, with its petty gossip interwoven
with matters of public concern, and its brisk activities set in a
black border of innumerable funerals: the one among all the books
of the time that is still quick with life after these two hundred
years and more. In its meager entries we can trace the change that
was coming to Massachusetts in the transition from a theocracy to a
royal colony; and we can feel the strong emotions which that change
aroused. The dry facts of history take on flesh and blood; forgotten
names become living men walking the streets of Boston or arguing in
the Council Chamber; Samuel Sewall himself becomes more real to us
than our own contemporaries. He was the veritable embodiment of his
serious, prudential Massachusetts, reflecting its changing fortunes
with painstaking fidelity. In that petty world of conventional piety
and shrewd self-interest, the kind-hearted Judge bustled about, a
sermon in one hand to soothe the doubts of the troubled, and a bit
of chocolate in the other to comfort the bedridden--as honest and
friendly and prosaic a soul as Massachusetts ever bred. If one wishes
to understand the first native New England generation, one cannot do
better than linger over the daily jottings of this lawyer-tradesman,
who knew his Calvin far better than his Coke, and who while busily
adding new acres to his holdings strove to keep the younger generation
uncontaminated by wigs and revels and other godless things, by the
sweet ravishment of the psalms, in the singing of which the voice of
the Judge was lifted up with pathetic earnestness.

For many years after his death fame dealt more than generously with
Samuel Sewall. The prosperity that came to him during his earthly
pilgrimage long provided for his memory, and made of him a greater
figure than either nature or good fortune created. Who does not know
Whittier’s tribute?

  Stately and slow, with thoughtful air,
  His black cap hiding his whitened hair,
  Walks the Judge of the Great Assise,
  Samuel Sewall, the good and wise.
  His face with lines of firmness wrought,
  He wears the look of a man unbought,
  Who swears to his hurt and changes not;
  Yet touched and softened nevertheless
  With the grace of Christian gentleness;
  The face that a child would climb to kiss;
  True and tender and brave and just,
  That man might honor and woman trust.

And a hundred and forty-eight years after the cold January day when
all that was mortal of him was “honorably Inter’d” in the Sewall tomb
whither so many of his family had gone before,[79] a brilliant student
of early American letters gave fresh currency to the stately Sewall of
tradition. “He was a man built, every way, after a large pattern. By
his great wealth, his great offices, his learning, his strong sense,
his wit, his warm human sympathy, his fearlessness, his magnanimity, he
was a visible potentate among men in those days.”[80]

That was before the diary was published and the lay figure of
tradition vanished in presence of the real man. We know Samuel Sewall
now and see him as he was. That he was a great man it is impossible to
make out; but that he was a small man by no means follows. Behind the
formal trappings of magistrate and councilor, we discover a capable,
middle-class soul, honest, simple-hearted, serving himself yet not
unmindful of his fellow townsmen, an excellent neighbor and citizen,
to whom the strongest appeal of life was the economic. Like those
kindred spirits, Defoe and Franklin, the dominant inspiration of his
life was prudential, as befitted the descendant of generations of
tradesmen. “Mr. Henry Sewall, my great Grandfather,” wrote the Judge in
old age, “was a Linen Draper in the City of Coventry in Great Britain.
He acquired a great Estate, was a prudent Man, and was more than once
chosen Mayor of the City.”[81] In turning Puritan the English burgess
did not change his nature, and Samuel Sewall was true to his breeding
in fashioning his life upon that of his great grandfather. To acquire
wealth and honors, to occupy a dignified position among his fellows,
was the dominant ambition of his life. With excellent thrift he fixed
his young affections upon the only child of a wealthy merchant, the
richest heiress in the colony; no penniless “waiting-woman,” for
Samuel Sewall, such as had contented the unworldly Thomas Hooker. He
understood how desirable it is to put money in one’s purse; so he made
a great alliance and proved himself a shrewd husbandman as well as a
kind husband.[82] From commerce and land speculation and money lending
and the perquisites of many offices, he accumulated steadily until his
wealth entitled him to be regarded as one of the first citizens of
Massachusetts. He did not forget his prudence even in his generosities,
but set down carefully in his diary what his benefactions cost, that
there might be no mistake when he came to make his reckoning with the
Lord. He knew his rights and upheld them stoutly; and in the petty
quarrels and litigations in which he found himself involved, he stuck
to the letter of the law and usually won his point. He did not misuse
his official position to feather his own nest, but what might be got
legally from public office he took care to get.

With abundant wealth the path of preferment was easy to him. From
his election to the privileges of a freeman in 1678, at the age of
twenty-six, to the end of a long life, he was continuously engaged
in public affairs. He sought office and was not backward in pushing
his claims upon a desirable post;[83] and by careful attention to
business rather than by exceptional parts, he rose to a place of
very great influence in the commonwealth. Like a competent man of
affairs, he was prompt in meeting engagements--“am, I think, the most
constant attender of Councils,” he remarked of himself approvingly.
He carried out to the letter the early advice given him: “Mr. Reyner
... Advised me not to keep overmuch within, but goe among men, and
that thereby I should advantage myself.”[84] Capable, industrious,
public-spirited, he led a busy and useful life that justified more than
commonly the responsibilities which came to him. His qualities might
be middle-class, but they were sterling and worthy of honor. It was a
fortunate star that led him out of Tory England, where he would never
have been more than a prosperous tradesman, to the new world where
kindred spirits were erecting a commonwealth after his own heart.[85]

Nevertheless with all his excellent qualities Samuel Sewall was not
a great or original nature. The evidence is convincing that he was a
capable executive and administrator rather than a creative thinker
or forceful leader; a Puritan embodiment of Defoe’s merchant ideal;
an example of the man who rises to civic honors by simple business
virtues. He was at home in the narrow round of routine, but for bold
speculation he reveals the incapacity of the practical soul. His
intellectual interests were few; his ready curiosity was that of the
uncreative mind, concerning itself with persons and happenings rather
than with ideas. To say that Sewall possessed either an economic
or political philosophy would be too generous an interpretation of
his opinions. The views which he upheld vigorously were little more
than prejudices. Of the several economic questions which engaged
the attention of the Council during his years of service, the most
insistent was the question of issuing bills of credit to supplement
the scanty currency. There was the usual class alignment, the wealthy
opposing the issues, and the poor generally favoring them. The
position of Sewall was clear. He vigorously opposed every issue, from
the conviction that the only honest money was hard money, even going
so far as to prefer barter to bills.[86] Nowhere does he reveal any
intelligent grasp of the economics of the problem, nor was he aware
that his judgment might have been influenced by his private interests
as a money lender.

In his political views he was equally unconcerned with broad
principles. He seems to have been wholly unread in political theory,
and like his fellow magistrates he never examined fundamentals. He
accepted without question the right of the godly to police society, and
he would have no meddling with affairs of state by tavern and fireside
politicians. As a member of the oligarchy he naturally approved
oligarchic rule. Although he would turn to the democracy for support
against the Lords of Trade, when the latter were moving to overturn
the theocracy, he put no trust in the political wisdom of the common
people. He was as magisterial as John Winthrop in his belief in the
principle of the stewardship of the elders. Stability of government
was the prime essential; there must be no criticism of government by
private individuals or by newspapers. On an occasion when Dudley’s
administration had been sharply attacked in a London paper, a copy of
which had been brought over and talked about, there was a great pother
in Council. Although Sewall was not willing to defend Dudley, he was
troubled.

  At last the Council voted, it tended to the disturbance of
  the Government. Lt. Govr. and Council order’d me to Reprimand
  Mr. Dummer.... I told him how intolerable it was for privat
  persons to print Reflections and Censures on the highest Acts of
  Government.... Twas ill done of them who printed it in London, and
  twas ill done by them that carried it on here.[87]

His characteristic attitude then comes out in the phrase: “I said
... I was for upholding Government whether in or out of it.” Samuel
Sewall was no rebel against authority. But if he was firm in support
of the _de facto_ government, he was insistent that it should be
honest. He protested to Governor Dudley against padding the muster
pay-rolls[88] and he dissented strongly against introducing the current
English practice of buying commissions in the army.[89] The scandalous
corruption of English politics must not be permitted to sully the
government of Massachusetts.

Sewall enjoyed in his lifetime the repute of a scholar. He was Latinist
enough to justify his Harvard degree of Master of Arts; he read a
good deal, and wrote and published books. But he seems to have cared
nothing for pure literature, and was unacquainted with the English
classics. His intellectual interest was in things either occult or
inconsequential. Biblical prophecy was his favorite study, and his
most ambitious work, _Phaenomena Quaedam Apocalyptica_, essayed to
prove that America was to be the final “rendezvous of Gog and Magog.”
Although long a magistrate and judge of the highest court, he was not
a lawyer. He received no preliminary training in the law, and there
are few indications in the _Diary_ that he read the literature of
the profession. His indifference seems to have given concern to his
friends, for on January 13, 1696, four years after he had been chosen
judge, he noted:

  When were there at first, Mr. Danforth bad me look on the
  Cupboard’s head for a book; I told him I saw there a Law-book,
  Wingate on the Common Law. He said he would lend it me, I should
  speak to Amsden to call for it; and if he died, he would give it
  me. Again when took leave after prayer, He said he lent me that
  Book not to wrap up but to read, and if misliked it, should tell
  him of it.[90]

Primitive New England did not take kindly to lawyers, and in
administering a patriarchal justice by rule of thumb, Sewall was like
other New England magistrates. Neither did it take kindly to the spirit
of free speculation, and in his potterings over occultisms he was
confessing the sterility of intellectual interests.

If the kind-hearted Judge lacked capacity for bold and liberal thought,
he lacked capacity as well for emotional fervor. He was quite without
imagination. Despite his honest concern for his soul, and his sincere
desire for the advancement of God’s kingdom in New England, Sewall did
not possess a deeply religious nature. In his religious life he was
the same prudent, plodding soul, that stowed away in his strong-box
deeds to ample possessions during his pilgrimage through this vale of
tears. The natural man was strong in his two hundred and odd pounds
of flesh, and the religious mysticism that lurked in the heart of
primitive Puritanism found no response in his phlegmatic soul. He was
no Seeker, like Roger Williams, to be driven by a passionate fervor
along untried paths; nor was he a philosopher, like John Wise, to
concern himself with broad ecclesiastical principles. Instead, there
is more than a hint of the tradesman’s conception of religion--one has
only to understand the profitableness of salvation to be led to invest
in it. His religion must be orthodox; no untried methods or gambler’s
chances; a good business man will scrutinize title-deeds with due care,
and the title-deeds to salvation are of the first importance. How
characteristic are the following entries in the diary:

  Sabbath, March 2d. I Pray’d in the Family, that might have an
  interest in God, Signed, Sealed and Delivered, and that all that
  tended to make it sure, might be perfected.

  Febr. 6. [1718] This morning ... I had a sweet and very affectionat
  Meditation Concerning the Lord Jesus; Nothing was to be objected
  against his Person, Parentage, Relations, Estate, House, Home!
  Why did I not resolutely, presently close with Him! And I cry’d
  mightily to God that He would help me so to doe!

  23. 5. [1721] Mr. Prince preaches the Lecture, from Gen. 22. 18
  ... A very seasonable Discourse. One Fly was discovered in his
  Ointment: He asserted that the 1000. years Rev. 20. stood for Three
  Hundred and Sixty Thousand years; taking every day of the 1000.
  years for a year: as 365. days i.e. years. _Apage has nugas!_
  [“Away with this nonsense!”][91]

No higher criticism for Samuel Sewall. If we quibble over the plain
words of Scripture, how shall we be certain of the terms of the
contract?

A man so cautious by nature, and with so large a stake in the existing
order, could not fail to be a conservative, content with a world that
justified itself by the prosperity which it brought him, and which
it would bring to others, he doubted not, if they governed their
conduct with equal prudence. He desired no innovations in church or
state; established forms answered his needs and filled the measure of
his ideal. The existing system was approved by all the respectable
people of the community; there was everything to gain in upholding
it, and likelihood of loss in suffering power to pass into the hands
of a royal governor or of the ignorant poor. And so, determined by
complex motives, by habit, by class ties, by economic interest, and
by honest liking, Samuel Sewall went with the stream of conventional
orthodoxy, strong for the old theocratic principles, seeing no need
for readjustments to meet changing conditions. The true principles of
church and state had been laid down by the fathers, to which the common
acceptance by the best people gave final sanction.

It is characteristic of the prosperous bourgeoisie, and the old Judge
walked the streets of Boston, or sat in his pew, or took his place
on the bench, as stubborn and unimaginative a conservative as any of
his fellows. If his persistent opposition to change, whether in the
matter of wigs, or Christmas keeping, or creed, or politics, was due
in part to a phlegmatic love of use and wont, it was prompted also by
an instinctive fear of innovation. The world doubtless is imperfect,
but it answers to God’s will and we understand its ways and can draw
our contracts with open eyes. Whereas change, however desirable it may
seem theoretically, entails too many disturbing uncertainties. Very
likely it was this subconscious concern for his material interests
that so often made the simple-minded Judge an unintelligent opponent
of all popular movements looking to a freer and more liberal society.
When his native kindliness was touched he spoke out frankly. His
anti-slavery tract (_The Selling of Joseph_), slight in extent and
somewhat overpraised by historians, was not only much in advance of
his time, but it contains one sentence that should not be forgotten,
“There is no proportion between twenty pieces of silver and liberty.”
Equally significant was his stand against capital punishment for
counterfeiting.[92] Such acts as the following must also be set down to
his credit: “I essay’d June 22 [1716], to prevent Indians and Negros
being Rated with Horses and Hogs; but could not prevail.”[93] His
native sense of justice was as strong as his kindliness. Who does not
know of his confession in regard to the witchcraft persecutions--an
act that set all Boston tongues wagging. When he was convinced that he
had made a grievous and sorrowful mistake, he rose in the congregation
while the minister read his public acknowledgment of that mistake,
and his repentance for his share in the unhappy business. Thereafter
in commemoration he kept an annual day of prayer and fasting. We can
forgive him much for that honest and manly act.

To the end of his life Sewall refused to go forward with the changing
times, and his voluntary assumption of the office of _praefectura
morum_ laid him under a heavy responsibility to see that the primitive
ways were upheld. He was magisterial in rebuke and few transgressors
of the strict New England code escaped a censure. One would like to
have James Franklin’s private opinion of the sharp-eyed old Judge. To
Franklin and other members of the Hell-fire Club--young fellows keenly
interested in domesticating the new wit literature in homespun Boston,
openly skeptical, inclining to Arianism and even to deism--he must
have seemed a prosy old reactionary, upholding a decadent orthodoxy
and an obsolete social order. No doubt many a sharp jibe was aimed at
his back, for there were many to whom the older ways began to seem
preposterous. It may very well have been that those who committed a
certain prank which Sewall records may have had him in mind.

  Aug. 3. [1717] ... ’Tis sad it should be so, but a virulent Libel
  was starch’d on the Three Doors of the Meeting House, containing
  the following Words:

                     TO ALL TRUE-HEARTED CHRISTIANS

    Good people, within this House, this very day,
    A Canting Crew will meet to fast, and pray.
    Just as a miser fasts with greedy mind to spare;
    So the glutton fasts, to eat a greater share.
    But the sower-headed Presbyterians fast to seem more holy,
    And their Canting Ministers to punish sinfull foley.[94]

Happily there is another and pleasanter side to the character of Samuel
Sewall, and one that looked forward to the future instead of backward
to the past. Despite the harshness of the Puritan creed and the bigotry
of Puritan rule, the fields and meadows of New England, that sent a
breath of the countryside through the crooked streets of Boston, were
a wholesome influence in the lives of men and women. Magistrate and
money-lender though he was, Samuel Sewall was a countryman and farmer
also, a judge of milch cows and fat porkers as well as criminals, a
lover of robins and flowers and fruitful orchards, one who sat his
horse well, and when on circuit often drew up at a rail-fence to
discuss the crops with some gossipy farmer. Above all, a lover of
men, the most neighborly soul in the world, mingling freely with all
classes, and although quite properly proud of a visit from the Governor
or other great person, never above chatting with the carpenter, or
doing a kindness to an old nurse. It was the friendly heart of the man
that prompted so many little errands of helpfulness; and if sermons and
tracts and good advice flowed from him like a spring freshet, if he was
magisterial in petty rebuke, such little oddities of the man and the
time did not detract from his sympathy or lessen his helpfulness. Men
stood in awe of Cotton Mather, and children must have run from him, but
neither awe nor fear threw their shadow across Sewall’s path. We can
make too much of the countless funerals that dot his pages, with their
thrifty reckoning of gloves and scarfs and rings that were the queer
perquisites of pallbearers. It was not an unwholesome world despite the
smell of mortality that exudes from the old records, or the terrors of
little children smitten with the fear of hell; and the homely round of
Samuel Sewall’s activities was very far from unwholesome.

It was his neighborliness that made him so representative of the
leveling tendencies of a provincial village life--an easy comradeship
with men of all conditions, unknown to the rigid class divisions
of the old world. Going one day to visit the Jews’ burial place at
Mile-End, while on a visit to London, he invited the sexton to a pot
of beer and a quiet chat, remarking in friendly fashion, “wisht might
meet in Heaven: He answered, and drink a Glass of Beer together,
which we were then doing.”[95] His English friends would scarcely
have understood that homely little scene, so natural to the colonial.
Sewall is the first Yankee who reveals the native kindliness of the New
England village. He was zealous to do good and to deal generously with
others, because he had been generously dealt by. Growing more human
with the ripening years, yet instinctively conservative, stubbornly
intent on managing his own affairs in his own way and by his own
agents, provincial to the core and strong in local pride, he reveals
the special bent of the New England character, as it unconsciously
differentiated itself from its English original. Not American as yet
like Franklin, and no longer wholly English like Winthrop, far from
democratic and yet no Tory, he was the progenitor of a practical race
that was to spread the gospel of economic individualism across the
continent.


Footnotes

[79] Two of his three wives and eleven of his fourteen children he had
buried.

[80] Tyler, _History of American Literature during the Colonial
Period_, Chapter XIII, Part IV.

[81] _Diary_, in _Massachusetts Historical Society Collections_, Fifth
Series, Vol. I, p. xi.

[82] Compare his haggling over the terms of settlement upon a later
proposed marriage; see _Diary_, Vol. III, p. 205.

[83] See _Diary_, Vol. III, p. 168.

[84] _Diary_, Vol. I, p. 32.

[85] The following is part of an obituary notice by his son:

In 1684, He was chosen a Magistrate of the _Massachusetts_ Colony....
In 1692, He was appointed by King William and Queen Mary in their
Royal Charter, one of the first Council for their Majesties in this
Province, into which He was annually chosen and sat till 1725, when
He resign’d his Election, having outlived all the others nominated in
that Fundamental Constitution. In 1692 He was made one of the Judges,
and in 1718, Chief Justice of our Superior Courts of Judicature thro’
the Province, in which He sat till 1728, when his Infirmities growing
on Him, He resign’d that Place also. In 1715, He was made Judge of
Probates for this County of _Suffolk_, and continued in that Office
till 1728, when He laid it down; it being the last Publick Post wherein
He served and honoured his Country. _Diary_, Vol. III, pp. 409-410.
In addition to the above, he was at times an overseer of Harvard
College, censor of the press, and captain of the Ancient and Honourable
Artillery Company; a frequent moderator of Boston town meeting, member
of innumerable committees on church, parish and commonwealth matters,
and adviser at large to whoever was in difficulties.

[86] See _Diary_, Vol. II, p. 366; Vol. III, pp. 87 and 345.

[87] _Diary_, Vol. III, pp. 84-85.

[88] _Diary_, Vol. II, p. 228.

[89] _Ibid._, p. 214.

[90] _Diary_, Vol. I, p. 419.

[91] _Diary_, Vol. I, p. 312; Vol. III, p. 165; Vol. III, pp. 281-282.

[92] See _Diary_, Vol. III, p. 277.

[93] _Ibid._, p. 87.

[94] _Diary_, Vol. III, pp. 116-117. Note the use of the word
Presbyterian in these lines.

[95] _Diary_, Vol. I, p. 301.




