Chapter I • The Reign of the Genteel


I

The discussion of the New England mind hitherto has kept pretty much
to the outskirts of Boston, to Concord and Roxbury and undistinguished
precincts; it has not penetrated the Back Bay where dwelt the authentic
representatives of Brahminism, nor has it concerned itself greatly
with Cambridge that was a lesser Back Bay. Nevertheless there were
other ideals than those of transcendentalism and social reform in the
New England of the renaissance--ideals of culture, of scholarship, of
_belles lettres_, to which the Brahmin mind contributed, and which
after the subsidence of the ferment came to dominate genteel New
England and for a generation largely influenced American letters. To
the revolutionary aspirations of the forties the Back Bay contributed
little. Brahmin Boston might turn Unitarian with Channing, but it
was at heart neither French romantic nor German idealist; it desired
rather culture for its own sake, and scholarship it regarded as the
handmaid of culture. It hoped of course that righteousness and the
will of God should ultimately prevail in human affairs, but it was not
exigent in its demands. Occasion and means it willingly left to God,
anticipating that the walls of Jericho must fall of their own weakness.
It is surprising how little the greater issues of the time ruffled the
serenity of the Brahmin mind, and how uncritical were its judgments on
such issues as came under its review. Divided between State Street and
the Back Bay, its life ran a smoothly agreeable course with no hint of
potential antagonisms between exploitation and culture. It followed so
strictly the injunction, let not thy left hand know what thy right hand
doeth, that the two were almost total strangers to each other. Like
Edith Wharton’s contemporary Knickerbockers, the Brahmins conceived
the great business of life to be the erection of barriers against the
intrusion of the unpleasant. They took it ill when those barriers were
assaulted by rude militants, and when indisputable Brahmins--men like
Edmund Quincy and Wendell Phillips--took part in the assault, the Back
Bay regarded them as more than a little queer.

The immediate consequence of this concern for defensive breastworks
was the reign of the genteel in life and letters, a reign that set up
a court of critical jurisdiction over the domain of American letters.
The essence of the genteel tradition was a refined ethicism, that
professed to discover the highest virtue in shutting one’s eyes to
disagreeable fact, and the highest law in the law of convention. Gone
were the franker days of Robert Treat Paine when a wit might find his
choicest _bons mots_ in the bottom of his cups. Coarseness had given
way to refinement. It was the romanticism of Brahmin culture, with all
Falstaffian vulgarity deleted, and every smutch of the natural man
bleached out in the pure sunshine of manners. It was Victorianism of
a more maidenly purity than the English strain, so carefully filtered
by passing through the close Puritan mesh that the smallest impurities
were removed. The first of literary commandments was the commandment
of reticence. Literature was conceived of as belonging to the library
and the drawing-room, and it must observe the drawing-room amenities.
Only a vulgarian would lug a spade there. Any venture into realism was
likely to prove libidinous, and sure to be common. Certainly Margaret
Fuller had overstepped the bounds of decency with her remarks about
women of the streets. The Adamite school was the vulgar expression
of the natural man, and Continental realism--the French and the
Russian--was only bringing the gutter into the library. Literature
must be fine and pure and noble, and as such it will serve decency and
manners; what excuse is there for it otherwise? The case for the true
church of literature, as against the Adamite and other heresies, was
admirably stated by Lowell:

  I have not seen Swinburne’s new volume--but a poem or two from it
  which I have seen shocked me, and I am not squeamish.... Why should
  a man by choice go down to live in his cellar, instead of mounting
  to those fair upper chambers which look towards the sunrise of that
  Easter which shall greet the resurrection of the soul from the body
  of this death? _Virginibus puerisque?_ To be sure! let no man write
  a line that he would not have his daughter read.... But I have
  outlived many heresies, and shall outlive this new Adamite one of
  Swinburne. The true Church of poetry is founded on a rock, and I
  have no fear that these smutchy back-doors of hell shall prevail
  against her. (_Letters_, Vol. I, p. 377.)


II

Though it willingly recognized the superior claims of poetry and the
essay, the Brahmin mind found a more congenial field for its literary
ambitions in history; and the quiet scholarship that it pursued with
exemplary diligence was likely to flower in substantial historical
studies. Excellent work much of it is, brilliant in certain instances;
yet it too is subtly marked by the psychology of the environment that
produced it. The renaissance of Boston scholarship began with Everett
and Ticknor, whose German training was imposed on natures instinctively
aristocratic, swayed by the older Federalist prejudices. The latter
applied himself to Spanish literature, but his colleague and fellow
historian, Jared Sparks, proved that in the American field even
painstaking scholarship could not subdue the temptation to improve upon
reality. Sparks applied Boston ethics to biography and conceived that
his mission in writing the life of a great American like Washington
was to portray a national hero as a model to the youth of the land. In
pursuance of this aim he studiously perfected nature by correcting all
the little blemishes of manner and little weaknesses of character in
order to produce an immaculate effect. He edited Washington’s letters
with a free hand, not only correcting the grammar and spelling, but
silently deleting such passages as did not become the hero he had in
mind. He did not of course go to the absurd lengths of Parson Weems
in inventing episodes and effects, but he refused to deal with his
materials realistically and the result was a falsifying of the total
impression.

The greatest and in certain respects the most characteristic work
of the period was George Bancroft’s _History of the United States_,
to which with single-minded purpose he devoted sixty laborious
years. Trained in Göttingen, he gathered his materials with German
thoroughness, but the underlying spirit and purpose of his exposition
were native to the ardent nationalism of Jacksonian America. Bancroft
was the only important member of the New England group of historians
who was a militant Democrat, and he set out to justify to the world
the ways of democratic America. It was a great undertaking and in the
opinion of Ranke, the German historian, it justified itself. “Your
history is the best book ever written from the democratic point of
view,”[466] he wrote Bancroft. The praise was perhaps not excessive.
Conceived in the early days of the Jacksonian triumph, it reflects
the grandiose conception of the future of America and the beneficent
influence of republican institutions on western civilization, that
were common in the golden days of equalitarianism and that even such
a scholarly legalist as Hugh Legaré shared. But unfortunately, with
his generation Bancroft had lost his economic bearings, and he drove
forward somewhat too confidently into the new seas of political
idealism trusting to the pole-star of emancipated human nature. As a
democrat he was too easily persuaded that democratic America lay in
the particular keeping of Providence, and he assumed too readily that
the democratic development of American institutions was in response to
the divine will. It reflects something of the partisanship of honest
patriots who believe God is on their side; but it served to correct
the teachings of Federalists like Richard Hildreth who insisted that
God was on the side of Federalism. Till Bancroft took up his pen the
bias of American chronicles had been anti-democratic. Every Federalist
with leisure, a quill, and a smattering of historical knowledge, had
added his mite to the Federalist myths that long constituted the body
of our history. The democratic interpretation ran so counter to Boston
tradition that Bancroft found little congeniality amongst his fellow
historians, and he eventually quitted his native state and took up his
home in Washington.

More representative of the Brahmin spirit was the work of William H.
Prescott, John L. Motley, and Francis Parkman, who constitute what may
be called the romantic school of Boston historians. They sought the
romantic in theme and aspired to the romantic in treatment quite as
consciously as did the contemporary novelists. Of excellent Brahmin
strain, with leisure, wealth, opportunity, they were free to pick
and choose as they would. Prescott and Motley turned away from the
partisanships of America, and while Jacksonianism was in full swing
the former wrote his _Ferdinand and Isabella_, and while the country
was wrangling over slavery the latter wrote his _Rise of the Dutch
Republic_. Broad in conception and dramatic in treatment, they are
admirable works, yet they suggest that aloofness from the sordid
realities of America so characteristic of the Brahmin mind. Far more
brilliant and significant was the work of Francis Parkman who turned
his imagination to the far West over which the struggle for exploration
and conquest had long persisted between the French and English. In his
twenties he had made a venturesome trip to the great plains, and that
experience gave life and vitality to his later historical writings,
that were enriched by close research, a brilliant style, and a creative
imagination. The theme he set himself was not alone a “history of the
American forest,” but a clash between civilizations--the “feudal,
militant, and Catholic France in conflict with democratic, industrial,
and Protestant England”; and with fine tenacity of purpose, in the
teeth of ill health, he wrought at his project till the America of the
old French War times was gathered into his pages. The Brahmin mind has
contributed to American letters no more brilliant work than came from
the pen of Francis Parkman.


III

If the highest aspirations of the Brahmin nature sought satisfaction
in poetry, Longfellow may be reckoned its most characteristic product.
In his work the romantic, the sentimental, and the moralistic,
blended in such just proportions, and expressed themselves with such
homely simplicity as to hit exactly the current taste and establish a
reputation that later generations have difficulty in understanding.
A gentle, lovable soul, widely read and in maturer years possessing
a ripe literary scholarship, he was a skillful purveyor of gentle,
lovable ideals. Although he drew his materials from Spain and Sweden
and Italy, from primitive New England and aboriginal America, it was
Germany that largely provided the staple of his romance. With Emerson
and Margaret Fuller and Theodore Parker, he found Germany a singularly
congenial land--not Königsberg with its transcendental metaphysics, nor
Weimar with its pagan culture, nor Tübingen with its higher criticism.
Such things, transcendental and critical, he was not concerned about;
it was the minor romantics, Freiligrath rather than Heine, the gentle
melancholy and pervasive _Sehnsucht_ of the German folk-nature, that
drew him irresistibly and quickened his sympathetic pen. There was
little intellect in Longfellow, little creative originality. He was the
poet of an uncritical and unsophisticated generation, as yet untroubled
by science and industrialism, and his mind was detached from politics
and his conscience rarely disturbed by social questions. He came of
excellent Federalist stock, his father having been a delegate from
Maine to the Hartford Convention; and with his courteous manners he
fitted easily into the little world of Cambridge Brahmins. However one
might question his poetry, none could question that he was a gentleman
amongst gentlemen.

If he was never the omnivorous bookman that Lowell was, he was
distinctly a poet of the library. His placid and singularly happy
life was pretty much bounded by his library walls. One could scarcely
have lived more detached from contemporary America, more effectively
insulated against the electric currents of the times. Though Thoreau
might flee to Walden he carried his questioning intellect with him;
even the constable would not leave him alone there. But Longfellow’s
door shut securely against all intrusion. The winds of doctrine and
policy might rage through the land, but they did not rattle the windows
of his study to disturb his quiet poring over Dante. The translation
of the _Divina Commedia_ would go forward even while the country was
being torn asunder. In a sense such work was his refuge against the
storm and stress of malignant forces that troubled him. He did not like
the tumult and the shouting, and much of Longfellow is compressed into
the sonnets that preface the translation, much of the gentleness of his
evasion, and much of the finer craftsmanship of his later years.

  Oft have I seen at some cathedral door
    A laborer, pausing in the dust and heat,
    Lay down his burden, and with reverent feet
    Enter, and cross himself, and on the floor
  Kneel to repeat his paternoster o’er;
    Far off the noises of the world retreat;
    The loud vociferations of the street
    Become an undistinguishable roar.
  So, as I enter here from day to day,
    And leave my burden at this minster gate,
    Kneeling in prayer, and not ashamed to pray,
  The tumult of the time disconsolate
    To inarticulate murmurs dies away,
    While the eternal ages watch and wait.

  How strange the sculptures that adorn these towers!
    This crowd of statues, in whose folded sleeves
    Birds build their nests; while canopied with leaves
    Parvis and portal bloom like trellised bowers,
  And the vast minster seems a cross of flowers!
    But fiends and dragons on the gargoyled eaves
    Watch the dead Christ between the living thieves,
    And underneath, the traitor Judas lowers!
  Ah! from what agonies of heart and brain,
    What exultations trampling on despair,
    What tenderness, what tears, what hate of wrong,
  What passionate outcry of a soul in pain,
    Uprose this poem of the earth and air,
    This mediaeval miracle of song!

A single incursion Longfellow made into the field of Abolition
controversy, prompted perhaps by Dickens, whose “grand chapter on
slavery” in _American Notes_ he had read in London. The seven poems
were written to beguile the tedium of a sea voyage. They are unreal
enough to seem quite harmless, yet they created a decided stir on
their appearance. For a Harvard professor to express publicly even a
mild sympathy with the Abolition movement, may well have been somewhat
perilous, considering the fate of Professor Follen; and the sacred
institution may have scented a real danger in such romanticisms.
Grotesque as these academic poems were, with their burnt-cork figures,
they perhaps served to romanticize and sentimentalize the negro
for northern minds, as _Uncle Tom’s Cabin_ did a decade later with
tremendous effect. Slavery had no weapon against such an attack, and
no doubt Longfellow’s contributions proved serviceable to the cause
of Abolitionism. But this one venture satisfied him, and having got
safely back to his library, he shut the door on the whole vexatious
question of slavery. He was not made for battle, and causes commanded
an unwilling allegiance. Little remained of his Puritanism save
conscience, a sense of struggle against somewhat vague and indolent
powers of evil, a pleasant melancholy that transmuted itself into
pleasant verse. He lived vicariously the lives of other poets, sharing
their emotions, repeating their thoughts, reproducing their pictures;
yet adding some individual color from his own sincere nature. Not
richly endowed, he was more than an echo. He marked the transition
from the nebulous ferment of the creative renaissance to the scholarly
culture of Brahmin Cambridge. After Longfellow came Charles Eliot
Norton in whose blameless life that culture flowered, and after that
came sterility.


Footnotes

[466] Quoted in Stanton, _Manual of American Literature_, p. 101.




