Chapter III • The Quest of Utopia


From the welter of unrest of the later years of the century, with
its labor struggles, its agrarian bitterness, its concern over the
exhaustion of the public lands and a pinching monetary system, its
acute distrust of monopolies and corporate power, sprang a very natural
eagerness to forecast the future and blaze new roads that might
lead to the democratic Canaan. Whither the main-traveled road would
lead, discerning idealists knew only too well. To bog down in a mire
of plutocracy would be a sorry ending to the great experiment; yet
the mud was deepening with every mile of advance and unless another
highway appeared the situation was unpromising. The crux of the problem
seemed to reside in an extension of the powers of the political state,
converting to social ends powers that hitherto had been serving private
gain. The plutocracy was pointing the way. If the political state were
fairly dedicated to democratic ends, why should not society go forward
toward a true commonwealth, founded on a social economy and dedicated
to common justice and the common well-being? There was need only to
subordinate private interests to collective interests, and substitute
coöperation for the present mad scramble of selfish individualism.

In elaboration of this pregnant thought a surprising number of social
romances appeared during the last quarter of the century, that were
native counterparts of the greater studies in collectivism by European
thinkers. A recent study lists forty-eight titles of Utopian romances
written between 1884 and 1900.[777] Of these several are communistic,
and the rest are socialistic; yet in keeping with the American temper
none openly makes use of the terms, and few apply the Marxian doctrine
of the class war. Their appeal was directed primarily to the middle
class of small business and professional men, and they were content to
rely on political means to achieve economic ends. Troubled as was the
American mind by the rise of a cutthroat exploitation, it was not yet
ready to entertain ideas of direct action or trust the proletariat to
enforce its will by mass strength. In one story, to be sure--Ignatius
Donnelly’s _Caesar’s Column_ (1890)--there is a gloomy picture of the
downfall of civilization caused by the class struggles; but the temper
of Donnelly had lost its genial optimism through his long immersion in
under-dog contests and had grown mordant and gloomy.


1 • Edward Bellamy and “Looking Backward”

When in 1888 Edward Bellamy published _Looking Backward_ he gave a huge
impetus to the Utopian romance. Third in the list of titles collected
by Mr. Forbes, it was to have a wide influence on the thought of the
times. It made instant appeal and successive editions were issued
to meet the popular demand. Not since _Uncle Tom’s Cabin_ had an
American novel reached so many readers, and Bellamy became at once
a national figure, the prophet of a new industrial order. There is
abundant evidence to the effect produced upon thoughtful readers. E. C.
Stedman, the first critic of the times, spoke of it as a “remarkable
and fascinating novel”; Frances E. Willard called it “a revelation and
an evangel”; and Howells remarked on “the extraordinary effect which
Mr. Bellamy’s romance has had with the public.” More significant still,
_Looking Backward_ speedily became the source and inspiration for a
series of social organizations that beginning at Boston soon spread
over the country. _The Nationalist_ was established as the organ of
the movement and thousands of eager men and women threw themselves
into the work of reshaping American society to conform to the new
social ideal. No doubt the enthusiasm was naïve, no doubt it sprang
from a social inexperience that underestimated the complexity of the
problem, yet the sources, clearly, were a sharp distrust of private
capitalism and an idealistic faith in coöperation. In a pronouncement
of the Boston “Nationalist Club,” January 9, 1889, the cause was rested
on two fundamental truths--“The principle of competition is ... the
application of the brutal law of the survival of the strongest and most
cunning”; and, “The principle of the Brotherhood of Humanity is one of
the eternal truths that govern the world’s progress on lines which
distinguish human nature from brute nature.”[778]

It is not easy to trace the origins of Bellamy’s interest in
collectivism or the sources of his thought. A journalist and lawyer,
he had studied in Germany, where presumably he had come in contact
with Marxian socialism. Writing in the _Nationalist_ for May, 1889, he
commented thus on the origins of _Looking Backward_:

  I never had, previous to the publication of the work, any
  affiliations with any class or sect of industrial or social
  reformers nor, to make my confession complete, any particular
  sympathy with undertakings of the sort. It is only just to myself
  to say, however, that this should not be taken to indicate any
  indifference to the miserable condition of the mass of humanity,
  seeing that it resulted rather from a perception all too clear
  of the depth and breadth of the social problem and a consequent
  skepticism as to the effectiveness of the proposed solutions which
  had come to my notice.

  In undertaking to write _Looking Backward_ I had, at the outset, no
  idea of attempting a serious contribution to the movement of social
  reform. The idea was of a mere literary fantasy, a fairy tale of
  social felicity. There was no thought of contriving a house which
  practical men might live in, but merely of hanging in mid-air, far
  out of the reach of the sordid and material world of the present, a
  cloud-palace for an ideal humanity.[779]

That the impulse did not come from the Marxians is sufficiently
clear from his explanation of the idea of an industrial army. “The
idea of committing the duty of maintaining the community to an
industrial army, precisely as the duty of protecting it is entrusted
to a military army,” came to him, he said, from the object-lesson
of European militarism. But however little he owed to the Marxians
it is clear that Bellamy--the literary amateur who had dabbled in
Hawthornesque fantasies--possessed a warm social conscience and a
vigorous inquiring mind; and once his attention had been drawn to the
evils of industrialism he would respond with the same direct competence
that marked the thinking of Henry George. Nine years before _Looking
Backward_ he had dealt with a sociological theme. In 1879 he wrote _The
Duke of Stockbridge, A Romance of Shay’s Rebellion_, for the _Berkshire
Courier_, which was reissued in book form in 1900. It was a hasty piece
of work that falls off greatly in the latter part; yet in its sympathy
for the agrarian rebels and its probing of the economic sources of
the post-Revolutionary unrest, it was far removed from the temper of
Federalist historians. It is an account of the tyranny of property
rule--of the exploitation of the debtor farmer by the creditor
gentleman made possible by the economic maladjustments resulting
from the war. A bitter discontent is in the hearts of the common
people. Hatred of lawyers and courts and process-servers, has taken
the place of hatred of Tories. Soldiers who had conquered Cornwallis
were returning home only to be conquered by writs and imprisoned by
sheriffs. The exactions of a brutal law fell upon helpless victims;
taxes outran incomes and there was no money to pay. Economic injustice
was daily whetting the edge of class bitterness. The animus of Shays’s
Rebellion is compressed into a few paragraphs that suggest how clearly
Bellamy had analyzed the social struggle.

  “I use ter think ez there wuzn’t no sech varmint ez a tory; but
  I didn’t know nothin’ ’bout lawyers and sheriffs them times. I
  calc’late ye could cut five tories aout o’ one lawyer an’ make a
  dozen skunks aout o’ what wuz left over.”

  “I hearn as haow Squire Woodbridge says taxes is ten times what
  they wuz afore the war, an’ its sartin that there ain’t one
  shillin’ inter folks’ pockets ter pay ’em with where there wuz ten
  on ’em in them days.... It seems darn curis, bein’ as we fit ag’in
  the red coats jest ter git rid o’ taxes.”[780]

So felt the agrarian. Now for the gentleman:

  “That is the trouble nowadays, ... these numskulls must needs
  have matters of government explained to them, and pass their own
  judgment on public affairs. And when they cannot understand them,
  then, forsooth, comes a rebellion. I think none can deny seeing in
  these late troubles the first fruits of those pestilent notions of
  equality, whereof we heard so much from certain quarters, during
  the late war of independence. I would that Mr. Jefferson and some
  of the other writers of disturbing democratic rhetoric might have
  been here in the State the past winter, to see the outcome of their
  preaching.”[781]

Nine years after _Looking Backward_ Bellamy published _Equality_, a
critical examination of economic history with a view to creating an
adequate social economics. The earlier work had drawn the outlines
of the democratic society of the future, the later supplied a
justification and a commentary. The great theme involved a twofold
problem: an analysis of the failure of social justice under private
capitalism, and a defense of the working of social capitalism. The two
threads are closely interwoven, and the effect is heightened by the
contrasts resulting from setting the two social orders over against
each other. Innumerable questions, touching diverse phases, are
propounded and answered. The apologist of private capitalism is pursued
into every stronghold of his logic; he is assailed by a hundred vivid
analogies which seek to lay bare the folly of a social system that
breeds waste only to breed poverty, that puts a premium upon greed and
yet takes away the security of possession, that bids the workers fight
each other instead of uniting for the common welfare. But men must see
a better before they will leave a worse, and so there is drawn the
picture of another commonwealth that must arise when men shall put off
the ass’s head from their shoulders, and set intelligently to work.
America is moving towards such a commonwealth, Bellamy is persuaded,
and yet how slow it is to grasp the meaning of democracy! It holds
back from its own good, loath to probe the depths of the revolutionary
philosophy of liberty, equality, fraternity. Julian West awakes in this
new world; his eyes are opened; the ass’s head is gone; he knows for
the first time the goodness of life in a rational society. And when
in a hideous nightmare he returned to the old Boston he had lived in
before he fell asleep, he tasted for the first time the full iniquity
of the old pigsty arrangement. “I have been in Golgotha,” he cried, “I
have seen Humanity hanging on a cross!” It is knowledge of the good
that must destroy the evil.

It was as a political economist that Bellamy attacked the problems
of a democratic society, and his radicalism begins and ends with the
interpretation he puts on the phrase. He was far from being a political
economist of the schools. His contempt for the older classical dogmas
was measureless. Manchesterism with its fetish of _laissez faire_ he
reckoned no better than a pseudo-science. “‘There were no political
economists before the Revolution,’” remarks one of the scholars of
the later age.[782] Such books as the _Wealth of Nations_, properly
speaking, should be called “Examinations into the Economic and Social
Consequences of trying to get along without any Political Economy.”
Before we shall get forward we must examine our terms.

  Economy ... means the wise husbanding of wealth in production
  and distribution. Individual economy is the science of this
  husbandry when conducted in the interest of the individual without
  regard to any others. Family economy is this husbandry carried
  on for the advantage of a family group without regard to other
  groups. Political economy, however, can only mean the husbandry
  of wealth for the greatest advantage of the political or social
  body, the whole number of the citizens constituting the political
  organization. This sort of husbandry necessarily implies a public
  or political regulation of economic affairs for the general
  interest. But before the Revolution there was no conception of
  such an economy, nor any organization to carry it out. All systems
  and doctrines of economy previous to that time were distinctly
  and exclusively private and individual in their whole theory and
  practice. While in other respects our forefathers did in various
  ways and degrees recognize a social solidarity and a political
  unity with proportionate rights and duties, their theory and
  practice as to all matters touching the getting and sharing of
  wealth were aggressively and brutally individualistic, antisocial,
  and unpolitical.[783]

A social arrangement based on an individual economy must necessarily
result in such monstrosities as the system of private capitalism with
its cash nexus. It is no other than an organized system of social
warfare, with all the appalling waste of war. Habit has blinded our
eyes or we should see the utter bankruptcy of individual competition,
that prides itself on its “famous process for beggaring a nation.”
“Were these serious men I saw about me,” cried Julian West as he
watched the folly of Washington Street, with its thousand shops madly
bidding against each other, its vulgar advertising and cheating and
swindling, “or children, who did their business on such a plan? Could
they be reasoning beings, who did not see the folly which, when the
product is made and ready for use, wastes so much of it in getting it
to the user? If people eat with a spoon that leaks half its contents
between bowl and lip, are they not likely to go hungry?”[784] What is
it but such folly which prevents society from doing the thousand things
which cry aloud to be done? So long as men must fight each other for
individual subsistence how shall they be able to join forces to fight
the common enemies, cold, hunger, disease? Our individualism keeps us
poverty-stricken; we are too poor to destroy the social squalor, too
poor to save our own lives.

If competition entails irretrievable waste, he points out, the system
of competitive profit involves economic suicide. It is a pistol which
private industrialism points at its own head. The struggle for profit
is the hidden cancer that is eating out the heart of modern society,
and Bellamy examines it searchingly in the chapter, “Economic Suicide
of the Profit System.”[785] Under private industrialism profits are
the oil to the wheels of industry, which turn in response to the
market. By the market is meant those who have money to buy with; and
demand is brisk or slack according to the diffusion of economic means.
When the buyers are satisfied and abstain from further purchases, the
market becomes glutted and the wheels of production cease to turn
“though starving and naked mobs might riot in the streets.” Profits,
however, must come out of somebody’s pocket; and the greater they are
the more the pocket that pays is emptied; unless replenished by other
profits, taken from still other pockets, it ceases to be able to buy in
like proportion. In consequence the market slacks off and the wheels
of industry run slower. The manufacturer takes his profits out of his
workmen, the merchant takes his out of the public--which is another
term for the workman; he who takes most grows rich fastest and is most
successful. Obviously, however, such riches are acquired at the expense
of the public capacity to buy; and such lessening capacity is ominous
of gluts and crises to ensue, with losses which must be made good by
greater profits when the wheels turn again. It is only too clear that
society is suffering from a chronic dyspepsia of its industrial system;
it cannot digest its food. The current maxim that a fair exchange is no
robbery--so confidently urged--cannot apply to the profit system, for
if the exchange is fair there is no profit, and if there is no profit
there will be no exchange. The further maxim that demand governs supply
and supply keeps pace with demand, refers only to the profit-market,
and quite overlooks the important detail of social need.

The stupidity of such a system Bellamy never tires of pointing out.
His striking analogy of the stage-coach has become a classic; the less
known parable of the water-tank[786] is equally vivid; a hundred other
shafts are directed at the profit-theory which underlies our individual
economy. Until the sway of such anarchy is broken, until society learns
to regulate its industrialism on the principles of a wise political
economy, there can be no hope of betterment. To create and apply this
wise political economy is the urgent business of democracy if it is not
to perish. It must be such an economy as shall satisfy both our ethical
ideals and our material needs. It must embody the spirit of democratic
solidarity and it must look beyond the demands of the profit-market to
the well-being of all. It must substitute coöperation for competitive
warfare. The criminal waste which keeps the gray wolves forever
snarling at the threshold of society, must cease; the specter of
poverty which disorders the lives of men and distempers their hopes,
must be banished by the united strength of all. If democracy cannot
achieve such a democratic political economy it must flounder through
deepening bogs until finally it sinks in the morass of plutocracy.

The fatal mistake of democracy heretofore has been the insufficiency
of its program. It is incredible how limited has been its vision and
how few and how minor have been its greatest revolutions. To overthrow
monarchy was excellent, but it did not bring in democracy; rather,
the unchecked sway of plutocracy. “‘The people, indeed, nominally
were sovereigns; but as these sovereigns were individually and as a
class the economic serfs of the rich, and lived at their mercy, the
so-called popular government became the mere stalking-horse of the
capitalists.’”[787] Political revolutions have proved heretofore to be
mere flashes in the pan; not until the economic revolution has been
effected will the old tyranny be blown to pieces:

  The second phase in the evolution of the democratic idea began with
  the awakening of the people to the perception that the deposing of
  kings, instead of being the main end and mission of democracy, was
  merely preliminary to its real programme, which was the use of the
  collective social machinery for the indefinite promotion of the
  welfare of the people at large....

  Which amounts to saying ... that there never was a democratic
  government properly so called before the twentieth century.... The
  so-called republics of the first phase we class as pseudo-republics
  or negative democracies....

  Regarded as necessary steps in the evolution of society from pure
  monarchy to pure democracy, these republics of the negative phase
  mark a stage of progress; but if regarded as finalities they were
  a type far less admirable on the whole than decent monarchies.
  In respect especially to their susceptibility to corruption and
  plutocratic subversion they were the worst kind of government
  possible.... How could intelligent men delude themselves with the
  notion that the most portentous and revolutionary idea of all time
  had exhausted its influence and fulfilled its mission in changing
  the title of the executive of a nation from king to President,
  and the name of the national Legislature from Parliament to
  Congress?... The American people fancied that they had set up a
  popular government when they separated from England, but they were
  deluded. In conquering the political power formerly exercised by
  the king, the people had but taken the outworks of the fortress of
  tyranny. The economic system which was the citadel and commanded
  every part of the social structure remained in possession of
  private and irresponsible rulers, and so long as it was held, the
  possession of the outworks was of no use to the people, and only
  retained by the sufferance of the garrison of the citadel. The
  Revolution came when the people saw that they must either take the
  citadel or evacuate the outworks.[788]

The significance of the title of Bellamy’s supplementary volume
should now be clear. The problem of democracy always and everywhere
is the problem of achieving economic equality. Without that all talk
of liberty and fraternity, all equality before the law, is empty and
sinister mockery. How can a man call himself citizen who must beg a
fellow citizen to become his master? How shall the wage-taker treat
his boss as a brother? Of what worth is equality before the law to
one without a job? Democracy and servitude cannot lie down together.
Wage-slavery debases the dignity of man; it puts upon him the greatest
of indignities, servitude to things; it cheats him of his right to
life, liberty, and happiness; it is the evil thing which degrades human
society to the level of the pigsty, and puts a premium upon the hoggish
instincts of men. It sows suspicion and hate between equals, changes
the unsuccessful into cringing sycophants, sets its heel upon the weak
and the helpless. The thing were too monstrous to be conceivable were
it not the everyday fact of life--more than that, were it not the ideal
of a supposedly democratic society, apologized for by our plutocratic
culture, defended by all that accounts itself respectable, buttressed
by the formidable turrets of the law, written down as a major premise
in our treatises on political science: and all in the sacred name of
individual enterprise. It is familiarity that blinds us to its evils,
and makes its victims only callous or sullen. And it endures because
men are deceived by its half-truths, seduced by its specious freedoms,
led astray by its fatuous promises. Being taught to set the privilege
of fighting above the privilege of helping, how should they not account
their egoism more sacred than their altruism?

When men shall leave off bounding their democratic horizons by the
old political economy and the old law, Bellamy was persuaded, they
will see more clearly. The political science of private property
conceived of government as a police power to safeguard the stake
of the individual in society. Very well, democracy needs only to
redefine the terms “stake-in-society” and “police power” to arrive at
a competent philosophy. The definition of the former is ready to hand
in the familiar words of the Declaration of Independence--the stake
of every man in society is no less than his life, his liberty, and
his happiness. To secure him in this stake is the primary function
of government. The property interpretation of the stake-in-society
principle was sound in its assumption of the economic as the
determining basis; we need only to democratize the interpretation to
arrive at our end.

  “The primal principle of democracy is the worth and dignity of
  the individual. That dignity, consisting in the quality of human
  nature, is essentially the same in all individuals, and therefore
  equality is the vital principle of democracy. To this intrinsic
  and equal dignity of the individual all material conditions
  must be made subservient, and personal accidents and attributes
  subordinated. The raising up of the human being without respect of
  persons is the constant and only rational motive of the democratic
  policy. Contrast with this conception that precious notion of your
  contemporaries as to restricting suffrage. Recognizing the material
  disparities in the circumstances of individuals, they proposed to
  conform the rights and dignities of the individual to his material
  circumstances instead of conforming the material circumstances to
  the essential and equal dignity of man.”

  “In short ... while under our system we conformed men to things,
  you think it more reasonable to conform things to men?”

  “That is, indeed,” replied the doctor, “the vital difference
  between the old and the new orders.”[789]

As a preliminary to this necessary end of conforming things to men
there must be a reinterpretation of the functions of the state. Here
again Bellamy’s political economy gives a surprising twist to the
current police theory of government.

  “In my day ... it was considered that the proper functions of
  government, strictly speaking, were limited to keeping the peace
  and defending the people against the public enemy, that is to the
  military and police powers.”

  “And in heaven’s name, who are the public enemies?” exclaimed Dr.
  Leete. “Are they France, England, Germany, or hunger, cold, and
  nakedness?”[790]

The plutocratic interpretation of the police power signifies no other
than the protection of the individual in the enjoyment of the fruits
of his exploitation--that his right to keep and use what he has got
must be held more sacred than the welfare of society; that the law,
the military, the police, shall defend him in his right to do with his
winnings as he will. The democratic interpretation of the police power,
on the other hand, holds that the state must intervene to the end that
property shall serve a social and not a private interest; that the weak
shall not be exploited by individual enterprise; that all shall be
protected in their right to life, liberty, and happiness. It demands an
ethical basis for the social economy. The legal maxim that a man may do
as he will with his own, is open to question. The matter of ownership
ceases to be a legal question of title, and becomes a moral question
of right and justice. Land, the machinery of production, the profits
of organized industry, coal, ores, oil, lumber--are such things justly
subject to private preëmption? Shall the complex structure of society
be bottomed on the law of contract, or on the ethics of social justice?
Substitute one for the other and a revolution is accomplished.

  Our ethics of wealth is ... extremely simple. It consists merely in
  the law of self-preservation, asserted in the name of all against
  the encroachments of any. It rests upon a principle which a child
  can understand as well as a philosopher, and which no philosopher
  ever attempted to refute--namely, the supreme right of all to live,
  and consequently to insist that society shall be so organized as to
  secure that right.[791]

Thus in the political science of democracy the old police theory of
government merges in an all-embracing trustee theory. To a paternal
state is entrusted the protection of the interests of society. That the
welfare of all shall be faithfully served, it is essential that the
common will control and direct the machinery for the production and
distribution of wealth. The anarchy of individualism must give place
to an ordered regimentation, under a centralized authority. The social
meaning of property must be probed to the bottom and the exact line
between public and private rights be marked off. This brings Bellamy to
his fundamental principle--the collectivistic organization of industry
as the _sine qua non_ of a democratic society. How effectively such a
centralized state must wage war upon poverty, how adequately it must
protect the citizen against the common enemies of cold, hunger, and
nakedness, it was the purpose of _Looking Backward_ and _Equality_ to
picture. “A horrible cockney dream,” William Morris called _Looking
Backward_; and by way of answer sketched his _News from Nowhere_,
loveliest of Utopias with its anarchistic freedom set in country
fields. Morris was an artist with an ample share of Ruskinian prejudice
against the machinery that Bellamy so greatly developed; nevertheless
Bellamy was far more modern and realistic in his understanding of the
part the machine will play in the society of the future. To socialize
the machine--to put upon it the slave-work of society, surely means
much to human freedom.

_Looking Backward_ is a brief for no particular school of socialism,
although it inclines somewhat to Fabianism. Not through strikes,
boycotts and lockouts, was the great change brought about, but in
consequence of the spread of social intelligence and social ethics.
Unionism was not the father of the Revolution, nor agrarianism its
mother. Direct action and violence in any form rather hindered than
helped. Class propaganda was too narrow and too selfish. The anarchists
with their “red flag and talk about burning, sacking, and blowing
people up,” retarded the Revolution by frightening the timid and making
“a thousand enemies of their professed cause to one friend.” “The labor
parties, as such, never could have accomplished anything on a large or
permanent scale.”

  It was not till a rearrangement of the industrial and social system
  on a higher ethical basis, and for the more efficient production
  of wealth, was recognized as the interest, not of one class, but
  equally of all classes, of rich and poor, cultured and ignorant,
  old and young, weak and strong, men and women, that there was any
  prospect that it would be achieved. Then the national party arose
  to carry it out by political methods.[792]

To wait for the consent of all would seem to the impatient a long
postponement of the millennium; yet the postponement, Bellamy argued,
need not be long. The overreaching greed of private capitalism was
daily hastening it. The new order must come about speedily as a
necessary consequence of two forces; the compulsion of economic
fact, and the stimulus of ideas. As the monopolistic tendencies of
private capitalism open the eyes of the dullest to the growth of a
plutocratic power beyond the control of the majority, a quick fear of
the impending tyranny must lead men to question the larger scope and
ultimate significance of the whole system. Under the lash of this fear
their minds will open to ideas which have long been knocking in vain
for admission. The sources of monopolistic power will be examined,
and the successive steps by which the few have gained control of the
machinery of production will become clear. Already the fertile idea of
the unearned increment which the land-taxers have got hold of and are
spreading widely, has prepared the way for the revolutionary doctrine
of the social fund. Let the common man once understand how small a
portion of wealth is produced by his private effort, and how large
a portion by the agency of social organization with its heritage of
experience and invention, and he will understand how unjustly private
capitalism appropriates what it has not earned. The conclusion that
wealth should belong to him who produces it, is a deduction of the
most elementary ethics; and since the production of wealth in quantity
is a consequence of the social organization and social heritage, the
conviction becomes irresistible that such wealth belongs to society
and cannot justly be appropriated by the individual.[793] Let such
an idea spread widely and the way is prepared for the taking over
by the state of the machinery of production, and the assumption by
it of the obligation of universal trusteeship. Then will come the
Revolution. Coöperation will take the place of competition; production
and distribution for the common well-being will destroy the malevolent
trinity of rent, interest, and profit, which have so long held the
world in poverty; the intelligent strength of all will stand between
the individual and cold, hunger, and nakedness. The noble words of
the Declaration of Independence will no longer be a catch-vote and
a mockery to the exploited multitude, but a reality. The democratic
ideal, with its social philosophy summarized in the phrase, “the only
wealth is life,” will destroy the last vestiges of ancient tyranny
and men will be free. Rooted in economic equality the fine flower
of individualism will expand as it cannot now in unfertile soil; a
generous and unstinted culture will spread the spirit of kindliness
through society, and a new and nobler art and religion will go hand in
hand with the new fellowship.

Only too clearly Edward Bellamy was an incorrigible idealist. He looked
into the future with more confident eyes than most of us; he saw in
the East the quickening of a new day where we see only darkness. A
child of the Enlightenment, he put his trust in the natural goodness
of men. They are not inherently base and ignoble, but the victims of
an evil system that breeds what is base and ignoble. “The folly of
men, not their hard-heartedness, was the great cause of the world’s
poverty. It was not the crime of man, nor of any class of men, that
made the race so miserable, but a hideous, ghastly mistake, a colossal
world-darkening blunder.”[794] In an arid land shall we waste the
little store of water, or shall we regulate it strictly, that the
desert may be brought to bloom as a garden?

  The labor of men, I explained, was the fertilizing stream which
  alone rendered earth habitable. It was but a scanty stream at best,
  and its use required to be regulated by a system which expended
  every drop to the best advantage, if the world were to be supported
  in abundance. But how far from any system was the actual practice!
  Every man wasted the precious fluid as he wished, animated only
  by the equal motives of saving his own crop and spoiling his
  neighbor’s, that his might sell the better. What with greed and
  what with spite, some fields were flooded while others were
  parched, and half the water ran wholly to waste. In such a land,
  though a few by strength or cunning might win the means of luxury,
  the lot of the great mass must be poverty, and of the weak and
  ignorant bitter want and perennial famine.

  Let but the famine-stricken nation assume the function it had
  neglected, and regulate for the common good the course of the
  life-giving stream, and the earth would bloom like one garden, and
  none of its children lack any good thing. I described the physical
  felicity, mental enlightenment, and moral elevation which would
  then attend the lives of all men. With fervency I spoke of that new
  world, blessed with plenty, purified by justice and sweetened by
  brotherly kindness, the world of which I had indeed but dreamed,
  but which might so easily be made real. But when I had expected
  now surely the faces around me to light up with emotions akin
  to mine, they grew ever more dark, angry, and scornful. Instead
  of enthusiasm, the ladies showed only aversion and dread, while
  the men interrupted me with shouts of reprobation and contempt.
  “Madman!” “Pestilent fellow!” “Fanatic!” “Enemy of society!” were
  some of their cries, and the one who had before taken his eyeglass
  to me exclaimed, “He says we are to have no more poor. Ha! ha!”

  “Put the fellow out!” exclaimed the father of my betrothed, and
  at the signal the men sprang from their chairs and advanced upon
  me.[795]

Like Henry George’s noble study of social poverty, _Looking Backward_
is a suggestive document of a generation that saw its finer spirits
repelled by the vulgar individualism of the Gilded Age. In the long
run, no doubt, its influence was slight and the hopes of the Bellamy
Nationalists, like the hopes of the Single-taxers, were doomed to
disappointment. Nevertheless it remains as a testimony to the fact
that in a blatant world of preëmption, exploitation, and progress,
were some who were concerned for a juster social order than the Gilded
Age dreamed of--a true commonwealth that free men might build if they
would.[796]


Footnotes

[777] Allyn B. Forbes, _The Literary Quest for Utopia, 1880-1900_.
“Social Forces,” Vol. VI, No. 2, December, 1927.

[778] _Nationalist_, Vol. I, p. 18.

[779] _Ibid._, Vol. I, p. 1.

[780] _The Duke of Stockbridge_, Chapter II, pp. 22, 28.

[781] _Ibid._, Chapter XXVI, p. 349.

[782] _Equality_, Chapter XXII, p. 189.

[783] _Ibid._, p. 189.

[784] _Looking Backward_, Chapter XXVIII, p. 314.

[785] _Equality_, Chapter XXII.

[786] _Equality_, Chapter XXIII, p. 195.

[787] _Equality_, Chapter II, p. 21.

[788] _Ibid._, Chapter II, pp. 19, 20, 21, 22.

[789] _Ibid._, Chapter III, p. 26.

[790] _Looking Backward_, Chapter VI, p. 59.

[791] _Equality_, Chapter XI, p. 74.

[792] _Looking Backward_, Chapter XXIV.

[793] See _Equality_, Chapter XIII--“Private Capital Stolen from the
Social Fund.”

[794] _Looking Backward_, Chapter XXVIII, p. 328.

[795] _Ibid._, pp. 328-9.

[796] At this point was to come a second section entitled “After
Bellamy; ‘Naturalism’; Tourgée’s _Murvale Eastman_.”--_Publisher._




