Chapter I • The Renaissance

  To write a history of Massachusetts, I confess, is not inviting to
  an expansive thinker.... From 1790 to 1820 there was not a book, a
  speech, a conversation, or a thought in the State. About 1820, the
  Channing, Webster, and Everett era begun, and we have been bookish
  and poetical and cogitative since. (Emerson, _Journals_, Vol. VIII,
  p. 339.)


In such summary fashion in the year 1852, Emerson recorded his
judgment on half a century of intellectual life in Massachusetts. It
was the comment of an exacting critic. In its characterization of
the extraordinary ferment of thought that marked the decades of the
thirties and forties, it is quite inadequate; but in its contemptuous
dismissal of the age of Fisher Ames and Robert Treat Paine it was
scarcely unjust. The utter sterility of those old times Emerson
understood only too well. It was the world of his own youth, whose
pale negations he had come to hate. The creative impulse was stifled,
the mind had grown stale from tedious iteration. But at last the old
barriers gave way, and into this narrow illiberal world, that had long
fed on the crusts of English rationalism and Edwardean dogmatism--dry
as remainder biscuit after voyage--broke the floods that had been
gathering in Europe for years, the waters of all the streams of
revolution that were running there bank-full. Before this inundation
the old provincialisms were swept away, and for the first time in its
history, and the last, the mind of New England gave itself over to a
great adventure in liberalism.

Quite evidently the renaissance resulted from the impact of the
romantic revolution upon the Puritan mind, and it issued in a form
native to New England experience. Animated by the common spirit
of Utopianism, its dreams were unlike those of Virginia or the
West, founded on a different economics and seeking different ends.
Massachusetts had discovered a particular road leading to Utopia by way
of the industrial revolution, and the textile mills on the Merrimac
began weaving a new pattern of life for New England. The old static
agricultural order was broken in upon, and with the social disruption
came naturally an intellectual disruption. The mind of that older New
England had been held in the close keeping of the church, and the
movement of intellectual emancipation became therefore at the outset a
movement leveled at theological conservatism; it was concerned first
to rid New England of the incubus of Calvinistic dogma. The Calvinists
were of tough fiber and tenacious of opinion, and to turn their flank
was no summer campaign. The result was a long battle of ideas, a fierce
struggle between the old deterministic theology and the new romantic
philosophy, with victory slowly inclining to the latter. This major
struggle gave to the renaissance its profoundly ethical spirit that
set it off sharply from the earlier renaissance of Virginia; and not
the least important of the results of the movement was the liberation
of the New England conscience from its long bondage to dogma, setting
it free to engage in a larger work in the world. What that conscience
accomplished in the brief period of its freedom; what causes it
espoused and what reforms it carried through--how it quickened a
humanitarian zeal in New England and imparted a militant spirit to its
culture--these are phases of the total movement not to be neglected by
the historian.

In the realm of ideas the renaissance was largely dominated by
old-world thought. From the abundant stores of European revolutionary
doctrine the New England liberals drew freely--more freely perhaps
from German idealism than from French Utopianism. Germany meant much
to the awakening mind of New England, by reason of its spiritual and
intellectual kinship. Plato was their common father, a transcendental
mysticism their common experience. Philosophical idealism with its
indwelling Godhood that exalted man to the divine and transformed
a mechanical universe into the dwelling place of divine love--this
was a dynamic faith, appealing to men long nurtured in faith, more
seductive to the children of Puritanism than any political or economic
romanticisms. It opened to them new heavens when the old were closed
and encouraged them to go forth on great ventures.

But the renaissance was very much more than a transplanting of German
idealism. France had a shaping hand in it, and England. Jean Jacques
came before Hegel, and Unitarianism before transcendentalism. It was
social and literary as well as philosophical. In so far as that which
was essentially one may be divided, the movement involved three major
strands: the social Utopianism that came from revolutionary France; the
idealistic metaphysics that emerged from revolutionary Germany; and the
new culture that spread with the development of literary romanticism.
To distinguish these three strands is one thing; to endeavor to
separate them is quite another. They interweave and blend in varying
patterns; they are but different, new-world phases of a comprehensive
European movement that runs far back into the preceding century--a
movement that in transferring economic and political mastery from the
aristocracy to the middle class, in destroying the worm-eaten feudal
order and clearing the way for the new capitalistic order, laid open
a broad path into the nineteenth century. The extraordinary appeal of
this vast movement to the liberal mind of America resulted from the
fact that an identical revolution was under way here. In New England,
perhaps more dramatically than elsewhere in America, the day of the
middle class was dawning, aristocratic ideals were disintegrating, and
the hopes of men were running high. To humanize this emerging society,
to awaken it to a nobler faith in human destiny, to further the cause
of social justice, to create a democracy of the spirit--this was
the deeper romantic purpose, however vaguely comprehended, that was
fermenting in the New England renaissance, and it was this that gave to
it a spirit so warmly ethical.

Now quite evidently a movement so extraordinarily complex would appeal
diversely to different minds, and in its development it drew to itself
a singularly various following. To the sons of respectable Federalism
it was the new romantic culture that appealed; to the militant
conscience of Puritanism it was the inspiration of social Utopianism;
to the emancipated intellectuals it was the metaphysical idealism. Its
many-sidedness was both confusing and stimulating. How shall we explain
a movement that embraced such different men as Everett and Channing
and Parker and Garrison and Whittier and Emerson and Longfellow and
Holmes; men often mutually repellent, sometimes sharply critical
of each other? No single mind sums up the whole--the theological,
humanitarian, mystical, critical, and cultural aspirations of the
awakening--as perhaps Goethe may be said to have done for Germany.
Emerson, Thoreau and Parker possibly embodied it most adequately; they
were transcendental individualists, intellectual revolutionaries,
contemptuous of all meanly material standards. But quite evidently
Everett would not travel far along the transcendental path they pointed
out, nor Holmes, nor Longfellow. These latter expected no romantic
Utopias, wanted no such Utopias. Cambridge and Boston satisfied their
hopes; they found the world not such a bad place for those who knew
how to meet it on its own terms. Yet they too were children of the
awakening, and in following their individual paths they contributed
in their own way to the disintegration of the old authoritarian order
that had long held the mind of New England in subjection. Each in
some measure and after his own fashion was a rebel, and their total
rebellions made up the sum of New England’s bequest to a more liberal
America. Yet in this eager and somewhat vague liberalism to which
the renaissance was dedicated in spirit, the note that runs through
the several programs is a note of reaction from the aspirations of
the middle class. It was an ethical protest against the harsh and
unjust realities of the industrial revolution that was so ruthlessly
transforming the old order of life in New England; and it took the form
of a return to a simpler life. To struggle free from the chains of the
eighteenth century, only to be bound in new chains, was an ignoble
ending to the emancipation that free men could not envisage with
satisfaction.




