Chapter III • Stirrings of Liberalism


I • John Wise • Village Democrat

In the days when Sir Edmund Andros was seeking to fasten upon
Massachusetts Bay the principles and practice of Stuart prerogative,
an event occurred that greatly stirred New England. Taxes having
been arbitrarily assessed in Council, the several towns were bidden
appoint commissioners to collect them. When the order reached Ipswich,
John Wise, minister of the second church, gathered the chief members
of his flock together, and it was agreed by them to choose no such
commissioner at the town meeting--“We have a good God, and a good
king, and shall do well to stand for our privileges,” the minister
is reported to have argued. Soon thereafter John Wise was summoned
before a star-chamber court on the charge of sedition. Upon his plea of
colonial privilege, the president of the court, Dudley, is said to have
retorted, “You shall have no more privileges left you than not to be
sold for slaves.” “Do you believe,” demanded Andros, “Joe and Tom may
tell the King what money he may have?” “Do not think,” put in another
judge, “the laws of England follow you to the ends of the earth.”
Thereupon with five others, John Wise was thrown into Boston jail,
where he lay one and twenty days, and whence he was released only after
payment of fifty pounds, giving bond in a thousand pounds for good
behavior, and suffering suspension from the ministry. “The evidence in
the case,” he remarked afterward, “as to the substance of it, was that
we too boldly endeavored to persuade ourselves we were Englishmen, and
under privileges.”[119] The year following, Andros having been driven
out, John Wise brought suit against Dudley for having denied him a writ
of _habeas corpus_.[120]

Two years later Wise served as chaplain in the ill-managed Quebec
expedition under Sir William Phipps. He bore himself well both in
council and on the field; went ashore with the storming party; and if
he had succeeded in his efforts to instil some of his own force into
the leaders, the grand exploit might not have dwindled to such an
unhappy ending. In a long account which he sent to Increase Mather,
then in London, he did not mince matters, or attempt to throw on
the Lord’s shoulders blame that belonged elsewhere, but charged the
fiasco to the cowardice of Major Walley, in command of the assaulting
troops.[121] Clearly the Ipswich minister was a fighting as well as a
praying parson, whom Cromwell would have delighted in.

Posterity has been too negligent of John Wise hitherto. Although
possessed of the keenest mind and most trenchant pen of his generation
of New Englanders, he was uninfected by the itch of publicity that
attacked so many of his fellow ministers, and so failed to challenge
the attention of later times. Called to serve in an outlying portion
of the Master’s vineyard he discovered little opportunity there and
less inclination to magnify his own importance. He was too honest to
persuade himself that God’s fame was bound up with his own, and he
was never forward to push his claims to priority in righteousness.
Nevertheless what little we know of him is to his credit. An
independent man, powerful of body, vigorous of intellect, direct and
outspoken in debate, he seems to have understood the plain people whom
he served, and he sympathized heartily with the democratic ideals then
taking form in the New England villages. Such liberalism as emerged
from the simplicity of village life found intelligent response in
his sympathies, and he dedicated his keen mind and wide reading to
the business of providing it with a philosophical justification.
Some explanation of his democratic leanings may be discovered in
his antecedents. His father was a self-made man who had come over
to Roxbury as an indented servant--most menial of stations in that
aristocratic old Boston world. He must have been of sound and rugged
stock, for in addition to a magnificent physique he endowed his son
with manly independence and democratic self-respect, which stood the
latter in good stead when, after having made his way through Harvard
College, he came to speak for the people against the tax program of
Andros, the reactionary ambitions of the Presbyterians, and the schemes
of the hard-money men. In John Wise, Cotton Mather was to encounter an
antagonist who was more than a match for him.

With the final overthrow of the theocracy and the lessening of the
political power of the clergy, a critical period in the development
of the church was reached, and with it a renewal of the old conflict
between the Presbyterian and Congregational principles. In the year
1705, under the leadership of the Mathers, the Presbyterian party,
which numbered among its adherents most of the ministers of the
larger churches, put forth a series of “Proposals,” looking to a
closer union of the churches, and greater control of the separate
congregations by the ministerial association. This was a challenge to
the Congregationalists which John Wise could not overlook. The question
touched the fundamentals of church organization, and when by way of
preparation he turned to examine critically the work of the fathers, he
found in it quite another meaning than Cotton Mather found. It was as a
liberal that he went back to the past, seeking to recover the original
Congregational principle, which, since the conservative triumph in
the Cambridge Platform of 1648, had been obscured. When he was quite
ready, he published in 1710, his _Churches Quarrel Espoused_, reissued
five years later; and in 1717, his _Vindication of the Government of
the New England Churches_, reissued together with the earlier work in
1772, and again in 1860. The two works were a democratic counterblast
to the Presbyterian propaganda, and they stirred the mind of New
England profoundly. What Edwards did later for the doctrinal side of
Congregationalism, John Wise did for the institutional. His exposition
of the Congregational principle was so luminous and convincing
that it soon came to be regarded as authoritative, and more than a
hundred years after the _Vindication_ appeared the Chief Justice of
Massachusetts cited it in support of a judicial decision.

The significance of John Wise in the history of democratic America
lies in the fact that he followed “an unbeaten path,” justifying the
principle of Congregationalism by analogy from civil polity. Seemingly
alone amongst the New England clergy of his day, he had grounded
himself in political theory; and the doctrine upon which he erected
his argument was the theory of natural rights, derived from a study of
Pufendorf’s _De Jure Naturae et Gentium_, published in 1672. Locke and
the other writers of the English natural-rights school he seems not to
have been acquainted with; but Pufendorf he had read closely, and he
discharged the new theory against his opponents with telling effect.
This was the first effective reply in America to the old theocratic
sneer that if the democratic form of government were indeed divinely
sanctioned, was it not strange that God had overlooked it in providing
a government for his chosen people? Wise was the first New England
minister to break with the literal Hebraism of the old school; like
Roger Williams he was willing to make use of profane philosophies,
basing his argument upon an appeal to history, a method which baffled
the narrow Hebraists, putting them in a quandary.

After examining the three regular forms of civil government, and
showing how each is related to “the many ennobling immunities” of the
subject, Wise turned to the real business in hand, which was to inquire
“whether any of the aforesaid species of regular, unmixed governments,
can with any good show of reason be predicable of the church of Christ
on earth”; whether the monarchical form as exhibited in papacy and
episcopacy, the aristocratic form as exhibited in Presbyterianism, or
the democratic form as exhibited in Congregationalism, is nearest the
divine model as revealed in Scripture and the law of nature?

The gross inadequacy of the monarchical principle appears to him so
certain that he concludes his argument with the comment “that God and
wise nature were never propitious to the birth of this monster.” The
inadequacy of the aristocratic principle seems to him equally clear.
The principle of stewardship, ideal though it may appear in theory, did
not seem to work in practice, and he put his finger shrewdly upon the
weakness of oligarchical rule in Massachusetts. Government by a “select
company of choice persons” might be justified, if--

  we could be assured they would make the Scripture, and not their
  private will the rule of their personal and ministerial actions;
  ... but considering how great an interest is embarked, and how
  frail a bottom we trust, though we should rely upon the best of
  men, especially if we remember what is in the hearts of good
  men (namely, much ignorance, abundance of small ends, many times
  cloaked with a high pretense in religion; pride skulking and often
  breeding revenge upon a small affront, and blown up by a pretended
  zeal, yet really and truly by nothing more divine than interest
  or ill nature), and also considering how very uncertain we are
  of the real goodness of those we esteem good men ... and ... how
  Christianity, by the aforesaid principle, had been peeled, robbed
  and spoiled already, it cannot consist with the light of nature to
  venture again upon such perils, especially if we can find a safer
  way home.... In a word an aristocracy is a dangerous constitution
  in the church of Christ.[122]

This “safer way home,” as he then proceeded to point out, lay in
following the broad path of democracy:

  But to abbreviate, it seems most agreeable with the light of
  nature, that if there be any of the regular forms of government
  settled in the church of God, it must needs be ... a democracy.
  This is the form of government which the light of nature does
  highly value, and often directs to as most agreeable to the just
  and natural prerogatives of human beings.... It is certainly a
  great truth, namely, that man’s original liberty after it is
  resigned ... ought to be cherished in all wise governments; or
  otherwise a man in making himself a subject, he alters himself
  from a freeman into a slave, which to do is repugnant to the law
  of nature. Also the natural equality of men amongst men must be
  duly favoured; in that government was never established by God or
  nature, to give one man a prerogative to insult over another....
  Honor all men. The end of all good government is to cultivate
  humanity, and promote the happiness of all, and the good of every
  man in his rights, his life, liberty, estate, honor, etc., without
  injury or abuse to any.[123]

From which he concludes that--

  ... a democracy in church or state, is a very honorable and
  regular government according to the dictates of right reason, And,
  therefore ... That these churches of New England, in their ancient
  constitution of church order, it being a democracy, are manifestly
  justified and defended by the law and light of nature.[124]

A vigorous thinker was John Wise, with a shrewd knowledge of men and
their selfishness. He would rule himself, well or ill, and would have
others do likewise. Stewards in church and state, he would have none
of. “Brethren,” he exclaimed, “ye have been called unto liberty,
therefore Hold your hold brethren!... pull up well upon the oars, you
have a rich cargo, and I hope we shall escape shipwreck ... daylight
and good piloting will secure all.”[125] “There is strong and sharp
reasoning” in his pages, more solid meat in his two volumes than in
all Cotton Mather’s muddled effusions. Like a good Englishman and a
good Yankee he hated arbitrary power as he hated the devil. “The very
name of an arbitrary government is ready to put an Englishman’s blood
into a fermentation; but when it comes and shakes its whip over their
ears, and tells them it is their master, it makes them stark mad.”[126]

Naturally so vigorous an advocate of democracy in the church was
disliked by the gentlemen whose ambitions he thwarted. Such plebeian
views were incomprehensible to Cotton Mather. When _The Churches
Quarrel Espoused_ was reprinted in 1713, prefaced with a commendatory
letter signed by two well-known clergymen, the latter wrote to a friend:

  ... A furious Man, called John Wise,[127] of whom, I could wish
  he had, _Cor bonum_, while we are all sensible, he wants, _Caput
  bene regulatum_, has lately published a foolish Libel, against
  some of us, for presbyterianizing too much in our Care to repair
  some Deficiencies in our Churches. And some of our People, who are
  not only tenacious of their Liberties, but also more suspicious
  than they have cause to be of a Design in their pastors to make
  abridgments of them; they are too much led into Temptation, by
  such Invectives. But the Impression is not so great as our grand
  Adversary doubtless hoped for.[128]

Two years later, when the _Vindication_ was published, the sulky
theocrat noted in his diary:

  25 [May. 1717] G[ood] D[evice]. Should not I take into
  Consideration what may be done for the Service of the Ministry and
  Religion and the Churches, throughout the Land, that the Poison of
  Wise’s cursed Libel may have an Antidote?[129]

Cotton Mather was unable to discover an antidote, and the poison of
Wise’s democratic philosophy was to prove of surprising vitality. As
late as 1772, when his two works were reprinted on subscription, no
fewer than 1133 copies were taken. That the argument of Wise was not
without influence in the struggle then developing seems reasonable; but
that it greatly influenced the thinking of the revolutionary leaders,
as Professor Tyler supposes, is scarcely probable. The argument from
natural rights was well known in 1772, and it was to Locke and not
to Wise that men like Samuel Adams turned for help. Nevertheless, in
denying to him wide influence in the later period we are neither
detracting from the honor that is rightly his as the first colonial to
justify village democracy by an appeal to political philosophy, nor
lessening the repute in which he should be held by Americans as the
early defender of local self-rule.

The instinctive sympathy of John Wise with the plain people among whom
he lived led him to stand with them in another matter that touched the
interests of the farming class. The currency question had thrust its
provocative demands into political councils, and sharply divided the
electorate. City men like Samuel Sewall were jealous to maintain the
English metallic currency, partly through custom and partly because its
scarcity augmented its value; whereas the plain people of Ipswich, like
so many country people, no doubt were impressed with the desirability
of a land-script currency. Into this mighty controversy entered John
Wise, who in the year 1721, under the pen name of _Amicus Patriae_,
is reputed to have been the author of a book entitled, _A Word of
Comfort to a Melancholy Country. Or the Bank of Credit ... fairly
defended by a Discovery of the Great Benefit, accruing by it to the
whole Province, etc. Humbly dedicated to the Merchants in Boston._ It
was “a well-managed and witty plea for paper money and ‘inflation.’”
With the economics of the problem that he was delving into, we are not
concerned; many heads have wrestled with it since; we are concerned
rather to point out that the democratic John Wise was on the same side
with the democratic Franklin, in espousing paper currency.

After all, the significant thing that emerges from the life and work
of John Wise, is the unerring directness with which he seized upon the
core of primitive Congregationalism, and the breadth and vigor with
which he defended it. After a spirited contest lasting three-quarters
of a century, theocratic Puritanism yielded to ecclesiastical
democracy. For two generations it had remained doubtful which way the
church would incline. Dominated by gentlemen, it was warped towards
Presbyterianism; but interpreted by commoners, it leaned towards
Congregationalism. The son of a plebeian. Wise inclined to sympathize
with the spirit of radical Separatism, bred of the democratic
aspirations of Jacobean underlings; and this radical Separatism he
found justified by the new political philosophy, as well as by facts
of the New England village world. The struggle for ecclesiastical
democracy was a forerunner of the struggle for political democracy
which was to be the business of the next century; and in founding his
ecclesiasticism upon the doctrine of natural rights, John Wise was an
early witness to the new order of thought.


II • Social Drifts

Great changes, whether liberal or otherwise as the future might
determine, were to come to Massachusetts from the new order with its
Charter provision establishing a property qualification for suffrage.
The venture in idealism was over and economic determinism reasserted
its sway. New England was to swing back into the broad current of
English political development. Following the Revolution of 1688 a new
theory of the political state was rising in England--the theory that
the state originated in private property and exists primarily for the
protection of property; and this conception, thrust upon New England,
was to cut sharply across the cleavages of the old order and create
new ones. It substituted the dominance of wealth for the stewardship
of righteousness; the stake-in-society principle for the Mosaic code.
It set a premium upon acquisitiveness and subordinated the Puritan to
the Yankee. It prepared the way for class alignments which must grow
sharper with the increase of wealth, and would eventually produce a
Tory group with natural longings for titles and a colonial aristocracy.
How powerful this mercantile-Tory element was to become would depend
upon the counter strength of the rising democratic group, with its
freehold tenure of land, its town meeting, its Congregational church,
and its distrust of aristocratic orders.

For the present, the world of John Wise was the real New England,
thrifty, parsimonious, intensely local, driving straight towards a
homespun democracy. The older fashioned New Englander, whatever his
social position, did not take kindly to Toryism; and when it made its
appearance in the train of the royal officials, swaggering somewhat
and a bit insolent, it seemed to the colonial both alien and wicked.
English Tory and Puritan Yankee frankly disliked each other; their
ideals were incompatible, their manners unlike. A cloud of suspicion
surrounded the English official as he walked the streets of Boston:
suspicion of the hated church which he promptly set up, though not much
given to worship; suspicion of his political motives and the overseas
authority which he represented. In a vague way the New Englanders
were convinced that he constituted a menace to their most cherished
rights and privileges; that he was secretly bent on undermining the
traditional liberties. And the English gentleman, with his casual
old-world arrogance, unwittingly aggravated the common suspicion.

How great was the chasm that separated the two worlds is sharply
revealed by an episode in the career of Joseph Dudley, son of the
emigrant, who was made royal governor in 1702. Dudley had lived much in
England, had sat in Parliament, and had imbibed prerogative notions of
government. He little relished the homely ways of New England and he
bore himself somewhat haughtily. One December day in 1705, as he was
driving along a country road with high snowdrifts on each side, he met
with two loads of wood. The chariot coming to a stop, Dudley thrust
his head out of the window and bade the carters turn aside and make
way for him; but they were inclined to argue the matter in view of the
drifts. Words were multiplied, and one of the carters cried--to quote
Sewall--“I am as good flesh and blood as you ... you may goe out of the
way.” In a rage the governor drew his sword and struck at the fellow,
who snatched the sword away and broke it. “You lie, you dog; you lie,
you devill!” cried Dudley, beside himself. “Such words don’t become a
Christian,” retorted the carter. “A Christian, you dog!” cried Dudley;
“a Christian, you devill! I was a Christian before you were born!”
and he snatched the carter’s whip and lashed him roundly. “Being in a
great passion: threatn’d to send those that affronted him to England.”
He arrested both carters and threw them into jail, whence they were
released by the help of Sewall, who took their side though connected
with Dudley through marriage. They were of good yeoman families, yet
the matter hung on for nearly a year before they were discharged from
their bonds.[130]

Village New England was becoming surprisingly independent in
spirit when plain countrymen stood upon their rights against the
Governor--“nor did they once in the Govrs ... sight pull of their
hatts,” as Dudley took pains to inform the Queen’s justices. Three
generations in America were having their effect in the creation of a
homespun democracy. “Mr. Dudley’s principles, in government, were too
high for the Massachusetts people,” commented a later Tory, whose own
principles were high:

  He found it difficult to maintain what appeared to him to be the
  just prerogative of the crown, and at the same time to recover
  and preserve the esteem of the country. The government had been
  so popular [_i.e._ democratic] under the old charter, that the
  exercise of the powers reserved to the crown by the new charter was
  submitted to with reluctance.[131]

If “the prejudices against him were great,” some explanation is found
in a letter written by his son, Attorney-General Paul Dudley, to an
English friend, which came to the hands of Cotton Mather and was
published by him:

  I refer you to Mr. -- for an Account of everything, especially
  about the Government, and the Colledge; both which, are Discoursed
  of here, in Chimney Corners, and Private Meetings, as confidently
  as can be.... This Country will never be worth Living in, for
  Lawyers and Gentlemen, till the _Charter_ is _Taken Away_. My
  Father and I sometimes Talk of the Queen’s Establishing a _Court of
  Chancery_ in this Country; I have Writ about it, to Mr. Blathwayt:
  If the Matter should Succeed, you might get some Place worth your
  Return; of which I should be very Glad.[132]

If New England had grown restive under the theocratic oligarchy, it had
no intention of being toryized by English placemen.

It was during these troubled years that a new force made its appearance
in Massachusetts which Sewall noted: “Sept. 25 [1690]. A printed
sheet entituled publick Occurrences comes out, which gives much
distaste because not Licensed....” A week later he added: “Print of
the Governour and Council comes out shewing their disallowance of
the Public Occurrences”; and the next day, “Mr. Mather writes a very
sharp letter about it.” This was Increase Mather, who would tolerate
no such lawlessness of the press, which must be kept as a private
preserve for the orthodox party. Against the Mather conservatism it
was impossible to make headway, and the little sheet did not come to
a second issue. Not till fourteen years later did Sewall set down a
similar note: “April 24 [1704]. I went to Cambridge.... I gave Mr.
Willard the first News-Letter that ever was carried over the River. He
shew’d it to the Fellows.” So began in America, at first unlawfully,
and then with due propriety, the work of making and publishing
newspapers. For seventy-two years thereafter, the _News-Letter_
was published continuously, justifying in all its utterances the
confidence of Boston conservatism, espousing naturally the Tory side
in the pre-Revolutionary quarrels, and coming to a sudden end on the
evacuation of Boston by General Gage.

On December 14, 1719, the _Boston Gazette_ entered the field as a
competitor for conservative readers, and two years later, August 17,
1721, the _New England Courant_ appeared, the first organ of the
opposition. It was edited by James Franklin, who possessed much of the
Franklin independence, untempered by the prudence of Benjamin; and he
set himself incautiously to the business of assailing the strait-laced
authorities of Boston. He got together a group of brisk young men,
known as the Hell-fire Club, who flung their vivacious satires at the
Mathers with such effect as to lead Cotton Mather to undertake the
following “Good Device”:

  Warnings are to be given unto the wicked Printer, and his
  Accomplices, who every week publish a vile Paper to lessen and
  blacken the Ministers of the Town, and render their Ministry
  ineffectual. A Wickedness never parall’d any where upon the Face of
  the Earth.[133]

Although his prayers could not convert the wicked journalists, his
warnings availed with the magistrates, who took means to put a stop
to such disrespect. Twice Franklin was arraigned for contempt, and
once he spent four weeks in the common jail. By way of counterblast
to so disreputable a sheet, the _New England Weekly Journal_ appeared
on March 20, 1727, an eminently respectable sheet, edited by Mather
Byles and with such notable contributors as the Reverend Thomas Prince.
But with the coming of the _Journal_ with its staff of writers who
modeled their style upon the Augustan wits, we are in the mid-current
of the eighteenth century, that was to enlarge the influence of the
public press far beyond what could have been foreseen from its small
beginnings. It was to penetrate the inland villages and slowly wear
away their insularity of temper and outlook, bringing fresh ideas to
minds that had long stagnated. On the whole it was not a liberal press,
but its final effect was profoundly liberalizing.


Footnotes

[119] A similar plea had failed Dr. Church when he offended the
oligarchy twenty years before, who quite as arbitrarily had fined him
six hundred pounds.

[120] See the account in Palfrey, _History of Massachusetts_, Vol. II,
Book XII, p. 327; and in Wise, _Vindication of the Government of the
New England Churches, Introduction_. The current Tory interpretation of
the common law of sedition was severe. “In 1679, at the trial of Henry
Carr [Care], indicted for some passages in a weekly paper, the Lord
Chief Justice Scroggs declared it criminal at Common Law to ‘write on
the subject of government, whether in terms of praise or censure, it is
not material; for no man has a right to say anything of government’”
(_State Trials_, VII, 929; quoted in Schuyler, _The Liberty of the
Press in the American Colonies, etc._)

[121] See _Massachusetts Historical Society Proceedings_, Second
Series, Vol. XV, pp. 283-296.

[122] _Vindication_, edition of 1860, pp. 50-53.

[123] _Ibid._, pp. 54-55.

[124] _Ibid._, p. 60.

[125] _The Churches Quarrel Espoused_, p. 116.

[126] _Ibid._, p. 209.

[127] A gratuitous insult, as Wise was well known.

[128] “Letter to Robert Wodrow, September 17, 1715:” _Diary_, in
_Massachusetts Historical Collections_, Seventh Series, Vol. VIII, p.
327.

[129] _Ibid._, p. 450.

[130] The account with affidavits is given in Sewall, _Diary_, Vol. II,
pp. 144-147.

[131] Hutchinson, _History of Massachusetts Bay Colony_, Vol. II, p.
148.

[132] Sewall, _Diary_, Vol. II, Introduction, p. 109.

[133] _Diary_, Vol. II, p. 663.




Book Two • The Colonial Mind


The undistinguished years of the early and middle eighteenth century,
rude and drab in their insularity, were the creative springtime of
democratic America--plebeian years that sowed what after times were
to reap. The forgotten men and women of those silent decades wrote
little, debated little, very likely thought little; they were plain
workmen with whom ideas counted for less than the day’s work. The stir
of achievement filled the land, daily penetrating farther into the
backwoods and bringing new farmlands under the plow. The stern demands
of necessity held men in their grip, narrowing the horizon of their
minds, and obscuring the vision of their larger accomplishment. Along
the Appalachian watershed a vast drama, magnificent in the breadth and
sweep of its movement, was being enacted by players unconscious of
their parts. Not until long after they had gone to their graves were
the broad lines of that drama revealed. Today it is plain that those
unremembered years were engaged in clearing away encumbrances more
significant than the great oaks and maples of the virgin wilderness:
they were uprooting ancient habits of thought, destroying social
customs that had grown old and dignified in class-ridden Europe. A
new psychology was being created by the wide spaces that was to be
enormously significant when it came to self-consciousness. If this
middle eighteenth century wrote little literature, it created and
spread among a vigorous people something of far greater importance to
America, the psychology of democratic individualism.

From this determining influence--too little recognized by later
generations--the creative outlines of our history have taken shape.
American ideals and institutions emerged in large part from the silent
revolution which during the middle eighteenth century differentiated
the American from the transplanted colonial; a change that resulted
from an amalgam of the older English stock with other races, and the
subjection of this new product on a great scale to the influence of
diffused landholding. From these two major facts of a new race and
a free environment came the social and political philosophy of older
America, to which we have traditionally applied the term democratic,
and which unconsciously wove itself into our daily intercourse and ways
of thinking.




Part One: The Mind in the Making • 1720-1763




