Chapter II • Winds of Political Doctrine


I

An economic revolution so widespread and profound could not fail to
impress its ideals on current political thought. In the year 1825 three
streams of tendency were flowing through the southern mind, rising from
different sources, incompatible in spirit and purpose, strong in their
diverse appeals; and in the end the major current was certain to engulf
the lesser. The humanitarianism of Virginia, the individualism of the
new West, and the imperialism of the Black Belt might seem to mingle
their waters for a time, but there would be confusions of thought and
diversity of counsels until one or another had worn a deeper channel
through which the dominant opinion might run. There could be no more
fascinating study in the economics of political theory than the
changing mind of the South during the critical decades from 1820 to
1850, as it followed the course determined by its peculiar institution.
Political thought passed under the jurisdiction of slavery, and
every southern writer took his daily bearings from that polar fact.
It is unintelligent to charge upon southern politicians a lack of
consistency--to point out that after 1820 Calhoun reversed himself on
every major political principle. It was true of Calhoun, as it was
true of Webster and true of Clay. In a rapidly changing America, with
economics in a state of flux, men were no longer free political agents,
guiding themselves by the fixed stars of accepted theory; they were
borne like corks on the current of the times, and their inconsistency
is the surest evidence that they spoke for their constituents. The
North and the South were at the parting of the ways, and if southern
imperialism created for its needs a philosophy of particularism, it
was met by a counter philosophy of nationalism created for its needs
by northern capitalism, which likewise was following the path of its
manifest destiny. The charge of innovation, indeed, lies more justly
against northern theory than southern; it was Webster rather than
Calhoun who ignored the teachings of the fathers.

Of these three streams of tendency it was the new imperialism of the
Black Belt that wore the deepest channel, gathering its tributaries
till it was swollen to an overwhelming flood that drew in every lesser
current. Every other interest was eventually sacrificed to slavery,
every ambition was laid upon that consuming altar. Southern political
thought, in consequence, came to be an ingenious study in the strategy
of defense. From the somewhat vague doctrine of states rights as struck
off by the Virginia school was elaborated a complete philosophy of
particularism with its principle of a protective state veto. Tremendous
as was the stir created by the doctrine of Nullification, that doctrine
was little more than a warning gesture, a militant expression of the
southern temper. The time was not ripe for the critical issue, the
philosophy of the new South was not yet clarified; the objective was
clearly seen, but the defenses were incomplete, the line of campaign
not yet laid down. That great work was in the skillful hands of
Calhoun, and much was yet to be done. The deeper purpose that lay
behind the gesture of Nullification was the purpose of erecting in the
slave states a civilization founded on a landed aristocracy that should
serve as a sufficient counterweight to the mercantile and industrial
civilization of the North; and in the event that the institution of
slavery were not assured of peaceful extension through the new West,
to secede and establish a southern Confederacy wherein a generous
civilization might develop, modeled after the Greek democracy. Such at
least was the dream of the noblest minds of the South.

Thrown early upon the defensive, southern political thought found too
little time to examine fundamental principles. The necessities of the
situation entailed a meticulous constitutional debate, in which the
terms of the Constitution were examined with microscopic care, and
interpreted in the light of their historical origin. Something of the
sterility of the lawyer’s mind marked the long debate; and little
of the suggestiveness of the philosopher’s. Acute as was Calhoun’s
reasoning, it reveals the weakness of contemporary political thought,
northern as well as southern. It concerned itself too exclusively
with government under the Constitution--its origin, the just
interpretation of the terms of the fundamental law, the potentialities
of consolidation inherent in the principle of loose construction. To
the broader problems of the nature and functions of the political
state--questions that had so deeply interested the speculative minds of
the French school--quite inadequate consideration was given. The drift
of circumstance was in the way of creating a leviathan state. Southern
orators railed at consolidation in abundant and florid language,
but they concerned themselves little with the deeper problem of the
relation of the political state to the well-being of the citizen.
This common weakness is strikingly evident in the work of Calhoun’s
successor, Alexander H. Stephens, whose interest was so exclusively
historical and constitutional as almost to exclude him from a place
among political philosophers.


II • John C. Calhoun • Realist

The greatest figure in that long controversy was certainly John C.
Calhoun, a man who set his face like flint against every northern
middle-class ambition, and with his dream of a Greek democracy steered
his beloved South upon the rocks. A truly notable figure was this
ascetic Carolinian. In the passionate debates over slavery he daily
matched powers with Webster and Clay and proved himself intellectually
the greatest of the three. He is the one outstanding political thinker
in a period singularly barren and uncreative. His influence was
commanding. Tall, lean, eager, with no humor, no playfulness, lacking
the magnetic personality of Clay and the ornate rhetoric of Webster,
speaking plainly and following his logic tenaciously, this gaunt
Scotch-Irishman became by virtue of intellect and character, driven by
an apostolic zeal, the master political mind of the South, an uncrowned
king who carried his native Carolina in his pocket like a rotten
borough. Long before his death he had expanded a political philosophy
into a school of thought. What he planned a hundred disciples hastened
to execute. Like Jefferson he was a pervasive influence in shaping
men’s opinions. It was impossible to ignore him or to escape the
admonitory finger that pointed at every weak and shuffling compromiser.

Whatever road one travels one comes at last upon the austere figure of
Calhoun, commanding every highway of the southern mind. He subjected
the philosophy of the fathers to critical analysis; pointed out
wherein he conceived it to be faulty; cast aside some of its most
sacred doctrines; provided another foundation for the democratic
faith which he professed. And when he had finished the great work of
reconstruction, the old Jeffersonianism that had satisfied the mind of
Virginia was reduced to a thing of shreds and patches, acknowledged
by his followers to have been a mistaken philosophy, blinded by
romantic idealism and led astray by French humanitarianism. To
substitute realism for idealism, to set class economics above abstract
humanitarianism, was the mission to which Calhoun devoted himself. He
undid for the plantation South the work of his old master. Speaking
in the name of democracy, he attacked the foundations on which the
democratic movement in America had rested, substituting for its
libertarian and equalitarian doctrines conceptions wholly alien and
antagonistic to western democracy, wholly Greek in their underlying
spirit.

Calhoun’s career was linked indissolubly with slavery. He was the
advocate and philosopher of southern imperialism, and in defense of
that imperialism he elaborated those particularist theories which
prepared the way for the movement of secession. Born and bred in
South Carolina, he was enveloped from infancy in the mesh of southern
provincialisms. Except for two years at Yale, where he graduated in the
class of 1804, and eighteen months reading law in Connecticut, his life
was spent between Washington and his plantation. He was in temperament
a Puritan, of that Scotch-Irish strain which, scattered along the
wide American frontier, greatly modified the American character and
gave to the South such different leaders as Stonewall Jackson and
Jefferson Davis. It was a hard, stern race--that Scotch-Irish--little
responsive to humanitarian appeal; and Calhoun was harder and sterner
than most. He held his emotions in strict subjection to his reason.
Intent on thinking every problem through from premise to conclusion,
concerned always with fundamental principles, he would have become,
in an environment congenial to humanistic thought, a distinguished
intellectual. His mind would have lost its rigidity and become pliable
from contact with diverse streams of theory, and his speculations would
have found new horizons from more generous intellectual acquisitions.
But unhappily there was nothing either at Washington or in South
Carolina that tended to liberalize his thinking. He had not gone to
school, as Jefferson had done, to the great thinkers of Europe; he
had not found an intellectual stimulus in revolutionary systems of
philosophy. He dwelt all his life in the arid world of politicians.
His two years at Yale may even be accounted a calamity. Timothy Dwight
and Calhoun were cut out of the same cloth. The South Carolina Puritan
would only be confirmed in his dogmatisms by the most dogmatic of
Yankee Puritans; and in consequence his career, like Jonathan Edwards’,
suffered from a narrow, ingrowing intellectualism. He was a potential
intellectual whose mind was unfertilized by contact with a generous
social culture.

Calhoun’s public life covered the forty years from 1810 to 1850,
from the first administration of Madison to that of Zachary Taylor.
For nearly half of the total period, up to the year 1828, he was a
politician of ability but without distinction. He entered Congress at a
time when the young men from the South and West were becoming impatient
with the cautious policy of the old Republicans led by Jefferson and
Madison. The war psychology was mounting under British pin-pricks,
and the young nationalists, forgetful that bayonets and cannon and
ships are not easily defeated by rhetoric, were eager to teach the
Mistress of the Seas some much-needed international manners. In those
early years Calhoun joined with Clay in driving through Congress a war
policy. In this he seems to have represented his constituents, whose
patriotism was always somewhat bellicose. During the shameful war
experience, the cool analytical Calhoun came near to exhibiting the
tawdry marks of the jingo; and thereafter for years there was little to
distinguish him from a Hamiltonian Federalist. He was a throughgoing
nationalist of the school of loose construction. He advocated a
protective tariff on the ground that “it would form a new and most
powerful cement, far outweighing any political objections that might be
urged against the system” (Gaillard Hunt, _John C. Calhoun_, p. 29). As
yet he had discovered no constitutional scruples against the exercise
of this or other implied powers. He was, he said, “no advocate for
refined arguments on the Constitution. The instrument is not intended
as a thesis for the logician to exercise his ingenuity on. It ought to
be construed with plain, good sense; and what can be more express than
the Constitution on this point?” (_ibid._, p. 30). As Secretary for War
in Monroe’s cabinet he was an advocate of internal improvements, and he
submitted to Congress an elaborate report on a proposed system of roads
and canals. Until the critical year 1828 there was little in Calhoun’s
career to distinguish him from Clay. The tide of national expansion was
running strong; the growth of exploitation was creating a middle-class
psychology; and Calhoun in these earlier years was as unconsciously
middle class as afterwards he became consciously aristocratic. He
sprang from an acquisitive race, and to the end of his life some
remnants of the old instincts clung to him despite his repudiation of
the middle-class political philosophy.

The year 1828, marked by a fierce discussion in South Carolina of
the Tariff of Abominations, proved the turning-point of his career.
As Vice President he had been little more than a spectator of the
growing discontent in his native state at the contrast between the
industrial prosperity of New England and the agricultural depression of
the South. But he could no longer remain an idle spectator. Pamphlets
and newspaper articles were appearing that sharply challenged his
position. Capitalistic Federalism and democratic equalitarianism were
equally under fire. The celebrated Dr. Cooper, an Englishman long
resident in South Carolina, who had suffered under the Alien and
Sedition law, had vigorously attacked the natural-rights dogma, and was
active in arousing the public mind against Calhoun’s consolidationist
tendencies.[402] The publication in 1821 of Yates’s _Minutes of Debates
of the Constitutional Convention_ had awakened widespread interest in
an historical interpretation of the Constitution, and the time was
ripe for a new period of constitutional debate. The tariff act of 1828
provided the immediate occasion. It opened the flood gates, and the
waters of states-rights doctrine that had long been gathering rushed
forth in a torrent. Calhoun hesitated no longer. The problem and the
solution had both clarified themselves in his mind, and he at once took
the lead in directing the unrest to achieve a definite end.

Calhoun’s contribution to political theory--a contribution that
elevates him to a distinguished place among American political
thinkers--was the child of necessity, and received its particularist
bias from the exigencies of sectional partisanship. With the rapid
expansion of the nation westward, and the consequent augmenting of a
potentially hostile free-soil power, the South was doomed to become
increasingly a minority voice in the councils of government; and if it
were to preserve its peculiar institution it must find more adequate
means of self-protection than it had enjoyed hitherto. The tendencies
most to be feared, in his judgment, were the spontaneous drift towards
consolidation, and an uncritical faith in numerical majorities.
He was convinced that America had too thoughtlessly accepted the
principle of political democracy as a sufficient safeguard against
the danger of arbitrary government. Soon or late it must discover,
what the South already was discovering, that numerical democracy,
unrestrained by constitutional limitations on its will, is no friend
to political justice. The critical test of every government is the
measure of protection afforded its weakest citizen; and judged by this
test a democratic state, when power has come to be centralized in few
hands, may prove to be no other than a tyrant. Irresponsible in its
unrestraint, the majority vote may easily outdo an Oriental despot
in arbitrary rule, and the more power it wields the more ruthless
will be its disregard of minority opinion. The political philosopher
who proposes to formulate an ideal democratic system of government,
therefore, must deal critically with this fundamental problem of
political justice, for upon the solution will turn the excellence and
permanence of every democracy. It was to this baffling problem that
Calhoun addressed himself.

In seeking a constitutional defense for the threatened southern
interests, he drew from the two great reservoirs of American
constitutional theory. From the Jeffersonian Republicans he derived his
familiar doctrine of states rights in opposition to the consolidating
principle; from the Federalists of the Montesquieu school he drew his
theory of static government, resulting from exactly balanced powers;
and from the amalgamation of these diverse theories he formulated a new
principle. Both schools of earlier thought, he had come to believe, had
been sound in their major premises, but both had gone astray in certain
important deductions. The experience of forty years, with the democracy
constantly augmenting its powers, had demonstrated to Calhoun’s
satisfaction both the grave danger that lay in the principle of
consolidation, and the insufficiency of existing checks on the Federal
government. The prime mistake of the Jeffersonians, he conceived, was
their belief that the democratic majority will necessarily serve the
cause of political justice; and the miscalculation of the Federalists
resulted from the belief that the division of powers provided in the
Constitution was adequate to prevent arbitrary government. He now
proposed to correct these two mistakes by providing an additional
check through the simple expedient--as logical as it was efficacious,
granted his premises--of recognizing the veto power of the individual
commonwealth upon an act of the Federal government. Stripped of its
states-rights limitation, this was in germ the principle of the
referendum, modified, however, by certain suggestive provisions.

The veto-power as a protective principle Calhoun regarded as the
hallmark of constitutional government. Granted that sovereignty
under the Constitution inheres in the people, and that all authority
is delegated, it follows that government is no more than an agent
with strictly defined fiduciary powers, all the acts of which are
subject to review by the principal. Whether such review shall be
immediate and plenary, or at more or less remove and limited,
becomes therefore a fundamental question of constitutional polity.
Unfortunately much confusion has resulted from an intentional
vagueness, contributed by interested groups to further particular ends,
in the common understanding of the terms, the people and government.
The former is rarely, as is usually assumed, a homogeneous body
with common interests, but a congeries of individuals and groups
and classes with diverse and often antagonistic interests; and the
latter--in a republic--is never a sacred entity, the residuary
legatee of sovereignty, to criticize which is to commit the crime
of _lèse-majesté_, but a group of officials invested with temporary
authority and actuated by motives common to all men. A necessary
preliminary, therefore, to an intelligent understanding of the
principle of veto is a critical analysis of these much misunderstood
terms.

Calhoun was far too honest a realist to be under any hallucinations in
regard to political government. He estimated at its full significance
“the never-ending audacity of elected persons.” Power he knew to be the
most insidious of poisons; every government is liable to the disease of
auto-intoxication. Seated securely in office the agent assumes all the
prerogatives of the principal and clothes his acts with the sanctity
of sovereignty. Armed with the taxing power, he distributes penalties
and benefits with partial hand, and unless an adequate defense
protects the weaker interests they will suffer a legal exploitation.
Every government justly rests under suspicion, and only the most
critical scrutiny of its conduct can keep it decently honest. Popular
government, from which the Republicans hoped too much, changes only
the outward form of the selfish struggle for power by substituting
party rule for class rule. With its disciplined party machine the
lure of political spoil encourages the most shameless exploitation of
the weaker groups, who have no recourse.[403] Hence, the more popular
the government, the more ruthless becomes the majority rule; and any
system of checks and balances that does not adequately restrain this
inherent tendency of party rule must prove a failure. However carefully
the political philosopher may provide for a division of powers among
executive, legislature and judiciary, he must fail of his object, for
a regnant majority will control all three branches of government, and
thus intrenched will defy the protests of the minority. The Montesquieu
theory had proved a failure in practice.

An even greater danger, in Calhoun’s judgment, lay in the current
misinterpretation of the term “the people,” the result of which was
the obscuring of the economic basis of society and the befuddling
of the whole problem of government. To this disastrous result, he
believed, both schools of political thought had contributed. The early
Republicans had oversimplified the political problem by assuming a
clear division between ruler and subject. The conception was a heritage
from European experience, where it had taken form as a strategic
move to align the unthinking mass against a despotic monarchy. The
Jeffersonians had used it to like purpose in their struggle against
consolidation, appealing to a common democracy against the aristocracy.
The early Federalists were even more blameworthy, for, understanding
clearly the economic origins of political power and the economic
ends served by the political state, they made their knowledge serve
their interests and concealed their designs by deceptive appeals to
patriotism. Every realist knows that “the people” is a political
fiction. Society is made up of individuals, each with his particular
interest. The total interests of the subject-citizens are necessarily
complex. Group and classify them as he may, the political philosopher
can never merge the parts in a coalescing whole, but must recognize
that the problem remains one of adjustments and compromises. It follows
therefore that any facile assumption that government represents the
people or rests on the will of the people is a disastrous fallacy.
Popular government rests on the will of the majority; aristocratic
government rests on the will of the aristocracy; and despotic
government rests on the will of the despot. It is an axiom that the
political state is partisan to those who administer it. The stakes of
rulership are high; the game of politics never lacks its devotees; the
business of deceiving the people in order to pluck the goose has long
been one of the respectable professions.

The perennial problem of constitutional government, then, in Calhoun’s
philosophy, remains what it was seen to be by the Federalist followers
of Montesquieu--the problem of restraining government by constitutional
checks to the end that it be kept just. Existing machinery having
demonstrated its inadequacy, it remained to provide more effective.
Freedom Calhoun regarded as the crown jewel of civilization, hardly
won, easily lost. But freedom was not to be measured by _habeas corpus_
acts and similar legal restraints on tyranny; it was freedom from legal
exploitation and statutory dictatorship. “The abuse of delegated power,
and the tyranny of the stronger over the weaker interests, are the two
dangers, and the only two to be guarded against; and if this be done
effectually, liberty must be eternal. Of the two, the latter is the
greater and most difficult to resist” (_Works_, Vol. VI, p. 32). In
more definite terms the problem is thus stated:

  Two powers are necessary to the existence and preservation of
  free States: a power on the part of the ruled to prevent rulers
  from abusing their authority, by compelling them to be faithful
  to their constituents, and which is effected through the right of
  suffrage; and a power to compel the parts of society to be just to
  one another, by compelling them to consult the interest of each
  other--which can only be effected ... by requiring the concurring
  assent of all the great and distinct interests of the community to
  the measures of the Government. This result is the sum-total of all
  the contrivances adopted by free States to preserve their liberty,
  by preventing the conflicts between the several classes or parts of
  the community. (_Ibid._, Vol. VI, pp. 189-190.)

In elaboration of the second phase of the problem Calhoun contributed
the principle on which his reputation as a political thinker must
rest--the doctrine of a concurrent majority. He found his solution
in an expansion of the principle of democracy--recovering the
true principle, he was fond of insisting--by superimposing upon
the consolidated, indiscriminate numerical majority the will of
a geographical majority; or in other words, by a special form of
sectional referendum.

  It results, from what has been said, that there are two different
  modes in which the sense of the community may be taken: one,
  simply, by the right of suffrage, unaided; the other, by the
  right through a proper organism. Each collects the sense of the
  majority. But one regards numbers only, and considers the whole
  community one unit, having but one common interest throughout; and
  collects the sense of the greater number of the whole, as that
  of the community. The other, on the contrary, regards interests
  as well as numbers;--considering the community as made up of
  different and conflicting interests as far as the action of the
  government is concerned; and takes the sense of each, through its
  majority or appropriate organ, and the united sense of all, as
  the sense of the entire community. The former of these I call the
  numerical, or absolute majority; and the latter, the concurrent,
  or constitutional majority. (“A Disquisition on Government,” in
  _Works_, Vol. I, p. 28.)

In such speculation on the possibility of achieving political justice
by the machinery of representation, Calhoun was face to face with a
revolutionary conception--the conception of proportional economic
representation. The idea was implicit in his assumption of an
existing economic sectionalism that must find adequate expression
through political agencies. He had come to understand the futility
of a miscellaneous numerical majority; he had only to go back to
eighteenth-century philosophy and substitute economic classes for
economic sectionalism, finding his social cleavages in economic
groups instead of geographical divisions, to have recast the whole
theory of representation. Clearly, he had made enormous strides in
his thinking. He had long since put behind him the philosophy of
Jefferson. He had subjected the principle of democracy to critical
scrutiny. But instead of rejecting it as an unworkable hypothesis, as
the Hamiltonian Federalists had done, he proposed to establish it on a
sound and permanent basis. The ideal of democracy he conceived to be
the noblest in the whole field of political thought, but misunderstood
and misapplied as it had been in America, it had become the mother of
every mischief. This betrayal of democracy he laid at the door of the
Jeffersonians. They had accepted too carelessly the romantic dogmas
of the French school, and had come to believe that democracy was
synonymous with political equalitarianism.

It was this false notion that had debased the noble ideal, and
delivered it over to the hands of the mob. To assert that men are
created free and equal is to fly in the face of every biological and
social fact. The first business of the true democrat, therefore,
was to reëxamine the nature of democracy and strip away the false
assumptions and vicious conclusions that had done it incalculable
injury. The Greeks, he pointed out, understood its essential nature
better than the moderns. Democracy assumes a co-partnership among
equals. Its only rational foundation is good will, and it can function
only through compromise. From this it follows that in a society
composed of high and low, capable and weak, worthy and unworthy--as
every historical society has been composed--a universal democracy is
impractical. The numerous body of social incompetents will suffer one
of two fates: they will be exploited by the capable minority under the
guise of free labor, or they will be accepted as the wards of society
and protected by the free citizens--they must inevitably become either
wage slaves or bond slaves, in either case incapable of maintaining
the rights of free members of the commonwealth. Democracy is possible
only in a society that recognizes inequality as a law of nature, but in
which the virtuous and capable enter into a voluntary co-partnership
for the common good, accepting wardship of the incompetent in the
interests of society. This was the Greek ideal and this ideal had
created Greek civilization.

Calhoun was thus brought face to face with the natural-rights theory,
which the glowing rhetoric of the Declaration of Independence had
disseminated throughout America, and which lay as a virus at the heart
of Jacksonianism. To destroy that theory, he believed, was a necessary
preliminary to any rational theory of democracy, and he turned to the
business with characteristic frankness. Upon the venerable dogmas he
threw the light of his realism, subjecting them to critical analysis.
The origin of government in compact was only a myth. The amiable being
known as man in a state of nature, whose portrait had been drawn by
the French romantics, he discovered in neither social nor biological
history. The true origin of government, he asserted in common with John
Adams, is to be found in practical necessity; government arises, as
Hobbes had pointed out, from the universal fact of human selfishness.
It has always been found necessary to lodge coercive powers in certain
hands as a social protection against individual aggression; and since
all men are impelled by self-interest, political systems are determined
in form and scope by this universal instinct. Without government there
is anarchy; with government there is potential tyranny. The crucial
problem to be solved by the political philosopher, hence, is to
determine the just delimitation between sovereign power and individual
liberty; the one protecting the rights of the whole, the other keeping
open fresh opportunity to advance.

Having thus established government on the firm basis of social
necessity, he proceeded to examine the romantic dogmas of liberty and
equality.

  It follows, from what has been stated, that it is a great and
  dangerous error to suppose that all people are equally entitled
  to liberty. It is a reward to be earned, not a blessing to be
  gratuitously lavished on all alike;--a reward reserved for the
  intelligent, the patriotic, the virtuous and deserving;--and not
  a boon to be bestowed on a people too ignorant, degraded and
  vicious, to be capable either of appreciating or of enjoying
  it. Nor is it any disparagement to liberty, that such is, and
  ought to be the case. On the contrary its greatest praise,--its
  proudest distinction is, that an all-wise Providence has reserved
  it, as the noblest and highest reward for the development of our
  faculties, moral and intellectual. A reward more appropriate than
  liberty could not be conferred on the deserving;--nor a punishment
  inflicted on the undeserving more just, than to be subject to
  lawless and despotic rule. This dispensation seems to be the result
  of some fixed law;--and every effort to disturb or defeat it, by
  attempting to elevate a people in the scale of liberty, above the
  point to which they are entitled to rise, must ever prove abortive,
  and end in disappointment....

  There is another error, not less great and dangerous, usually
  associated with the one which has just been considered. I refer
  to the opinion, that liberty and equality are so intimately
  united, that liberty cannot be perfect without perfect equality.
  That they are united to a certain extent,--and that equality of
  citizens, in the eyes of the law, is essential to liberty in a
  popular government, is conceded. But to go further, and make
  equality of _condition_ essential to liberty, would be to destroy
  both liberty and progress. The reason is, that inequality of
  condition, while it is a necessary consequence of liberty, is, at
  the same time, indispensable to progress.... It is, indeed, this
  inequality of condition between the front and rear ranks, in the
  march of progress, which gives so strong an impulse to the former
  to maintain their position, and to the latter to press forward
  into their files. This gives to progress its greatest impulse. To
  force the front rank back to the rear, or attempt to push forward
  the rear into line with the front, by the interposition of the
  government, would put an end to the impulse, and effectually arrest
  the march of progress. (“A Disquisition on Government,” in _Works_,
  Vol. I, pp. 55-56.)

It was the persuasive ideal of a Greek democracy in the plantation
states that lay back of Calhoun’s defense of slavery--a defense that
thrusts into sharp relief the change of southern attitude in the
decade of the thirties. The earlier Jeffersonian attitude had been
fairly expressed by a Georgia representative in the debate on the
Missouri question:

  Believe me, sir, I am not a panegyrist of slavery. It is an
  unnatural state; a dark cloud which obscures half the lustre of our
  free institutions!... Would it be fair; would it be manly; would
  it be generous; would it be just, to offer contumely and contempt
  to the unfortunate man who wears a cancer in his bosom, because he
  will not submit to cautery at the hazard of his existence? (Quoted
  in Hunt, _John C. Calhoun_, p. 53.)

But with slavery put upon its defense, the southern spokesmen passed
from apology to praise. From the first, Calhoun accepted the system
implicitly, but now he subjected it to critical analysis in the light
of his theory of a Greek democracy. Over against it he set the northern
system of wage labor, and he came to the conclusion that the latter
was more brutal and inhumane than the former. He was convinced that
heretofore the South had made a serious mistake in apologizing for its
peculiar institution, and in expecting its eventual extinction. In
this matter the fathers had been wrong. No serious-minded Southerner
any longer believed that slavery was on the way to natural extinction.
It was spreading daily and must be permitted to spread. The hopes of
southern civilization were bound up with it. The North must be brought
to recognize it as a beneficent institution, necessary to a free,
cultivated democracy, the only alternative to those fierce conflicts
between wage labor and capital which already in the manufacturing
states were threatening the permanence of American institutions. In
a speech delivered in 1838, Calhoun thus sketched the new southern
conception:

  Many in the South once believed that it [slavery] was a moral and
  political evil. That folly and delusion are gone. We see it now in
  its true light, and regard it as the most safe and stable basis
  for free institutions in the world. It is impossible with us that
  the conflict can take place between labor and capital, which makes
  it so difficult to establish and maintain free institutions in
  all wealthy and highly civilized nations where such institutions
  as ours do not exist. The Southern States are an aggregate, in
  fact, of communities, not of individuals. Every plantation is a
  little community, with the master at its head, who concentrates
  in himself the united interests of capital and labor, of which he
  is the common representative. These small communities aggregated
  make the State in all, whose action, labor, and capital is equally
  represented and perfectly harmonized. Hence the harmony, the union,
  the stability of that section, which is rarely disturbed, except
  through the action of this Government. The blessing of this state
  of things extends beyond the limits of the South. It makes that
  section the balance of the system; the great conservative power,
  which prevents other portions, less fortunately constituted,
  from rushing into conflict.... Such are the institutions which
  these deluded madmen are stirring heaven and earth to destroy,
  and which we are called on to defend by the highest and most
  solemn obligations that can be imposed on us as men and patriots.
  (“Remarks on the State Rights Resolutions in Regard to Abolition.
  January 12, 1838,” in _Works_, Vol. III, p. 180.)

Thus in the end the political philosopher turns partisan to a cause.
His fruitful speculations on the theory of representation, his
inquiry into the economic basis of politics, remained incomplete, the
larger reaches only half explored. Espousing the ideal of democracy,
he yielded to the seductions of a Greek republic. Beginning as a
Jeffersonian, he ended as the philosopher of a slave aristocracy, from
whose principles men like Governor McDuffie of South Carolina deduced
the dictum that “the laboring population of no nation on earth are
entitled to liberty, or capable of enjoying it.” It was a curious
dream, yet no more curious than his faith in an obsolete article in
the Constitution to withstand the advance of a hostile economy. There
is something almost tragic in the self-deception of this clear-minded
realist in his appeal to a paper defense against economic forces.
“The Constitution--no interference--no discrimination,” he cried
passionately in repudiating the right of Abolition petition. “These are
the grounds on which the battle may be safely fought.... You must tell
these deluded fanatics, you have no right to intermeddle in any form or
shape.... Expediency, justice, plighted faith, and the Constitution:
these, and these only, can be relied on to avert conflict” (_Works_,
Vol. III, p. 190).

Lost faiths and repudiated prophets go down to a common grave. The
living have little inclination to learn from the dead. The political
principles of Calhoun have had scant justice done them by later
generations who incline to accept the easy opinion that the cause which
triumphs is altogether the better cause. What Calhoun so greatly feared
has since come about. He erected a last barrier against the progress of
middle-class ideals--consolidation in politics and standardization in
society; against a universal cash-register evaluation of life: and the
barrier was blown to pieces by the guns of the Civil War. Historically
he was the last spokesman of the great school of the eighteenth
century, the intellectual descendant of John Adams. The two men were
much alike in the broad principles of their political philosophy, and
identical necessities brought them to identical conclusions. They
agreed in the fundamental principle that property will rule by reason
of its inherent power, and that political justice is attainable only by
a nicely calculated system of checks and balances, which provides each
important group with a defensive veto. But in the social experience on
which Adams founded his doctrine, political antagonism was potential
in rival classes, and justified a division of powers on the model
of the British constitution. In the intervening years, however, the
economic alignment had become sectional, the rise of party government
had created a new problem, and the earlier division of powers seemed
to demand a supplementary veto if the nice balance contemplated in
the Constitution were to be maintained. This was the kernel of the
states-rights doctrine which Calhoun elaborated with such skill. That
he should have associated the principle with a cause that was doomed
was disastrous to the just fame of Calhoun. More, it was disastrous to
the vital democratic principle of decentralized powers. In championing
a Greek democracy Calhoun affronted the latent idealism of America, and
the harm he did to agrarian democracy was incalculable.


III • Alexander H. Stephens • Constitutionalist

Southern scholars are pretty well agreed that the ablest defender
of the doctrine of secession was Alexander H. Stephens, the Georgia
commoner. He was sprung from the plain people. Brought up in severe
poverty, self-taught, the friend of the poor, he was no child of an
exclusive planter aristocracy, and was never quite trusted by them.
The victim of a slight, ramshackly physique, never weighing a hundred
pounds, never knowing a well day, fearfully handicapped in the everyday
matter of living, it is amazing that soul and body held together for
seventy-one years and more amazing that he accomplished what he did.
“Throughout life,” says one of his biographers, “he was practically
a brain without a body.” Temperamentally despondent, he was driven
into restless activity to forget self. His will was fine-tempered
steel and ill health never broke his courage even when it laid him on
his back. He feared nothing, but took a position and argued a cause
without regard to personal consequences. He never flinched from the
personal encounters which the lawless code of Georgia politics invited.
A morbid consciousness of his feeble physique sometimes drove him
into truculence, and on one occasion he was stabbed eighteen times by
a certain ornament of the Georgia bench, and saved his life only by
grasping the blade that was driven at his throat. But such encounters
can be explained on the ground of overcorrection; the real Stephens was
gentle, peace-loving, hating all swaggerers military or civilian, “a
man of generous sympathies, of broad humanity, a democrat of democrats,
a friend of all the world” (Pendleton, _Alexander H. Stephens_,
p. 253). The words _Non sibi sed aliis_, cut in his tombstone at
Crawfordville, come nearer the truth than epitaphs usually do. He was
never selfishly ambitious and he could justly say after the fall of the
Confederacy, “I am old and weak in bodily infirmity, but I have done
my duty to God and my country, and I am ready for whatever fate may be
assigned me” (_ibid._, p. 393).

Stephens was a lifelong student of politics, regarding it as “one
of the most intricate, as well as interesting subjects that can
engage the attention of reflecting minds.” He was not a political
philosopher like Calhoun, concerned with principle and theory, but a
constitutional historian concerned to trace the genesis and development
of the fundamental law of the land. He was probably more widely read
in the early literature of the Constitution than any other man of his
generation. He had thumbed and dog-eared Elliot’s _Debates_, and could
cite dates and explain circumstances for the elucidation of doubtful
points or the correcting of an unhistorical interpretation. He knew the
genesis of every article, of almost every word in the Constitution, and
the reasons which determined the special form which each assumed; and
this exact knowledge equipped him for the task of critical commentator
on earlier commentators. Unfortunate was the theorizer who fell into
his hands. Federalist expositors like Story and Motley, given to rash
generalization from inadequate data, suffered disaster under his
critical inspection. With his fund of historical knowledge he was amply
prepared for the labor of love to which he turned after the war, and in
his _Constitutional View of the War between the States_ he produced
one of the most notable studies in the origin of the Constitution that
we have.

Certain deep personal needs, taking form in passionate conviction,
determined the bias of Stephens’ political philosophy, which was
quite simple, consistent and inflexible, from his first entry into
public life until his death. There was no subtlety in his intellectual
processes, no balancing uncertainly between diverse appeals, but
a clear faith which he expounded to the common voter in confident
expectation that it would awaken sympathetic response. His extensive
reading was not so much a disinterested search for light on the
ideal relations of men in society, as for confirmation of certain
prepossessions. That those prepossessions were shared by his fellow
Georgians, that they were the natural product of existing social
conditions, gave to them an added sanction. The creative source of
his philosophy was a passionate love of freedom; and his meditations
convinced him that the only freedom worth a tuppence is civil liberty
under civil law--that the test of any civilization is the concern it
manifests for the safeguarding of such liberty by exact and adequate
constitutional provisions. His reverence for law was a religion with
him, and his love of the Constitution as the fostering mother of the
law was only this side idolatry. “No stronger or more ardent Union man
ever lived than I was,” he asserted late in life. Intense loyalty was
almost commonplace amongst the people from whom he sprang. Love of the
Union, and of the Constitution as a guarantee of that Union, was far
stronger in the South before the Civil War than in the North. But it
was the Constitution of the fathers, not a newfangled consolidating
instrument that drew all power to Washington, that they loved. Pride
of locality--naïve though it might be and provincial--the spontaneous
pride of a simple untraveled people--was rooted in the southern
heart. It was nourished by a deep love of homestead and neighborhood,
natural to an agrarian society; and it came to political expression
in the doctrine that the commonwealth must be free to manage its own
affairs in its own way. The theory of states rights, amongst such
a people, was not an abstract principle but an expression of the
psychology of localism created by everyday habit. This explains the
intensity of conviction which colors the thought of Stephens. The
principle of local sovereignty was inbred. He rarely deigns to argue
the question. He never concerned himself with abstract argument--as
Jefferson had done--to prove the superior excellence of local home
rule. This failure, indeed, may perhaps be accounted his greatest
weakness as a political thinker. Rather he was concerned to prove that
state sovereignty existed prior to the Union, that it was jealously
guarded at the making of the Constitution, that it had never been
surrendered, and hence was the constitutional order until destroyed by
the Civil War. But if he refrained from abstract argument touching the
desirability of localizing political power, he exhibited a Jeffersonian
fear of unregulated power which consolidation makes possible.

This passionate love of freedom he exemplified in his own career. He
followed his convictions and spoke his own mind, regardless of occasion
or circumstance. He was no man’s tool. He hated a demagogue and never
curried favor with his constituents or calculated popular response. In
his public life he considered himself a representative of the people
of Georgia, and the one object of his labors was the preservation of
that constitutional liberty in which they had grown up. In furtherance
of this policy he found himself not infrequently at odds with other
southern leaders. He vigorously opposed his party in its Mexican war
policy, looking upon it as no other than imperialistic vandalism aimed
at a weaker neighbor for the purpose of extending slave territory.
There was no glamor for him in military victories; he would not concede
that a republic might plead manifest destiny in extenuation of armed
aggression, or that the ends of civilization may be furthered by war.
In a speech opposing the policy of his fellow Whigs, he thus expressed
his conception of national progress:

  I am no enemy to the extension of our domain, or the enlargement
  of the boundaries of the republic. I trust the day is coming,
  and not far distant, when the whole continent will be ours; when
  our institutions shall be diffused and cherished, and republican
  government enjoyed, throughout the length and breadth of this
  land.... That this is our ultimate destiny, if wise counsels
  prevail, I confidently believe. But it is not to be accomplished
  by the sword.... Republics never spread by arms. We can properly
  enlarge only by voluntary accessions....

  There is much said in this country of the party of progress. I
  profess to be of that party; but I am far from advocating that kind
  of progress which many of those who seem anxious to appropriate
  the term exclusively to themselves are using their exertions to
  push forward. Theirs, in my opinion, is a downward progress. It
  is a progress of party, of excitement, of lust of power; a spirit
  of war, aggression, violence and licentiousness. It is a progress
  which, if indulged in, would soon sweep over all law, all order,
  and the Constitution itself.... It is to progress in _these_
  essential attributes of national greatness that I would look: the
  improvement of mind, the “increase and diffusion of knowledge among
  men,” the erection of schools, colleges and temples of learning;
  the progress of intellect over matter; the triumph of mind over the
  animal propensities; the advancement of kind feeling and good will
  among the nations of the earth; the cultivation of virtue and the
  pursuits of industry; the bringing into subjection and subservience
  to the use of man of all the elements of nature around us; in a
  word, the progress of civilization, and everything that elevates
  and ennobles man. This ... is not to be done by wars, whether
  foreign or domestic. Fields of blood and carnage may make men brave
  and heroic, but seldom tend to make nations either virtuous or
  great. (Quoted in Pendleton, _Alexander H. Stephens_, pp. 79-80.)

A man of peace, Stephens was greatly agitated over the movement of
secession. He fought the Fire Eaters to the bitter end in his native
state, but like other high-minded Southerners he went out with his
commonwealth. Loyalty to Georgia was stronger than loyalty to the
nation. But in the new order he preserved his old principles. The
Jeffersonian democrat could not forget his teachings. When the
Confederacy was discussing its proposed Constitution, he took alarm
at some loose talk about the desirability of setting up a monarchy.
His old friend Bob Toombs, one of the ablest of the southern leaders,
quite frankly preferred the English system to the American.[404] There
seems to have been considerable comment to like effect amongst the Tory
hot-heads; but the wind was not blowing in that direction and such
straws were only the stirrings of vagrant eddies. The Constitution as
adopted was more democratic than the older instrument--an outcome to
which Stephens contributed greatly.

As Vice President of the Confederacy he constituted himself the special
guardian of constitutional liberty, and his jealous concern at what
he regarded as administrative usurpations of power brought on grave
differences with President Davis. Even in the urgent crises of war he
would not sanction the use of extra-constitutional powers. He knew
better than most that power grows by what it feeds on, that too often
war destroys the liberty it professes to be serving. To win the war
and lose the peace, to secede in defense of constitutional rights and
then tamely yield them up, seemed to him a pitiful ending, and when
President Davis suspended the right of _habeas corpus_ and his generals
proclaimed martial law, he took alarm. “All such orders,” he said,
“are palpable and dangerous usurpations, and if permitted to continue
will end in military despotism.... Better in my judgment that Richmond
should fall, and that the enemy’s armies should sweep our whole country
from the Potomac to the Gulf than that our people should submissively
yield obedience to one of these edicts of our own generals” (Pendleton,
_Alexander H. Stephens_, p. 292). Freedom of speech he would not have
interfered with under any excuse. The suspension of civil law he
considered a threat aimed at every citizen of the South. He had heard,
he said, that one purpose of the act was “to control certain elections
and certain expected assemblages in North Carolina”--where there was a
good deal of disaffection--“to put a muzzle upon certain presses, and
a bit in the mouth of certain speakers of that State. If this be so, I
regard it as the more dangerous to public liberty” (_ibid._, p. 313).
To the question, “Can you not trust the President?” he replied in words
that deserve to be remembered:

  To the question of whether I would not or cannot trust him with
  these high powers not conferred by the Constitution, my answer is:
  I am utterly opposed to everything looking to or tending toward
  dictatorship in this country. There is no man living and not one of
  the illustrious dead, whom, if now living, I would so trust.... I
  would not turn on my heel to choose between masters. I was not born
  to acknowledge a master from either the North or the South. I shall
  never choose between candidates for that office. I have no wish
  or desire to live after the degradation of my country, and have
  no intention to survive its liberties, if life be the necessary
  sacrifice of their maintenance to the utmost of my abilities.
  (_Ibid._, pp. 313-314.)

No argument of expediency, no appeal to military necessity ever moved
him from the belief that the sole justification of government is the
maintenance of liberty, and that the sole guarantee of such liberty is
the orderly process of civil law. He was harassed by the encroachment
upon individual freedom demanded by war, north as well as south. “The
North to-day,” he said, “presents the spectacle of a free people having
gone to war to make freemen of slaves, while all they have as yet
attained is to make slaves of themselves” (_ibid._, p. 293). Perhaps no
other public man in America kept his head amidst the passions of the
time so completely as Stephens. He was utterly beyond reach of jingo
appeal, and he suffered what the individual must expect to suffer who
pits his single conscience against the mass will. He was branded as a
traitor, and only his extraordinary hold on the affections of the plain
people of Georgia saved him from the bitterest experience.

During the black period following the southern collapse, when he
was disfranchised, broken in health past mending, and hated by the
followers of President Davis, Stephens sought distraction in writing
American history. Three and a half years, from 1867 to 1870, he devoted
to his _Constitutional View of the Late War between the States_. The
case for states rights has never been more convincingly put than in
this monumental study. The first volume in particular, which deals
with the history of the Constitution, is an acute and able work. The
thesis on which it rests is the doctrine which Paine and Jefferson
derived from the French school, namely, that a constitutional compact
is terminable. Elaborated by Stephens and applied to the case in
question, the doctrine becomes this: that the right of secession is
a civil as well as a revolutionary right; that it is implied in the
compact originally entered into by the several states; that any state
may rightfully take back what it had peacefully granted, when such
action shall seem to it desirable. The sovereign commonwealth has
never abrogated its sovereignty; the Constitution is a Federal compact
amongst equals; the United States is a federated Union, not an organic
nation. To conceive of the organic law as a consolidating instrument
binding the individual citizen immediately to the central government,
as Webster and Judge Story had done, was not only unhistorical but
contrary to every fact and every tradition. To arrive at the principle
of consolidation, and hold that the right of secession is only a
revolutionary right, one must deliberately shut one’s eyes to the early
history of the Constitution.

Not content to prove the original compact nature of the
Constitution--an argument that runs through fourteen hundred pages,
buttressed by a mass of citations from all sources and wholly
convincing in its evidence--Stephens undertakes to prove the wisdom of
the fathers in establishing the federal union in compact. In respecting
existing loyalties to the several commonwealths, they not only
preserved the local democracies--which, as a Jeffersonian, Stephens
believed were the foundation of good government--but they established
the federal state on a strong and enduring foundation. The Hamiltonian
consolidationists had asserted that a strong state must rest on the
principle of coercive sovereignty, that it can he held together only
through the exercise of authority. Stephens replied by laying down the
counter principle that the secret of a strong and enduring state is to
be discovered in the spontaneous loyalty of its citizens, and that in
consequence a democracy which rests on the good will of the people as a
whole is the most enduring of all forms.

  A Government, to be worth anything, ... must be strong. Its parts
  and members must be held together by force of some sort. This I
  cordially admit. We do not differ as to the force or its extent; we
  differ only as to its nature and character. Should it be a physical
  or moral force? In my judgment, the strongest force that can hold
  the parts or constituent elements of any Government together is the
  affection of the people towards it. (_Constitutional View, etc._,
  Vol. I, p. 526.)

Affection, he reasoned, cannot be coerced. It must spring spontaneously
from the recognition that government is useful, that it is just, that
it treats all its parts and members equally, that it is an agency
erected by a free people to serve the ends of freedom. Allegiance is
an individual compact between the citizen and government. Destroy the
principle of voluntary allegiance, seek to coerce the citizen, impose
upon minorities the ruthless will of majorities, subjugate individual
commonwealths, and the federal Union which Jefferson believed to be
“the strongest Government on Earth,” would indeed become what Hamilton
in his blindness to the secret of power believed that it was--“a frail
and worthless fabric.” “But the indissoluble union between the several
states of this Confederated Nation is, after all, not in the _right_,
but in the _heart_” (_ibid._, Vol. I, p. 527). So long as the rights of
all are respected, the common interest and common loyalty will preserve
the union. Injustice alone is to be feared, for no political bonds can
long resist the action of this most potent of social dissolvents.

Modern as Stephens was in the assertion of the principle of good will
as the source of sovereignty in democratic government, he belonged to
his own generation in his blindness to economic motives. He thought
exclusively in legal and constitutional terms; he remained wholly a
lawyer. It is hard to understand how one so profoundly read in our
political history should have failed to discover the workings of
economic forces beneath the surface of politics. Calhoun, bred in
the same Jeffersonian school, had found his way through the mist of
equalitarianism to the solid realism of an earlier day; but to the last
of his fourteen hundred pages of exposition Stephens retained the
illusion that the political state is something apart from economics and
superior to it. He conceived of government as an end in itself, and
this lends an air of unreality to his thinking. An ardent Jeffersonian,
he reduced the philosophy of his master to the compact theory of
government. The economic basis of Jefferson’s philosophy, his love of
an agrarian order and hatred of capitalistic exploitation--motives
which serve to explain and justify his theory of local self
government--Stephens wholly ignores. The result is a grotesque
perversion of a philosophy which John Taylor had elaborated clearly.
Jefferson was a much greater political thinker than Stephens conceived,
although he called him the “greatest philosophical statesman” America
has produced. In his estimate of Andrew Jackson he falls into the same
mistake. He attempts to reduce the confused career of Jackson--half
middle-class in his earlier years and later returning to agrarian
principles--to the same narrow compass of the compact theory. Even
Webster, for whom he entertained “the highest esteem and admiration,”
and in praise of whose moral qualities he is almost fulsome,[405] he
quite failed to understand. Webster’s theory of the Constitution, he
clearly demonstrated, was utterly unhistorical; but Webster’s economic
alliances he ignored. What havoc was wrought in current politics by
suffering political theory to obscure economic reality is suggested by
the fact that Stephens, a Jeffersonian in every instinct, turned Whig
and voted for Webster in 1852--after the latter’s death. Politics makes
strange bedfellows, yet it must have been an ample bed that could sleep
the spokesman of an agrarian economy and the spokesman of capitalism
side by side.

In his attitude towards slavery Stephens was a product of his Georgia
environment. His views were ready-made, out of the common southern
storehouse. The economic determinism which he ignored in politics had
its revenge, and the man who often differed with his constituents on
political issues fell victim to the subtle power of economics. As the
South Carolina philosophy took form, issuing finally in the romantic
conception of a Greek democracy, it imposed itself imperiously on the
southern mind, on the commoner equally with the aristocrat. It was
impossible to escape, unless, like Moncure Conway, one were of an
idealistic temper far different from the common run. For Stephens it
proved impossible. In this matter of slavery he had no individual
opinion; his mind was molded by the common psychology and became a
repository of the common prejudice. He followed his fire-eating friend
Bob Toombs into the camp of Calhoun, and talked about a Greek democracy
in true Charleston style. In a speech delivered on March 21, 1861,
shortly after he was chosen Vice President of the Confederacy, he gave
expression to the new philosophy in these words:

  The prevailing ideas entertained by ... most of the leading
  statesmen at the time of the formation of the old Constitution
  were that the enslavement of the African was in violation of the
  laws of nature; that it was wrong in principle, socially, morally,
  and politically. It was an evil they knew not well how to deal
  with, but the general opinion of the men of that day was that,
  somehow or other in the order of Providence, the institution
  would be evanescent and pass away.... Those ideas, however,
  were fundamentally wrong. They rested upon the assumption of
  the equality of races. This was an error. Our new government is
  founded upon exactly the opposite idea; its foundations are laid,
  its corner-stone rests upon the great truth that the negro is not
  equal to the white man; that slavery--subordination to the superior
  race--is his natural and normal condition ... in conformity with
  the ordinance of the Creator.... Our Confederacy is founded upon
  principles in strict conformity with these [Divine] laws. This
  stone which was rejected by the first builders “is become the
  chief of the corner”--the real “corner-stone” in our new edifice.
  (Pendleton, _Alexander H. Stephens_, pp. 251-254.)

To the end of his life Stephens saw no reason to change his opinion
on negro slavery. He regarded it as more humane than wage slavery
because of the patriarchal responsibility devolving upon the master.
The institution was not founded, he said, on “the erroneous dogma of
the greatest good to the greatest number,” but on the broader principle
of securing “the greatest good possible, morally, intellectually, and
politically, to all classes of persons ... without necessary wrong or
detriment to any” (_Constitutional View, etc._, Vol. I, pp. 539-542).
In his relations with his own slaves he followed the best traditions
of the South. His kindness won their loyalty and affection. “Ef he
ain’t in heaven,” said a house servant after his death, “’tain’t no
use for anybody else to try to git dere” (Pendleton, _Alexander H.
Stephens_, p. 100). To the argument of Hinton Helper that the system
was economically ruinous to the poor white, he seems to have given no
consideration; but to the argument of the Abolitionist that it was
immoral, he replied with deep conviction. On that point he would not
yield an inch. After quoting a miscellany of Biblical texts from the
earliest Hebraic times down to Paul, he comments naïvely:

  To maintain that Slavery is _in itself sinful_, in the face of all
  that is said and written in the Bible upon the subject, with so
  many sanctions of the relation by the Deity himself, does seem to
  me to be little short of blasphemous! It is a direct imputation
  upon the wisdom and justice, as well as the declared ordinances of
  God, as they are written in the inspired oracles, to say nothing of
  their manifestation in the universe around us. (_Ibid._, Vol. II,
  p. 83.)

It is doubtful wisdom for the layman to meddle with Scripture. Stephens
was a sounder interpreter of the writings of the constitutional fathers
than of the will of God.

A careful historian devoted to a single idea rather than a creative
political thinker; a thorough democrat of the Jeffersonian school,
humanitarian, liberty-loving, courageous; a man who devoted his life
to the preservation of constitutional liberty as it had taken shape
before the industrial revolution unsettled the basis of modern life,
Alexander H. Stephens was an honest gentleman who bravely defended
the traditions of the South in the face of a new order. He was of
an earlier generation, instinctively hostile to all consolidation,
which, under the impulse of economic evolution, was obliterating state
lines, gathering financial power in great reservoirs, and creating a
new alignment between labor and capital. With such evolution it was
axiomatic that political practice should follow economic fact; that
a consolidating wealth should create a consolidated political state.
Great enterprises with ramifications in every section would not long
tolerate a multitude of state sovereignties; sovereignty must be
centralized at Washington where it could be guided and controlled.
The war only hastened what in the nature of things was inevitable.
Stephens rightly insisted that slavery was only the immediate _casus
belli_. The deeper cause was the antagonistic conceptions of the theory
and functions of the political state that emerged from antagonistic
economic systems. That the principle of local self-government should
have been committed to the cause of slavery, that it was loaded with
an incubus certain to alienate the liberalism of the North, may be
accounted one of the tragedies of American history. It was disastrous
to American democracy, for it removed the last brake on the movement
of consolidation, submerging the democratic individualism of the
South in an unwieldy mass will, and surrendering the country to the
principle of capitalistic exploitation. Stephens never seems to have
realized this grave mistake in strategy. He never realized that the
principle of democracy, in the cause of which he believed that he was
faithful to the end, received a staggering blow from the enlistment of
northern liberalism under the banners of a consolidating nationalism.
He remained to the last an unreconstructed Jeffersonian, convinced that
the lost cause was the cause of liberal democracy.


IV • Francis Lieber • A New-Modeled Federalism

To turn from Calhoun and Stephens to Francis Lieber is to pass from the
South to the North, from an obsolescent political theory to a prophetic
conception, from the doctrine of states rights to the principle of an
evolving state that draws all lesser sovereignties into its orbit by
the law of attraction. Joseph Story had educed the legal conception
of the organic nature of the federal union from the terms of the
Constitution; Francis Lieber provided a philosophical background
that justified the same conclusion; and under the combined legal
and philosophical attack the compact theory found its philosophical
breastworks leveled, its natural-rights theory undermined, and its
commanding position effectively turned.

The figure of our first academic political philosopher appears oddly
out of place in the midst of South Carolina politicians, yet fate
set the studious German in the thick of the Fire Eaters, to cogitate
a philosophy of freedom in the land of slavery, and to justify the
spirit of nationalism amongst the advocates of particularism. For
twenty-one years he lived quietly in his southern classroom and study,
disregarding the passions that buzzed about him, elaborating ideas
that in later years came to exercise a determining influence upon
our academic political thinkers, and publishing ponderous volumes
that marked the beginning of the swing away from the natural-rights
philosophy and towards the conception of an engrossing political
state. Applying German liberalism to American constitutionalism, he
succeeded in new-modeling the Federalism of Hamilton and sending it
forth to meet the needs of an imperializing generation. He agreed
with Calhoun in the latter’s attack on French romantic theories; he
agreed with Webster in the conception of the organic nature of the
federal compact; but he went further and elaborated a theory of the
state as an historical development that receives its form and spirit
from the impress of social needs. Building on a foundation provided by
Montesquieu and Burke, guided by Hamilton and Marshall, he set about
erecting a structure that in the hands of Theodore Woolsey and John W.
Burgess came to overtop all local and state sovereignties--an imperial
authority that, in the words of Burgess, must become “the organ of
interpretation in last instance of the order of life for its subjects”
(Merriam, _American Political Theories_, p. 299). In that subtle shift
of vocabulary from citizen to subject appears the final result of the
speculations begun by Lieber, which in rejecting the natural-rights
philosophy overthrew the defenses erected by the eighteenth century
against an engrossing political state, and set the individual citizen
at the mercy of a new divine-right sovereignty. “Really the state
cannot be conceived,” according to Burgess, “without sovereignty,
_i.e._ without unlimited power over its subjects; that is its very
essence” (Merriam, _American Political Ideas: 1865-1917_, p. 380).

Between the democratic Stephens and the imperializing Burgess stands
the work of Francis Lieber. Born in Germany in the year 1800, son of
a well-to-do Berlin family, Lieber’s youth and young manhood fell in
stirring times. When only fifteen he served in the Waterloo campaign
under Blücher, was wounded, stricken with typhus, and nearly lost his
life. From those perilous experiences he emerged a pronounced liberal.
During the Metternich reaction he fell under suspicion, served a
prison term for his political opinions, graduated from the University
of Jena, and in 1822 went to Greece with a group of young German
idealists to serve the cause of revolution. Disgusted with the Greek
character he made his way to Italy, fell in with the historian Niebuhr,
became tutor to the latter’s son for a year, continued his university
studies, was a second time imprisoned, and finally in 1826 quitted
a hopelessly reactionary Germany, spent a year in England, and then
emigrated to America, following the example of Prof. Charles Follen.
In Boston he taught gymnastics for a time, edited the _Encyclopedia
Americana_, and in 1835 was appointed to the professorship of history
and political economy in South Carolina College. Here he remained
till 1856, teaching, writing, and acquiring academic fame. In 1855
he aspired to the presidency of the college, a post then vacant, but
his political theories were in disrepute with the legislature, and his
views on slavery were under general suspicion. Becoming embroiled with
the politicians, he lost the post, resigned his professorship, and went
to New York City, and in 1857 he was called to the new chair of history
and political science at Columbia, where he remained till his death in
1872.

The two books on which rests his reputation, _Political Ethics_
(1838-1839) and _Civil Liberty and Self-Government_ (1853), are
substantial volumes quite lacking the genial note that marks his
_Stranger in America_ (1834), a series of sketchy letters that
among other things contains an extraordinarily vivid account of his
experiences at Waterloo (_Letters VI, VII_). To a casual reader these
excursions into the philosophy of politics are as soberly respectable
as a judge’s wig, as studiously conventional as a professor’s gown.
He went about the business of blowing up the accepted Jeffersonian
philosophy decently, in the name of the law and under the high sanction
of liberty. There can be no doubt that this German liberal was a
passionate lover of liberty, and no doubt of his conviction that
freedom is possible only in a society under the reign of law. Like
Hamilton, he had no local ties or state loyalties to circumscribe his
political allegiance. It was natural for him to think in terms of
nationality. His bitter experience in Germany had laid open to him the
fatal weakness of petty states, and he was loath to see repeated in
America the history of warring antagonisms that disrupted the German
people. He was a profound admirer of the British constitution, more
English than German in his conception of liberty.

The nationalism of Lieber was identical with that of John Adams. It
was, in a phrase, government by law. But this government by law was
both political and legal. The former, he believed, was admirably
provided for by the federal Constitution; the latter was equally
provided for by the body of the Common Law; with these twin safeguards,
he was convinced, the liberty of the citizen was assured. In his
interpretation of the Constitution Lieber added little that was new.
He followed the older Federalists back to Montesquieu, and accepted
the existing system of constitutional checks as the final word of
political wisdom. In _Civil Liberty and Self-Government_ he glorifies
the federal system as the apotheosis of representative republicanism,
quite unconcerned at its undemocratic features. The sufficiency of
the Common Law to all social needs and the implicit sovereignty of
the judiciary, he regards as equally axiomatic. “The law,” he says,
“must be the lord and our ‘earthly god,’ and not a man, a set of men,
or the multitude” (_Civil Liberty and Self-Government_, p. 208). Yet
with the common blindness of the legalist, he proceeds to erect a
profession above society, and exalts a group of judges, appointive and
not elective, preferably holding office for life, as the embodiment of
impartial justice. That it is a presumption contrary to fact seems not
to have entered his mind. That judicial interpretation implies judicial
legislation, and that judicial legislation implies the sovereignty
of lawyers, are logical deductions of which his philosophy made no
account. Unfriendly to a democracy, he was content to yield authority
into the hands of the judiciary.

But if in his exaltation of the Common Law he was as extreme a legalist
as Hugh Legaré, in his doctrine of historical evolution he discovered
the seeds of freedom in what he calls institutions. By these he means
the organic expressions of daily life, or the customs of society which
take spontaneous form from its needs. It is no other than the social
fabric that Tom Paine was fond of contrasting, in its pervasive and
beneficent coöperation, with the repressive tyrannies of the political
state. Where liberty reposes thus in the social fabric, Lieber argues,
the sovereign power is held in check; and where institutional freedom
has not taken root, the political state will run into absolutism.

“Liberty,” he argues, “is a thing that grows, and institutions are its
very garden beds. There is no liberty which as a national blessing has
leaped into existence in full armor like Minerva from the head of Jove.
Liberty is crescive in its nature. It takes time, and is difficult,
like all noble things.... It must be defended, developed, conquered,
and bled for. It can never be added, like a mere capital on a column;
it must pervade the whole body” (_Civil Liberty and Self-Government_,
pp. 334-335, third edition). “Liberty stands in need of character,” and
this character is received from social institutions. He then proceeds:

  ... An institution is a system or body of usages, laws, or
  regulations of extensive and recurring operation, containing within
  itself an organism by which it effects its own independent action,
  continuance, and generally its own farther development. Its object
  is to generate, effect, regulate, or sanction a succession of
  acts, transactions, or productions of a peculiar class or kind.
  The idea of an institution implies a degree of self-government.
  Laws act through human agents, and these are, in the case of
  institutions, their officers or members. (_Ibid._, p. 300.)

It was the deep-rooted _civisme anglais_, he believed, that had
developed the orderly liberty of the English race; and it is this same
institutional spirit that provides the surest check upon the augmenting
power of the political state. There can be no tyranny where society is
trained and disciplined in liberty.

The creative source and origin of this excellent _civisme anglais_
Lieber discovered in the principle of local self-government; in
the exercise of local control of local interests; the enjoyment of
innumerable lesser sovereignties within the larger national organism.
These lesser sovereignties are both civil and social, and the amount
of liberty enjoyed in a given society is measured by the independent
vigor with which they function. The exercise of definite rights by the
several states is clearly one of the important institutional functions
of self-government, but it is only one. The New England town-meeting,
county and city governments, are even more important, while outside
these civil organisms are innumerable social organisms, exercising
their common right of establishing by-laws for their own governance,
and spreading the spirit of liberty through all the practices of
society.

  According to the Anglican view, institutional self-government
  consists in the fact that all the elementary parts of the
  government, as well as the highest and most powerful branches,
  consist in real institutions ... [but it] consists, farther,
  in the unstinted freedom and fair protection which are granted
  to institutions of all sorts, commercial, religious, cultural,
  scientific, charitable, and industrial, to germinate and to
  grow--provided they are moral and do not invade the equal rights
  of others. It receives its aliment from a pervading spirit of
  self-reliance and self-respect--the real afflatus of liberty.
  (_Ibid._, p. 320.)

This, quite evidently, is the spirit of _laissez faire_ applied
to political philosophy. A people thus used to order their social
affairs, as the English people have long done, will prove competent
to manage their political affairs; and the widespread spirit of
individual independence will prevent the drift towards unregulated
centralism with its corollary of tyrannical power. The conception of
institutional liberty embodies much of the spirit of Jeffersonianism,
and it goes back in its origins as far as Roger Williams. The
states-rights advocates, Lieber implies, were mistaken in seeking
the principle of liberty through particularism. In magnifying the
individual commonwealth they overlooked the more vital units of
self-government. To erect the state above the nation was no lasting
solution of the most difficult problem in political philosophy, namely,
the coördination of sovereign power with individual liberty; it was
only to substitute one sovereignty for another, whereas to encourage
the spread of self-governing bodies through society was to provide the
necessary countercheck to centralizing power and coördinate liberty and
sovereignty under the reign of law.

A stimulating thinker was this German liberal with his historical
method and his conception of an evolutionary freedom rooted in the
institutions of the English people. He gave a new turn to speculation
on the origin and nature of the political state, the immediate
consequence of which was the repudiation of the compact theory and
natural-rights philosophy by our academic political scientists. The
organic conception of the political state fell in with the centralizing
movement that followed the Civil War, a movement which the forces of
institutional self-government have been powerless to prevent. On the
whole the influence of Lieber has been rather against than for that
liberty which was so dear to him, and the explanation is to be found
in the tragic divorce, in his thinking, of politics and economics. His
inveterate legalism and his failure to investigate the economics of
politics proved in the end the undoing of his liberalism.


Footnotes

[402] See Merriam, _American Political Theories_, p. 231; Gaillard
Hunt, _John C. Calhoun_, p. 64.

[403] See “A Disquisition on Government” in Calhoun’s _Works_, Vol. I,
pp. 41-42.

[404] See Pendleton, _Alexander H. Stephens_, p. 231, note.

[405] See _A Constitutional View, etc._, Vol. I, pp. 406-408.




