Chapter II • The Heritage of Jeffersonianism


I

To the young Virginia Republicans of the year 1800, Jeffersonianism
seemed to be a comprehensive social philosophy peculiarly adapted to
their needs. It offered a practical and humane program of national
development in harmony with existing fact and native genius. It had
not yet been distorted by the caprice of circumstance into a somewhat
nebulous idealism, nor confined within the narrower limits of political
equalitarianism and states-rights theory. By later generations
Jefferson has been interpreted too exclusively in terms of the
Declaration of Independence, the glowing idealism of which has proved
curiously elastic and has been stretched by later libertarian movements
to meet their special and particular ends: by the Jacksonian democracy
in their struggle for manhood suffrage; by the Abolitionists in their
attack upon a slave-sanctioning Constitution; by other idealists in
their various crusades. The great name of Jefferson, in consequence,
has come to be commonly associated with the conception of democracy and
the ideal of social justice. But to his young Virginia followers in the
morning of the Republican movement, the perennial suggestiveness of
their leader lay in the fact that he embodied for them the many-sided
liberalism of French revolutionary thought, its economic and social
idealisms equally with political. They interpreted him more adequately,
for they understood, as later interpreters frequently have not, how
deeply the roots of his natural-rights philosophy went down into
current economics. Of the different French writers who gave shape
and substance to his thinking, the strongest creative influence on
the mature Jefferson came from the Physiocratic group, from Quesnay,
Condorcet, Mirabeau, Du Pont de Nemours, the brilliant founders of an
economy that was primarily social rather than narrowly industrial or
financial. Historically the Physiocratic school is as sharply aligned
with idealistic agrarianism as the Manchester school is aligned with
capitalistic industrialism. The conception that agriculture is the
single productive form of labor, that from it alone comes the _produit
net_ or ultimate net labor increment, and that bankers, manufacturers
and middlemen belong to the class of sterile workers, profoundly
impressed the Virginia mind, bred up in a plantation economy and
concerned for the welfare and dignity of agriculture.

Franklin had first given currency to the Physiocratic theory in America
a generation earlier, but it was Jefferson who spread it widely among
the Virginia planters. He did more; he provided the new agrarianism
with a politics and a sociology. From the wealth of French writers
he formulated a complete libertarian philosophy. His receptive mind
was saturated with romantic idealism which assumed native, congenial
form in precipitation. From Rousseau, Godwin and Paine, as well as
from Quesnay and Condorcet, came the idea of political justice and the
conception of a minimized political state, assuming slightly different
forms from filtering through different minds. The early doctrine of
_laissez faire, laissez passer_--a phrase given currency by Gournay,
the godfather of the Physiocratic school--proved to be curiously
fruitful in the field of political speculation, as in economic. From
it issued a sanction for natural rights, the theory of progress, the
law of justice, and the principle of freedom. The right of coercion was
restricted by it to the narrowest limits, and the political state was
shorn of all arbitrary power. “Authority,” the Physiocratic thinkers
concluded, “should only employ the force of the community to compel
madmen and depraved men to make their conduct conform to the principles
of justice.”

So far Jefferson went gladly with the Physiocrats, but in their
acceptance of a benevolent despotism he discovered a denial of their
first principles, and turned to the more congenial democratic group.
With the political principles of Godwin and Paine he was in hearty
accord. With them he accepted as an historical fact the principle that
government is everywhere and always at war with natural freedom, and
from this he deduced the characteristic doctrine that the lover of
freedom will be jealous of delegated power, and will seek to hold the
political state to strict account. From this same principle, following
Paine, he deduced the doctrine of the terminable nature of compact,
which he set over against the legal doctrine of inviolability. In this
matter French liberalism and English legalism were at opposite poles.
Replying to Burke’s doctrine of irrevocable compact, Paine had written
_The Rights of Man_, which Jefferson did much to popularize in America,
and with the broad principles of which he was in complete accord.
“The earth belongs in usufruct to the living,” Paine had argued, and
the dead possess no rights over it. Government from the grave is a
negation of the inalienable rights of the newborn; hence social justice
demands that a time limit should automatically revoke all compacts.
Since no generation can rightly deed away the heritage of the unborn,
the natural limit of every compact is the lifetime of the generation
ratifying it. “No society,” Jefferson said, “can make a perpetual
Constitution, or even a perpetual law.”

In this suggestive theory of the terminable nature of compact is to be
found the philosophical origin of the later doctrine of states rights.
However deeply it might be covered over by constitutional lawyers and
historians who defended the right of secession, the doctrine was there
implicitly, and the southern cause would have been more effectively
served if legal refinements had been subordinated to philosophical
justification of this fundamental doctrine. With a frank contempt for
all legalists Jefferson believed that social well-being was not to be
bounded by constitutional limitations or statutory enactments; that
political action should be governed by reason rather than by historical
precedent. He had discovered that the political state does not remain
static, but gathers power by the law of physical attraction; with
increasing power it becomes increasingly dangerous to natural freedom;
hence a long-established and venerable constitution may become, by
reason of its hold upon the popular affection, the most useful of
agencies to cloak aggressions on the rights of the people. The love
of profits is always seeking to overthrow the rule of justice. Human
selfishness persistently distorts civic conduct, warping it from ideal
ends. But the shortcomings of existing political states cannot abrogate
the law of justice or destroy the love of freedom. To safeguard freedom
from encroachment by the political state, and to establish the rule of
justice, were always the great and difficult ends that Jefferson aimed
at, and as a follower of the Physiocratic school and a Virginia planter
he turned naturally to a _laissez faire_ agrarianism in opposition to a
centralizing capitalism.

But he was much too sound a political thinker and too sagacious a
party leader to rest his case upon abstract theory. In all his later
writings and counsels he kept his mind close to economic fact, and
the Jeffersonian movement was a long and effective training school in
the economic basis of politics. It habituated the motley rank and file
of the electorate to think in economic terms and to regard political
parties as the instruments of economic groups. This was in keeping
with the soundest eighteenth-century tradition, before romantic dogma
had divorced politics and realism; and in so far Jefferson agreed
with his Federalist opponents, Hamilton and John Adams. A decade of
acrimonious debate had made it plain to the common voter that the real
struggle in America lay between the rival capitalist and agrarian
interests, of which the Federalist and Republican parties were the
political instruments. The Congressional enactments of the first twelve
years had further clarified the issue. The funding plan had visibly
increased the number and wealth of the rising capitalist group. The
first banks were being erected and the complex machinery of modern
credit--the hated “paper system” that had driven out the traditional
metallic currency--was being rapidly built up. A small financial group
in the northern cities was growing powerful from discounting and
money-brokerage. The truth was slowly coming home to the farmers and
small men that war is profitable to the few at the cost of the many;
that from the egg of war-financing was hatched a brood of middlemen
who exploited the post-war hardships and grew rich from the debts that
impoverished the producing farmers. This ambitious class, hitherto
negligible in America, was provided with the means to make a vigorous
fight; it invoked the political state as an ally, and under Hamilton’s
leadership used the administration to serve its financial interests.
It looked with open hostility upon every agrarian program, was cynical
towards French romantic theories, and was restrained by no scruples. To
loose the hands of this capable class from the helm of government, to
keep America agricultural, and the Federal state secondary in all but
necessary police powers to the several commonwealths, was the avowed
and logical purpose of the Jeffersonian Republicans.[398]

The leaders of the movement were men who in capacity and training were
worthy opponents of the capable Federalists. In surprising number
they were from the Old Dominion, gentlemen of the best Virginia
stock, who in the last decades of the eighteenth century engrafted
upon a generous plantation tradition the Physiocratic doctrines of
France. A finer race of gentlemen America has never produced, and it
was fortunate for the Jacksonian movement, which produced no notable
thinkers and contributed little to political and economic theory, that
the preceding generation had given adequate form to the philosophy of
agrarianism. That theory took definite shape between 1800 and 1820.
In the days of Hamilton’s control of the Treasury Department, the
agrarian opposition was weakened by the lack of such a theory; but the
necessities of the situation were a prod to the young Republicans,
and the philosophy of agrarianism rapidly crystallized. In its final
form it was an extraordinarily interesting and native expression of
two hundred years’ experience of a society founded on agriculture--a
reasoned defense of an older America against the ambitions of a younger
and more vigorous.


II • John Taylor • An Agrarian Economist

The intellectual leader of the young Republicans in the great attack
on the economics of Federalism was a thinker too little recognized by
later Americans. His just fame has been obscured with the cause for
which he labored, and his reputation lies buried with the old agrarian
_régime_. Nevertheless John Taylor of Caroline County, Virginia, “the
philosopher and statesman of agrarianism,” was the most penetrating
critic of Hamiltonian finance and the most original economist of his
generation. Unambitious, simple, honest, calm and dignified in bearing,
he embodied the heroic virtues of the great age of Virginia. In his
_Thirty Years’ View_, Thomas H. Benton describes him thus:

  I can hardly figure to myself the ideal of a republican statesman
  more perfect and complete than he was in reality:--plain and
  solid, a wise counsellor, a ready and vigorous debater, acute and
  comprehensive, ripe in all historical and political knowledge,
  innately republican--modest, courteous, benevolent, hospitable,--a
  skilful, practical farmer, giving his time to his farm and his
  books, when not called by an emergency to the public service--and
  returning to his books and his farm when the emergency was over....
  He belonged to that constellation of great men which shone so
  brightly in Virginia in his day, and the light of which was not
  limited to Virginia, or our America, but spread through the bounds
  of the civilized world. (Chapter XVIII.)

Taylor was a member of Congress at the time of the funding operations
and contributed two notable pamphlets to the public discussion: the
first, issued in 1793, entitled _An Examination of the Late Proceedings
in Congress Respecting the Official Conduct of the Secretary of the
Treasury_; the second, issued the following year, entitled _An Inquiry
into the Principles and Tendencies of Certain Public Measures_. Twenty
years later, in 1814, he embodied his matured convictions in a stout
volume, printed at Fredericksburg, entitled _An Inquiry into the
Principles and Policy of the Government of the United States_. The
work is tediously prolix--dressed, according to Benton, “in a quaint
Sir Edward Coke style”--even more tediously moralistic; but in spite
of very evident stylistic shortcomings, it deserves, in the opinion
of Professor Beard, “to rank among the two or three really historic
contributions to political science which have been produced in the
United States” (_Economic Origins of Jeffersonian Democracy_, p. 323).
It was the last of the eighteenth-century works, solidly reasoned,
keeping a main eye upon economics and refusing to wander off into
the bog of constitutionalism, concerned rather with the springs and
sources of political action and the objectives of political parties. It
summed up adequately the agrarian argument against capitalism, analyzed
the current tendencies, and provided a convenient handbook for the
Jacksonian movement, from which the latter drew freely in the dispute
over the Bank.

Like Jefferson’s, the agrarianism of Taylor was founded in the
Physiocratic economy. He was convinced that the tiller of the soil
was the only true economist, and that if republican America were to
retain its republican virtues it must guard against every system of
exploitation, for in exploitation lay the origin of social caste.
America had rid itself of the feudal principle of a landed aristocracy,
which in the past had provided the machinery of exploitation, by the
abolition of the law of primogeniture and entail, only to be confronted
by a graver danger, the new aristocracy of liquid wealth. His main
purpose, therefore, was an examination of the sources of power of the
capitalistic order, and the successive steps by which it had risen to
power. His analysis is acute and reveals a mind concerned with the
realities that lie beneath outward appearances. It is the economics
of history that concern him most, for as fully as John Adams he was
convinced that economics determine the form of the political state.
In his analysis of the origins of government, he discovers in every
society a master class that becomes the beneficiary of sovereign
power: the political state is first erected and thereafter used to
safeguard the past acquisitions and to further the present ambitions
of a dominant economic group which calls itself an aristocracy; and
such an aristocracy imposes its will upon the exploited mass, crudely
by the sword and purse, and subtly by the skillful use of psychology.
Once in control of the political state it intrenches itself behind
certain fictions which profess to carry moral sanction. This political
jugglery plays many tricks to catch the gullible; arrayed in the garb
of patriotism, loyalty, obedience to authority, law and order, divine
right, it carries a weighty appeal. When these moral fictions fail,
the fictions of the law step in, and such doctrines as the sacredness
of contract translate the stealings of the master class into vested
interests which the state is bound to protect. There is a fine irony
in Taylor’s implied references to Burke’s doctrine of a changeless
constitution based on a nonrevocable compact, and Hamilton’s doctrine
of the public faith, which, he argues, were clearly designed to
sacrifice the common good to the interests of a class:

  Law enacted for the benefit of a nation, is repealable; but law
  enacted for the benefit of individuals, though oppressive to
  a nation, is a charter, and irrepealable.... Posterity, being
  bound by the contracts of its ancestry, in every case which
  diminishes its rights, man is daily growing less free by a
  doctrine which never increases them. A government intrusted with
  the administration of publick affairs for the good of a nation,
  has a right to deed away that nation for the good of itself or
  its partisans, by law charters for monopolies or sinecures; and
  posterity is bound by these deeds. But although an existing
  generation can never reassume the liberty or property held by its
  ancestors, it may recompense itself by abridging, or abolishing the
  right of its descendants. (Page 61.)

The two theories to which he devotes chief attention are the natural
aristocracy theory of John Adams, and the capitalistic aristocracy
theory of Hamilton. The first of these takes its bias from stressing
the inequality inherent in the nature of men; individuals are
biologically unequal; and from this fact Adams deduces that the thrifty
rise to opulence and the thriftless sink into poverty by reason of
individual qualities. Society can neither keep a strong man down nor
thrust a weak man up. Between the rich and the poor, the capable and
incapable, a state of war exists, held in check by the strong hand
in feudal and monarchical societies, but necessarily open and bitter
in a democracy. Hence the inevitable failure of democracy wherever it
is tried, and the necessity of nicely calculated checks in a republic
to prevent the equal tyranny of an aristocracy and a mob. The second
theory, the Hamiltonian, justifies itself by the same theory of
human nature. It accepts the fact of social inequality as inherent
in men, but it sees no reason to pursue Utopian dreams. Recognizing
the universal fact of economic control, it erects the state upon
exploitation as preferable to anarchy. This capitalistic state it
defends before a gullible public by eloquent appeals to the national
faith, the security of property, the fear of lawlessness.

Having thus analyzed the two theories Taylor seeks to cut the ground
from under both by arguing that social classes cannot be historically
explained by the fact of biological inequality amongst individuals, but
rather by accidental opportunity, unscrupulousness, and brute force.
All aristocracies, whether feudal, natural, or capitalistic, take their
origin and uphold their dominion, not from superior excellence or
capacity, but from exploitation, that beginning in a small way grows
by what it feeds on till it assumes the proportions of a colossus.
Exploitation breeds a continually augmenting exploitation that conducts
inevitably to caste regimentation. All aristocracies are founded in
social theft. They are not established in the morality of nature, but
exist as parasites on the social wealth; they levy upon the producer;
and the only preventive is to destroy the foundations on which they
rest by taking from them the means of exploitation.

In conjuring up phantom dangers of feudal aristocracies, Taylor pointed
out, John Adams was fighting dead issues. No feudal aristocracy could
arise in America; land was too plentiful and the quick jealousy of the
people would strike it down. The danger to republican institutions
was closer at hand; it was the poison of the new capitalism that was
spreading its virus through all the veins of the national life. And
in order that the American people might know something of the history
of this innovating force which they must reckon with, John Taylor
proceeded to open to them a page in the economics of capitalism. The
aristocracy of credit, founded on “monopoly and incorporation,” he
pointed out, had arisen first in England with the growing power of
the middle class; it had gone forward swiftly in consequence of the
Napoleonic wars, and through the agencies of the Bank of England and
the Consolidated Debt, it had secured control of the public credit. It
had arisen first in America in consequence of the financial disturbance
resulting from the Revolutionary War, and had further strengthened its
position by the War of 1812. Ambitious men had taken advantage of the
national necessities to create an artificial paper system identical
with that of England. They had profited immensely from the funding
operations and the National Bank; they were setting up their private
banks in every city and town, and through the manipulation of credit
were taking heavy toll of the national production. A money monopoly was
the most dangerous of all monopolies, and the master of all.

Taylor had grown up under the traditional domestic economy. He was
habituated to think of production in terms of consumption, and of
money as a stable measure of exchange. He could not adjust his mind
to the theory of production for profit, of middleman speculation, as
socially legitimate; and when that speculation extended to the national
currency, and exacted its profits from the medium of exchange, he took
alarm. Gold and silver are fairly stable commodities that allow of no
sudden increase or diminution, and in consequence a specie currency
does not readily lend itself to speculative juggling. But a paper
system has no natural limitations. Expanded and contracted at the
will of speculators, it subjects the business of the country to the
exploitation of money brokers. Vast sums had thus been taken from the
people by the funding operations. Gold and silver had been driven out
of circulation, and with their disappearance a riot of speculation
had begun by which only the brokers had profited. Such was the origin
of the new money aristocracy that had already taken possession of
the state and was using it for the sole end of exploitation. America
must make choice between agrarianism and capitalism; the two were
incompatible, John Taylor was convinced, and unless the ambitions of
the paper-money aristocracy were held in check, the American producer
would come under the heel of middle-class exploitation.

So suggestive was the reasoning of Taylor, so interesting for the light
it throws on the agrarian mind of the Virginia Republicans, that it
will be well to set down his theses in compact form. As summarized
admirably by Professor Beard, his argument runs thus:

  1. The masses have always been exploited by ruling classes, royal,
  ecclesiastical, or feudal, which have been genuine economic castes
  sustaining their power by psychological devices such as “loyalty to
  the throne and altar.”

  2. Within recent times a new class, capitalistic in character,
  has sprung up, based on exploitation through inflated public
  paper, bank stock, and a protective tariff, likewise with its
  psychological devices, “public faith, national integrity, and
  sacred credit.”

  3. In the United States, this class was built up by Hamilton’s
  fiscal system, the bank, and protective tariff, all of which
  are schemes designed to filch wealth from productive labor,
  particularly labor upon the land.

  4. Thus was created a fundamental conflict between the capitalistic
  and agrarian interests which was the origin of parties in the
  United States.

  5. Having no political principles, capitalism could fraternize with
  any party that promised protection, and in fact after the victory
  of the Republicans successfully entrenched itself in power under
  the new cover.

  6. The only remedy is to follow the confiscatory examples of
  other classes and destroy special privilege without compensation.
  (_Economic Origins of Jeffersonian Democracy_, p. 351.)

In the great battle of ideas that followed the conflict of interests,
the Virginia agrarians armed themselves with trenchant weapons.
In intellectual equipment they were a match for the ablest of
the Federalists; in social idealism, in generous concern for the
_res publica_, or common public business, in sober and practical
humanitarianism, they were far superior. Between John Taylor of
Virginia, spokesman of planter agrarianism, and Fisher Ames of
Massachusetts, spokesman of Boston Federalism, the contrast could
scarcely be greater. It is a contrast in social culture, in humane
ideals, in interpretations of the native genius of America; and in the
comparison it is not the Virginia Republican who suffers.


Footnotes

[398] See Charles A. Beard, _The Economic Origins of Jeffersonian
Democracy_, Chapter XIII.




