Chapter II • Ralph Waldo Emerson • Transcendental Critic


At the age of thirty-six the man who was to become the most searching
critic of contemporary America expressed his conception of his mission
in the following passage:

  What shall be the substance of my shrift? Adam in the garden, I am
  to new-name all the beasts of the field and all the gods in the
  sky. I am to invite men drenched in Time to recover themselves
  and come out of time, and taste their native immortal air. I
  am to fire with what skill I can the artillery of sympathy and
  emotion. I am to indicate constantly, though all unworthy, the
  Ideal and Holy Life, the life within life, the Forgotten Good, the
  Unknown Cause in which we sprawl and sin. I am to try the magic of
  sincerity, that luxury permitted only to kings and poets. I am to
  celebrate the spiritual powers in their infinite contrast to the
  mechanical powers and the mechanical philosophy of this time. I am
  to console the brave sufferers under evils whose end they cannot
  see, by appeals to the great optimism, self-affirmed in all bosoms.
  (_Journals_, Vol. V, p. 288.)

Seven days before Emerson set down this transcendental pronouncement,
he had written in his journal a different comment:

  A question which well deserves examination now is the Dangers of
  Commerce. This invasion of Nature by Trade with its Money, its
  Credit, its Steam, its Railroad, threatens to upset the balance of
  man, and establish a new, universal Monarchy more tyrannical than
  Babylon or Rome. Very faint and few are the poets or men of God.
  Those who remain are so antagonistic to this tyranny that they
  appear mad or morbid, and are treated as such. Sensible of this
  extreme unfitness they suspect themselves. And all of us apologize
  when we ought not, and congratulate ourselves when we ought not.
  (_Ibid._, Vol. V, pp. 285-6.)

In such comments and others scattered plentifully through his Journals,
Emerson essayed to make clear to himself the function of transcendental
criticism as he felt himself called to practice it. It was to be
no trivial or easy duty. In the midst of a boastful materialism,
shot through with cant and hypocrisy and every insincerity, fat and
slothful in all higher things, the critic proposed to try the magic
of sincerity, to apply the test of spiritual values to the material
forces and mechanical philosophies of the times. His very life must
embody criticism; his every act and word must pronounce judgment on
the barren and flatulent gods served by his countrymen. He must be a
thinker and as such he must summon to the bar of a nobler philosophy
the current standards of value and conduct. Men of the greatest
reputation must not be spared; he must “issue a _quo warranto_ and
revoke the characters of fame,” overruling the verdict of newspaper
editors and the acclaim of the electorate. Here was a revolutionary
business indeed, that the critic was proposing to himself; and the
calm serenity with which he set about it was disconcerting. A thinker
loose in the America of Daniel Webster, a thinker who proposed to
test men and measures by the magic of sincerity, was likely to prove
an unpleasantly disturbant factor in a world of pretense. Measured by
such standards the current philosophies must bate and dwindle, and the
common ideals shrink to the mean and paltry. The life of an honest
thinker laid on the America of 1840 would reveal how far short it came
from the stature of intellectual manhood.

Emerson the critic has been too much obscured to common view by Emerson
the brilliant dispenser of transcendental aphorisms. The oracular
_Essays_ with their confident wisdom--the sententious expression of
the middle period of a life that came to late maturity--interpose
themselves between the young priest whose intellectual interests
quietly detached themselves from Unitarian orthodoxy, and the mature
critic whose loyalties quietly detached themselves from the gods of his
generation. The very brilliancy of the _Essays_ conceals the laborious
processes by which their abundant wisdom was distilled. One must go
to the _Journals_ for that--to those intimate records that reveal how
patiently he sought for truth and how honestly he followed it. Wisdom
did not come to him of its own accord; it was painfully groped for.
As an introspective Puritan youth he began early to keep a diary of
his intellectual life, gathering into successive journals the savings
from his discursive readings. For years as a quiet student he lived
in a world of moral aphorisms, a cold, thin atmosphere where gnomic
phrases bloomed and ancient oracles uttered judgment. This was the
seedtime of his mind. He was making acquaintance with the noble dead,
gathering their utterances to make for himself a new testament. “No
man could be better occupied,” he said later, “than in making his own
bible by harkening to all those sentences which now here, now there,
now in nursery rhymes, now in Hebrew, now in English bards, thrill
him like the sound of a trumpet.” As a young man he made this his
chief concern. His early journals are an ample nursery where cuttings
from all philosophies are set out, there to grow into such plants as
circumstance should permit. The ancestral cult of the book was in his
blood, and living as he did under the threat of ill health, none too
confident that the years would lengthen out before him, he forced
himself to a severe intellectual regimen. To invest his days wisely
was his single purpose. He wanted only the best securities for his
investments, and what he got he carefully deposited, together with
the increments of his own thought, to draw upon at later need. There
were no wastrel forays in his intellectual life, no unpruned riot of
growth, but the very odds and ends of his meditation were carefully
treasured to be used when other materials were lacking. Fortunately
the stuff was of good quality that outlasted many makings-over, till
finally he got the cut to his liking. From this discipline of years
came his superlative mastery of the sententious sentence; his brilliant
utterances are rich with the thought he has crammed into them.

The cheerful serenity that never deserted him was a triumph of will
over circumstance. It was a singularly cheerless world that bred him,
subsisting by sheer will power, eating its heart out with heroic
ambitions, too grimly earnest to enjoy what it got so laboriously--the
lean aftermath of two centuries of asceticism. The business of plain
living and high thinking was a joyless manner of life, and the young
Emerson got little pleasure from it. A nature less insulated must have
broken under the strain. It was a world stricken with tuberculosis.
Of the five brothers one was mentally defective, another burnt up his
vitality and went to the West Indies to die, a third of brilliant
powers succumbed to consumption, his first wife died of the same
scourge, his second wife and Emerson himself were long affected with
incipient tuberculosis. To ease such anxious lives there was need of a
great solace, and that solace was sought in religion. The ascetic youth
ran as naturally to religious meditation as a normal child to play.
No call to conversion ever came to him; the natural man postulated
in Calvinistic dogma was washed out of him before he was born. The
earlier jottings in the journals, before philosophy came to soften the
inherited asceticism, and a transcendental revulsion from the common
pessimism had turned him into a serene optimist, often are as bleak and
austerely introspective as those morbid human documents that fill the
old libraries of Puritanism. Such meditations are thin gruel for the
nourishment of a vigorous life, and Emerson must have suffered from
innutrition if he had not come upon more substantial food.

Fortunately the old Puritan anchors were already dragging, and
Emerson was pretty well adrift when the romantic surge caught him
and sent him far along new courses. The Puritan moralizer became
the transcendental seeker; the curious-minded loiterer in the gates
of the temple, who had studied the moral winds by watching the tiny
straws of circumstance--erecting unconsidered trifles into ethical
signposts--calmly quitted the church and set forth on his intellectual
quest. The ties had long been loosening, but it was his year abroad
where he discovered ways of thinking unknown to Concord and Boston,
that effectively liberalized his mind and released him from the
narrow Yankee provincialisms. On that momentous trip Goethe, Landor,
Coleridge, Wordsworth, Carlyle, set him speculating on new themes,
stimulating afresh the love of Plato, in whom he had long found
inspiration. Continental idealism with its transcendental metaphysics
refashioned Emerson and put him upon his life-work.

Speaking of the intellectual revival of New England later in life, he
remarked that “Goethe was the cow from whom their milk was drawn”; but
it would seem that the influence of Wordsworth proved more immediately
stimulating, for on his return home Emerson set about the systematic
contemplation of nature which left so considerable a deposit in his
mind. Before this he had been too intent on his soul to consider the
sunshine on the fields, but thereafter he made his pilgrimages into the
country with the seriousness of one conducting a novel experiment. In
this new concern for nature there was a deliberate self-consciousness.
In temperament he was a bookish recluse, in love with the printed
page. He was not a Thoreau to love his Walden Pond for its own sake,
and it needed an effort of the will to send him as far as Auburn
wood, to lie on his back and translate nature into metaphysic. But
he had come to the point where his developing philosophy must send
him into the fields. He had looked within himself and discovered the
divinity of the individual soul; but he had not probed the non-self,
the great encompassing universe of matter by which the individual
is circumscribed and of which he is a part. To discover there the
diffused presence of God, to feel his kinship with man, to understand
that the soul is a microcosm, were necessary preliminaries to the
unfolding of his transcendental philosophy, and he went about the work
with painstaking thoroughness. From this creative contact with nature
emerged the Emerson we know, radiant with idealism, glad of life; and
this radiant gladness he put into his maiden essay, _Nature_.

This was in 1836 when Emerson was thirty-three years of age. In the
next two years he published _The American Scholar_, quintessence of
transcendental individualism, and the _Divinity School Address_, the
bible of transcendental religion. With the appearance of the second
series of _Essays_, six years later, the major ideas of his philosophy
were fully elaborated. Stripped of its idealistic phraseology, of its
beauty and fervor, the master idea of the Emersonian philosophy is the
divine sufficiency of the individual. In accepting himself he accepted
his fellows, and he accepted God. The universe he conceived of as a
divine whole, whereof each man is his own center from whom flows the
life that has flowed in upon him, perennially fresh, perennially a new
creation. The law for things is not the law for mind; man is unkinged
in acknowledging any lesser sovereignty than the sovereignty of self.
Statutes, constitutions, governments, schools, churches, banks,
trade--the coercing sum of institutions and customs--these things do
not signify; they are only idols with clay feet that blind men worship.
The true divinity dwells elsewhere, in the soul of man; and that
divinity must rule the world and not be ruled by it. The apotheosis
of individualism--such in briefest terms was the gospel of Emerson;
new only in its radiant dress and idealistic sanctions, the final
transcendental form of a doctrine spread widely by the French romantic
school. It was the same revolutionary conception that Channing had come
upon, that Jefferson had come upon, that Rousseau had come upon--the
idea which in the guise of political romanticism had disintegrated
the _ancien régime_, and in the form of philosophical romanticism
had disintegrated eighteenth-century rationalism--the idea that was
providing Utopian dreams for an ebullient democratic faith.

Thus equipped with a philosophy Emerson was prepared to begin his work
as a critic. The ideal he had drunk of was a perennial condemnation of
the material. The mean and ignoble ends pursued by a mean and ignoble
society were a challenge to the serenity of his faith, and he must set
himself to analyze the causes of the low estate to which the potential
sons of God had fallen. Lesser revolutions in thought were implicit in
this greater one, revolutions which Emerson was bound to go through
with. Despite the jaunty optimism of which he was often accused, his
eyes were never blind to reality; to see, and measure, and judge,
was to become his life business. He did not shrink from the ugliest
fact, and the unhappy condition he discovered men to be in would have
discouraged a less robust faith. At times even he doubted. At times he
seems half persuaded, with Cotton Mather, that the potential children
of light are “strangely and fiercely possessed of the devil.” “Human
nature is as bad as it dares to be,” he commented in his journal; and
at another time, “If it were possible to repair the rottenness of human
nature ... it were well” (_Journals_, Vol. VIII, p. 259).

In seeking an explanation of the tragic gap between the real and the
ideal, he came to attribute a large measure of the cause, like the
eighteenth-century romantics, to pernicious social institutions which
stifle the nobler impulses and encourage the baser; and he became
convinced likewise that the work to which the critic was called was
the work of liberation, setting the mind free from false and ignoble
loyalties that it might serve the true. He prepared therefore to lay
his transcendental yardstick on the little world of Yankee reality and
judge how far short it came of its potential divinity. New England had
never been scrutinized so searchingly, measured so justly. Serene,
imperturbable, he set the ideal in one pan of the scales, and all the
New England realities in the other, and bade his neighbors see how the
balance tipped. For a generation he was the conscience of America, a
pricker of inflated balloons, a gauger of the national brag and cant
and humbug. With keen insight he put his finger on the mean and selfish
and the great and generous. He surveyed his world with the detachment
of posterity and anticipated the slower judgment of time. His
penetration was uncanny and few of his judgments on men and measures
have suffered reversal in the court of final jurisdiction.

So shrewd a critic must concern himself greatly with the Jacksonian
revolution that was hurrying America towards the acceptance of
political equalitarianism. By every compulsion of his transcendental
philosophy Emerson was driven to accept the abstract principle
of democracy. He understood well what hopes for human betterment
were awakened by the principle of majority rule, and as he followed
the noise and tumult of the political campaigns he was driven to
definition. In 1834 he commented in his journal:

  The root and seed of democracy is the doctrine, Judge for yourself.
  Reverence thyself. It is the inevitable effect of the doctrine,
  where it has any effect (which is rare), to insulate the partisan,
  to make each man a state. At the same time it replaces the dead
  with a living check in a true, delicate reverence for superior,
  congenial minds. “How is the King greater than I, if he is not more
  just?” (_Journals_, Vol. III, p. 369.)

Somewhat later in the same year he suggested:

  Democracy, Freedom, has its root in the sacred truth that every man
  hath in him the divine Reason, or that, though few men since the
  creation of the world live according to the dictates of Reason, yet
  all men are created capable of so doing. That is the equality and
  the only equality of all men. To this truth we look when we say,
  Reverence thyself; Be true to thyself. (_Ibid._, Vol. III, p. 390.)

  When I ... speak of the democratic element, I do not mean that ill
  thing, vain and loud, which writes lying newspapers, spouts at
  caucuses, and sells its lies for gold; but that spirit of love for
  the general good whose name this assumes. There is nothing of the
  true democratic element in what is called Democracy; it must fall,
  being wholly commercial. I beg I may not be understood to praise
  anything which the soul in you does not honor, however grateful may
  be names to your ear and your pocket. (_Ibid._, Vol. IV, p. 95.)

His deepening concern over the state of politics in America--the
property-mindedness of the Whigs and the mob-mindedness of the
Democrats--drew him into an analysis of political parties and the
nature of the political state. He was little read in the political
classics, and although he professed a mild approval of Montesquieu
and was never tired of praising Burke, he was little influenced by
either. The latter’s political theory, indeed, was so fundamentally
hostile to Emerson’s major convictions--so legalistic in its
reverence for government from the grave, so explicit in denial of
new-born rights--that it is a fair assumption that Emerson never
took the trouble to understand him but was content to enjoy his
glowing rhetoric. Later commentators are too much given to glossing
over Emerson’s political theory, not approving its implications; or
explaining it away by appeal to certain comments jotted down when
his nerves were tried by enthusiasts;[456] but there is no explaining
away a theory that was the logical expression of his transcendental
philosophy, unless his whole philosophy be explained away. Emerson
knew very well where his political theory led, and he had no timid
compunction about following it through.

In his speculations on the nature and functions of the ideal
republic--a theme that was much in his mind--he elaborated what we
may call the transcendental theory of politics, a theory closely akin
to philosophical anarchism. All the elaborate machinery devised by
political thinkers like Montesquieu and John Adams, with their schemes
of checks and balances to preserve the _status quo_, he calmly throws
overboard; constitutions he is not interested in, nor the complicated
props of coercive sovereignty. The single, vital, principle on which
the true republic must found itself, he insists, is the principle of
good-will. Since “governments have their origin in the moral identity
of men,” the recognition of a common human nature with common interests
must induce rational men to enter a common political brotherhood; and
until men become wise enough voluntarily to coöperate to the common
well-being, no good government is possible. The history of governments
hitherto is a history of the tragic failure of men to achieve a
rational political state. “The idea, after which each community
is aiming to make and mend its law,” he suggests in the _Essay on
Politics_, following Carlyle, “is the will of the wise man. The wise
man, it cannot find in nature, and it makes awkward but earnest efforts
to secure government by contrivance.” But he does not push his “wise
man” theory to the patriarchal absolutism of Carlyle; with Channing he
postulates an ethical sovereignty above the instrument. “Absolute right
is the first governor; or, every government is an impure theocracy.”

The doctrine of good-will establishes government in “moral identity”;
it “separates the individual from all party, and unites him at the
same time to the race”; and in so doing it accepts the sovereignty of
the ethical absolute. This major conception of Channing’s Emerson took
over and made his own. He is explicit in his assertion of the need of a
moral interpretation of the doctrine of natural rights. The doctrine of
an ethical sovereignty, he asserts,

  ... promises a recognition of higher rights than those of personal
  freedom, or the security of property. A man has a right to be
  employed, to be trusted, to be loved, to be revered. The power of
  love, as the basis of a State, has never been tried.... There will
  always be a government of force where men are selfish; and when
  they are pure enough to abjure the code of force they will be wise
  enough to see how these public ends of the post-office, of the
  highway, of commerce and the exchange of property, of museums and
  libraries, of institutions of art and science can be answered.

  Every man’s nature is a sufficient advertisement to him of the
  character of his fellows. My right and my wrong is their right
  and their wrong. Whilst I do what is fit for men, and abstain
  from what is unfit, my neighbor and I shall often agree in our
  means, and work together for a time to one end. But whenever I
  find my dominion over myself not sufficient for me, and undertake
  the direction of him also, I overstep the truth, and come into
  false relations to him. I may have so much more skill or strength
  than he that he cannot express adequately his sense of wrong,
  but it is a lie, and hurts like a lie both him and me. Love and
  nature cannot maintain the assumption; it must be executed by a
  practical lie, namely by force. This undertaking for another is the
  blunder which stands in colossal ugliness in the governments of
  the world.... For any laws but those which men make for themselves
  are laughable.... This is the history of government,--one man does
  something which is to bind another.... Hence the less government
  we have the better,--the fewer laws, and the less confided power.
  The antidote to this abuse of formal government is the influence of
  private character, the growth of the individual ... the appearance
  of the wise man; of whom the existing government, is, it must be
  owned, but a shabby imitation.... To educate the wise man the State
  exists, and with the appearance of the wise man the State expires.
  The appearance of character makes the State unnecessary. The wise
  man is the State. (_Essay on Politics._)

Thus in transcendental fashion does Emerson range himself on the side
of Jefferson, in opposition to a coercive sovereignty. A strong and
energetic government he feared as an efficient instrument of tyranny;
and of the several contrivancies by which it enforced its will, he
considered the police power the stupidest. As a sensible man he bore
with the state; he would pay his taxes; he would not strain at gnats;
but as a free man he would not suffer the state to coerce him; he would
destroy it first. There is a passage in his journal, written at the
time of the declaration of war against Mexico--when Alcott and Thoreau
refused to pay their taxes--that states his position with whimsical
directness:

  The State is a poor, good beast who means the best: it means
  friendly. A poor cow who does well by you,--do not grudge it its
  hay. It cannot eat bread, as you can; let it have without grudge
  a little grass for its four stomachs. It will not stint to yield
  you milk from its teat. You, who are a man walking cleanly on two
  feet, will not pick a quarrel with a poor cow. Take this handful
  of clover and welcome. But if you go to hook me when I walk in the
  fields, then, poor cow, I will cut your throat. (_Journals_, Vol.
  VII, p. 220.)

With equal emphasis he rejected the economic interpretation of
politics. As a child of the romantic revolution he understood quite
clearly how the waves of humanitarian aspiration broke on the reefs
of property rights, how economic forces were in league against the
ideal republic. There could be no true democracy till this matter of
economics was put in subordination to higher values. Both the political
parties, the respectable Whigs and the voluble Democrats, he was
convinced, were debauched by it; the one served property openly, the
other secretly. “From neither party, when in power, has the world any
benefit to expect in science, art, or humanity, at all commensurate
with the resources of the nation.” Emerson did not deny the fact of
the universal appeal of economics. He could not, of course, accept the
theory of economic determinism; but he was convinced that the whole
matter must be probed deeply:

  The philosophy of property, if explored in its foundations, would
  open new mines of practical wisdom, which would in the event
  change the face of the world; would destroy the whole magazine
  of dissimulation, for so many ages reckoned the Capital art of
  Government. It would purge that rottenness which has defamed the
  whole Science until _politic_ has come to mean cunning.... It would
  go deep into ethics and touch all the relations of men. (_The
  Present Age._)

Pending such exploration it was clear to Emerson that the
Federalist-Whig theory of a stake-in-society, or rulership by persons
of principle and property, was wholly vicious:

  The theory of politics which has possessed the minds of men, and
  which they have expressed the best they could in their laws and
  in their revolutions, considers persons and property as the two
  objects for whose protection government exists. Of persons, all
  have equal rights, in virtue of being identical in nature. This
  interest of course with its whole power demands a democracy. Whilst
  the rights of all as persons are equal, in virtue of their access
  to reason, their rights in property are very unequal.... Personal
  rights, universally the same, demand a government framed on the
  ratio of the census; property demands a government framed on the
  ratio of owners and owning.... That principle no longer looks
  so self-evident as it appeared in former times, partly because
  doubts have arisen whether too much weight had not been allowed
  in laws to property, and such a structure given to our usages as
  allowed the rich to encroach upon the poor, and keep them poor;
  but mainly because there is an instinctive sense, however obscure
  and yet inarticulate, that the whole constitution of property, on
  its present tenures, is injurious, and its influence on persons
  deteriorating and degrading; that property will always follow
  persons; that the highest end of government is the culture of men.
  (_Essay on Politics._)

In such suggestions as he offered touching the form of the ideal
republic, where “every child that is born must have a just chance
for his bread,” Emerson reveals a pronounced bias in favor of
the Physiocratic theory of society. He was at one with Jefferson
in preferring an agrarian to an industrial order. Manchester
economics--the doctrine of the economic man, of the iron law of wages,
and other obscenities of the school--he quite frankly loathed. He did
not, he said, “look with sour aspect at the industrious manufacturing
village, or mart of commerce”; but he would not glorify the machine,
nor reduce man to a factory hand. He questioned the sufficiency or
finality of the division of labor. There is more than a suggestion of
William Morris in the doctrine elaborated in _Man the Reformer_; that
the industrial revolution with its factory system, must be judged in
the light of its effect upon the workingman, that the true function of
work must be explored and every man ply his tool to his own good. The
suggestion that “a man should have a farm or mechanical craft for his
culture,” was an implicit denial of industrialism in the days of its
first triumphs--a denial that Morris would have indorsed.

  We must have a basis for our higher accomplishments, our delicate
  entertainments of poetry and philosophy, in the work of our hands.
  We must have an antagonism in the tough world for all the variety
  of our spiritual faculties, or they will not be born. Manual labor
  is the study of the external world. The advantages of riches
  remains with him who produces them, not with the heir.

  I should not be pained at a change which threatened a loss of
  some of the luxuries or conveniences of society, if it proceeded
  from a preference of the agricultural life out of the belief,
  that our primary duties as men could be better discharged in that
  calling.... But the doctrine of the Farm is merely this, that
  every man ought to stand in primary relations with the work of the
  world, ought to do it himself, and not to suffer the accident of
  his having a purse in his pocket, or his having been bred to some
  dishonorable and injurious craft, to sever him from those duties;
  and for this reason, that labor is God’s education; that he only
  is a sincere learner, he only can become a master, who learns the
  secret of labor, and who by real cunning extorts from nature its
  sceptre. (_Man the Reformer_.)

In all this--in the doctrine of the minimized state, of the sacred
rights of the individual, of the wholesomeness of an agricultural life;
in his concern for social justice and his tenderness for the poor and
exploited among men--Emerson proved himself a child of the romantic
eighteenth century, who by his own transcendental path had come upon
the Utopia that an earlier generation had dreamed of, and which he
sketched in the lovely poem prefacing the _Essay on Politics_. Much of
Emerson is compressed in these lines:

  Fear, Craft, and Avarice,
  Cannot rear a State.
  Out of dust to build
  What is more than dust....
  When the Muses nine
  With the Virtues meet,
  Find to their design
  An Atlantic seat,
  By green orchard boughs
  Fended from the heat,
  Where the statesman ploughs
  Furrow for the wheat;
  When the Church is social worth,
  When the state-house is the hearth,
  Then the perfect State is come,
  The republican at home.

The contrast between such Utopian conceptions and the realities of
America in the forties was calculated to edge the critical judgment
with a certain asperity. The older agrarian simplicity of New England
was being submerged by the industrial revolution, and in the midst
of the change Emerson quietly pronounced judgment upon the new idols
of his generation, upon State Street and Beacon Street, upon Webster
and Clay and Douglas, upon Everett and Choate, upon black slavery and
white, upon the Mexican War and the Fugitive Slave Bill, upon the
stolid poor and the callous rich. His judgment was severe but it was
never unjust. His later journals are a rich storehouse of critical
comment, keen, illuminating, disastrous in its analysis of all cant
and humbug. At times--in his comment on Webster, in his hatred of
State Street, in his criticism of the common materialism--he is almost
savage; at other times he is consumed with a vast sympathy for the
long-suffering, exploited mass of the people. “Alas, for the majority,”
he exclaimed, “that old, inevitable dupe and victim. What a dreary
Iliad of woes it goes wailing and mad withal. Some dog of a Cleon
or Robespierre or Douglas is always riding it to ruin” (_Journals_,
Vol. VIII, p. 449). When the Fugitive Slave Bill passed he wrote:
“This filthy enactment was made in the nineteenth century, by people
who could read and write. I will not obey it, by God” (_ibid._, Vol.
VIII, p. 236). In smug and prosperous Boston he found no comfort--the
Boston that applauded when “Thank-God Choate thanked God five times” in
denouncing “the trashy sentimentalism of our lutestring enthusiasts.”
Emerson would have none of Boston:

  In Boston is no company for a fine wit. There is a certain
  _poor-smell_ in all the streets, in Beacon Street and Mount Vernon,
  as well as in the lawyers’ offices, and the wharves, and the same
  meanness and sterility, and leave-all-hope-behind, as one finds in
  a boot manufacturer’s premises. (_Ibid._, Vol. VIII, p. 363.)

With Theodore Parker he judged Boston to be the home of Hunkers, of
that “cotton aristocracy” that Webster served. It groveled servilely
before State Street; how should the homely moralities get a hearing in
such a place? Even Harvard College he charged with being a tool of the
Boston counting-houses.[457]

It was the crass materialism of America, of the Democrats equally
with the Whigs, of the northern capitalists equally with the southern
planters, that drove him to exasperation, and tempered his optimism.
There is no jaunty optimism in a passage written during the panic days
of ’37:

  ... Society has played out its last stake; it is checkmated.
  Young men have no hope. Adults stand like day-laborers idle in
  the streets. None calleth us to labor. The old wear no crown of
  warm life on their gray hairs. The present generation is bankrupt
  of principles and hope, as of property. I see man is not what man
  should be. He is a treadle of a wheel. He is the tassel at the
  apron-string of society. He is a money-chest. He is the servant
  of his belly. This is the causal bankruptcy, this the cruel
  oppression, that the ideal should serve the actual, that the head
  should serve the feet.... Pride, and Thrift, and Expediency, who
  jeered and chirped and were so well pleased with themselves, and
  made merry with the dream, as they termed it, of Philosophy and
  Love,--behold they are all flat, and here is the Soul erect and
  unconquered still. What answer is it now to say, It has always
  been so? I acknowledge that, as far back as I can see the widening
  procession of humanity, the marchers are lame and blind and deaf;
  but to the soul that whole past is but one finite series in its
  infinite scope. Deteriorating ever and now desperate. Let me begin
  anew; let me teach the finite to know its master. (_Journals_, Vol.
  IV, p. 242.)

To be a critic rather than a fighter, and a critic because he was a
poet and philosopher--this was the duty laid upon Emerson; and yet he
was sorely troubled when men from the skirmish line of social conflict
reported to him the need of leaders. Why should he be privileged to
remain in his study when slaves were abducted on the streets of Boston
and John Brown was fighting at Harper’s Ferry? With the extremest
reluctance he was drawn into the struggle--it was not his fight.

  I waked at night [he recorded in his journal] and bemoaned myself,
  because I had not thrown myself into this deplorable question of
  Slavery, which seems to want nothing so much as a few assured
  voices. But then, in hours of sanity, I recover myself, and say,
  “God must govern his own world, and knows his own way out of this
  pit, without my desertion of my post, which has none to guard it
  but me. I have quite other slaves to free than those negroes, to
  wit, imprisoned spirits, imprisoned thoughts, far back in the
  brain of man,--far retired in the heaven of invention, and which,
  important to the republic of Man, have no other watchman, or lover,
  or defender, but I.” (_Ibid._, Vol. VIII, p. 316.)

But always in the end he was drawn in, and none spoke wiser or braver
words to a careless generation. He never faltered, never compromised;
the prophet of the ideal faced the real and told the truth about it,
serenely and with clear insight. His heroes were not the heroes of
State Street; Horace Greeley, Theodore Parker, Horace Mann, Henry
Ward Beecher, he accounted the great Americans of his day, and not
Everett and Webster and Clay and Calhoun. A friend of civilization, he
was partisan only to the ideal; to justice, truth, righteousness. A
Yankee of the Yankees, a Puritan of the Puritans, he had emancipated
himself from all that was mean and ungenerous in the one and harsh
and illiberal in the other. A free soul, he was the flowering of two
centuries of spiritual aspiration--Roger Williams and Jonathan Edwards
come to more perfect fruition.


Footnotes

[456] See, for example, _Journals_, Vol. VII, p. 221.

[457] “Harvard College has no voice in Harvard College, but State
Street votes it down on every ballot. Everything will be permitted
there which goes to adorn Boston whiggism: ... but that which it exists
for,--to be a fountain of novelties out of heaven, a Delphi uttering
warning and ravishing oracles to elevate and lead mankind,--_that_ it
shall not be permitted to do or to think of. On the contrary, every
generosity of thought is _suspected_, and gets a bad name.” (_Ibid._,
Vol. IX, p. 215.)




