Chapter III • John Dickinson • The Mind of the American Whig


For many colonials it was a hard and bitter choice that was thrust
upon them by the political situation. They had no wish to choose
between loyalty to the British Empire and love for their native land.
So long as the quarrel remained a legal dispute over parliamentary
encroachments, colonial sentiment was fairly united in opposition to
the ministerial policy; differences of opinion arose over methods of
defense, rather than the need of it. The threatened loss of home rule
drew together radical and conservative. Although Governor Hutchinson
asserted that the feeling against England was the work of a small
populistic element--“in Massachusetts Bay the exception to the
constitutional authority of Parliament was first taken, and principally
supported, by men who were before discontented”[244]--it is clear
that the active Tory party numbered at first few more than the royal
officials and their beneficiaries. But when it came to the point of
severing colonial relations with the mother country, comparatively few
among the upper classes in the northern and middle colonies went with
the party of independence. The moderate men, the conciliationists,
were crushed between the two extremes, and the Tory party was greatly
increased in numbers and influence.

Of this moderate party of conciliationists, the outstanding figure
during the years of tedious debate was John Dickinson, of Philadelphia.
His _Letters from a Pennsylvania Farmer_, published between December 2,
1767, and February 15, 1768, created considerable stir both in America
and England, and if Hutchinson may be trusted, they “formed a temporary
political creed for the colonies.” Later he was chief draftsman of a
notable series of state papers: the Declaration of Rights of the Stamp
Act Congress; the two Petitions to the King and the Address to the
Inhabitants of Quebec of the first Continental Congress; and finally
the Articles of Confederation. Professor Tyler has fastened upon
him the title of “penman of the Revolution”; but a juster title, and
more in accord with the facts, would be “spokesman of the Colonial
Whigs.” From his first entrance into public life to the adoption of
the Constitution, Dickinson was a consistent advocate of the political
philosophy of which John Pym was the early representative, Locke
the philosophical defender, and Pitt the parliamentary advocate--a
philosophy which he accepted as the final embodiment of the long
struggle for English freedom.

English Whiggery has been fortunate in its advocates. It has been
expounded with great fervor and glossed with much eloquence. Its ends
have been so persistently proclaimed as at one with the cause of human
liberty, that in the mind of English-speaking people it early became
synonymous with English liberalism. In so far as it represented a
protest against divine right, such an interpretation was historically
just. It was the expression of a rising class, and every rising class
in its ostensible program professes to be liberal. But in the outcome
Whiggery proved to be very different from generic liberalism. Examined
critically the program of Whiggery is seen to have been compounded
of substantial economic interests. Although the Whig party created
the modern House of Commons and ministerial government, and wrote
into the British constitution the principle of no taxation without
representation, back of such revolutionary changes was a middle-class,
property theory of society. It laid down as the first principle of
political science the dogma that government is instituted for the
protection of property; and it advanced by inevitable stages to the
position that government should use its powers to extend the field of
profitable operations and safeguard exploitation, the natural outcome
of which was a policy of imperialism. On the pretense of furthering
human liberty it carried the British flag and British goods to the ends
of the earth. The great Pitt, grandson of the unscrupulous exploiter of
India, completed the work begun by John Pym more than a century before;
the American Revolution was the natural sequence of an imperialistic
policy begun by Cromwell’s Navigation Act, which, aimed immediately
at the Dutch carriers, put the power of the government behind British
shipping to the disadvantage of American competitors.

The philosophy of Whiggery had spread widely in America before the
Revolution and numbered among its advocates probably the great
majority of thoughtful Americans. Of these John Dickinson became
the best known, although he was certainly not the ablest--less
able, indeed, than his fellow Marylander, Daniel Dulany. Of Quaker
extraction, Dickinson was a country gentleman who inherited broad
acres, an honorable name, and high social position. His dignified
standing was further assured by his marriage with the only surviving
child of Isaac Norris, long Speaker of the Pennsylvania Assembly, and
the most influential amongst a little group of wealthy merchants who
had long ruled the commonwealth in patriarchal fashion. By his wife he
came into possession of Fairhill, a country place of several hundred
acres on the outskirts of Philadelphia, one of the show places of the
city, of which the mansion with its stately façade, its waxed floors
and red-cedar wainscoting, its books and paintings and statuary,
its setting of gardens and fishponds and conservatories, was vastly
impressive to a world that loved dignified display.

With such advantages of wealth and position he could hardly fail to
get on in his profession, and within a short time after his return
from the Inns of Court at London, where he had his training in the
law, he became one of the leaders of the Philadelphia bar and was
soon deep in commonwealth politics. He was a gentleman in a society
of gentlemen and preferment came easily to him. His natural parts
were respectable, he had improved himself by considerable reading in
history and politics, he possessed a cultivated pen and some facility
in debate. He understood commercial problems, could talk trade, was
ready with statistics of imports and exports, and was an advocate of
the paper money which Philadelphia merchants had discovered to be a
stimulus to business. Among his intimate friends were Robert Morris,
Thomas Willing, and George Clymer, representatives of the younger
generation of Philadelphians, whose speculative enterprises were not
approved by their conservative elders. And so by consequence he became
the spokesman of the mercantile interests in their remonstrance against
the ministerial policies.

But Dickinson was more than a legal adviser to clients who were in
trade. As lawyer and statesman he was true to the best traditions of
the English law and the British constitution, faithful to what he
conceived to be the larger interests of the British Empire. In all his
public acts he was animated by a scrupulous sense of duty, swerving no
whit from the line of conduct marked out by his principles in spite
of the clamor of opposition. From first to last he seems to have been
guided by a fine sense of responsible stewardship that came to him
from his English heritage. Certainly the dignity of John Dickinson
and the integrity of his political career suffer little by contrast
with certain popular representatives who governed their conduct by
expediency rather than principle. The great ideal of imperial unity
possessed him completely, and he would do nothing to bring it into
jeopardy. He sacrificed his great influence with the radicals by his
refusal to go with the majority for independence; he would not assist
in disrupting the British Empire even though he could not preserve it.
The refusal was difficult and it destroyed his popularity in a moment.
He withdrew from active participation in political affairs, and for
years afterwards, to the eyes of former associates, his conduct seemed
to have been pusillanimous.

By temperament and breeding Dickinson was a conservative, and this
native bias was emphasized by his English training in the law. The
lawyers of the middle and southern colonies were far better trained
than those of New England. Many were from the Inns of Court, where
they had steeped themselves in the Common Law and had imbibed profound
respect for the orderly processes of English legal procedure.
They found intellectual satisfaction in tracing the evolution of
constitutional practice, and their methods of thought were too strictly
legal to suffer them to stray into the domain of extra-legal political
speculation. Their appeal was to the law and the constitution; never to
abstract principles. If, on the other hand, the revolutionary leaders
of New England--and Virginians like Jefferson and Patrick Henry--were
poorer lawyers they were better political scientists, for their legal
training had been too casual and too scanty to contract their minds to
statutes and precedents. Jefferson and John Adams were alike in this
respect; their interests were speculative rather than legal; and they
wrote more convincingly when defending the principles of Locke than in
expounding Coke.

But John Dickinson remained always the lawyer. The English political
thinkers of the seventeenth century scarcely touched the fringe of
his mind. In consequence his writings are a long constitutional
argument. He rarely refers to political authorities. The philosophy of
Locke--whom he had read--is largely ignored, and Hume--“this great man
whose political speculations are so much admired”--is quoted only in
support of a constitutional interpretation. “The constitutional modes
of relief are those I wish to see pursued on the present occasion,” he
insisted in reply to the natural-rights advocates, and the attitude
is eloquent of the man. This scrupulous legalism he carried to such
lengths that when the new constitution for Pennsylvania was adopted he
refused to take office under it because he doubted the legality of the
convention that framed it.

With such temperament and training Dickinson would seem to have had the
making of an excellent Tory in him. What cause had he to quarrel with
Great Britain, and why should he have risked his lot with the party
of protest? It was not because he denied the ministerial theory of
parliamentary sovereignty in America, for he acknowledged both the fact
and the necessity for such sovereignty:

  He, who considers these provinces as states distinct from the
  _British Empire_, has very slender notions of _justice_, or of
  their _interests_. We are but parts of a _whole_ and therefore
  there must exist a power somewhere to preside, and preserve the
  connection in due order. This power is lodged in the parliament;
  and we are as much dependent on _Great-Britain_ as a perfectly free
  people can be on another.[245]

Nor was it because of old trade grievances--shipping restrictions, the
spying of customs officers, prohibitions laid on manufactures, and the
like. He accepted without challenge the English mercantile view of the
economic relations of colonies to the mother country, and he professed
to see in existing trade regulations only the incidental and necessary
burdens of a system both salutary and just; he had no protest to urge
against the principle of the Navigation Acts.

  Colonies have been settled by the nations of _Europe_ for the
  purposes of trade. These purposes were to be attained, by the
  colonies raising for their mother country those things which she
  did not produce herself; and by supplying themselves from her
  with things they wanted. These were the _national objects_, in
  the commencement of our colonies, and have been uniformly so in
  their promotion.... The parent country, with undeviating prudence
  and virtue, attentive to the first principles of colonization,
  drew to herself the benefits she might reasonably expect, and
  preserved to her children the blessings, on which those benefits
  were founded. She made laws, obliging her colonies to carry to
  her all those products which she wanted for her own use; and all
  those raw materials which she chose herself to work up. Besides
  this restriction, she forbad them to procure _manufactures_ from
  any other part of the globe, or even the _products_ of _European_
  countries, which alone could rival her, without first being brought
  to her. In short, by a variety of laws, she regulated their trade
  in such a manner as she thought most conducive to their mutual
  advantage, and her own welfare.[246]

Not only did Dickinson concede to the mother country the right to
regulate the entire system of colonial trade and industry to the
primary advantage of British merchants, even going so far as to justify
it by a false historical explanation of the rise of the colonies; not
only did he profess to believe that such regulation had been exercised
in a spirit of unselfish concern for the well-being of the empire; but
he professed a faith in the King and the English people that suggests
Hutchinson and Bernard. Consider such naïve adulation as the following:

  We have an excellent prince, in whose good dispositions towards us
  we may confide. We have a generous, sensible and humane nation,
  to whom we may apply. They may be deceived. They may, by artful
  men, be provoked to anger against us. I cannot believe they will
  be cruel or unjust; or that their anger will be implacable. Let us
  behave like dutiful children, who have received unmerited blows
  from a beloved parent. Let us complain to our parent; but let our
  complaints speak at the same time the language of affliction and
  veneration.[247]

With so much conceded, what ground of serious quarrel remained? What
was there to justify an American protest against the parliamentary
program? Nothing less than the vital principle of taxation. In this
matter the ministerial policy overrode the fundamental tenet of
Whiggery. The situation was critical, for if the Tories denied the
validity of the Whiggish principle in dealing with the colonies, they
might deny it at home and the old battle of 1688 must be fought over.
The right of control of the public purse by a chamber in which the
property owners were represented, and which they would dominate, was a
principle too vital to be yielded, and the English Whigs in Parliament,
led by Pitt and Camden, took vigorous issue with the ministerial tax
proposals. To American Whigs the proposed innovation was a calamity. To
suffer control of the American purse to pass out of their hands into
those of a group beyond their reach meant a return to a system of Tory
spoliation; it meant that property and the rule of property in America
were threatened. To the colonial Whig the constitutional representative
chamber could be no other than the assembly of the commonwealth of
which he was a taxpayer. The English Parliament was alien if not
hostile to his interests; and if the right of imposing taxes upon the
colonies were held to lie in this overseas body, the colonials would
find themselves in the identical position of their ancestors of the
days of King Charles. No longer masters of their property, they would
not be a free people.

All this John Dickinson understood perfectly, and as a large property
owner he hastened to the defense of the principle of self-taxation.
He proposed to show that the policy of the ministry, in advancing the
new tax program, was a usurpation of power and a violation of the
constitutional rights of American property owners; and that as such
it should be resisted on constitutional grounds. This is the burden
of the celebrated _Letters from a Pennsylvania Farmer_. In arguing
their case the American debaters were embarrassed by a long series of
precedents which seemed to prove that Parliament possessed sovereignty
over the colonies; that such sovereignty had in fact been repeatedly
acknowledged; and that a hundred years of fiscal legislation,
unchallenged heretofore, had clearly established the parliamentary
right of taxation. To this difficult point Dickinson directed his
argument. The real point at issue, he contended, lay in the fundamental
distinction between a tax and an imposition; Parliament possessed the
constitutional right to impose the latter, but not the former. An
imposition, he pointed out, is a fiscal arrangement made by the proper
representatives, primarily “for the regulation of trade,” and with a
view to the general interests of the whole; whereas a tax is a “gift
of the people to the crown, to be employed for public uses.” The one
is regulatory in intent, imposed in a paternal spirit; and though the
result may lessen or increase the opportunity of the individual or the
community to acquire property, it does not take away what has already
been got; whereas a tax reaches into the pocket of the individual
and takes from him what belongs to him alone. Unless the subject
“give and grant of his own free will,” such a tax had long been held
unconstitutional. Of necessity, every tax must be internal, and since
by their charter governments the colonies were granted the right to
impose “internal taxes,” Parliament has no right to impose them.

  A “+TAX+” means an imposition to raise money. Such persons
  therefore as speak of _internal_ and external “+TAXES+,” I pray
  may pardon me, if I object to that expression, as applied to the
  privileges and interests of these colonies. There may be _internal_
  and _external_ +IMPOSITIONS+, founded on _different principles_,
  and having _different tendencies_, every “tax” being an imposition,
  tho’ every imposition is not a “tax.” But _all taxes_ are founded
  on the same _principles_; and have the _same tendency_. External
  impositions, for the regulation of our trade, do not “grant to
  his Majesty _the property of the colonies_.” They only _prevent
  the colonies acquiring property_, in things not necessary, in a
  manner judged to be injurious to the welfare of the whole empire.
  But the last statute respecting us, “grants to his Majesty _the
  property of the colonies_,” by laying duties on the manufactures of
  _Great-Britain_ which they +MUST+ take, and which she settled on
  them, on purpose that they +SHOULD+ take. What _tax_ can be more
  internal than this? Here is money drawn, _without their consent_,
  from a society, who have constantly enjoyed a constitutional mode
  of raising all money among themselves.[248]

This line of argument was not original with Dickinson. It had earlier
been elaborated by Daniel Dulany of Maryland, in an able pamphlet,[249]
which had provided argument to Pitt for his speech on the repeal of the
Stamp Act.[250] Dickinson in turn quoted from Pitt’s speech in support
of his position.[251] How intimate was the connection between English
and American Whigs, and how like was their reasoning, is made clear
from a passage of a later speech by Pitt which Dickinson quoted in the
preface to a collected edition of his works issued in 1801:

  This universal opposition to your arbitrary system of taxation,
  might have been foreseen; it was obvious from the nature of things,
  and from the nature of man, and _above all_ ... from the spirit
  of +WHIGGISM+ flourishing in _America_. The spirit which _now_
  pervades _America_, is _the same_ which formerly opposed loans,
  benevolences, and ship-money in this country; is _the same spirit_
  which roused all _England_ to action at the revolution, and which
  established at a remote era, your liberties, on the basis of that
  grand fundamental maxim of the constitution, that no subject of
  _England_ shall be taxed, but by his own consent. To maintain this
  principle, is the _common cause_ of the +WHIGS+, on the other
  side of the _Atlantic_, and on this. _It is liberty to liberty
  engaged._ In this great cause they are immoveably allied. It is
  the alliance of _God_ and _nature_, immutable, eternal, fixed as
  the firmament of heaven. As an _Englishman_, I recognize to the
  _Americans_, their supreme unalterable right of property. As an
  _American_, I would equally recognize to _England_, her supreme
  right of regulating commerce and navigation. This distinction is
  involved in the abstract nature of things; property is private,
  individual, absolute: the touch of another annihilates it. Trade
  is an extended and complicated consideration; it reaches as far
  as ships can sail, or winds can blow; it is a vast and various
  machine. To regulate the numberless movements of its several
  parts, and combine them into one harmonious effect, for the good
  of the whole, requires the superintending wisdom and energy of the
  supreme power of the empire. On this grand practical distinction,
  then, let us rest: taxation is theirs, commercial regulation is
  ours. As to metaphysical refinements, attempting to shew, that
  the _Americans_ are equally free from legislative controul, and
  commercial restraint, as from taxation, for the purpose of revenue,
  I pronounce them futile, frivolous, and groundless.[252]

How characteristic of Pitt is the shrewd purpose, covered over with
pretentious rhetoric, to seize the imperialistic substance of trade
control for the London merchants, and graciously yield in the name of
liberty, the shadow of taxation!

Discussion of abstract rights interested Dickinson no more than it did
Pitt; but he cared greatly for English liberty, by which he meant the
rights of propertied gentlemen recognized by the British constitution,
for which his ancestors had struggled. He had no wish to enlarge
those rights, for he believed they were adequate to the well-being
of Englishmen. No thought of a republican form of government crossed
his mind. He had no sympathy with democracy; he believed in a “mixed
government” as exemplified in the British system; and while he was not
an outspoken advocate of an American peerage, he would have approved of
its institution. Like so many upper-class Americans, he was English as
well as colonial; he could not conceive that the heritage of England
to her sons was circumscribed by geographical lines, and he habitually
thought and spoke in terms of the British Empire, and never in local
terms. What he most feared was a misunderstanding that would widen
into rupture. There is more than a hint of the doctrine of passive
resistance in his counsel of moderation:

  The cause of _liberty_ is a cause of too much dignity to be sullied
  by turbulence and tumult. It ought to be maintained in a manner
  suitable to her nature. Those who engage in it, should breathe a
  sedate, yet fervent spirit, animating them to actions of prudence,
  justice, modesty, bravery, humanity, and magnanimity.... I hope,
  my dear countrymen, that you will, in every colony, be on your
  guard against those, who may at any time endeavour to stir you
  up, under pretense of patriotism, to any measures disrespectful
  to our Sovereign and our mother country. Hot, rash, disorderly
  proceedings, injure the reputation of a people, as to wisdom,
  valour, and virtue, without procuring them the least benefit. I
  pray god, that he may be pleased to inspire you and your posterity,
  to the latest ages, with a spirit of which I have an idea, that
  I find a difficulty to express. To express it in the best manner
  I can, I mean a spirit, that shall so guide you, that it will be
  impossible to determine whether an _American’s_ character is most
  distinguishable, for its loyalty to his Sovereign, his duty to
  his mother country, his love of freedom, or his affection for his
  native soil.[253]

In these earlier years of the controversy Dickinson seems to have
remained placidly unaware of the sordid realities of parliamentary
huckstering, the details of which Franklin was daily noting in his
letters. He seems honestly to have believed in the justice and good
intentions of the King and his ministers, and he felt little sympathy
for the New England malcontents. But as the debate dragged on, and the
English politicians in whose rectitude he had professed confidence,
clearly were playing into the hands of British trading interests, going
so far as to seek to bolster up the falling fortunes of the East India
Company at the expense of colonial merchants, he was impelled to speak
with plebeian warmth. His _Two Letters on the Tea Tax_, written in
November, 1773, are as vigorous in denunciation as Samuel Adams could
have penned.

  _Five Ships_, loaded with +TEA+, on their Way to _America_, and
  this with a View not only to _enforce_ the _Revenue Act_, but to
  _establish_ a _Monopoly_ for the _East-India Company_, who have
  espoused the Cause of the Ministry; and hope to repair their
  broken Fortunes by the Ruin of _American_ freedom and Liberty! No
  Wonder the Minds of the People are exasperated ... to a degree of
  Madness.... Pray have you heard, whether _they_ and the _Ministers_
  have not _made a Property_ of +US+, and whether +WE+, our +WIVES+
  and +CHILDREN+, together, with the +HARD EARNED FRUITS OF OUR
  LABOUR+, are not _made over_ to this almost _bankrupt Company_,
  to augment their Stock, and to _repair_ their _ruined Fortunes?_
  Justice seems to have forsaken the old World.... The Rights of
  free States and Cities are swallowed up in Power. Subjects are
  considered as Property.... Are we ... to be given up to the
  Disposal of the _East-India Company?_.... Their conduct in Asia,
  for some Years past, has given ample Proof, how little they regard
  the Laws of Nations, the Rights, Liberties, or Lives of Men. They
  have levied War, excited Rebellions, dethroned lawful Princes,
  and sacrificed Millions for the Sake of Gain ... hackneyed as
  they are in Murders, Rapine, and Cruelty, [they] would sacrifice
  the Lives of Thousands to preserve their Trash, and enforce their
  measures.[254]

The ideal of a beneficent British Empire, extending English freedom
through the world, appealed to the imagination of Dickinson; but the
reality of British imperialism, “hackneyed in murders, rapine and
cruelty,” seeking to extend its exploitation to America, striking at
the trade interests of Philadelphia and his merchant friends, was
enough to disturb his legal calm. What fate awaited American rights
and liberties if the London imperialists were permitted to prey upon
them, he began to comprehend. The bones would be picked clean, and
America would become another India. It was the deepening fear of such
a possibility that sapped Dickinson’s loyalty, and reconciled him to
independence after the thing was done.

The later years of Dickinson were happier than those of the middle
period. The conservative reaction that set in with the conclusion of
peace carried the emerging party of nationalism back to the position
of Whiggery, which Dickinson had tenaciously occupied. The leaders of
that party were coming to agree on the necessity for a closer alignment
in defense of property rule, and they gladly accepted Dickinson as
an ally and co-worker. He was chosen a member of the Constitutional
Convention, and there found a congenial audience for the exposition of
his political principles. In the debates he spoke as a high Federalist
who would like to go further toward the model of the British system
than the state of the public mind rendered expedient. A strong and
stable government, he believed, depended upon a just balance of king,
lords, and commons.

  A limited monarchy he considered as _one_ of the best governments
  in the world. He was not certain that the same blessings were
  derivable from any other form. It was certain that equal blessings
  had never yet been derived from any of the republican forms. A
  limited monarchy, however, was out of the question. The spirit of
  the times, the state of our affairs, forbade the experiment, if it
  were desirable. Was it possible, moreover, in the nature of things,
  to introduce it, even if these objects were less insuperable? A
  house of nobles was essential to such a government. Could these
  be created by a breath, or by a stroke of the pen? No. They were
  the growth of ages, and could only arise under a complication of
  circumstances none of which existed in this country. But, though a
  form the most perfect, _perhaps_, in itself, be unattainable, we
  must not despair.[255]

Granted the necessity of a republican form of government, the question
so vital to Whiggery remained, how could property secure and maintain
a commanding position in the government? The reply was obvious; it
must be through limitation of suffrage rights. If the vote could be
restricted to property holders, even though small freeholders were
included, the common rights of property would be secure.

  Mr. Dickinson had a very different idea of the tendency of
  vesting the rights of suffrage in the freeholders of the Country.
  He considered them as the best guardians of liberty; And the
  restriction of the right to them as a necessary defence agst. the
  dangerous influence of those multitudes without property & without
  principle, with which our country like all others, will in time
  abound.[256]

A further safeguard offered in the proper constitution of the Senate.
As a representative of a small state, Dickinson was concerned that the
several states should enjoy a parity of power in the upper house, as he
was concerned that the Senate should provide a safeguard for property
interests. It must be rendered secure from factional unrest and
democratic aggression. He was very likely at one with his friend George
Clymer, in holding that “a representative of the people is appointed
to think _for_ and not _with_ his constituents”; and to the end that
the right persons should be chosen to do the national thinking, he
laid down the principle that, “In the formation of the Senate, we
ought to carry it through such a refining process as will assimilate
it as nearly as may be to the House of Lords in England.”[257]
Such expressions throw sufficient light upon Dickinson’s opinions
of democratic government, but they do not prepare us for a curious
inconsistency that marked his last years, namely, his friendship for
Jefferson and his sympathy with the Jeffersonian program. The reasons
for this strange shift are not clear, but it is generally attributed
to his fear of consolidation that might end in subordinating the small
states to the greater ones. It certainly was not due to any sympathy
with agrarianism.

Dickinson was in no sense a serious political thinker. He was a
cultivated lawyer who defended with skill and grace a ready-made
philosophy, unconcerned about the social significance of that
philosophy. Scarcely anywhere else in his writings does he show to such
poor advantage as in the nine _Letters of Fabius_ written in defense
of the Constitution during the great debate. There is in them not
a single illuminating comment. His most anxious concern is shown in
his reply to George Mason’s direct charge, that the “government will
commence in a moderate aristocracy; it is at present impossible to
foresee whether it will, in its operation, produce a monarchy, or a
corrupt oppressive aristocracy.”[258] After searching the records of
the past he concludes that “the uniform tenor of history ... holds up
the _licentiousness_ of the people, and _turbulent temper_ of some of
the states, as _the only causes_ to be dreaded, not the conspiracies
of federal officers.”[259] The argument had been somewhat staled by
Federalistic repetition, but Dickinson soberly accepted it as sound
historical interpretation. His cleverest defense he found in an
appeal to the analogy of the British constitution, which has only one
democratic branch, and that “diseased” by inadequate representation, to
withstand the power and influence of king and lords; if English liberty
has been thus safeguarded, what danger can threaten America with “a
constitution and government, every branch of which is so extremely
popular”?[260]

However greatly the writings of Dickinson, from the Farmer’s Letters
to the _Letters of Fabius_, may have appealed to Whiggish lawyers, it
is inconceivable that they should have appealed to the rank and file
of Americans. As an eighteenth-century gentleman he little understood
the spirit of liberalism that was stirring in many minds; he did not
sympathize with the turbulent forces that were driving towards a
different social order; and in consequence his technical arguments
seem today curiously old-fashioned. Franklin’s common sense kept him
a realist; but Dickinson’s loyalty made him an idealist, incapable of
understanding current economic forces either in England or America. The
colonial was so ingrained in his habits of thought that it was hard for
him to become an American. So long as it was politic to profess loyalty
to England while remonstrating against ministerial policies, John
Dickinson was the man for the business. But when it became necessary
to throw aside the mask of loyal professions, to stand up and fight,
he was thrust aside to make room for more vigorous spokesmen. No doubt
there were desirable things which the radicals overlooked; no doubt
the ideal of imperial unity, of a world-wide federation of the several
bodies of Englishmen, possessed a grandeur which ardent patriots held
too cheap. But that ideal did not prevail, despite Dickinson’s earnest
endeavors; and in the new order which arose he probably never felt
quite at home, or was free from a lingering regret. He belonged still
in that older world in which he was bred.


Footnotes

[244] _History of Massachusetts Bay_, Vol. III, p. 257.

[245] “Farmer’s Letters,” in _Works_, Vol. I, p. 312.

[246] _Ibid._, p. 337.

[247] _Ibid._, p. 327.

[248] _Ibid._, pp. 332-333.

[249] _Considerations on the Propriety of Imposing Taxes in the British
Colonies, for the Purpose of Raising a Revenue by Act of Parliament._

[250] See Tyler, _Literary History of the American Revolution_, Vol. I,
p. 111.

[251] _Works_, Vol. I, p. 320.

[252] _Ibid._, pp. xv-xvii.

[253] “Farmer’s Letters,” in _Works_, Vol. I, pp. 324-325.

[254] _Works_, Vol. I, pp. 459-461.

[255] _Elliot’s Debates_, Vol. V, p. 148.

[256] _Ibid._

[257] _Ibid._, Vol. I, p. 163.

[258] Quoted in Ford, _Pamphlets on the Constitution_, p. 332.

[259] _Ibid._, p. 200.

[260] _Ibid._, p. 212.




