Chapter II • The Great Debate


When one considers the bulk of commentary that has grown up about
the Constitution, it is surprising how little abstract political
speculation accompanied its making and adoption. It was the first
response to the current liberal demand for written constitutions as a
safeguard against tyranny, but it was aimed at the encroachments of
agrarian majorities rather than at Tory minorities. It was the work
of able lawyers and men of affairs confronting a definite situation,
rather than of political philosophers; and it was accompanied
by none of that searching examination of fundamental rights and
principles which made the earlier Puritan and later French debate
over constitutional principles so rich in creative speculation. Not a
single political thinker comparable to the great English and French
philosophers emerged from the struggle. The debate drew freely upon the
materials supplied by those thinkers, but it added little that was new.

The Constitution was a venture in republicanism, on a scale and under
conditions without historical precedent. It was inevitable, therefore,
that the debate should concern itself greatly with the nature of
republicanism and its adaptability to American conditions. As the
argument developed, two major questions assumed critical importance:
the question of the powers of the Federal state, and the question of
the sovereign rights of the majority; and in dealing with both the
debaters were on ground inadequately surveyed. Of definite republican
theory little was available except the writings of a small group of
seventeenth-century republicans. Of democratic theory, on the other
hand, even less was available. American democratic aspiration had
far outrun old-world liberalism, and had produced no independent
speculation of its own. French democratic theory still awaited the rise
of Jacobinism to clarify its principles. The party of Commonwealth
Levelers, to be sure, with their doctrines of a “paramount law,”
manhood suffrage, and annual parliaments, offered much that might have
proved suggestive; but the literature of the Levelers was buried too
deep under Tory obloquy to be resurrected, and nowhere else was to be
found any considerable body of democratic theory. It was inevitable,
therefore, that the debaters should go back to the English liberals of
the preceding century.

Consider for a moment the authorities bandied to and fro in the great
debate. With such exceptions as Machiavelli, Vattel, Pufendorf,
Montesquieu, they were the well-known English theorists, Hobbes,
Harrington, Milton, Sidney, Halifax, Hume, and Blackstone. Unhappily
for the democrats every one of these great names counted against
their aspirations. Hobbes was a state absolutist whose _Leviathan_
provided sharp weapons for those who wished to tone the government
high; Hume was a Tory who accepted the traditional interpretation of
human nature in the light of which democracy was the open door to
anarchy; Blackstone was a Tory lawyer, who interpreted the British
constitution by a narrow legalism that was obsolete before the
_Commentaries_ came from the press. Harrington, Milton, and perhaps
Sidney, were republicans of strong aristocratic bias, and Halifax
and Locke--the latter by much the most influential of all--were
constitutional monarchists.[298] Every one of these great authorities
either distrusted or violently condemned democracy, yet they provided
the major body of theory made use of by the Federalists.

On the other hand, the slowly accumulating democratic theory was
unknown to the members of the convention. In 1761 Robert Wallace
had advanced an Owenite theory of property, attacking the principle
of economic individualism as responsible for the current evils of
government by landed property; but his book, _Various Prospects_, made
no ripple on the placid waters of English liberalism.[299] In 1768
Joseph Priestley, a thinker who later was to exercise great influence
in America, who lived here for a number of years and was intimate with
Jefferson, published his essay. _First Principles of Government_, a
work embodying the first English interpretation of the perfectibility
of man, the rule of reason, the theory of the diminished state, and the
Benthamite principle of utilitarianism or expediency in statecraft,
which struck at the principle of coercive sovereignty. But the ideas
of Priestley were probably little known in America in 1787, and his
influence was undermined further by a theological attack which sought
to fasten upon him the stigma of atheism. In short, in this war of
ideas the democrats were provided with little ammunition and fought at
a great disadvantage. If the debate had taken place five years later,
after the French Revolution had provided new democratic theory, the
disparity of intellectual equipment would have been far less marked.

One other fact must be kept in mind, namely, that the great debate was
in reality two debates, one carried on in the quiet of the convention
hall, the other in the open. Each interprets the other, and taken
together they reveal the conflict of forces and ideas that determined
the form of the Constitution. In the privacy of the convention the
speakers were free to express their views frankly, and in consequence a
loose rein was given to the play of ideas; fundamental principles were
examined critically and economic motives and class interests openly
acknowledged. But in arguing the case before the generality of voters
without doors a more cautious approach was necessary; arguments must
be tempered to well-known prejudices, and circumspection must take the
place of frankness. In the earlier debate, among innumerable lesser
problems, two main questions dominated the argument: the question of
the form of the centralized state--whether it should be aristocratic or
republican; and if republican--as was inevitable--the question of what
should be done about the majority will--how representation should be so
refined as to guarantee stability to the government and security to the
minority. In the second debate the appeal was to expediency rather than
to principles, and turned on three chief points: the need of adoption
in view of the desperate condition of the country; the adaptation
of the proposed republican form to the vast extent of territory and
diversity of interests; and the necessity of providing checks upon
political parties if anarchy were to be avoided.

In the convention the need of a strong state, with powers beyond
local legislatures, was not so much debated as assumed. By common
consent it was agreed that the present lack of a centralized, coercive
sovereignty, was the source of all current evils. How many members
preferred monarchy to republicanism, in principle, it is impossible to
determine; but they all realized the inexpediency of attempting to set
it up; even Hamilton yielded to the logic of Colonel Mason’s argument:
“Notwithstanding the oppression and injustice experienced among us
from democracy, the genius of the people is in favor of it, and the
genius of the people must be consulted.” Accepting then the principle
of republicanism as a compromise between the extremes of monarchy
and democracy, the practical problem remained of erecting a system
that should secure the minority against the aggressions of political
faction. If the danger lay in an uncontrolled majority will, the way
of safety lay in imposing restraints upon that will. In elaborating
a system of checks and balances the members of the convention were
influenced by the practical considerations of economic determinism more
than by the theories of Montesquieu. They were realists who followed
the teachings of the greatest political thinkers from Aristotle to
Locke in asserting that the problem of government lay in arranging a
stable balance between the economic interests of the major classes. The
revolutionary conception of equalitarianism, that asserted the rights
of man apart from property and superior to property, did not enter into
their thinking as a workable hypothesis. The very conditions of the
unsettled times were an argument against it. Property, they argued,
is the stabilizing force in society; it is conservative and cautious;
having everything to lose by social upheavals, it is a restraining
force upon factional unrest. The propertyless, on the other hand,
having nothing to lose, easily become the victims of demagogues and
embroil society with foolish experiments. The republican experiment
might work in America because property was widely distributed, but in
the course of time a propertyless majority would arise, whose fickle
and subversive will must be held in check. The problem, therefore, was
to provide in time against such an eventuality. Certain members of the
convention did not go so far in their fear of the propertyless, but
relied upon the ability of property to protect itself by extra-legal
means. “Give the votes to people who have no property,” argued
Gouverneur Morris, “and they will sell them to the rich, who will be
able to buy them.”[300] But the more general view was expressed by
Madison:

  The landed interest, at present, is prevalent, but in process of
  time ... when the number of landholders shall be comparatively
  small ... will not the landed interests be overbalanced in future
  elections? and, unless wisely provided against, what will become of
  our government? In England, at this day, if elections were open to
  all classes of people, the property of landed proprietors would be
  insecure. An agrarian law would take place. If these observations
  be just, our government ought to secure the permanent interests of
  the country against innovation. Landholders ought to have a share
  in the government, to support these invaluable interests, and to
  balance and check the other. They ought to be so constituted as to
  protect the minority of the opulent against the majority.[301]

This conception of the natural sovereignty of the landed interest with
its stake-in-society theory of political rights, America inherited
from England; and although the new Constitution professed to rest
on the sovereignty of the people, the men who framed it refused to
interpret the term, sovereignty of the people, in an equalitarian
sense. They did not profess to be, in the words of John Quincy Adams,
“slavish adorers of our sovereign lords the people.” Every principle
of their social and political philosophy taught them the desirability
of limiting the majority will in order that the wiser minority will
might rule. Paul Leicester Ford has asserted that “the Federal compact
was the first deliberate attempt and assent of a majority to tie
its own hands; to give to the minority guarantees of fair and equal
treatment, without which democratic government is well-nigh impossible,
save when developed along the lines of socialism.”[302] Such partisan
misinterpretation of plain historical fact is characteristic of our
Federalist historians. If the hands of the disfranchised majority
were tied by the voting minority, it is a bit absurd to attribute the
resulting guarantees to an altruistic sense of justice, deliberately
expressed by the former. Very possibly in a world so aristocratic as
was America in 1787, no other course would have succeeded; but there is
not a single historical fact to justify so naïve an interpretation, and
the bitter partisan warfare which followed is sufficient to disprove it.

We are too prone to forget the wide popular disfavor with which the
new Constitution was received. No sooner did the second debate open
than it became evident that the majority opinion held quite a different
conception of the sovereignty of the people than was expressed by the
convention. It had no desire to tie its own hands; it did not take
kindly to the proposal to transfer power from the several states to the
Federal government. The villagers and small men were afraid of the new
instrument; they asserted that it had been prepared by aristocrats and
moneyed men, and they repudiated the stake-in-society principle. “The
Constitution,” said General Thompson in the Massachusetts Convention,
“and the reasons which induced gentlemen to frame it, ought to have
been sent to the several towns to be considered by them. My town
considered it seven hours, and after this there was not one in favor of
it.” In Rhode Island, where it was thus submitted, it was rejected “by
a very great majority.” The state of mind of the agrarian majority was
thus expressed by Amos Singletary, of Sutton, Massachusetts:

  These lawyers, and men of learning, and moneyed men, that talk
  so finely, and gloss over matters so smoothly, to make us, poor
  illiterate people, swallow down the pill, expect to get into
  Congress themselves; they expect to be the managers of this
  Constitution, and get all the power and all the money into their
  own hands, and then they will swallow up all us little folks, like
  the great leviathan.[303]

Among the host of pamphlets and newspaper articles that quickly
appeared, _The Federalist_ written by Hamilton and Madison with some
help from Jay, and _Letters from the Federal Farmer to the Republican_,
by Richard Henry Lee, fairly adequately present the opposing arguments.
By common consent _The Federalist_ was at once accepted by its party
as an unanswerable defense of the Constitution; and its fame has grown
greater with the passing years. No other work on political theory in
the American library has been rated so high, or been more frequently
cited. From the mass of contemporary pamphlets it emerges like a
colossus. It “has been seriously and reverently called the Bible of
Republicanism.” says a legal historian, which “for comprehensiveness
of design, strength, clearness, and simplicity ... has no parallel
among the writings of men, not even excepting or overlooking those of
Montesquieu and Aristotle,”[304]; and a literary historian pronounces
authoritatively, “it is so wisely thoughtful that one may almost
declare it the permanent basis of sound thinking concerning American
constitutional law.”[305]

_The Federalist_ was the work of able lawyers, with whom was joined a
notable political thinker. In very large part it is of interest only to
students of early constitutional theory and practice. It was designed
as a frankly partisan argument to appeal to an influential group in
New York, many members of which had followed George Clinton and Robert
Yates in opposition to the Constitution. On the political side it
develops four main theses: the necessity for taking effective action in
view of the self-confessed failure of the Articles of Confederation;
the urgent need of a sovereign, unitary state, to avoid the horrors
which must follow from “the political monster of an _imperium in
imperio_”; the necessity of providing that justice shall prevail over
the majority will; and the adaptability of the republican form to a
great extent of territory and divergent interests. Of these the second
and third lay bare the heart of Federalist political theory; and in the
treatment of them there is no shrinking from the conclusions of the
earlier debate, although the tone is conciliatory.

The argument for a unitary, sovereign state, developed by Hamilton,
and the argument for justice, developed by Madison, rest upon the same
basis and are regarded as the twin problems of government. The true
sanction of government is found, not in good will, as Bentham and later
democratic thinkers have urged, but in coercion;[306] and coercion
is accepted as necessary because of universal selfishness. “Why has
government been instituted at all? Because the passions of men will not
conform to the dictates of reason and justice, without restraint.”[307]
Granted coercive sovereignty, government must guarantee justice to
all; and justice demands that the majority shall suffer needful
restraint equally with the minority. The great and insidious danger
to good government has always been faction, the argument runs, and a
chief merit of the Constitution lay in its provisions to lessen the
disasters of factional ambition. “Complaints are everywhere heard
from our most considerate and virtuous citizens, equally the friends
of public and private faith, and of public and personal liberty, that
our governments are too unstable, that the public good is disregarded
in the conflict of rival parties, and that measures are too often
decided, not according to the rules of justice and the rights of the
minor party, but by the superior force of an interested and overbearing
majority.”[308]

No theory is more representative of the time than the theory of
faction. It was a first line of defense thrown up against the
advancing democratic movement. The term had long served conveniently
to stigmatize any popular unrest, the “factious multitude” having
been held synonymous in earlier usage with mob; but in the eighteenth
century the word was applied generally to political parties. In a
world moving inevitably towards manhood suffrage, a sharp alignment of
parties with definite platforms was greatly feared by the minority,
for the organization of the rank and file of voters must end in
majority control. An honest appeal to the people was the last thing
desired by the Federalists, and the democratic machinery of recalls
and referendums and rotation in office, which had developed during
the war, was stigmatized as factional devices which in the end must
destroy good government. “As every appeal to the people would carry an
implication of some defect in the government,” argued Madison,[309]
“frequent appeals would in a great measure deprive the government of
that veneration which time bestows on everything, and without which
the wisest and freest governments would not possess the requisite
stability.” “The danger of disturbing the public tranquillity by
interesting too strongly the public passions is a still more serious
objection against a frequent reference of constitutional questions to
the decisions of the whole society.”

In the remarkable tenth number, which compresses within a few pages
pretty much the whole Federalist theory of political science, Madison
has explained the Federalist objections to political parties and party
government.

  By a faction, I understand a number of citizens, whether amounting
  to a majority or minority of the whole, who are united and actuated
  by some common impulse of passion, or of interest, adverse to
  the rights of other citizens, or to the permanent and aggregate
  interests of the community.... If a faction consists of less than
  a majority, relief is supplied by the republican principle, which
  enables the majority to defeat its sinister views, by regular
  vote.... When a majority is included in a faction, the form of
  popular government, on the other hand, enables it to sacrifice to
  its ruling passion or interest, both the public good and the rights
  of other citizens. To secure the public good and private rights,
  against the danger of such a faction, is then the great object
  to which our inquiries are directed.... By what means is this
  great object attainable? Evidently by one of two only. Either the
  existence of the same passion or interest in a majority at the same
  time must be prevented; or the majority, having such coexistent
  passion or interest, must be rendered by their number and local
  situations, unable to concert and carry into effect schemes of
  oppression. If the impulse and the opportunity be suffered to
  coincide, we well know, that neither moral nor religious motives
  can be relied on as an adequate control.

In full agreement with the greater political thinkers of the past,
Madison then traces political parties to economic sources. Since in
every society the diversity of economic groups creates diversity of
political programs, party divisions and party alignments are inevitable
in the ordinary course of events. The unequal distribution of property
is the realistic basis of all politics, and the “_sentiments_ and
_views_ which arise from the possession of different degrees and kinds
of property form the stuff of so-called ‘political psychology.’”[310]

  The diversity in the faculties of men, from which the rights of
  property originate, is ... an insuperable obstacle to a uniformity
  of interests. The protection of these faculties is the first
  object of government. From the protection of different and unequal
  faculties of acquiring property, the possession of different
  degrees and kinds of property immediately results; and from the
  influence of these on the sentiments and views of the respective
  proprietors, ensues a division of the society into different
  interests and parties.

  The latent causes of faction are thus sown in the nature of
  man; and we see them everywhere brought into different degrees
  of activity, according to the different circumstances of civil
  society. A zeal for different opinions ... [has] divided mankind
  into parties, inflamed them with mutual animosity, and rendered
  them much more disposed to vex and oppress each other than to
  co-operate for their common good.... But the most common and
  durable source of factions has been the various and unequal
  distribution of property. Those who hold and those who are without
  property have ever formed distinct interests of society. Those
  who are creditors, and those who are debtors, fall under a like
  discrimination. A landed interest, a manufacturing interest,
  a mercantile interest, a moneyed interest, with many lesser
  interests, grow up of necessity in civilized nations, and divide
  them into different classes actuated by different sentiments and
  views. The regulation of these various and interfering interests,
  forms the principal task of modern legislation, and involves
  the spirit of party and faction in the necessary and ordinary
  operations of the government.

As a means of securing a necessary balance between rival interests,
Madison approved a republican rather than a democratic form of
government:

  The two great points of difference, between a democracy and
  a republic, are, first, the delegation of the government, in
  the latter, to a small number of citizens elected by the rest;
  secondly, the greater number of citizens, and greater sphere of
  country, over which the latter may be extended. The effect of the
  first difference is, on the one hand, to refine or enlarge the
  public views, by passing them through the medium of a chosen body
  of citizens, whose wisdom may best discern the true interests
  of their country, and whose patriotism and love of justice,
  will be least likely to sacrifice it to temporary or partial
  considerations. Under such a regulation, it may well happen, that
  the public voice, pronounced by the representatives of the people,
  will be more consonant to the public good, than if pronounced by
  the people themselves, convened for the purpose.... The other point
  of difference is, the greater number of citizens, and extent of
  territory, which may be brought within the compass of republican,
  than of democratic government; and it is this circumstance
  principally which renders factious combinations less to be dreaded
  in the former, than in the latter.... Extend the sphere, and you
  take in a greater variety of parties and interests; you make it
  less probable that a majority of the whole will have a common
  motive to invade the rights of other citizens; or if such a common
  motive exists, it will be more difficult for all who feel it to
  discover their strength, and act in unison with each other.[311]

In such argument Madison was adapting to his purpose the views of
Milton and other seventeenth-century republicans, to whom in the
dangerous days when the Puritan Commonwealth was breaking up, the
“noise and shouting of the rude multitude,” the drunken ribaldry of the
London rabble, was prophetic of “new injunctions to manacle the native
libertie of mankinde.” But it has long since become a commonplace of
political observation that the minority and not the majority is the
more dangerous to the common well-being, for it is the minority that
most frequently uses government to its own ends.

The contrast in temper and argument between _The Federalist_ and
Richard Henry Lee’s _Letters from the Federal Farmer_,[312] is
striking. The calmness and fair-mindedness of the work persuade one
that it ill deserves the name partisan; it comes near to being a frank
and disinterested examination of the proposed instrument of government.
Its sharpest strictures are tempered by ready acknowledgment of
excellent features. The burden of Lee’s accusation is that the
instrument is undemocratic; that it must result in placing the majority
under control of the minority; and that it in no wise reflects the
sober judgment of the body of the people. He is more restrained than
Elbridge Gerry, who asserted that it was the outcome of a conspiracy
hatched in secret, a work of “such motley mixture, that its enemies
cannot trace a feature of Democratic or Republican extract.” But the
Farmer’s restraint adds weight to the serious charges which he brings
against the instrument, and the unseemly haste of its advocates in
urging its speedy adoption. It was not to destroy the work of the
Convention that he pleaded for delay; but that it should receive full
and fair consideration, and be disposed of as its merits or defects
should warrant.

His first concern is that the Constitution should not be adopted with
the inconsiderate haste for which _The Federalist_ was pressing.
“The first principal question that occurs, is, Whether, considering
our situation, we ought to precipitate the adoption of the proposed
Constitution?” Hamilton had made much of the desperate state of affairs
that admitted of no delay; Lee replied by denying, with Franklin and
other competent observers, that the present state was desperate.
Matters were improving daily, peace was restoring the ravages of war.

  I know uneasy men, who with very much to precipitate, do not admit
  all these facts; but they are facts well known to all men who
  are thoroughly informed in the affairs of this country. It must,
  however, be admitted, that our federal system is defective, and
  that some of the state governments are not well administered;
  but ... we impute to the defects in our governments many evils
  and embarrassments which are most clearly the result of the late
  war.... When we want a man to change his condition, we describe
  it as wretched, miserable, and despised; and we draw a pleasing
  picture of that which we would have him assume.... It is too often
  the case in political concerns that men state facts not as they
  are, but as they wish them to be.... Men who feel easy in their
  circumstances, and such as are not sanguine in their expectations
  relative to the consequences of the proposed change, will remain
  quiet under the existing governments. Many commercial and monied
  men, who are uneasy, not without just cause, ought to be respected;
  and by no means, unreasonably disappointed in their expectations
  and hopes.... It is natural for men, who wish to hasten the
  adoption of a measure, to tell us, now is the crisis--now is the
  critical moment which must be seized or all will be lost; and to
  shut the door against free enquiry, whenever conscious the thing
  presented has defects in it, which time and investigation will
  probably discover.... If it is true, what has been so often said,
  that the people of this country cannot change their constitution
  for the worse, I presume it still behoves them to endeavor
  deliberately to change it for the better.

Granted that experience has demonstrated the need of revising the
Articles of Confederation in certain essential points, Lee maintains
that the enemies of democracy have been making undue capital out of
the shortcomings of an emergency government, in the hope of subverting
the democratic state governments and substituting a more aristocratic
form.

  The confederation was formed when great confidence was placed in
  the voluntary exertions of individuals, and of the respective
  states; and the framers of it, to guard against usurpation, so
  limited, and checked the powers, that, in many respects, they
  are inadequate to the exigencies of the union.... During the
  war, the general confusion, and the introduction of paper money,
  infused in the minds of people vague ideas respecting government
  and credit. We expected too much from the return of peace, and of
  course we have been disappointed. Our governments have been new and
  unsettled; and several legislatures, by making tender, suspension,
  and paper money laws, have given just cause of uneasiness to
  creditors. By these and other causes, several orders of men in
  the community have been prepared by degrees, for a change of
  government; and this very abuse of power in the legislatures,
  which in some cases has been charged upon the democratic part of
  the community, has furnished aristocratical men with those very
  weapons, and those very means, with which, in great measure, they
  are rapidly effecting their favourite object.

The methods by which the convention was brought together at a time when
the “idea of destroying ultimately, the state government, and forming
one consolidated system, could not have been admitted,” is traced
briefly with penetrating comment, and the unfortunate decision of some
excellent republicans to take no part in the work is regretted:

  Here the favorable moment for changing the government was
  evidently discerned by a few men, who seized it with address....
  Tho’ they chose men principally connected with commerce and the
  judicial departments, yet they appointed many good republican
  characters--had they all attended we should see, I am persuaded, a
  better system presented. The non-attendance of eight or nine men,
  who were appointed members of the convention, I shall ever consider
  as a very unfortunate event to the United States.--Had they
  attended, I am pretty clear that the results ... would not have
  had that strong tendency to aristocracy now discernible in every
  part of the plan ... the young visionary men, and the consolidating
  aristocracy, would have been more restrained than they have been.

Lee frankly concedes that the instrument possesses many excellent
features, but he considers it greatly vitiated by the “want of that one
important factor in a free government, a representation of the people.”
“Because we have sometimes abused democracy, I am not among those who
think a democratic branch a nuisance.” “Every man of reflection must
see, that the change now proposed, is a transfer of power from the many
to the few.” The present agitation may be traced to its source in “two
very unprincipled parties,” between whom stand the great mass of honest
and substantial people:

  One party is composed of little insurgents, men in debt, who want
  no law, and who want a share of the property of others; these are
  called levellers, Shaysites, &c. The other party is composed of a
  few, but more dangerous men, with their servile dependents; these
  avariciously grasp at all power and property; you may discover
  in all the actions of these men, an evident dislike to free and
  equal government, and they go systematically to work to change,
  essentially, the forms of government in this country; these are
  called aristocrats, m--ites, &c. Between these two parties is
  the weight of the community: the men of middling property, men
  not in debt on the one hand, and men, on the other, content with
  republican governments, and not aiming at immense fortunes, offices
  and power. In 1786, the little insurgents, the levellers, came
  forth, invaded the rights of others, and attempted to establish
  governments according to their wills. Their movements evidently
  gave encouragement to the other party, which, in 1787, has taken
  the political field, and with its fashionable dependents, and the
  tongue and the pen, is endeavouring to establish in a great haste,
  a politer kind of government. These two parties ... are really
  insignificant, compared with the solid, free, and independent part
  of the community.

Calm voices such as Lee’s were few in those strident days, and the
Federalists fairly overwhelmed the silent majority with clamorous
argument. Polite culture and professional learning joined forces to
write down the agrarians. The Hartford Wits dedicated smart couplets
to the cause; Francis Hopkinson made merry over their ways; Noah
Webster confuted them with his economic interpretation of politics;
lawyer-scholars like James Wilson and John Dickinson exposed their
heresies; solid business men like Peletiah Webster contributed after
the measure of their intelligence. In their ardor the Federalists
went further. “What can be the views of those gentlemen in Boston.”
asked Lee pertinently, “who countenanced the printers in shutting up
the press against a fair and free investigation?” From the strident
debate emerged not only the Constitution, but political parties, no
longer to be spoken of as factions, but eventually to be accepted as
necessary agencies in republican government; and to understand their
rival policies we must turn to examine the political philosophies of
the outstanding leaders.


Footnotes

[298] These English liberals have been often regarded as democrats.
Thus Merriam says of Locke, “He was the most famous of seventeenth
century democratic thinkers.” _American Political Theories_, p. 90.

[299] See Laski, _Political Thought from Locke to Bentham_, p. 188.

[300] _Elliot’s Debates_, Vol. I, p. 386.

[301] _Ibid._, Vol. I, pp. 449-450.

[302] _The Federalist_, Introduction, p. viii.

[303] Quoted in Harding, _The Federal Constitution in Massachusetts_.

[304] Carson, _History of the Supreme Court_, quoted by Ford, _The
Federalist_, p. xxix.

[305] Wendell, _Literary History of America_, p. 118.

[306] Number 15.

[307] _Ibid._

[308] Number 10.

[309] Number 49.

[310] Beard, _The Economic Basis of Politics_, pp. 29-32.

[311] Number 10.

[312] The full title is: _Observations leading to a fair examination
of the system of government, proposed by the late Convention; and to
several essential and necessary alterations in it. In a number of
Letters from the Federal Farmer to the Republican._ Reprinted in Ford’s
pamphlets.




