Chapter II • The Skepticism of the House of Adams


In the welter of change that resulted from the revolutionary
transitions of the Gilded Age, one man at least stood apart, skeptical
about the worth of the current revolutions, unconvinced that all the
hurly-burly meant a rational progress. To Henry Adams skepticism
early became a habit. Doubt persistently dogged his footsteps and the
more critically he examined the ways of his generation of Americans,
the more certain it seemed to him that any were unworthy the name of
civilization. He was not at home in the new world of the Gilded Age;
and as he watched the disintegrations of the older New England in which
he had been brought up, an incurable nostalgia seized upon him and he
set about seeking another home where he might live the good life he had
not lived heretofore. The America of the Gilded Age was alien to him;
its gods were not his gods, nor its ends his ends. And so began for him
a long pilgrimage of the spirit that was to carry him far and return
him at last with no solider gains than a handful of curious relics in
his pilgrim’s scrip.

The sturdy New England character, with its self-sufficing individualism
and granite integrity, never came to finer flower than in the
Braintree-Quincy house of Adams. Intellectually curious, given to
rationalism, retaining much of the eighteenth-century solidity of
intellect and honest realism, refusing to barter principle for the good
will of men, the Adams line produced no more characteristic offshoots
than came in the fourth generation. In Charles Francis Adams, Jr.,
Henry Adams, and Brooks Adams, the family virtues of independence,
intellectual integrity, and disinterested criticism, found abundant
expression. All three were children of an earlier century, endowed with
the solidest Yankee-Puritan qualities of mind and heart, unyielding
as the rock ledges of their native fields; and they found the
experience of living in the late nineteenth century, of adjusting their
eighteenth-century minds to the demands of a sordid capitalistic order,
a difficult business. Though they tried to bridge the chasm between
the two worlds, though they honestly sought some working compromise
that would suffer them to share in the work of their generation, they
met with failure. It was not possible for the House of Adams, with its
old-fashioned rectitude, to accept the ways of the Gilded Age, and in
the end they turned aside from the main-traveled road to follow their
own paths.


I • Charles Francis Adams--The Business Failure

Of the three Charles Francis Adams most nearly succeeded in his
experiment of a _rapprochement_ with capitalism, with the result that
his life came nearest to shipwreck. Perhaps there was less of the Adams
granite in his character. He refused to turn rebel but consciously
sought to win the prizes offered by his generation, training himself
to serve financial interests, making overtures to business, and
achieving a very considerable financial success. Yet nothing was more
incongruous than an Adams serving as lackey to State Street, and when
after abundant experience he came finally to realize it he turned away
to pick up the scattered threads of a life largely wasted. For years
he had suffered from a long maladjustment. When he quitted the army
at the close of the war with the brevet rank of brigadier-general, he
found himself adrift. The world of his youth was gone and the future
seemed drab and unpromising. Intellectually he was caught between
tides. The traditional idealisms had burnt out in the bitter struggle,
and in the sterile post-war years his Puritan nature found no adequate
nourishment. The crusading ardor was gone, and the new world of science
had not yet risen on the horizon of young men who had given their youth
to the army. In 1865 he came upon John Stuart Mill’s essay on Auguste
Comte, which he said revolutionized his whole mental attitude--“I
emerged from the theological stage, in which I had been nurtured, and
passed into the scientific.... From reading that compact little volume
of Mill’s ... I date a changed intellectual and moral life.” Yet from
this accidental foray into Victorian rationalism he got little more
than a sense of release from a dead Puritanism. Creative intellectual
enthusiasms were not to be his portion.

Disillusioned with the law, over which he had been pottering, and
wanting to ally himself with the dominant forces of his generation, he
“fixed on the railroad system as the most developing force and largest
field of the day.” He delved into the history of certain railways and
established a reputation as a student of transportation. For upwards of
a quarter century--from 1866 to 1890--as a member of different public
commissions and finally as president of the Union Pacific system--Jay
Gould’s road--he devoted his best energy to the work, only to be
disillusioned in the end. In 1912 he wrote this confession:

  Indeed, as I approach the end, I am more than a little
  puzzled to account for the instances I have seen of business
  success--money-getting. It comes from a rather low instinct.
  Certainly, as far as my observation goes, it is rarely met with in
  combination with the finer or more interesting traits of character.
  I have known, and known tolerably well, a good many “successful”
  men--“big” financially--men famous during the last half-century;
  and a less interesting crowd I do not care to encounter. Not one
  that I have ever known would I care to meet again, either in
  this world or the next; nor is one of them associated in my mind
  with the idea of humor, thought, or refinement. A set of mere
  money-getters and traders, they were essentially unattractive and
  uninteresting.... In the course of my railroad experiences I made
  no friends, apart from those in the Boston direction; nor among
  those I met was there any man whose acquaintance I valued. They
  were a coarse, realistic, bargaining crowd.[701]

Yet not till he had reached his late fifties did he finally cut the
ties that held him to the “bargaining crowd,” and turn to the business
of salvaging the remnant of his days. He gave himself over with zest to
the writing of Massachusetts history, but it was then too late to do
notable work. He had laid too many offerings on an altar he had come to
loathe. Not a lifelong student like Henry, he had been unable to gather
great stores of knowledge. Not a militant rebel like Brooks, he had
never been given to searching inquiries into the laws of civilization.
And so when he found himself free at last, he set himself to the
business of local chronicles. That was better than nothing; it was the
one thing in his life he took solid pride in; the work was honestly and
capably done; but it was small savings from a lifetime of conscientious
work. His venture into the realm of business had been a disaster.


II • Henry Adams--Intellectual

From a similar disaster Henry Adams was saved by an early
disillusionment. His efforts at _rapprochement_ were little more than a
gesture. While casting about after the war for a promising opening for
a career he hit upon finance as a likely field and published a number
of essays that drew attention to him. But it was quite impossible
for him to go forward along such lines. He was too completely the
intellectual, too aloof from his generation in spirit and will, to ally
himself with the economic masters of the Gilded Age. Sooner or later
he would go his own way, and luckily good fortune took the matter in
hand promptly. No suitable opportunity offering, he was dragooned by
family and friends into an assistant-professorship at Harvard, where
he spent seven years trying to explain to himself and his students
the meaning of the Middle Ages. Those years were his introduction to
history. The passion of the student was in his blood, and he turned
with zest to brood over the scanty records of past generations, seeking
a clue to the meaning of man’s pilgrimage on earth, trying to arrange
the meaningless fragments in some sort of rational pattern, in the hope
of discovering an underlying unity in what seemed on the face only a
meaningless welter of complexity and irrationality. A rationalist, he
followed his intellect in an eager quest for the law of historical
evolution, and he ended fifty years later in mysticism. It was a
natural outcome for a lifetime of rationalizing--a compensation for the
mordant dissatisfactions that issued from the restless play of mind.

Dissatisfied with his labors he quitted the Harvard post in 1879 and
thereafter made his home at Washington in the atmosphere of politics.
From the Middle Ages he turned to the American past and set out to
explore the period during which the first Adams had played his part.
He could not deal with narrow parochial themes; he would not fall
into the “sink of history--antiquarianism,” that satisfied Charles
Francis Adams. From the beginnings of his intellectual life he had
been concerned with the ideas and ideals that presumably lie behind
periods and civilizations; so he went back to what he regarded as the
great age of American political history, to inquire into the meaning
of the struggle between Federalism and Jeffersonianism for control of
the venture in republicanism. But finding little satisfaction there, as
he had earlier found none in Victorian England, where he had studied
closely contemporary English statesmen--Palmerston and Lord Russell and
Gladstone--only to convince himself that they were bankrupt of ideas
and morality, and had nothing to teach concerning the good life, he
abandoned the field, threw over his familiar studies, and set about the
great business of reëducating himself.

From his long studies in the American past one significant thing
had emerged--he had come to understand the source of certain of his
dissatisfactions with current American ideals that set him apart
from his fellows. He had gone back to his own origins and had traced
the rise of the defiant Adams prejudices that were as strong in the
fourth generation as they had been in the first. The Adams family was
eighteenth-century--Henry Adams had come to understand--and he himself
in mind and education and prejudices, was of that earlier time. He
was a child of Quincy rather than Boston--a simple world with simple
virtues that capitalism and industrialism were destroying in the name
of progress. From such village loyalties he could not rid himself.
Perhaps in reason he should not have preferred that earlier homespun
world; but affection does not heed logic, and as Henry Adams traced the
decline of Quincy to Hamilton’s financial policy that started the new
capitalism on its triumphant career, he was filled with bitterness.
It was a vulgar order that was rising and an evil day. Since 1865 the
bankers had ruled America, and they were coming finally to cajole
the American people into accepting their vulgar ideals and putting
their trust in a bankers’ paradise. As he watched the temples of the
new society rising everywhere in the land, his gorge rose at the
prospect. He had no wish to dwell in a bankers’ paradise. Dislike of
a capitalistic society was in his blood. From father to son all the
Adamses had distrusted capitalism and hated State Street. The “only
distinctive mark of all the Adamses,” he said late in life, “since old
Sam Adams’s father a hundred and fifty years before, had been their
inherited quarrel with State Street, which had again and again broken
out into riot, bloodshed, personal feuds, foreign and civil war,
wholesale banishments and confiscations, until the history of Florence
was hardly more turbulent than that of Boston.”[702]

And so when at the climax of the capitalistic revolution he watched
the change going on noisily all about him, when the transition to
the bankers’ paradise was called progress and capitalistic feudalism
was hailed as the advent of Utopia, he seemed to himself a somewhat
pathetic anachronism. Shades of the prison house were falling about
him. “He had hugged his antiquated dislike of bankers and capitalistic
society,” he said bitterly, “until he had become little better than a
crank.”

  He had known for years that he must accept the régime, but he
  had known a great many other disagreeable certainties--like age,
  senility, and death--against which one made what little resistance
  one could.... For a hundred years, between 1793 and 1893, the
  American people had hesitated, vacillated, swayed forward and back,
  between two forces, one simply industrial, the other capitalistic,
  centralizing, and mechanical. In 1893, the issue came on the single
  gold standard, and the majority at last declared itself, once for
  all, in favor of the capitalistic system with all its necessary
  machinery. All one’s friends, all one’s best citizens, reformers,
  churches, colleges, educated classes, had joined the banks to force
  submission to capitalism; a submission long foreseen by the mere
  law of mass. Of all forms of society or government, this was the
  one he liked least, but his likes and dislikes were as antiquated
  as the rebel doctrine of State rights. A capitalistic system had
  been adopted, and if it were to be run at all, it must be run by
  capital and by capitalistic methods.[703]

But while he clung tenaciously to his obsolete prejudices in favor of
an earlier century, the pugnacious realism of that century was oozing
out of him. The middle years of his life, between the acceptance of the
Harvard post in 1870 and the final break with Victorianism in 1892,
were intellectually an unhappy period. He was losing his grasp on
realities and becoming narrowly and exclusively political-minded. It
was not good for him to live daily in the presence of politics. In so
“far as he had a function in life,” he said of the Henry Adams of 1877.
“it was as stable-companion to statesmen, whether they liked it or
not.”[704] The term “statesmen” was of course only a polite euphemism
for the breed of politicians who played their sordid game under his
critical eyes. He was rarely under any illusions in regard to them
except when blinded by friendship. Certainly his etchings of Grant and
Blaine and Sherman and Conkling and other servants of democracy were
done with acid.

Yet in all his penetrating comment on men and measures there is a
curious failure to take into account the economic springs of action. He
had let slip the clue old John Adams had followed so tenaciously. An
acute historian, not thus wanting, would never have traced the triumph
of the gold standard to the “mere law of mass,” would never have
substituted a physical determinism for an economic, would never have
confused the principle of mass with a minority. How far an intelligent
man and a competent historian could go astray in his criticism of
current ways is suggested by the curious novel _Democracy_, that he
wrote in 1880 while living in the daily companionship of John Hay and
Clarence King. In dealing with the phenomena of political corruption
he had none of the acuteness of old John Taylor of Carolina, who would
have put his finger unerringly on the cause, or of the first Adams. If
he had written _Democracy_ after he had studied the funding operations
of the Federalists under Hamilton’s leadership, very likely he would
have dealt with the problem more searchingly; but in 1880 Henry Adams
revealed no more critical intelligence than did Godkin or Lowell or
other critics of the Gilded Age.

The historical work done during those middle years at Washington
was abundant and excellent, marked by rigorous use of sources, a
dispassionate attitude towards partisan issues, and excellent form.
It was easy for an Adams to take middle ground between Jefferson and
Hamilton, however much his sympathies inclined to the former. In
all this work, however, in the _Life of Albert Gallatin_ (1879), in
_John Randolph_ (1882), as well as in the nine-volume _History of the
United States during the Administrations of Jefferson and Madison_
(1889-1891), the point of view remains too narrowly political, with the
result that it fails to thrust into adequate relief the economics of
the great struggle between agrarianism and capitalism; and without that
clue the interpretation is wanting in substantial realism.

By 1891 he was convinced that he had got all he could from the curdled
milk of politics, and he became dissatisfied with his work. There can
be little doubt that it was a growing realization of the inadequacy
of his analysis of social forces that determined him to abandon the
field he had tilled so long and set about the business of reëducating
himself. If _Mont-Saint-Michel and Chartres_ and _The Education_ tell
anything about Henry Adams they reveal that his dissatisfactions
welled up from deep springs within himself--from the consciousness
of his failure to penetrate beneath the surface, to probe the hidden
forces that move the puppets on the historical stage. He had long
been seeking an adequate philosophy of history--for a unity behind
the multiplicity--and in these early years of the nineties he was
stimulated by Brooks Adams, who was then deep in his theory of the law
of civilization and decay and had come to lean heavily on the principle
of economic determinism.[705] “Brooks Adams had taught him,” he said
later, “that the relation between civilizations was that of trade,” and
stimulated by this rediscovery of the philosophy of the first Adams he
set about the business of orienting himself to the realm of science,
of substituting for a meaningless political interpretation a broader
philosophical interpretation.

Very likely it was his reading in the sociology of the Enlightenment
that first turned his thought to the philosophy of history--chiefly
Turgot and Comte. Speaking of the years 1867-1868 he said he “became
a Comteist, within the limits of evolution.”[706] He had long been
interested in such clues as science offered--in the geological theories
of Sir Charles Lyell and the biological deductions of Darwin. But the
theory of biological evolution with its implications of a benevolent
progress from the simple to the complex, failed to satisfy him; and
he turned to the physical sciences for a guide, discovering as the
ultimate reality behind all appearances--force. This physical principle
he transferred to the field of sociology. Coal-power, electrical
power, he concluded, were to civilization what the gaseous theory was
to physics. It was a creative suggestion and it revolutionized his
conception of history. It runs through all his later speculations and
provided the basis of his thinking. “Adams never knew why,” he said,
“knowing nothing of Faraday, he began to mimic Faraday’s trick of
seeing lines of force all about him, where he had always seen lines of
will.”[707] “To evolutionists may be left the processes of evolution;
to historians the single interest is the law of reaction between
force and force--between mind and nature--the law of progress.”[708]
“The great division of history into phases by Turgot and Comte
first affirmed this law in its outlines by asserting the unity of
progress.”[709]

Thus by the aid of the physical sciences Henry Adams came back to
the philosophy of determinism--a conception that may lead either to
pantheism or to mechanism as one’s temperament determines. In such a
choice there would be no doubt which way Henry Adams would go; he must
somehow reconcile determinism and progress, he must discover unity
in multiplicity--and that unity and progress he found in a mystical
pantheism. “Continuous movement, universal cause, and interchangeable
force. This was pantheism, but the Schools were pantheist ... and their
deity was the ultimate energy, whose thought and action were one.”[710]
How creatively this pantheistic mysticism was to determine his later
thinking is sufficiently revealed in the pages of _Mont-Saint-Michel
and Chartres_. With incredible labor Henry Adams had at last made his
way out of the Sahara of politics in which he had long wandered.

Phrased in less transcendental terms his philosophy of history, as he
came finally to understand it, was expressed thus:

  The work of domestic progress is done by masses of mechanical
  power--steam, electric, furnace, or other--which have to be
  controlled by a score or two of individuals who have shown capacity
  to manage it. The work of internal government has become the task
  of controlling these men, who are socially as remote as heathen
  gods, alone worth knowing, but never known, and who could tell
  nothing of political value if one skinned them alive. Most of them
  have nothing to tell, but are forces as dumb as their dynamos,
  absorbed in the development or economy of power. They are trustees
  for the public, and whenever society assumes the property, it
  must confer on them that title; but the power will remain as
  before, whoever manages it, and will then control society without
  appeal, as it controls its stokers and pit-men. Modern politics
  is, at bottom, a struggle not of men but of forces. The men become
  every year more and more creatures of force, massed about central
  power-houses. The conflict is no longer between the men, but
  between the motors that drive the men, and the men tend to succumb
  to their own motive forces. This is a moral that man strongly
  objects to admit, especially in mediaeval pursuits like politics
  and poetry, nor is it worth while for a teacher to insist upon
  it.[711]

From a civilization thus tyrannized over by coal-power and electrical
power, he turned away to discover if possible a civilization in which
men had lived the good life that he longed for; and in his second
incursion into medieval times he found what he had long been seeking.
Two centuries, from 1050 to 1250, came to represent for him in the
evening of his days the crown and glory of all human endeavor; the
first century with its Norman Mont-Saint-Michel and its _Chanson de
Roland_, with its forthright strength and simplicity, its uncritical
acceptance of life and God, its hope encompassed by a sufficing
unity--a strong, naïve, credulous world, yet with men’s minds
buttressed like their cathedrals by a faith that held in equilibrium
the soaring arches of their aspirations, with every cranny and nook
flooded with radiant color: and the second century, that expressed
itself in the cathedral of Chartres, with its adoration of the Virgin,
its courtly love of Guillaume de Lorris and Marie de Champagne, its
passionate mysticism of Saint Louis and Saint Bernard and Saint
Francis, and its soaring scholasticism of Thomas Aquinas--a tender,
feminine age, that worshiped woman and erected its altars to Our Lady
of Love rather than to Our Lady of Sorrows, that found in Isolde the
ideal woman and expressed itself in Eleanor of Guienne and Blanche
of Castile, in Héloïse and Marie de Champagne, more adequately than
in Richard Cœur-de-Lion, till it finally went the way of mortality
“with the death of Queen Blanche and of all good things about the
year 1250”:--to such idealization of medievalism did this child of
Puritanism come in the wistful twilight of his days. He had never
evaded life, nor professed himself satisfied with mean or cheap
substitutes, but had sought persistently till he had come to believe
that the good life had been lived once, though it might not ever be
lived again. So much at least was clear gain, even though it should end
in wistfulness.

_Mont-Saint-Michel and Chartres_ is a beautiful book, the more
beautiful because of its wistfulness; and the theme that runs through
its pages is a denial of the values that embodied for his countrymen
the sum of all excellence. It is an account of certain happy
generations--so few amongst the countless many--who worshiped in love,
before fear had come to the western world and crept into the message
of the church; a love that elevated Mother Mary above the Christ of
the Cross, and that in her shrine at Chartres would allow no hint of
sorrow or suffering to appear, but represented her as looking out upon
the world with a gracious and regal kindliness and mercy, quick to
succor and to forgive--the spirit of love that suffices life in all its
needs. _Mont-Saint-Michel and Chartres_ is rich and tender and wise,
perhaps beyond anything else that his generation of Americans wrote,
with a mellow scholarship that walks modestly because it has learned
how little it knows. Yet in its every implication it is a sharp and
searching criticism of Boston and America of the nineteenth century. It
repudiates every ideal of a generation that had gambled away the savor
of life--that does not comprehend “and never shall,” the greatness of
that earlier time, “the appetite” for living, the “greed for novelty,”
“the fun of life.”[712] It was precisely these things, unimportant
though they might seem to the acquisitive mind, that Henry Adams had
missed in his own life and passionately resented having missed. To come
to know great men and great deeds and great ages is perhaps of doubtful
expediency for one who must live amongst small men; and Henry Adams
was forced to pay a heavy penalty for his catholic understanding and
sympathy.

The profound suggestiveness of _Mont-Saint-Michel and Chartres_ lies in
the skill with which the brilliant threads of medieval art and thought
and aspiration are woven into a single pattern, and the splendor of its
unity traced to a mystical _élan_ that found its highest expression
in faith. It was the ideal of love that he discovered in the golden
twelfth century--love above law, above logic, above the church and the
schools: a love that explains for him the passionate worship of Mother
Mary, together with the new “_courtoisie_” that sought to shape manners
and morals to humane ends. The humanity of the Virgin set her above
the Trinity, as the humanity of Saint Francis set him above Thomas
Aquinas, for all the latter’s soaring scholasticism. To one who entered
those bygone times through the portals of Chartres cathedral, it was
natural to interpret the total age in the light of the gentle smile of
the Mother of God, and to feel her presence as a transforming spirit
amongst men. Has any other Yankee interpreted so lovingly the mission
of the Virgin, as Henry Adams analyzed it in such a passage as this?

  True it was, although one should not say it jestingly, that the
  Virgin embarrassed the Trinity; and perhaps this was the reason,
  behind all the other excellent reasons, why men loved and adored
  her with a passion such as no other deity has ever inspired: and
  why we, although utter strangers to her, are not far from getting
  down on our knees and praying to her still. Mary concentrated
  in herself the whole rebellion of man against fate; the whole
  protest against divine law; the whole contempt for human law as
  its outcome; the whole unutterable fury of human nature beating
  itself against the walls of its prison-house, and suddenly seized
  by a hope that in the Virgin man had found a door of escape. She
  was above law; she took feminine pleasure in turning hell into an
  ornament; she delighted in trampling on every social distinction
  in this world and the next. She knew that the universe was as
  unintelligible to her, on any theory of morals, as it was to her
  worshippers, and she felt, like them, no sure conviction that it
  was any more intelligible to the Creator of it. To her, every
  suppliant was a universe in himself, to be judged apart, on his
  own merits, by his love for her,--by no means on his orthodoxy,
  or his conventional standing in the Church, or according to his
  correctness in defining the nature of the Trinity. The convulsive
  hold which Mary to this day maintains over human imagination--as
  you can see at Lourdes--was due much less to her power of saving
  soul or body than to her sympathy with people who suffered under
  law,--divine or human,--justly or unjustly, by accident or design,
  by decree of God or by guile of Devil. She cared not a straw
  for conventional morality, and she had no notion of letting her
  friends be punished, to the tenth or any other generation, for the
  sins of their ancestors or the peccadilloes of Eve.

  So Mary filled heaven with a sort of persons little to the taste
  of any respectable middle-class society, which has trouble enough
  in making this world decent and pay its bills, without having to
  continue the effort in another. Mary stood in a Church of her own,
  so independent that the Trinity might have perished without much
  affecting her position; but, on the other hand, the Trinity could
  look on and see her dethroned with almost a breath of relief....
  Mary’s treatment of respectable and law-abiding people who had no
  favours to ask, and were reasonably confident of getting to heaven
  by the regular judgment, without expense, rankled so deeply that
  three hundred years later the Puritan reformers were not satisfied
  with abolishing her, but sought to abolish the woman altogether
  as the cause of all evil in heaven and on earth. The Puritans
  abandoned the New Testament and the Virgin in order to go back to
  the beginning, and renew the quarrel with Eve.[713]

Thus at last, in another land and a remote age, Henry Adams found
the clue that explained for him his own failure and the source of
the dissatisfactions that had tracked him doggedly through his far
wanderings. He had come to understand the reasons for the sterility of
his Massachusetts past, and the last shreds of his Puritan-Federalist
heritage were cast off. In comparison with the vision that came to
him in the choir of Chartres, how unspeakably poor and mean were
the activities he had portrayed in _Democracy_, or even those he
had dealt with in his history of the early days of the republic. He
had discovered the highest existence in emotional response to noble
appeal; the good life was the unified life, possible only on a grand
scale in those rare and great periods of social _élan_ when the
individual is fused in an encompassing unity. Of that golden age of
the Transition--so he finally cast up the account--“the sum is an
emotion--clear and strong as love and much clearer than logic whose
charm lies in its unstable balance.”

  The Transition is the equilibrium between the love of God--which
  is faith--and the logic of God--which is reason; between the round
  arch and the pointed. One may not be sure which pleases most, but
  one need not be harsh toward people who think that the moment
  of balance is exquisite. The last and highest moment is seen at
  Chartres, where, in 1200, the charm depends on the constant doubt
  whether emotion or science is uppermost. At Amiens, doubt ceases;
  emotion is trained in school, Thomas Aquinas reigns.[714]

  Of all the elaborate symbolism which has been suggested for the
  Gothic cathedral, the most vital and most perfect may be that the
  slender nervure, the springing motion of the broken arch, the leap
  downwards of the flying buttress,--the visible effort to throw off
  a visible strain,--never let us forget that Faith alone supports
  it, and that, if Faith fails, Heaven is lost. The equilibrium is
  visibly delicate beyond the line of safety; danger lurks in every
  stone. The peril of the heavy tower, of the restless vault, of the
  vagrant buttress; the uncertainty of logic, the inequalities of
  the syllogism, the irregularities of the mental mirror,--all these
  haunting nightmares of the Church are expressed as strongly by the
  Gothic cathedral as though it had been the cry of human suffering,
  and as no emotion had ever been expressed before or is likely to
  find expression again. The delight of its aspiration is flung up
  to the sky. The pathos of its self-distrust and anguish of doubt
  is buried in the earth as its last secret. You can read out of it
  whatever else pleases your youth and confidence; to me, this is
  all.[715]

One may enter the past, of course, through such portals as one chooses;
but one is likely to choose the portals that promise to open upon the
world of one’s desires. It was a fortunate accident, no doubt, that
led Henry Adams to Chartres to study the cathedral glass under the
guidance of John La Farge; nevertheless it finally determined for him
his total interpretation of the Middle Ages and of all history, and
that interpretation followed naturally a subtle ancestral bias. Even
in his rebellion against his past he could not get away from it, but
like Ruskin and John Henry Newman he came to affirm--whether rightly
or wrongly, who shall say?--that the singular glory of the Middle Ages
was the mystical _élan_ that came to expression in the adoration of the
Virgin. As a child of generations of Puritans he came back finally, in
the twilight of his studies, to the great ideal of faith. And yet it
is not without suggestion that William Morris, who more nearly than
any other modern expressed in his daily life the spirit of the Middle
Ages, never concerned himself much with the medieval church--neither
its cathedrals nor its scholasticism nor its miracles--never talked
about an age of faith, would scarcely have understood, indeed, what
was meant by the drive of a mystical _élan_; but discovered the secret
of that earlier civilization in the gild rather than the church, and
traced the source of the haunting beauty that clings to all its works
to the psychology of craftsmanship that found delight in shaping the
raw material to the craftsman’s dreams.

The difference between Morris and Adams is great enough, and at
bottom it is the difference between the artist and the intellectual;
yet it is a pity that Henry Adams, with his wide acquaintance in
England, should never have known the one Victorian he should most
have delighted in--the nineteenth-century craftsman who found in his
workshop the good life the historian dreamed of, and was unhappy
because it had been lost. Perhaps it would not have greatly changed the
latter’s interpretation. He was not a pagan in temperament to enter
sympathetically into the medieval world that Morris had discovered and
of which the Church was only a drapery--a drapery that never quite
covered a frank _joie de vivre_ that was an emotion far more realistic
and human than any mystical _élan_, and that persisted long after the
apogee of faith in the early twelfth century, filling all the later
Middle Ages with its abundant beauty till it was finally destroyed by
the economic revolution that came out of the Reformation. But at any
rate he might have been led by such knowledge to set the craftsman
beside the poet and the schoolman and the mystic--the nameless artist
who wrought such marvels beside the patron who took care to have his
name and his arms emblazoned on window and wall to remind posterity
of his generosity; and certainly, his interpretation of the Middle
Ages would not have suffered by such addition. Instead, an excessive
intellectualism drove him back upon the naïve.

The disillusion of Henry Adams is abundantly instructive to the student
of our flamboyant transition, so different from the golden Transition.
Here was an honest man and an able--none honester and none abler in
his generation--who devoted his life to finding a path out of the maze
of middle-class America, that should lead to a rational and humane
existence. He was never overconfident of his conclusions. All arrogant
dogmatisms he had long since left behind; they had become for him
pathetically futile and foolish. Creeds and faiths, whether in religion
or politics or economics, he no longer subscribed to; but a certain
residuum remained, from his long meditations--a sense of interfusing
unity, mystical, pantheistic, that his lurking skepticism dealt
tenderly with. “_Inter vania nihil vanius est homine_,” he asserted as
a skeptic, and as a mystic he replied, “Man is an imperceptible atom
always trying to become one with God. If ever modern science achieves
a definition of energy, possibly it may borrow the figure: Energy is
the inherent effort of every multiplicity to become unity.”[716] In
these later years he called himself half whimsically a “conservative
Christian Anarchist”[717] and the explanation probably is to be
found in his shift from intellectualism to emotion as the crown of
a satisfying life. “The two poles of social and political philosophy
seem necessarily to be organization or anarchy; man’s intellect or
the forces of nature.”[718] In rare and happy periods--as in the
glorious Transition--freedom finds its fullest life in a spontaneous
drawing together of the whole; but as the social _élan_ dies away,
institutions, organization, remain. Thomas Aquinas follows Saint
Francis, form remains after emotion has subsided. Nevertheless the free
man must cling to his freedom, in spite of society, in spite of the
political state.

  Absolute liberty is absence of restraint; responsibility is
  restraint; therefore, the ideally free individual is responsible
  only to himself. This principle is the philosophical foundation of
  anarchism, and, for anything that science has yet proved, may be
  the philosophical foundation of the universe; but it is fatal to
  all society and is especially hostile to the State.[719]

Though he lived in the midst of a centralizing politics and found
his friends in such servants of centralization as John Hay and Henry
Cabot Lodge, Henry Adams had no faith in the dominant ideals. He was
never a friend to an acquisitive society with its engrossing political
state. In the light of his favorite dictum that “Power is poison,”
he may perhaps be regarded as an old-fashioned Jeffersonian; it is
another evidence of the persistence of his eighteenth-century mind. He
was an arch-individualist who would go his own way and reach his own
conclusions, quite unconcerned that his views were wholly at variance
with those of his generation. How could it be otherwise? How should
men who lived in the counting-house understand even the language of
this pilgrim returned from other and greater worlds? It was foolish to
talk of what he had seen. And so when he wrote _Mont-Saint-Michel and
Chartres_ he published it privately, and was incredulous when it was
proposed to republish it and give it to the world. What had he, or the
twelfth century, to say to the land of Theodore Roosevelt and Pierpont
Morgan? Was not this America of theirs peopled by the descendants of
the _bourgeoisie_ who, six hundred years before, resentful at having
been cheated--as they supposed--in their heavy investments in shrines
and churches of Our Lady, had turned away from all such unprofitable
business, and put their savings in lands and houses and ships and
railways and banks--of which things politics was the sluttish servant?
How should one who had known Saint Francis and Eleanor of Guienne take
such men or such a world seriously?


III • Brooks Adams--Rebel

The difference between Henry Adams and Brooks Adams is, perhaps,
sufficiently revealed in the distinction between the intellectual and
the rebel. The youngest of the brothers was a militant nonconformist,
a searching and outspoken critic of all the faiths of his generation.
In Brooks Adams the family skepticisms were pointed and barbed,
and the family distrust of capitalism issued in a broadside attack
upon the hateful system. Few Americans of his day were so little
pleased with the bankers’ Utopia dreamed of by the middle class,
or subjected the capitalistic mind to such critical analysis. Not
content with rejecting that Utopia, he pursued his studies in the
history of western civilization with a view to determining whether
the economic mind, instead of being the friend and ally of a human
society--as it professed to be--were not rather the foul wellspring
of a disintegrating egoism that must destroy every civilization that
yields to its siren appeal. In the theory he eventually elaborated,
the capitalistic mind proves to be a greedy spider spinning his web
to catch the simple imaginative minds--warrior and priest and artist
and craftsman--and suck them dry. The sterile middleman becomes master
of society and with the inevitable enslavement of the producer, and
the drying-up of production at its source, civilization withers and
decays, to be followed by another cycle in the long struggle between
the creative and acquisitive instincts.

None but a congenital rebel could have arrived at such conclusions from
the studies in which his youth was passed. As a son of the house of
Adams the profession of the law was the predestined path to politics
and diplomacy, and like Charles and Henry he devoted his younger
years to the ancestral study, receiving such training as the Harvard
Law School could give. He made greater progress than his brothers,
eventually getting so far as to write legal treatises; but finding such
work a bit arid he supplemented his legal studies with the writing of
Massachusetts chronicles. His dissatisfactions seem to have culminated
in the late eighties, during the lean years that preceded the crash
of 1893; and he turned away from local chronicles to speculate on
the deeper causes of social vigor and decline. The result was the
publication in 1895 of _The Law of Civilization and Decay_, a study
in social dynamics that took its point of departure from psychology,
and based its conclusions on physics and economics. Before Henry Adams
he elaborated the theory that civilization is the product of social
energy, and social energy obeys the physical law of mass, accelerating
or retarding in ratio to the density of population reduced to order.
As society draws together in great centers its activity increases
until exhaustion finally slows it down; whereupon follows a period
of disintegration that breaks up the integrated mass and disperses
its energy. The social ebb and flow, therefore, is always from
decentralization to centralization and back again to decentralization,
and as it flows it thrusts into the foreground different types of mind
that express themselves in diverse ideals.

The master types that appear and disappear in this ceaseless flux are
determined by two psychological drives that always and everywhere
shape human activity--fear and greed: the one culminating in the
social rule of the priest, the other in the social rule of the usurer.
Decentralization with its isolation breeds the imaginative mind which,
seeing more devils than vast hell can hold, turns to the priest for
succor--to one who deals in miracles and professes to be able to fend
off malignant powers, and who in consequence grows rich by his traffic
in relics and rises to economic power. But imagination produces as well
the creative mind that finds in isolation the promptings to revery,
expresses its dreams in terms of beauty, and fashions a realm of art
in which to dwell. Priest, artist, and warrior,--shrine, cathedral,
and castle--were the creation of medieval times, the naïve products
of the golden age of decentralization. Whereas centralization, with
the rubbing away of singularity by daily contact and the greater
rewards that lie open to activity, breeds automatically the economic
mind--a mind that is necessarily unimaginative, practical, competitive,
acquisitive, skeptical, preferring administration to creation, and
setting exploitation as the single object of activity. And since
centralization offers increasing rewards to greed, the economic mind
subdues the imaginative, and the money-lender with his control of
wealth rises to mastery. As he expropriates the resources of society
he inevitably dominates the political state. His wealth enables him to
maintain a hired police to safeguard his gains, until expropriation
having run its course, the police fail to hold in check the mass of the
exploited, and an unmartial class discovers that money can no longer
buy security against the strength of numbers. The usurer is overthrown,
his wealth is expropriated, and the social cycle must be run again.

This suggestive theory, which he works out with conspicuous skill in
his interpretation of the Middle Ages and the rise of capitalism,
implies a perennial conflict between fear and greed, that turns finally
upon the relative development of the arts of attack and of defense.
Centralization, it is clear, results from the superiority of the
former; when attack is superior to defense the lesser strongholds of
exploitation must fall and the defeated must become subject to the
coalescing masters. After the disruption of the Roman Empire western
Europe created its feudal system, by means of which the baron in
his stout castle flouted the centralizing ambitions of the impotent
monarchy; and it was not till the wealth of the church and of the
_bourgeoisie_ was thrown on the side of the king, and the development
of the art of attack through the use of gunpowder, that the rise of the
monarchical state was possible. But having aided the king to reduce the
power of the barons, thereby rendering trade secure on a large scale,
the _bourgeoisie_ turned against the medieval church with its vast
wealth that invited expropriation. In the primitive age of faith, under
the dominion of fear, the burgesses had spent their money prodigally
to build shrines and churches and cathedrals--in France alone between
the years 1170 and 1270, eighty cathedrals and nearly five hundred
large churches had been built, that by a calculation made in 1840,
would cost a billion dollars to replace[720]--but with the development
of the economic mind such amazing expenditures seemed wasteful, and
the _bourgeoisie_ looked about for a cheaper way of salvation. The
money cost to the worshipers of saints and relics was a sharp prod to
their skepticism as to the efficacy of such worship. This explains for
Brooks Adams the origins of the Reformation; it was due to the economic
dissatisfaction of the burgess class; the church had grown rich and
grasping from its monopoly power. Speaking of the rise of English
Lollardry, he argued:

  The Lollards were of the modern economic type, and discarded the
  miracle because the miracle was costly and yielded an uncertain
  return ... gifts as an atonement for sin were a drain on savings,
  and the economist instinctively sought cheaper methods of
  propitiation. The monied class, therefore, proceeded step by step,
  and its first experiment was to suppress all fees to middle-men,
  whether priests or saints, by becoming their own intercessors with
  the deity ... [and] as the tradesman replaced the enthusiast, a
  dogma was evolved by which mental anguish, which cost nothing, was
  substituted for the offering which was effective in proportion
  to its money value. This dogma was “Justification by Faith,” the
  cornerstone of Protestantism....

  But the substitution of a mental condition for a money payment
  led to consequences more far-reaching than the suppression of
  certain clerical revenues, for it involved the rejection of the
  sacred tradition which had not only sustained relic worship, but
  which had made the Church the channel of communication between
  Christians and the invisible world. That ancient channel once
  closed, Protestants had to open another, and this led to the
  deification of the Bible.... Thus for the innumerable costly
  fetishes of the imaginative age were substituted certain writings
  which could be consulted without a fee. The expedient was evidently
  the device of a mercantile community, ... and made an organized
  priesthood impossible. When each individual might pry into the
  sacred mysteries at his pleasure, the authority of the clergy was
  annihilated.[721]

With warrior and priest superseded by the tradesman as the dominant
type--the imaginative mind by the economic--came the inevitable triumph
of greed over fear. The ancient defenses of the church were razed and
it stood naked to its enemies. In presence of the skepticism of the
burgesses it could no longer sell its miracles in the open market,
could no longer persuade men that it was God’s vicegerent with powers
of binding and loosing; and with its divine sanctions gone, its
wealth-hoards lay unprotected before the cupidity of king, noble, and
commoner. The spoliation of the monasteries was the prelude to the long
movement of the Reformation in England, and made possible its success.
So long as the church retained its lands and treasure it could not
easily be overturned; so a greedy King and greedy nobles took effective
measures to disarm it, and having got their hands on the substantial
plunder they left to Genevan ministers the lesser business of disputing
over the form and doctrine of the new church. The revolution had
already been accomplished; and this revolution--the transfer from
priest to layman of a third of the wealth of England--was but prelude
to still greater revolutions that were preparing, and which began
with the pouring into England of the gold and silver from the Spanish
treasure-ships. The spoiling of Rome and the spoiling of the Spaniard
were both buccaneering adventures undertaken by zealous Protestants.
Drake and Hawkins--pirate and slaver--were “hot gospellers,” ready
to fight, plunder, or rape for the glory of God and the profit of
England; and it was such men who diverted to London the flood of
Spanish-American silver that issued from the rich mines of Potosi.

Potosi was discovered in 1545, and from that event Adams dates the
rise of the commercial activity that was to prepare the way for the
Industrial Revolution, which came to flower two centuries later.
This vast upheaval that destroyed the older feudal England, was the
immediate outcome of the plundering of India that brought to London the
vast treasure-hoards of the East. The eviction of the peasants from
their lands had already provided a plentiful supply of cheap labor,
the machinery of credit and exchange had been created, and with this
immense influx of capital the Industrial Revolution was a matter of
course. The manufacturers seized control of England and ruled till
approximately 1810, when their authority was disputed by the financiers
who gradually displaced them. The Bank Act of 1844, which yielded the
control of the currency to the bankers, marked the definite transfer
of sovereignty to Lombard Street; Samuel Lloyd, the banker, completed
the work begun in 1523 by Thomas Cromwell, burgess-adventurer--the
work of bringing England under the authoritative sway of the principle
of greed. Since 1844 western civilization has lain helpless under the
heel of the usurer, who levies his tax upon production by expanding and
contracting the currency at will, and rules society through his control
of the political state. The triumph of the economic mind is complete.

  The aristocracy which wields this autocratic power is beyond
  attack, for it is defended by a wage-earning police, by the side of
  which the legions were a toy--a police so formidable that, for the
  first time in history, revolt is hopeless and is not attempted. The
  only question which preoccupies the ruling class is whether it is
  cheaper to coerce or bribe.[722]

_The Law of Civilization and Decay_ is an extraordinarily provocative
study, the main principles of which he elaborated and applied in later
historical studies, the result of which was to emphasize for him the
determining influence of economics and geography in the rise and fall
of empires.[723] Equipped thus with a comprehensive philosophy of
history, he turned in a later work to examine certain aspects of the
play of social forces in America, in the light of universal social
experience. The particular object of his inquiry in _The Theory of
Social Revolutions_ is the machinery of social control developed in
America during the movement of capitalistic centralization, and its
probable adequacy to meet the future stresses of acceleration. The
problem of security for the capitalistic order resolves itself, he
decides, into the problem of a sufficient protective police; and
since every non-military masterclass must depend upon some form of
mercenary Swiss guard, the solution in America has assumed a form not
uncommon in earlier European experience, but which every European
country has learned at bitter cost to reject. In the face of a strong
anti-militaristic public sentiment that forbids a coercive army and
navy, the financial masters have had recourse to the courts; and it is
the eventual effect of such perversion of the courts to non-judicial
ends that he considers in this frank inquiry.

Historically, he points out, the courts have at times exercised two
diverse functions, the judicial and the political; and the problem
of justice and equity before the law, it has been found by long and
bitter experience, resolves itself into the total separation of
the one from the other. The judicial function is that of impartial
arbitrament in accordance with an established _corpus juris_; it is
judgment and not will. The enactment of the law, on the other hand,
is a political function, residing in the legislature. When therefore,
the courts exercise the political function, they not only assert
that the judicial will is sovereign, but they engage in a perilous
struggle for mastership and involve themselves in all the passions
of partisan objectives. Every “dominant class, as it has arisen, has
done its best to use the machinery of justice for its own benefit.”
The temptation to such perversion is perennial; it is the particular
and besetting temptation of an unmartial monied class; and in times
of social stress it becomes acute. In revolutionary crises--as in
England under Lord Chief-Justice Jeffreys and in France under the
Revolutionary Tribunal--the political function overrides the judicial,
the last protection of the individual is swept away, and society lies
helpless before the ruling power. Thus to pervert the legitimate
functions of the courts is a dangerous game to play--most dangerous
for a non-military group for whom the courts are protectors; and yet
it is precisely this game that capitalism in America, heedless of the
teachings of experience, has long been playing. Using the courts as a
police power it has brought contempt upon them and thereby weakened the
arm upon which alone it can hope to rely in periods of acute stress. In
short, capitalism has assumed the functions of sovereignty in America,
but it has refused to assume the responsibilities of sovereignty. To
gain immediate ends it has shut its eyes to future consequences; and
what those future consequences are likely to be Brooks Adams is at
pains to point out.

The kernel of his argument, obviously, lies in the thesis that the
federal courts have assumed political functions; and into this question
he delves with the equipment of the lawyer added to that of the
philosophical historian. “Politics,” he asserts realistically, “is the
struggle for ascendancy of a class or a majority.” Under the “American
system, the Constitution ... is expounded by judges, and this function,
which, in essence, is political, has brought precisely that quality
of pressure on the bench which it has been the labor of a hundred
generations of our ancestors to remove.”[724] Hence, “from the outset,
the American bench, because it deals with the most fiercely contested
of political issues, has been an instrument necessary to political
success. Consequently, political parties have striven to control it,
and, therefore, the bench has always had an avowed partisan bias.”[725]
From so anomalous a situation two curious developments have resulted:
in the rôle of guardians of the Constitution the courts have assumed
sovereign powers over the legislature, and at the same time, by a
clever nonjudicial hocus-pocus they have declared themselves superior
to the Constitution, possessed of the prerogative of dispensation.
How the first came into being Adams traces in detail from the time
of Marbury vs. Madison in 1803, when Marshall asserted a supervisory
jurisdiction over Congress, to Standard Oil Company vs. United States
in 1911, when the Court amended an act of Congress that Congress
had declined to amend. How the second came into being is a curious
story. It arose, according to Adams, from the rigidity of a written
constitution, that having been interpreted narrowly must somehow be
stretched to meet public needs. In such an emergency the “Supreme Court
of New York imagined the theory of the Police Power,” saying in effect,
“in our discretion, we suspend the operation of the Constitution, in
this instance, by calling your act an exercise of a power unknown to
the framers of the Constitution.”[726]

In other words, having, by the assumption of sovereignty, nullified
the legislative power from which relief would naturally come, and
having awakened a hostile public opinion by its narrow interpretation
of contractual rights, the court was embarrassed and looked about for
a loophole of escape; and the most convenient loophole was the novel
doctrine of judicial prerogative:

  No legislature could intervene, and a pressure was brought to bear
  which the judges could not withstand; therefore, the Court yielded,
  declaring that if impairing a contract were, on the whole, for
  the public welfare, the Constitution, as Marshall interpreted it,
  should be suspended in favor of the legislation which impaired it.
  They called this suspension the operation of the “Police Power.”
  It followed, as the “Police Power” could only come into operation
  at the discretion of the Court, that, therefore, within the limits
  of judicial discretion, confiscation, however arbitrary and to
  whatever extent, might go on.[727]

  The effect of the adoption by the Supreme Court of the United
  States of the New York theory of the Police Power was to vest
  in the judiciary, by the use of this catch-word, an almost
  unparallelled prerogative. They assumed a supreme function which
  can only be compared to the Dispensing Power claimed by the
  Stuarts, or to the authority which, according to the Council
  of Constance, inheres in the Church, to “grant indulgences for
  reasonable causes.” I suppose nothing in modern judicial history
  has ever resembled this assumption....[728]

It is this amazing principle of the judicial prerogative which sets
the Courts above the Constitution and grants them the privilege of
dispensing Indulgences, that has perverted their functions from the
judicial to the political. If Indulgences are for sale, naturally the
wealthy will buy them. And since corporate wealth is regarded by the
judiciary with a more than friendly eye, it rarely finds difficulty
in securing such Indulgences as it seeks. The Courts have become, in
consequence, not so much the Swiss Guards of capitalism, as a pliant
sovereign lord who dispenses rewards to his favorites. The capitalist
is “the most lawless” of citizens. In his attitude towards the state he
is essentially anarchistic; he evades or nullifies a law that he does
not like, while clamorous for the enforcement of a law that works in
his favor.

  If the capitalist has bought some sovereign function, and wishes to
  abuse it for his own behoof, he regards the law which restrains him
  as a despotic invasion of his constitutional rights, because, with
  his specialized mind, he cannot grasp the relation of a sovereign
  function to the nation as a whole. He, therefore, looks upon the
  evasion of a law devised for public protection, but inimical to
  him, as innocent or even meritorious.

  This attitude of capital has had a profound effect upon shaping
  the American legal mind. The capitalist, as I infer, regards the
  constitutional form of government which exists in the United
  States, as a convenient method of obtaining his own way against a
  majority, but the lawyer has learned to worship it as a fetish. Nor
  is this astonishing, for, were written constitutions suppressed,
  he would lose most of his importance and much of his income. Quite
  honestly, therefore, the American lawyer has come to believe that
  a sheet of paper soiled with printers’ ink and interpreted by
  half-a-dozen elderly gentlemen snugly dozing in armchairs, has some
  inherent and marvellous virtue by which it can arrest the march of
  omnipotent Nature. And capital gladly accepts this view of American
  civilization, since hitherto capitalists have usually been able to
  select the magistrates who decide their causes.[729]

The skepticisms of the House of Adams came to their frankest expression
in the writings of Brooks Adams. The passion for social justice
had brought him at last to a philosophy of history that made him a
trenchant critic of the American of his generation. He rejected alike
the humanitarian optimism that, from Condorcet to Herbert Spencer,
had inspired generous souls with hope for future progress--and that
even Henry Adams clung to--and the economic optimism that from the
beginnings of the westward movement had inspired acquisitive souls with
the hope of continuous gain. Nothing perhaps marked him more clearly as
a rebel than his denial of the god worshiped by his fellows. The gospel
of progress was for him no more than a fetish of the economic mind.
In the ebb and flow of civilizations under the attraction of fear and
greed, what justification was there for faith in a benevolent progress?
His lot had been cast, unfortunately, in an age of capitalism, when
the acquisitive mind was triumphing over the imaginative, the banker
over the priest and craftsman and mystic; but he could see no reason in
heaven or earth to brag of that fact, and he would have held himself
a fool to apply the term progress to the spread of greed that was
crowning the usurer as master of men. A thorough skeptic, with the
comfortable illusions of his generation dissipated, he was in worse
plight than Henry Adams, for he had created no golden twelfth century
as a refuge against the present.

But if he was under no illusions, he was under no intellectual
tyrannies; he had cleared his mind of all middle-class fetishes
and could look out calmly upon a mad world. After a century and a
quarter this youngest of the House of Adams was still true to the
sturdy intellectual honesty of his race. He refused to cry up a fool’s
paradise where his fellows were crowning the banker as king--professing
to serve high ends while seeking vulgar profits: he would not shut his
eyes to disagreeable truth or hold his tongue. In Brooks Adams one
can almost hear the voice of the first Adams elaborating his doctrine
of determinism, pointing out to a romantic generation the unpleasant
realities that confuted its optimism, expatiating on the abundant
follies of men that lay snares in their own path, yet clinging to a
faith in justice that has become old-fashioned. Possibly Brooks Adams
is not to be reckoned a great figure, but he was an honest man and
worthy of his name--no mean accomplishment, for all in all the Adams
family is the most distinguished in our history.


Footnotes

[701] _Autobiography_, pp. 190-195.

[702] _The Education of Henry Adams_, p. 21.

[703] _Ibid._, pp. 343-344.

[704] _Ibid._, p. 317.

[705] _Ibid._, pp. 338-339.

[706] _Ibid._, p. 225.

[707] _Ibid._, p. 426.

[708] _Ibid._, p. 493.

[709] _Ibid._, p. 493.

[710] _Ibid._, pp. 428-429.

[711] _Ibid._, pp. 421-422.

[712] _Ibid._, p. 139.

[713] _Mont-Saint-Michel_, pp. 276-277.

[714] _Ibid._, pp. 321-322.

[715] _Ibid._, p. 383.

[716] _Mont-Saint-Michel_, p. 332.

[717] _The Education_, p. 405.

[718] _Mont-Saint-Michel_, p. 344.

[719] _Ibid._, p. 372.

[720] See Henry Adams, _Mont-Saint-Michel_, pp. 94-95.

[721] _The Law of Civilization and Decay_, pp. 150-151.

[722] _Ibid._, p. 292.

[723] See _America’s Economic Supremacy_, New York, 1900; _The New
Empire_, New York, 1902.

[724] _The Theory of Social Revolution_, p. 45.

[725] _Ibid._, pp. 47-48.

[726] _Ibid._, p. 128.

[727] _Ibid._, p. 93.

[728] _Ibid._, p. 91-92.

[729] _Ibid._, pp. 213-215.




