Chapter II • The New Capital


I

Very different from the gay and cultivated Quaker City was the
commercial port of Manhattan, with its Yankee energy ingrafted on the
stolid Dutch stock, which fate seized upon and transformed into the
greatest of our new cities, the favorite home of the genius of American
enterprise. Never a cultural capital as Philadelphia had been, and
as Charleston was becoming--a fact which Fenimore Cooper untactfully
announced to the world--it was ambitious to acquire commercial and
financial ascendency; and this ascendency of the economic over the
cultural, this frank evaluation of progress in terms of exploitation,
marks the definite transition from the eighteenth century to the
nineteenth, the triumph of an aggressive middle class over the
leisurely ways of an older landed aristocracy. The romance of expansion
was creating there a new psychology, and this new psychology was
preparing the city for leadership in the new age that was rising. Its
strategic position brought to it the produce of the new settlements
that were pushing west to the great lakes and beyond; its aggressive
traders were reaching out for a share in the markets of the world;
the plodding methods of money-getting that had satisfied an earlier
generation no longer satisfied men who had discovered the richer
possibilities of capitalistic manipulation. The potentialities that lay
in the capitalistic system were shrewdly explored, and the necessary
machinery of the new finance was devised. The acquisitive spirit of the
city found itself in a position to profit from the rage of speculation
that was running through the country, and it quickly outdistanced its
rivals in the race for financial supremacy.

The changes that came to New York in the last years of the old century
were enough to muddle a head stronger than Rip Van Winkle’s. The quiet
ways of colonial times were gone, and in their stead was a restless
activity that had no leisure for its pipe and mug in the sleepy tavern.
Business and politics could not wait on men who like Wouter Van Twiller
pickled their dreams in tobacco smoke. The bewilderment of old Rip
on his return from the hills was the bewilderment of the colonial
mind in the presence of a new order. When Washington came to New York
to assume the presidency, the town contained approximately 29,000
inhabitants, some two thousand of whom were slaves. Fifty years later
the census of 1840 set down its population as 312,710. In 1789 Albany
was a Dutch village of four or five thousand, and a few miles to the
West lay an unbroken wilderness. Within the narrow zone of the quiet
settlements old and new dwelt in close proximity. The most feudal of
American aristocracies fringed the banks of the Hudson from Albany to
Manhattan; and reaching out through the Mohawk valley that aristocracy
was laying a network of speculative land-holdings through which a flood
of Yankee pioneers was making its way from the long-settled lands of
Connecticut and Massachusetts. The frontier was close at hand; the
leveling spirit was near neighbor to the feudal; potential economic
rivalries were becoming actual, and the days of a static, power-proud
Dutch aristocracy were numbered. The spirit that had dominated the
commonwealth from its founding was tenacious of life, but on January
26, 1839, died Stephen Van Rensselaer, last of the Patroons, courteous,
dignified, a worthy embodiment of the old patriarchal virtues, who
had outlived his age; and hard upon his death came the final break-up
of the traditional order. The small men got the land they had long
tilled and the influence of the Dutch gentry slowly disintegrated.
A new order was rising that had discovered shorter roads to wealth
than feudal rents. While the more energetic of the old order, men
like Gouverneur Morris and Judge William Cooper, were deep in land
speculation, in Manhattan a new aristocracy of capitalism was rising.
Wall Street was losing the distinction of housing the most exclusive
of the landed gentry, to gain a greater distinction as the home of
the new aristocracy of credit. By 1825 the rise of industrialism, the
development of banking, the completion of the Erie Canal, the influx
of proletarian immigrants, and the drift of population to the towns
had fixed the destiny of the city. In becoming the chief repository of
the new capitalism New York had become the first and greatest of our
middle-class capitals.

Of this new Manhattan the representative citizen was a man whose
aggressive ambitions differentiated him sharply from Stephen Van
Rensselaer, and whose dramatic career of exploitation seemed to
Washington Irving to embody the romantic potentialities of America.
John Jacob Astor was to the New York of 1825 what Robert Morris had
been to Philadelphia a generation before--an evidence of the wealth
that was to be got by those who would boldly exploit the vast resources
of America. A German immigrant who landed in America with small funds,
immediately following the Peace of Paris, Astor embarked in the fur
trade, acquired a fortune which he invested in Manhattan land, and
then laid his plans to engage in a great venture in imperialism.
Stirred by the Lewis and Clarke expedition, he proposed to explore
the virgin resources of the far Pacific Northwest. With the tacit
approval of the government he undertook the hazardous project of the
Astoria settlement, sent his agent to the Russian posts of Alaska, and
by subsidizing an army of trappers proposed to gather the peltries of
the entire Northwest for the rich Canton market. It was a grandiose
conception worthy of a feudal baron of commerce. It was knit up
with dreams of conquest; it necessarily entailed open warfare with
the English companies whose ambitions were equally grandiose; it
was certain to be attended by bitter hardships on the part of the
venturesome agents to whom it was intrusted; and the outcome was
uncertain as a gambler’s chance. Irving has thrown over his narrative
of the great venture a glamour of patriotism; to him it appeared as
a plan of empire building; but whether patriotism or profit was the
determining impulse in the mind of John Jacob Astor, the settlement of
Astoria suggests the romantic aspirations that were making over the
lethargic world of Dutch Manhattan, in the venturesome days of the new
capitalism. Stephen Van Rensselaer and John Jacob Astor would have had
difficulty in understanding each other.


II

In sharp contrast with Boston, New York was wanting in intellectual
background and intellectual stimulus. It had never gone to school to
dogmatic theology and neither clergy nor laity had been disciplined by
a severe Puritan regimen. Gentlemen were little given to metaphysical
speculation and the subtleties of creed never provided the staple of
talk in the farmer’s kitchen. The terrors of hell rarely troubled the
sluggish imagination of the Dutch, and the extraordinary stimulus that
came to the serious-minded New Englander from long contemplation of
the ways of God, was lacking amongst a more prosaic people. No other
stimulus supplied the want and in consequence ideas and books were
held in low esteem and the things of the mind suffered. The English
gentry commonly sent their sons to the English universities, but the
Dutch by common report seem to have been indifferent to schooling
and opportunities for education were sadly inadequate. The result
was a low plane of intellectual life, which even in Cooper’s time
was remarked by him. There were brilliant and cultivated intellects,
wits like Gouverneur Morris and statesmen like John Jay; yet even
under the stimulus of Revolutionary and Constitutional controversy
the contribution of New York to political theory was far slighter
than that of New England or Virginia. _The Federalist_ was its single
notable production, and even in that the papers of Madison were no
inconsiderable part. As a commercial port it attracted young men
ambitious to rise in the world of affairs rather than in the world of
letters. Unlike Philadelphia it had never been a cosmopolitan meeting
ground for aspiring young intellectuals and purveyors of polite
culture, nor an important center of printers, publishers and book
dealers. Aside from Philip Freneau, who had long since established
himself in New Jersey when he was not at sea, it had contributed little
to pure literature, or even to the political satire that deluged
Philadelphia. As a creative center it ranked far below Hartford,
Connecticut, where in the seventeen-eighties and nineties wit had
become a staple commodity for export. And yet despite its intellectual
lethargy it was a pleasant little town, with a note of cosmopolitanism
that rendered life amongst the upper classes genial and urbane. The
spirit of aristocracy was as yet little weakened by alien newcomers
from the more republican New England, and city and commonwealth were
ruled by a little group of old-fashioned gentlemen who upheld the rigid
Federalism of the tie-wig school.

In the year 1800 the political leaders of the state were men of long
established reputations, Hamilton, Jay, Gouverneur Morris, Rufus
King, with whom was closely associated the brilliant lawyer James
Kent, afterward Chancellor. Only two of the five were of the older
New York stock: Rufus King was from Maine, Hamilton from the West
Indies, and Kent was of Yankee Presbyterian ancestry. Politics were
already becoming turmoiled by faction, with bitter cleavages and
vindictive struggles for the spoils of office that sadly confused the
logic of the earlier alignment. The old Federalist party was led by
the distinguished gentlemen named above; the Democratic party was led
by the Livingstons and Clintons; and outside both was the ambitious
Aaron Burr who played a lone hand against the field. After the death of
Hamilton the disintegration of the old parties went forward rapidly.
The Livingstons and Clintons broke, and a fierce political feud arose
between them. The former were accounted the true Jeffersonians, but
under the name of Lewisites they drifted towards the Federalist
remnant; the Burrites went to pieces after the disgrace of their
leader; and the Clintonians remained masters of the field, with a
motley support drawn from Tammany Hall Irish, Wall Street bankers, and
odds and ends of all factions. From this sordid situation, rendered
conspicuous by the extension of suffrage under the new constitution,
emerged two master politicians, adepts in all the arts of party
manipulation, who exploited the prejudices of the voting masses in a
way to justify the gloomy fear of demagoguery that haunted the minds of
the old Federalists. Martin Van Buren and Thurlow Weed, Democrat and
Whig, were finished products of the new school of practical politicians
who held that office-holding was the great end of partisan struggle,
and that principles must not stand in the way of success.


III

Through this fierce scramble of rival politicians moved a scholarly
figure who preserved to the last the dignity and distinction of an
earlier age. James Kent, whose long life and ripe legal learning were
devoted to upholding what he conceived to be the ultimate principles
of law and politics, was the chief political thinker of the transition
days of New York. A disciple of Locke and Blackstone, remodeling
seventeenth-century liberalism into eighteenth-century conservatism,
he was concerned to erect the barriers of the Common Law about the
unsurveyed frontiers of the American experiment, assigning exact
metes and bounds beyond which it should not go. Like John Marshall
and Joseph Story he was expert in devising legal springes to catch
unwary democrats, and while the Jeffersonians were shouting over their
victories at the polls, he was engaged in the strategic work of placing
the Constitution under the narrow custodianship of the English law.
An ardent Federalist and later an equally ardent Whig, he reveals in
his precise thinking the intimate relations that everywhere exist
between economics, politics, and legal principles. With John Adams he
accepted the dictum of Locke that “the great and chief end ... of men’s
uniting into commonwealths, and putting themselves under government,
is the preservation of their property”; and believing that the English
Common Law was the securest of all agencies devised to safeguard the
subject in the enjoyment of his property rights, he made no difficulty
in imposing that law upon the Constitution, circumscribing the
written document by Common Law fences. Government he conceived to be
a patriarchal institution erected for the single purpose of coercing
the vicious, and as such it must remain in the hands of the good, the
wise and the wealthy. It did not need the authoritative pronouncement
of his great master to convince him that the wealthy included the good
and wise. Observation of the “barbarian Jackson” and his rude followers
was enough to convince him of the truth of the fact. “All theories of
government that suppose the mass of the people virtuous,” he wrote to
Webster, “and able and willing to act virtuously, are plainly utopian,
and will remain so until the Saturnian age” (William Kent, _Memoirs and
Letters of James Kent_, p. 207). Profoundly distrustful of democracy,
he brought all his wide reading in the history of ancient and medieval
republics to demonstrate the favorite Federalist conviction--a
conviction that Paulding in his _Letters from the South_ paid his
respects to[420]--that democracy is only a euphemism for mob-rule and
that it must speedily conduct to anarchy and despotism. All leveling
principles he repudiated without waiting to hear cause. Until necessity
counseled otherwise he looked with suspicion on the holders of liquid
wealth, as likely to prove wanting in the wisdom and goodness that came
naturally to the landed proprietor. He would have the many ruled by the
few, but those few he would have owners of great estates.

After all, the learned Chancellor was only a transplanted Yankee of the
Fisher Ames school, with something of the austerity and intellectual
vigor of his two Puritan grandfathers. An ardent admirer of Hamilton,
he early broke with the more liberal faith of his family and joined
himself to the extreme Federalists. He was advanced rapidly by Governor
Jay, enjoyed for years both office and distinction, and ably defended
the party of his choice. Fearful of agrarian laws and the sequestration
of property by the enfranchised poor, he fought stubbornly every
proposal for an extension of suffrage or a larger measure of
self-government for the cities. Defeated in the great constitutional
convention of 1821 he soon after lost his office and retired to write
his _Commentaries on American Law_, a work that was to exercise a
creative influence on the later development of our jurisprudence. That
American law came to be deeply colored by Federalist political theory,
that it upheld from the bench principles that had been repudiated at
the polls, was due in no little measure to the legal scholarship of
this last of the New York Federalists. What a recent historian has
borrowed to describe another applies with equal felicity to Chancellor
Kent--“his pigmy hope that life would some day become somewhat better,
punily shivered by the side of his gigantic conviction that it might be
infinitely worse” (Fox, _Decline of Aristocracy in New York Politics_,
p. 243). As he contemplated the ways of the triumphant Jacksonians, he
found such consolation as he could in turning back to an older century
with its narrow outlook and sober culture. Writing to his brother in
1835, he said:

  There never was such misrule. Our Tory rich men are becoming
  startled and alarmed at our downhill course. My opinion is that
  the admission of universal suffrage and a licentious press are
  incompatible with government and security to property, and that the
  government and character of this country are going to ruin. This
  suffrage is too great an excitement for any political machine. It
  racks it to pieces, and morals go with it. It is probable England
  is going the same way. We are becoming selfish, profligate,
  crazy.... Give me the writings of Addison and Locke, and the
  Presbyterianism of Dr. Ripley, Dr. Stiles, and old Dr. Rogers.
  (Kent, _Memoirs and Letters of James Kent_, pp. 218-219.)


IV

With the extraordinary upheaval in economics and politics New York
unfortunately underwent no corresponding intellectual revolution. The
renaissance that a generation earlier had created a new Virginia, and
that was awakening in Massachusetts a many-sided intellectual activity,
touched the mind of New York only lightly. The ground was unprepared
for the new philosophies. To Virginia, French romantic theory had
come with the appeal of a new gospel for the reason that plantation
economics fell in with the major premises of Physiocratic liberalism,
and the old-world dogmas seemed to find new-world justification. To
New England, German idealism had come likewise with the appeal of a
new gospel, after Unitarianism had broken the fetters of Calvinism and
set free its traditional idealism. But among the young men of New York
in 1825 neither France nor Germany was a determining influence. With
an inadequate cultural background and no responsive economics, they
were attracted only casually to the current European liberalisms. They
were wanting in idealism and in consequence the major intellectual
and social movements of the times influenced the form and content of
the new Knickerbocker literature far less profoundly than was the
case in New England. New York was as insular as Charleston. That
the growing economic unrest would ultimately find expression in a
controversial or Utopian literature, was a matter of course; and that
the cosmopolitanism of the city should make for vigorous discussion,
was equally a matter of course. Nevertheless Albert Brisbane, William
Leggett, Parke Godwin and Horace Greeley were far less representative
of the dominant literary spirit than Irving and Halleck and Willis of
the earlier group, or Stedman and Stoddard later.

The Knickerbocker movement was inaugurated by four young men whose
clever sketches caught the provincial ear of polite society and set the
new fashion in prose and verse. Irving and Paulding in _Salmagundi_,
and Halleck and Drake in the _Croaker Papers_, were lucky adventurers
whose slight crafts made the most prosperous of voyages. Bright young
fellows with a charming literary swagger, they aspired to be wits and
exploit the amusing foibles of Broadway. Twelve years separated the
two ventures, and in the interval Byron and Scott had been supplanting
Moore and Campbell in the esteem of the Town, and the literary mode of
New York was changing. From their gay provincialism, happily Irving and
Paulding later freed themselves; Drake died at the age of twenty-five;
but Halleck retained to the end of a leisurely life the mannerisms of
the Croaker period--a crochety wit who affected persiflage, a brisk
young buck who gently slid into a _blasé_ old buck, a free lance in
verse who lived in state on the income of a small literary investment
made in his twenties.

The very considerable reputation of Fitz-Greene Halleck resulted in
part from the literary sterility of New York in his early days, and in
part from the personal popularity of the man. A Connecticut Yankee,
descended on his mother’s side from old John Eliot, he was drawn to
the city as a promising field for an accountant, and eventually found
his way into the office of John Jacob Astor by whom he was later
pensioned. He accepted the views and shared the antipathies of his Wall
Street associates, but with a certain affectation of individuality that
took delight in shocking them by whimsical pronouncements in favor of
the Catholic church and the monarchical system. There is perhaps a
suggestion of seriousness in the remark that Bryant has preserved: “The
ship of state,” so he reports Halleck as saying, “must be governed and
navigated like any other ship, without consulting the crew. What would
become of the stanchest bark in a gale, if the captain were obliged to
call all hands together and say: ‘All you who are in favor of taking
in sail, will please to say ay’” (_Orations and Addresses_, p. 186).
His political affiliations were Federalist-Whig, and his satire exudes
much of the old prejudice against the democratic mass. The pompous
long-winded DeWitt Clinton was a fair mark for his shafts;[421] the
demagoguery of office-seeking politicians was a fruitful theme for
his wit;[422] and Halleck’s satire plays upon them with good-natured
raillery. But his gayety cannot hide a certain animus in dealing with
the tousled-headed democracy. When the labor movement was painfully
getting under way in New York Halleck contemplated the curious
phenomenon with a tolerant contempt--in something of the spirit of a
wit of pre-Revolutionary times who amused the Town with his couplet:

  Down at night a bricklayer or carpenter lies,
  Next sun a Lycurgus or Solon doth rise.

As an illustration of the attitude of polite society in New York a
hundred years ago towards the aspirations of the proletariat, Halleck’s
forgotten _Epistle to Robert Hogbin, Esq., Chairman of the Committee of
Working-Men, etc._, deserves quotation:

  Mr. Hogbin,--I work as a weaver--of rhyme--
    And therefore presume with a working-man’s grace,
  To address you as one I have liked for some time.
    Though I know not (no doubt it’s a fine one) your face.

  There is much in a name, and I’ll lay you a wager
    (Two ale-jugs from Reynolds), that Nature designed,
  When she formed you, that you should become the drum-major
    In that choice piece of music, the Grand March of Mind.

  A Hogbin! a Hogbin! how cheering the shout
    Of all that keep step to that beautiful air,
  Which leads, like the treadmill, about and about,
    And leaves us exactly, at last, where we were!

  Yes, there’s much in a name, and a Hogbin’s so fit is
    For that great moral purpose whose impulse divine
  Bids men leave their own workshops to work in committees,
    And their own wedded wives to protect yours and mine!...

  When the moment arrives that we’ve won the good fight,
    And broken the chains of laws, churches, and marriages,
  When no infants are born under six feet in height,
    And our chimney-sweeps mount up a flue in their carriages--

  That glorious time when our daughters and sons
    Enjoy a _blue Monday_ each day of the week,
  And a clean shirt is classed with the mastodon’s bones,
    Or a mummy from Thebes, an undoubted antique--

  Then, then, my dear Hogbin, your statue in straw,
    By some modern _Pig_malion delightfully wrought,
  Shall embellish the Park, and our youths’ only law
    Shall be to be Hogbins in feeling and thought.

In Halleck’s better work there is sometimes evident a certain critical
detachment that permitted him to see both sides of his theme. In
the lines to his native Connecticut he has taken pretty accurately
the measure of the Puritan and the Yankee. He rests under no awe
in presence of the old worthies, and he throws overboard the pious
fairy-tales of Cotton Mather--“that slanderer of the memory of our
fathers”--only to forgive the preacher who scolded his friends
“up from earth to heaven” because of the “sour grapejuice in his
disposition.” Unfortunately little of his work possesses the virility
of _Connecticut_. His most ambitious poem, _Fanny_, is a feeble and
discursive satire on the social climber. It was a great favorite at
the time and passed through several editions, but the sparkle is gone
out of its affected jauntiness and little has been lost in its being
forgotten. Halleck’s casual literary activity continued only for the
brief period between the years 1819 and 1828; thereafter for close on
forty years he was content to turn out an occasional _jeu d’esprit_,
enjoy the deepening twilight of his reputation, and watch his fellow
Yankee, Willis, invest his talents in the ephemeral. The day of the wit
was past in New York.


Footnotes

[420] See _Letters_, etc., Vol. I, p. 207.

[421] See _Governor Clinton’s Speech_.

[422] See _The Recorder_.




