Chapter III • The Frontier in Letters


When the West began to appear in literature in the late twenties and
early thirties, it was the Ohio valley that became the beneficiary of
the new interest, and over the vast region through which flowed the
Beautiful River--as far as the Mississippi and beyond--was thrown the
romance of the settlement. It was a beguiling theme with its background
of dark forests and bloody Indian fights, with its venturesome
flatboats that drifted with the current, its picturesque rivermen,
“half horse, half alligator,” who towed their heavy crafts upstream,
its rude miscellany of settlers who intrusted their families and goods
and cattle to great rafts and set forth hopefully on waters that were
to bear them presumably to the Promised Land--a theme to appeal to
imaginations easily stirred to romance. There was a darker side to
be sure; wrecks in plenty littered the shores, wrecks of fortune and
character and life; outlaws and blackguards thronged the river and
preyed on the adventurers; but in spite of such misadventures the great
movement was invested with dramatic interest, and the Ohio valley
became the particular repository of the romance of the frontier, a
monopoly which later times never despoiled it of and which only the
Golden Coast of California ever remotely rivaled. It was fortunate
in that its early history was recorded by a romanticizing generation
that wove its myths about the wilderness scouts, that delighted in the
picturesque talk of river boatmen and discovered themes for epics in
the founding of new commonwealths.

From the first, therefore, the literature of the new West fell
naturally into the romantic note. The early writers who essayed to deal
with frontier materials were eastern men who proposed to exploit the
romance of the Inland Empire as frankly as their fellow adventurers
were exploiting the material resources. Gradually in their work two
main conceptions crystallized, which came to overshadow all lesser
themes: one localized itself in Kentucky and took form in the poetic
conception of the Dark and Bloody ground; the other associated itself
first with the rivermen but quickly diffused its spirit through the
backwoods and took form in the conception of western humor. The first
was a heritage from the early days when the Indian tribes fought for
their ancient hunting grounds and fell upon the isolated stations with
knife and tomahawk; the second grew up with a later generation that had
penetrated far into the wilderness, where, stimulated by much whisky,
its rough vigor found issue in exaggerated boasting. Each created its
legendary hero about whom popular imagination wove its myths: the
figure of Daniel Boone came to symbolize the heroic qualities of a race
of scouts and backwoodsmen who matched their wits in woodcraft with
the Indians and proved the quality of their Kentucky rifles in many a
brush with the warriors; and the figure of Davy Crockett came to embody
in the popular mind the loquacious eccentricities and exaggerated
wit that were already passing into a literary tradition. Many hands
contributed to the common work: writers as different as James Kirke
Paulding with his _Westward Ho!_, Robert Montgomery Bird with his _Nick
of the Woods_, Nathaniel Beverley Tucker with his _George Balcombe_,
Albert Pike with his _Prose Sketches and Poems_, Augustus Longstreet
with his _Georgia Scenes_, and Joseph G. Baldwin with his _Flush
Times of Alabama and Mississippi_--to name only a few. From such
diverse elements was created the new literature of the West that was
contemporary with the rise of Jacksonian democracy and that gave wide
currency to certain romantic conceptions.


I • The Romantic Frontier

Of this very considerable group of writers the two who earliest
wrote from immediate first-hand knowledge of frontier life were
Timothy Flint, Harvard graduate and missionary, and Judge James Hall,
Pennsylvania lawyer, both of whom spent a considerable portion of their
mature lives in the West. Of Timothy Flint’s restless wanderings and
periodic settlements, at Saint Charles, Missouri, at New Orleans, at
Alexandria on the Red River in Louisiana, at Cincinnati, with frequent
returns to his native Massachusetts and a short editorial experience
in New York City, it is impossible to speak in detail; they suggest,
however, the breadth and intimacy of his knowledge of the West got from
twenty-five years’ experience there from 1815 to his death in 1840.
Few men traveled so widely through the frontier, or carried with them
such keenly observant eyes. He wrote much, conducted for several years
a literary magazine in Cincinnati, was for a short time editor of _The
Knickerbocker Magazine_ on the withdrawal of Charles Fenno Hoffman, and
established a considerable reputation as a representative of western
letters. Much of his work was frankly casual, but his _Recollections
of the Last Ten Years, Passed in Occasional Residences and Journeyings
in the Valley of the Mississippi_, published in 1826, and his four
novels published between 1826 and 1830, make up the first important
contribution to the new literature of the West.

In temperament Timothy Flint seems to have been something of a realist.
In his daily life he was frankly outspoken and critical, often to his
own hurt, and some of the many troubles he met with in his honest
preaching to frontier heathen, resulted from this plain speaking. He
refused to measure life and conduct by the crude western standards,
and the enmities resulting from such refusal brought about a rupture
with the home society that had supported his missionary undertaking.
It was this intellectual honesty that filled his _Recollections_ with
an invaluable body of observation and criticism, and constituted
it an important source-book for later historians. Paulding early
made use of it writing his _Westward Ho!_--published in 1832--and
in his introduction, after paying tribute to Flint’s “picturesque
description,” he went on to say that the work “has not met its deserts,
and he should be highly gratified if this passing notice served in any
way to call public attention to its interesting details.” Unfortunately
the occasional realism of the _Recollections_ gave place in his novels
to romance saturated with sentiment and heavily coated with moralizing.
With a fund of exact information at his disposal he chose to turn
away from reality and project his stories into regions he had visited
only in imagination. _Francis Berrian, or the Mexican Patriot_, deals
with a Southwest far beyond his extremest journeyings; _The Life and
Adventures of Arthur Clenning_ is a romanticized version of Robinson
Crusoe; and _The Shoshonee Valley_ is a romance conceived out of tales
told him by far western travelers, woven into an extravagantly romantic
plot. The only one of his tales that makes use of familiar settings is
_George Mason, the Young Backwoodsman; or “Don’t Give up the Ship,”_
in which he put some of the materials gathered in his journeyings up
and down the Mississippi, but sentimentalized and moralized out of
all realism. It is a pity that Flint should have fallen in with the
extremest mode of the times, for in many essential respects he was the
best qualified man of the West to write an honest account of a world
just taking form.

The literary reputation of Timothy Flint soon came to be overshadowed
by that of Judge Hall. “Among writers of short narratives, the most
characteristically Western fiction of the time,” remarks a recent
student, “James Hall was clearly preëminent; and he became the
central figure in a kind of school of experimenters in the materials
of frontier life” (Ralph Leslie Rusk, _The Literature of the Middle
Western Frontier_, Vol. I, p. 274). In the early twenties he had ridden
the circuit in Illinois as a very young lawyer, when the settlements
were scattered thinly through the southern portion of the state. At
Vandalia he started the _Illinois Monthly Magazine_, which survived for
two years, when he removed to Cincinnati and established _The Western
Monthly Magazine_, which in the four years from 1832 to 1836 became
one of the “most important of the pioneer period.” “The purpose,” says
the student above quoted, “was not so much to introduce the East to
the West as to make the West conscious of itself” (Rusk, _ibid._, Vol.
I, p. 173). To this end Hall was writing and publishing short tales
and descriptions, and he had already collected a miscellany of prose
and verse by several hands which he issued as an annual, _The Western
Souvenir, a Christmas and New Year’s Gift for 1829_. Thus launched on a
literary career, he wrote in the next twenty years a very considerable
amount, including tales, sketches of manners, history and casual
comment.

His best-known story is probably _Harpe’s Head_, which he later
incorporated with other tales in a volume entitled _Legends of the
West: Sketches Illustrative of the Habits, Occupations, Privations,
Adventures and Sports of the Pioneers of the West_, and published
in 1832. The work proved popular and passed through half a dozen
editions. Sketchy and loose in construction, it belongs to the school
that hovered between the essay and the romance, delighting in the
picturesque, exuding sentiment, and going out of its way to exploit the
pleasantly horrible. It is a mingling of Virginia chivalry and frontier
bravery, woven about a central plot of a daughter of a Virginia house
who removes to Kentucky under tragic circumstances, is abducted by a
roving band of Indians, and subsequently rescued. Additional romantic
interest is sought in the melodramatic deeds of the title hero--a
well-known border ruffian with an insatiable blood-lust who murders his
unsuspecting victims wherever he comes upon them--and in the curious
exploits in rattlesnake killing of Hark Short, a waif from the Carolina
swamps who lives like a fox in his den. The interest of the story
today lies in the pleasantly idealized descriptions of such scenes as
the barbecue and the camp meeting, rather than in the portrayal of
backwoods characters. Although Hall frequently professed his devotion
to realism, there is little evidence of it; occasional figures like
Pete Featherton, whose rifle had been bewitched, and occasional
indulgence in a conventionalized backwoods dialect, serve only to
heighten the somewhat gaudy romance of the whole. Yet even such timid
ventures brought on his head criticism from a Cincinnati editor “for
tiring the reader with vulgar backwoods expressions” (Rusk, _ibid._,
Vol. I, p. 282).

That Hall’s interest in backwoods eccentricities of speech and manner
suffered a heavy handicap from the romantic taste of his readers may
easily be believed. Matter excluded from his tales he sometimes put
into his introductions. Thus in the third edition of _Harpe’s Head_
he analyzed at some length certain characteristics of the crude
pioneers who were creating the psychology of the West--their fondness
for drinking, betting, horse-trading, stump-speaking, swearing.
Particularly it is the exuberance of their picturesque language that
he emphasized, an exuberance that was already becoming a literary
tradition and that flowered in the cento of western folk ways that were
gathered into the Davy Crockett myth. A single passage will suffice to
suggest some of the elements from which Davy was created:

  Though usually taciturn in the presence of strangers, [the
  frontiersman] is communicative to his friend or guest, has often
  strong colloquial powers, with quaint, singular, figurative,
  and even eloquent forms of expression. His language, which is
  commonly brief, sententious, and abrupt, becomes, when excited by
  the interest of the subject or by passion, highly expletive, and
  redundant with exaggerated forms and figures of comparison. When
  he swears--and he is probably not more given to this exceedingly
  vulgar vice than other men--but when he does swear in earnest, his
  philology becomes concentrated, and explodes with an appalling
  energy, which would have astonished even the celebrated army in
  Flanders. (_Ibid._, Introduction, p. xii.)

In his last collection, _The Wilderness and the War Path_, published
in 1846 and including some earlier tales, Hall contributed little that
was new. There is the same heavy romance with touches of realism, and
by way of reply to Bird’s interpretation of the Indian character he
exploits the romantic qualities of the red man; but his failures are
commoner than his successes, and his work as a whole must be regarded
as a sacrifice to the bad taste of his generation. From this judgment,
perhaps, should be excepted his _Romance of American History_, which is
still pleasantly readable.


II • The Realistic Frontier

Far more vital than these literary tales with their heavy coating
of romance are the few realistic sketches--only too rare in those
exuberant days of the high-flown--that preserve the authentic ways
of backwoods life in their rude vernacular. Of such sketches those
that most faithfully reveal the impress of the frontier, preserving
down to the present the note of verisimilitude, are _Georgia Scenes_
by Augustus B. Longstreet, and the _Autobiography of Davy Crockett_,
to which may be added, perhaps, Joseph G. Baldwin’s _Flush Times of
Alabama and Mississippi_.


1 • Augustus Longstreet • The Georgia Frontier

For some reason no glamour has ever gathered about the Georgia
frontier. It may be that fate conspired against it in bestowing
no idealizing historian to throw a romantic haze over life in the
pine woods. Or perhaps it was the Georgians themselves who did the
commonwealth an evil turn. As a matter of sober fact what could even
romance do with the raw materials that went to the making of this
crude southern Yankee state? How could the most confirmed romantic
discover rare graces in the indigenous Cracker, or weave poetry about
the ubiquitous peddler with his pack of Yankee notions? Any honest
historian could hardly avoid taking into account the ungainly throng
that attended a gander pulling, or depict Ransy Sniffle as other than
a pallid, pot-bellied, clay-eating grotesque. Crude, uncouth, drab,
with primitive passions and unlovely manners, Georgia offered scanty
materials for the most ardent eulogist. Frontier life there ran a
petty round between fist fights and horse races, between politics and
religion. These were the staples of everyday existence, as necessary
to the natural man as whisky and salt pork; and the honest Georgian
preferred his whisky straight and his politics and religion red-hot.
The Jeffersonian hated the Federalist vindictively; and Presbyterian,
Baptist, and Methodist regarded each other malignantly, convinced that
the devil was stoking his fires for the lost neighbor who persisted in
sitting under the wrong preaching. Denominationalism on the Georgia
frontier was as harsh and unforgiving as political partisanship.
Alexander H. Stephens believed that the plain people of Georgia were
the most democratic on the face of the earth, and the kindliest;
yet the pugnacious little democrat was himself nearly butchered by
a democratic neighbor. In depicting such a society realism was the
only honest method; but to make it palatable it must be well seasoned
with humor. If it were garnished with moralizing, so much the better.
There must be no subtleties in the treatment, no literary touches. The
humor must be in the backwoods vernacular, and the preaching open and
aboveboard--frank pulpit-thumping lessons to awaken the surliest sinner.

For such business Gus Longstreet was ideally fitted. A true child of
the Georgia border, he never quite outgrew his early environment.
Born in Augusta in 1790 of New Jersey parents, Holland Dutch but with
a large admixture of English blood,[414] he came of plain stock. A
driving, robust, energetic fellow, never squeamish, with a ready
wit, he was at home amongst the plain people, the greatest wag in
every gathering. He could knock a man down or shoot out a squirrel’s
eye with any champion of them all; he could enter into a dance or a
revival meeting with equal ardor, or take the stump against a seasoned
campaigner. A fellow must be simple-minded who would expect to get the
best of him in swapping horses, or in the way of a practical joke. It
came hard for so vigorous a plebeian to settle down as a substantial
citizen, and the dignified titles that he gathered in the course
of a long and prosperous career--judge, doctor of laws, doctor of
divinity--fitted him somewhat incongruously. On the whole one prefers
the plain Gus Longstreet to Judge Longstreet, but his neighbors, who
thought they knew a man when they saw one, thrust his titles upon him.
Besides he had gone to college and was thereby lifted to a place of
distinction which he could not avoid. The process of scraping off the
bark of the frontier followed orthodox southern lines. A few years’
schooling at Dr. Moses Waddell’s celebrated Academy, where at different
times Calhoun, Crawford, McDuffie, Petigru and Legaré prepared for
college, and two years at Yale, provided him with a stock of rusty
Latin to suffice a college president; and a winter or two at the law
school in Litchfield, Connecticut, following Calhoun’s high example,
furnished him with enough Blackstone to meet the demands of Georgia law
courts. Thus provided intellectually, he went forth boldly to cope with
the Georgia world as he found it.

It was a plebeian world that approved his plebeian qualities. There was
nothing of the southern patrician in Gus Longstreet, nothing of the
ascetic Puritan that marked so deeply men like Calhoun, Legaré, and the
Grimkés. In his strong instinct of acquisitiveness, his canny thrift
that never failed to seize advantage by the forelock, his desire to
get on in the world while serving God, he was a Georgia Yankee, with
an emotional religion that took comfort in discovering that God was
always on his side of any controversy. Yankee also was his knack of
doing many things well enough to impress his less capable neighbors. He
was a frontier jack-of-all-trades, passing easily from one profession
to another, lawyer, newspaper editor, writer, minister, politician,
teacher, and between times busying himself with all sorts of odd jobs,
doing everything readily and nothing thoroughly well. A good talker,
his chief interests were politics, religion, and money-making. He wrote
much in careless haste, apologizing always for the lack of finish; but
except for the sketches which were gathered under the title of _Georgia
Scenes_, he produced nothing that needs to be remembered. At the age of
forty-eight he quitted the law for the Methodist ministry, proved to be
a mediocre preacher, and was soon given the berth of president of Emory
College, a denominational school then recently established at Oxford,
for which his literary reputation and his reputed scholarship seemed to
fit him. Later he was president for a few months of Centenary College,
Louisiana, but found the place uncongenial, resigned, and was chosen
president of the University of Mississippi, where he served seven years
and made full use of the opportunity to speculate in real estate. At
the age of sixty-six he was made president of the University of South
Carolina, where he ruled patriarchally till the school was closed by
the war.

How great a man he was judged to be by his fellow Georgians is hard
for us to realize today. Throughout his later years he was regarded
by his friends as the brightest ornament of Georgia society, a
Christian gentleman who was a model to southern youth, a scholar who
had brought honor to the commonwealth, an author who had silenced
the reproach that the state had produced no literature. Yet it must
be confessed that the Judge shrinks in compass when taken out of his
native environment. Beside John P. Kennedy or Hugh Legaré, he lacks
distinction either of mind or manner; compared with Gilmore Simms he
is only an amateur in letters. His latest biographer[415] has sifted
a mass of material to prove the solid and eminent worth of the man;
yet no impression of intellectual vigor emerges from the analysis;
one must take it on the authority of somewhat incompetent witnesses.
The figure that emerges from the clutter of contemporary estimate is
that of a capable, expansive, middle-class soul, disputatious in the
lordly southern manner, genially domineering, magnificently superior
to logic, given to erecting an imposing structure of convictions on
the slightest of foundations, impatient of contradiction and inclined
to lose his temper when the argument went against him--a witty,
agreeable gentleman, at home amongst mediocre preachers, and an oracle
to admiring friends. He was on terms of intimacy with not a single
first-class mind. He had no intellectual curiosity and was incapable of
rigorous intellectual processes. Yet good fortune had marked him for
her own. A small investment in letters, made at odd moments between
law cases and farming operations, returned him such dividends in the
way of contemporary fame that for forty years thereafter he lived in
the sunshine of a literary reputation. No other American, unless it
were William Wirt, ever drew such ample revenues of popular praise from
a casual investment, and certainly none ever expanded with greater
self-satisfaction. To the end of his life he was the much-sought-after
author of _Georgia Scenes_, and the most ambitious southern magazines
were glad to publish his frequent effusions; in all of which the Judge
delighted, for he was a simple soul and accounted himself an apostle of
southern culture, a mentor of southern taste, and he loved to see his
name in print.

As a man close to the people Longstreet reflected the current Georgia
views on politics. He was an idolatrous admirer of Calhoun and George
McDuffie. The former he rated “above William Pitt, or any other premier
who ever lived before or since his day” (Wade, _Augustus Baldwin
Longstreet_, p. 124) and the latter he regarded as “hardly inferior to
him in anything.” Calhoun’s innate Hebraisms, so deeply imbued with a
patriarchal spirit, fitted to a nicety his own Hebraized conception of
a Jeffersonian order. Writing of Calhoun, in after years, Longstreet
remarked with evident approval:

  I believe that he regarded the government of the children of
  Israel in the wilderness, the most perfect that ever existed on
  earth. Be that as it may, he called my attention to it more than
  once as exactly the government ours ought to be, or was intended
  to be. “There,” said he, “each tribe had its place on the march
  and in the camp, each managed its own concerns in its own way,
  neither interfered in the slightest degree, with the private
  affairs of another, nor did their common head interfere with any of
  them in any matters, save such as were of equal interest to all,
  but unmanageable by them as separate and distinct communities.”
  (_Ibid._, p. 60.)

The background of his political thought was Jeffersonian agrarian.
He was always a countryman at heart, and his dearest interests were
agricultural. But he seems to have been quite unread in political
theory, and probably had never heard of John Taylor’s economic
principles. Suffering from an incurable political itch, he was one of
the earliest and most ardent of states-rights advocates. He went for
Nullification before either Calhoun or McDuffie had espoused it; and
he followed his premises through to the logical end of secession. But
with the growth of northern Abolitionism his Jeffersonianism began
to disintegrate. Garrison’s appeal to equalitarianism and the rights
of man aroused all his southern prejudices. A philosophy that could
be turned against the sacred institution was no philosophy for a
southern gentleman, and like Calhoun he repudiated the whole French
liberal philosophy that he had imbibed in his youth. He even went so
far as to play with Calhoun’s doctrine of economic representation.
Writing to President Lamar, of Texas, in the late thirties, he said,
“A government should have a legislative assemblage to represent
each of its large economic interests, one, say, agricultural, one
manufacturing, one commercial. No bill not acceptable to all three
of these assemblages should become a law” (_ibid._, p. 138). But in
defense of slavery he argued as a minister rather than an economist. He
declined to consider it an economic question; he would not discuss it
as a social question; political theories, he believed, had nothing to
do with it. The right to hold slaves he regarded as a moral question
to be determined exclusively by the authority of the Bible, and on
such a question he professed to speak with assurance. He was vastly
annoyed at the Abolitionists’ unchristian appeal to the old doctrine
of equalitarianism, and in 1845 he wrote angrily, “Will not some
of you accept my ideas and then argue through the question on that
basis, without taking recourse to the Declaration of Independence or
throwing up a breastwork out of the long-forsaken rubbish of the Social
Contract, or bewildering your pursuers in the mazes of metaphysical
subtlety?” (_ibid._, p. 282). His religion was deeply involved in
the institution of slavery, and it seemed to him uncharitable for
an intellectual like Theodore Parker to question the sufficiency of
a southern minister’s texts, or to drag him beyond his intellectual
depths. So exasperated did he grow that finally he would have no
fellowship with northern Methodists, and was a prime mover in the great
schism that rent the church into sectional branches. Abolitionism
seemed to him hypocrisy and blasphemy and as a minister of Christ
he could not hold fellowship with those who rejected the Master’s
word. After the war, in reviewing the long controversy, his Christian
pugnacity flared up anew, and he flung at the northern churches the
accusation that they had been “the most man-astounding, God-offending
foes that we had” (_ibid._, p. 367).

There could be no more telling commentary on the literary poverty of
_ante-bellum_ Georgia than the extraordinary popularity of Longstreet’s
sketches. Written for the most part between the years 1832 and 1836,
while he was publishing the _State Rights Sentinel_, they profess to
be authentic documents of frontier life in Georgia in the early years
of the century, and the deliberate note of realism contributes to the
impression of authenticity. The love of the romantic that spread like
the plague among southern men of letters during the long reign of Sir
Walter, fortunately did not infect the robust nature of Longstreet.
The best of the sketches are spun out of the vernacular; they are
as objective as Longstreet could make them--conscious studies in
the local, done with obvious delight in butternut ways and frontier
dialect. The quality of the work improves as he draws nearer the
backwoods, and comes upon the unregenerate Cracker in his native
habitat. There his humor has free play, exuding in practical jokes and
ready repartee, in boyish pranks and homely idiom. And there he finds
characters to his liking and bits of realistic drama. If one were to
single out the sketch that is most indigenous to the Georgia frontier,
the truest local document, the choice might well fall on _The Fight_,
an account of a bloody meeting between backwoods gladiators brought
on by skillful diplomacy of Ransy Sniffle, a grotesque clay-eater and
Longstreet’s favorite character. Other excellent sketches are _The
Gander Pulling_, _The Shooting Match_, _Georgia Theatrics_, _The Horse
Swap_, _The Militia Company Drill_--stories that throw an unromantic
light on the ways of the Georgia Cracker. Longstreet was as uncritical
as his readers and his frequent failures are glaring in their badness.
Perhaps the worst of the sketches are the absurd _The “Charming
Creature” as a Wife_, a crude sermon on the folly of marrying a lazy
woman; _The Song_, an overdone burlesque, and the puerile _The Debating
Society_, a heavy practical joke which for some inexplicable reason Poe
thought the best of the whole.

Slight though the sketches in _Georgia Scenes_ are, they embody
solid merits; they are not literary and they are quite unaffected by
Irving and the exploitation of the picturesque. Realism was only too
rare in those days of high-flown romance, and how honestly realistic
was Longstreet’s work is revealed by a comparison with James Hall’s
contemporary stories of the West, such as _Harpe’s Head_, or even with
Kennedy’s _Swallow Barn_. After all Gus Longstreet was an original,
and he set the style that was followed in a long series of frontier
sketches, and established the tradition of frontier humor that flowered
at last in Mark Twain.


2 • The Davy Crockett Myth

_The Narrative of the Life of David Crockett of the State of Tennessee_
was woven from the same stuff that Longstreet made use of, but the
fabric is of far better texture. It is the great classic of the
southern frontier, far more significant than _Georgia Scenes_, far
more human and vital. Realistic in method, it is romantic in spirit.
In its backwoods vernacular it purveys the authentic atmosphere of
the cabin and the canebrake; it exhibits the honesty, the wit, the
resourcefulness, the manly independence of a coonskin hero; it
reveals, in short, under the rough exterior of a shiftless squatter and
bear-hunter, qualities that are sterling in every society where manhood
is held in repute. It is an extraordinary document, done so skillfully
from life that homespun becomes a noble fabric and the crudest
materials achieve the dignity of an epic.

The thing had long been waiting to be done. The literary romantics had
tried their hand at the frontier materials and had failed, and then
came a realist of the Georgia school who used the stuff as he found it
and created a lasting document. A practiced writer collaborated with a
picturesque talker, and the fame of the Tennessee Congressman was made.
Romantic America found a new hero and Davy Crockett reaped a surprising
reward. He had the good fortune to preëmpt the romance of the
backwoods, to file on an unsurveyed tract of western life, and when the
lines were run it was found that his claim embraced all that was native
and picturesque along the Mississippi frontier. Popular imagination
seized upon him and endowed the mighty hunter of the canebrakes
with the fugitive romance that had been gathering for years. He was
erected into a mythical figure that drew to itself the unappropriated
picturesque that sprang spontaneously from the crude western life. How
this astonishing result came about, how good fortune came to single out
Davy Crockett for her smiles, offers a somewhat amusing commentary on
the ways of an unsophisticated generation.

That in its later development, if not in the beginning, the Davy
Crockett myth was a deliberate fabrication scarcely admits of doubt,
nor that its immediate purpose was frankly partisan. It did not
spring from the soil of the Tennessee canebrakes; it was created at
Washington. It was not the spontaneous product of popular imagination;
it was the clever work of politicians. The successive stages through
which it passed in its triumphant progress can be traced fairly
accurately with the aid of a little historical imagination. Roughly
they were three; the exploitation of Davy’s canebrake waggery, the
exploitation of his anti-Jackson spleen, and the exploitation of
his dramatic death at the Alamo. The first phase is embodied in the
_Sketches and Eccentricities of Col. David Crockett, of West Tennessee_
(1833); the second, in _An Account of Col. Crockett’s Tour to the North
and Down East_ (1835), and _The Life of Martin Van Buren_ (1835); and
the last, in _Col. Crockett’s Exploits and Adventures in Texas_ (1836).
Midway between the first and second stages stands _A Narrative of the
Life of David Crockett, of the State of Tennessee_ (1834), which may
be accepted in the main as authentic autobiography. None of the five
was written by Crockett. He probably had a hand in the first in spite
of his repudiation of the work, for most of the important facts of his
life and the language of many of the picturesque episodes were taken
from its pages to be reproduced in the _Narrative_. The _Tour_ and
_Martin Van Buren_ were claimed by him and were certainly done under
his eye and with his help, but the _Exploits_ is quite as certainly
sheer fabrication, done by a hack writer after Davy’s death. It was
the politicians who contributed most to the success of the myth. They
exploited Davy as a convenient weapon against Jackson, saw their work
prosper beyond all expectation, get out of their hands, enlarge itself
to a cento of backwoods romance and pass into folklore. It was an
unforeseen outcome that must have been vastly amusing to those who set
the thing going.

The early thirties, it will be remembered, were robustious times when
broadcloth in politics had suddenly gone out of style and homespun had
come in. The new coonskin democracy had descended upon Washington,
and picturesque figures provided with ample plugs of tobacco were
making themselves free with Congressional perquisites. Nothing like
it had been seen before in the city of dignified politicians, and the
spectacle must have delighted the wags of the capital. But to the
members of the overthrown dynasty the Jacksonian votes which these
picturesque backwoodsmen represented were very far from amusing. The
loss of desirable offices was a hard lesson that taught them the need
of catering to this new element of the great American democracy. In
their remunerative occupation as representatives of the prosperous and
genteel constituencies of the East, the old-school politicians had too
long overlooked the power of the plain voter which the progress of
manhood suffrage was daily increasing. Hence began a desperate campaign
to counteract the Jacksonian appeal. The coonskin vote could no longer
be ignored and shrewd plans were laid to capture the backwoods for the
new Whig party. The program of internal improvements was well enough
in its way, and the old Revolutionary cry of the sword and the purse
might prove useful; but the party needed a picturesque figure to draw
the coonskin democracy to its standard. Men rather than principles
appealed to the West, self-made men, speaking the western vernacular,
imbibing western views with their whisky, uncorrupted by broadcloth.
This explains the tremendous Whig hurrah over log cabins and hard cider
that marked a later campaign; and this explains likewise the singular
fate that overtook Davy Crockett, the bear-hunter from the canebrakes.

Davy had first come to Washington during Adams’ administration, and in
four years’ loafing and boasting at the Congressional bar had achieved
some distinction as a picturesque original with the tongue of a wag.
He spoke rarely in the House and the few records in the _Congressional
Debates_ are sadly commonplace. Until after he broke with Jackson his
political influence at Washington was negligible. But that fortunate
break was the beginning of his fame. He had unwittingly made himself.
He had become a valuable asset to the Whig party. To find a native
Tennesseean, a real coonskin democrat, one who had served under Jackson
and been sent to Congress as a Jacksonian, as authentic a Westerner as
the General himself, at bitter personal odds with Old Hickory, ready to
talk out in meeting and eager to repudiate the latter’s attack upon the
Bank, was a find indeed to the hard-pressed Whigs; and they would have
been no politicians if they had not used what God sent. In consequence
Davy soon found himself talked about. His picturesque eccentricities
began to be exploited. His rugged western honesty was applauded; his
shrewd backwoods intelligence was praised; his frontier humor was
skillfully touched up; his characteristic motto, “go ahead,” was seized
upon as an expression of the progressive spirit of the lusty young Whig
party. In short he was speedily turned into a myth by ways not unknown
in our time, and sent forth as useful campaign material in the fight
for political righteousness. Davy was vastly surprised at his sudden
rise to fame. He had never realized how great a man he was; but he
accepted it as an agreeable fact and went ahead.

The work had already begun with the publication of the _Sketches and
Eccentricities of Col. David Crockett_, that came from the clever pen
of some journalist with a liking for the new vein of backwoods humor.
A Whig bias runs through the pages, but the book is more a character
sketch than a political document. The first embroiderings laid upon
the original homespun are seen in an extravagance of picturesque
language--an extravagance quite lacking in the more realistic
_Narrative_. A well-known passage professing to relate an occurrence
on Davy’s first trip to Washington will serve to reveal an early stage
of the myth-making process--the fathering upon Davy of a type of humor
then being exploited by clever young writers:

  I was _rooting_ my way to the fire, not in a good humour, when some
  fellow staggered towards me, and cried out, “Hurrah for Adams!”
  Said I, “Stranger, you had better hurrah for hell, and praise your
  own country.” Said he, “And who are you?”

  “I’m that same David Crockett, fresh from the backwoods,
  half-horse, half-alligator, a little touched with the
  snapping-turtle; can wade the Mississippi, leap the Ohio, ride upon
  a streak of lightning, and slip without a scratch down a honey
  locust; can whip my weight in wild-cats--and if any gentleman
  pleases, for a ten-dollar bill, he may throw in a panther--hug a
  bear too close for comfort, and eat any man opposed to Jackson.”
  (_Ibid._, Chapter XIII.)

The touching up of the picturesque in the _Sketches_ seems to have been
a little too much for Davy, who resented the note of clownishness; but
he was not the man to permit undue modesty to blight so agreeable a
myth in its tender stage. He loved to swagger in the public eye too
much for that, and he joined heartily with his new political friends
to clothe it in more dignified dress. His incredible egotism was
aroused and he swallowed the Whig bait, hook, line and sinker. He began
to take himself seriously and set about the business of propagating
the myth. He conceived the plan of issuing in his own name books
which he humorously claimed to have written in the same way that the
President wrote his state papers. Some wag having suggested his name
for the presidency to succeed Jackson, Davy was at great pains to
advertise the fact to the world. To link himself with Jackson in the
public eye and to contrast his own rugged honesty with the latter’s
reputed abandonment of democratic principles, was the single purpose
of these Whig documents. The autobiography was quickly followed by
the _Tour_, and this by the _Life of Martin Van Buren_, each more
obvious propaganda than the last, and frankly designed to undermine
the popularity of the President and his advisers with the coonskin
democracy. Who the writer was that lent his pen to the work has never
been determined. A recent student has adduced testimony to prove that
it was Augustin S. Clayton, a Georgia Congressman, a ready talker and
writer, a man of sound culture, a close friend of Longstreet and fond
of the backwoods vernacular. The argument is plausible, but the case
is not established.[416] In the _Life of Martin Van Buren_ the mask
is dropped and all the malicious gossip of the Congressional lobby is
poured out on “little Van,” the “heir-apparent to the ‘government.’”
The backwoods character is retained only in an occasional coarseness
or deliberate lapse of grammar inserted in a text that is written
with vigor and skill. The book is far less amusing than Kennedy’s
_Quodlibet_. Davy is pretty much lost out of its pages and its
contribution to the myth was probably slight.

It is in the _Tour_, on the title page of which Davy formally accepts
the brevet dignity of Colonel conferred upon him by the writer of the
_Sketches_, that the myth expands more genially. A clever and amusing
campaign document, it is a masterpiece of Whig strategy to gull the
simple. The loquacious Davy joined heartily with his managers to cash
in on his reputation. His egotism was played upon at every turn and
he was quite unconscious that he had become a mere cat’s-paw to pull
Whig chestnuts out of the coals. He was paraded at meetings with
Daniel Webster, given great dinners, applauded for his rustic wit and
homespun honesty, presented with a fine rifle; and he seems never to
have realized how grossly he was being exploited. His self-esteem was
proof against disillusionment and he accepted the applause greedily.
Wherever he went he was taken in charge by the young Whigs. Everything
was carefully arranged beforehand. News was sent forward that he was
coming; crowds were gathered to greet him; publicity was attended to;
morning, noon, and night he was invited to speak, and the speeches were
carefully reprinted--not the authentic speeches, probably, but good
campaign material nevertheless. It was a gratifying experience and Davy
swelled up like a turkey cock.

As a result of his tour he was immensely strengthened in his new
political faith and became a staunch nationalist. When he first went
to Congress he was anti-tariff and had won his seat on that issue; but
he was invited to Lowell, shown an idyllic picture of contented and
prosperous mill-hands, dined, given a prepared table of statistics
proving how industrialism “is calculated not only to give individual
happiness and prosperity, but to add to our national wealth and
prosperity,” and bidden Godspeed in the work of spreading the true
gospel among the honest, simpleminded and patriotic frontiersmen.
After having been presented by Mr. Lawrence with a fine suit of
domestic broadcloth, Davy would have been an ingrate not to vote for a
protective tariff. But alas! the opportunity never came. A backwoods
constituency that had never been dined by Lowell capitalists and
had little use for fine broadcloth, a constituency that persisted
in throwing up coonskin caps for Old Hickory in spite of Lowell
statistics, resented his apostasy from the Democratic faith and at
the next election invited him to stay in the canebrakes. The gorgeous
bubble was pricked. Davy had expanded under prosperity and could not
now endure adversity. In a fit of anger he quitted his family and the
state of Tennessee, went off on the mad chase to Texas and in March
of the next year fell at the Alamo. Vain, ignorant Davy Crockett! A
simple-minded frontiersman, he went down to Jericho and fell among
thieves, and when they were done with him they left him despoiled
politically but invested with a fame that has grown to this day. After
his death other hands took up the work, wove around his name the humor
and romance of the frontier, and made of him a legendary figure. It
would have pleased Davy to know how the myth had prospered.[417]

Yet from this crude romanticism, this picturesque propaganda of
coonskin days, one solid contribution remains--the autobiography. It
is a striking bit of realism, done after the manner of the Longstreet
school. There is politics in it, of course. Written just after Davy had
gone through a bitter campaign from which he had emerged triumphant, it
is a bold pronouncement that he wears no collar marked “My dog--Andrew
Jackson.” In the campaign of 1830 he had been defeated by the
Jacksonians, but two years later he “made a mash” of his opponents, and
the elation of that victory adds a certain cockiness to his habitual
swagger. But it is much more than a political tract; it is a vital
frontier document. The main facts of his biography, as set down there,
may be accepted as true, and the general picture of backwoods existence
in Tennessee; but the humor has been elaborated and the effect of the
picturesque heightened by his collaborator. Such added touches were
only natural. The real Davy was very far from romantic. An honest
picture of the Tennessee democracy in its native habitat would reveal
few idyllic features. It was a slovenly world and Davy was pretty
much of a sloven. Crude and unlovely in its familiar details, with its
primitive courtships and shiftless removals, its brutal Indian campaign
and fierce hunting sprees, its rough equality, its unscrupulous
politics, its elections carried by sheer impudence and whisky, the
autobiography reveals the backwoods Anglo-Irishman as an uncivilized
animal, responding to simple stimuli, yet with a certain rough vigor of
character. Wastefulness was in the frontier blood, and Davy was a true
frontier wastrel. In the course of successive removals he traversed the
length of Tennessee, drinking, hunting, talking, speculating, begetting
children, scratching a few acres of land to “make his crap,” yet living
for the most part off the country; and his last squatting place on the
Obion River, seven miles from the nearest neighbor, was as primitive
as the first. Willing to endure almost incredible hardships to obtain
a keg of gunpowder to celebrate Christmas, risking his skin to kill a
bear with a butcher knife, he was never much given to mending fences
or enlarging his plow lands. He was a hunter rather than a farmer,
and the lust of killing was in his blood. With his pack of hounds he
slaughtered with amazing efficiency. A later generation would call
him a game-hog. His family must have had Gargantuan appetites to have
consumed one-tenth of the meat that fell before his beloved Betsy; the
rest went to the dogs and hogs and buzzards. His hundred and five bears
in a single season, his six deer shot in one day while pursuing other
game--two of which were left hanging in the woods--serve to explain
why the rich hunting grounds of the Indians were swept so quickly
bare of game by the white invaders. Davy was but one of thousands who
were wasting the resources of the Inland Empire, destroying forests,
skinning the land, slaughtering the deer and bear, the swarms of
pigeons and turkey, the vast buffalo herds. Davy the politician is a
huge western joke, but Davy the wastrel was a hard, unlovely fact.

Strip away the shoddy romance that has covered up the real man and the
figure that emerges is one familiar to every backwoods gathering, an
assertive, opinionated, likable fellow, ready to fight, drink, dance,
shoot or brag, the biggest frog in a very small puddle, first among the
Smart Alecks of the canebrakes. Davy was a good deal of a wag, and the
best joke he ever played he played upon posterity that has swallowed
the myth whole and persists in setting a romantic halo on his coonskin
cap. Yet in spite of the romantic machinery the play turns out to be
broad farce.


Footnotes

[414] The family name of Langestraet was given an English form by his
grandfather.

[415] John Donald Wade, _Augustus Baldwin Longstreet_.

[416] See John Donald Wade, “The Authorship of David Crockett’s
_Autobiography_,” _Georgia Historical Quarterly_, September, 1922.

[417] Among the miscellaneous material gathered together in the
_Exploits and Adventures in Texas_ and attributed to Davy is
Longstreet’s _Georgia Theatrics_, lifted verbatim from _Georgia Scenes_.




Book Two • The Mind of the Middle East


The literature of the Middle East during the years of the romantic
revolution, unlike contemporary letters north and south, revealed
no coalescing unity of spirit and purpose; it was rather the casual
and somewhat fortuitous expression of two cities, both of which were
divided by language and custom into fairly equal groups, and neither
of which had developed a homogeneous native culture. There were no
intellectual hinterlands to Philadelphia and New York, as there were
to Boston and Charleston and Richmond; no common ideals spread over
broad areas, no dominant schools of thought, no branching roots by
which a common literature might be nourished. In consequence it may,
perhaps, be reckoned a misuse of terms to speak of the mind of the
Middle East, as one may speak of the mind of New England or of the
Old Dominion, where in spite of pronounced variations of individual
temperament a common culture had set its mark on the literature. There
were few common ties and few intellectual sympathies to bind together
the men of letters of New York or Philadelphia. Certainly Irving and
Paulding and Cooper and Melville and Whitman reveal none of that strong
community of taste and purpose that marks the Concord group, or the
Boston-Cambridge group, or even the Charleston group. They expressed
no common culture, they had been disciplined in no common faith,
and they were held together by no common economic or political or
intellectual interests; as a result their writing is a frank expression
of individual temperament and taste, unfettered by schools, drawing its
nourishment from no common soil. They stand on their own feet, and to
understand them requires no critical examination of a complex cultural
background. And yet this very diversity may prove to be symptomatic of
the hurrying changes that the rise of the middle class was bringing
to America--to the city perhaps even more dramatically than to the
country. The confusions and diversity of thought that mark the
literature of Philadelphia and New York may, perhaps, most adequately
suggest the mercurial temper of the revolutionary transition from the
eighteenth century to the nineteenth, of which the romantic spirit was
the natural expression.




