Chapter III • Literature and the Middle Border[765]


III • Hamlin Garland and the Middle Border

It was not till the end of the eighties that the bitterness of the
frontier began to creep into literature. Its slackness and drab
poverty had got into the pages of _The Hoosier Schoolmaster_, as its
neighborliness had got into Riley; but in these earlier studies there
was no brooding sense of social injustice, of the wrongs done the
Middle Border by unjust laws, of the hardships that are increased
by the favoritism of government. In the year 1887, however, came a
significant change of temper. Three very different writers--Harold
Frederic, Joseph Kirkland, and Hamlin Garland--turned to the theme of
farm life, and dealt with it in a mordantly realistic vein. It was the
first conscious literary reaction to the subjection of agriculture to
capitalistic exploitation and it was marked by the bitterness of a
decaying order.

_Seth’s Brother’s Wife_, by Harold Frederic, is a drab tale of farm
life in upper York State, as bitter as any tale of the western border.
It is a story of defeat, of flight from country to town. The blight
of failure is upon the farming community--a blight that embitters old
and young; and the sketches of country louts, of soured lives, of
broken men and women, do not make pleasant reading. No gentle idyllic
light rests on the landscape such as Sarah Orne Jewett discovers on
the fields and villages of New England. Sabrina Fairchild, an old maid
embittered by the family failure, yet clinging to the family pride
and hopeful that the family prestige will be restored, is a pathetic
and desolate figure, gaunt and sharp-tongued; at mortal feud with
another pathetic old woman, who with her husband had emigrated from
Massachusetts years before, and held herself proudly above the mean and
vulgar neighborhood in which they had settled. The slack servants,
gossipy and impudent, the petty lives, the grasping ways unrelieved by
any grace or beauty, and set in a world of petty machine politics, make
a drab and unattractive picture. Harold Frederic quite evidently hates
this countryside that bred him. He will not, like Hamlin Garland, take
up the battle for it against the town. He sees no hope in political
programs; he is no Populistic agrarian fighting for justice; he wants
only to escape from it to the city, where life may be lived more
generously. The “trail of the serpent is over it all,” he remarks,
“rich and poor, big and little. The nineteenth century is a century of
cities; they have given their own twist to the progress of the age--and
the farmer is almost as far out of it as if he lived in Alaska. Perhaps
there may have been a time when a man could live in what the poet calls
daily communion with Nature and not starve his mind and dwarf his soul,
but this isn’t the century ... get out of it as soon as you can.”[766]

Much less bitter and hopeless is _Zury: The Meanest Man in Spring
County_ (1887), by Joseph Kirkland, son of Matilda Kirkland, who a
generation before had written sketches of the Michigan frontier.
In the preface the author points out that his study is “a palpable
imitation of Thomas Hardy’s ‘Far from the Madding Crowd,’” an “attempt
to reproduce, on American soil, the unflinching realism ... of life
down in actual contact with the soil itself.” It is a tale of pioneer
days in Illinois, in the second quarter of the nineteenth century, and
it draws a full-length portrait of the son of a Pennsylvania immigrant
who struggles up from mean beginnings to prosperity. The niggardliness
of frontier life is drawn unsparingly--the harsh struggle for
subsistence--but there is no outcry against governmental favoritisms or
the law’s injustice. It is nature that must be fought and conquered,
and the battle needs strong men who must subdue their finer natures
and more generous impulses to the work of acquisition. Zury Prouder
is a masterful fellow who bends every energy to the business of
accumulation. He makes one hand wash the other, and by dint of saving
and squeezing and trading and foreclosing he slowly amasses wealth and
power. He is a thrifty farmer as well as a shrewd trader, but his soul
is seared by the frontier meanness--squeezed into land and stock and
mortgages, consumed with the passion for grabbing. It was a reaction
from the skimpiness of his youth. The bitterness of poverty had
entered his heart as a boy, and his life took shape from the youthful
resolve--

  “Dad, I’m goin’ t’own a mortgage ’fore I die; mind what I say.”

  “Hope ye will, Zury,” his father replies. “Yew’ll have a holt of
  the right eend of the poker then; ’n’ t’other feller he’ll have a
  holt o’ the hot part, same’s we’ve got naow.”

  “You bet! An’ it’ll sizzle his hands, tew, afore I’ll ever let up
  on him.”

But Kirkland will not let Zury remain a crabbed and hard-fisted son of
the frontier. As the frontier hardships grow less the soul that has
been seared by poverty is awakened to more generous impulses. Late
in life Zury is taken in hand by a Boston woman who had come out as
a schoolteacher years before, and whom Zury had given up for a bride
with a rich farm, but to whom he eventually returns. Under her care
the plates of mail are stripped from his heart, his better nature
expands, and the meanest man in Spring County ripens into a kindly and
lovable old age. What poverty and hardship had warped and twisted, love
straightens out and ennobles; the meanness of the frontier is washed
away as the rich soil yields a more abundant life. It is not a great
book, but it is vigorous and honest, and its earlier chapters contain
some admirable bits of realism. As one of the first stories of the
western farmer it is secure of a place in the history of our American
fiction.

It was this same year, 1887, that Hamlin Garland, alone and brooding
over his studies at the Boston Public Library, wrote his first sketches
of life in the Middle Border. The romance was fading from the prairies
when he took up his pen. The Golden West of Mark Twain and the bucolic
West of Whitcomb Riley had both slipped into the past and the day that
was rising was to bring its discouragements that seared men’s hopes
as the hot winds seared the fields of rustling corn. The burdens of
the western farmer were heavy on his shoulders and he could foresee
no time when they would be lighter. Depression had settled on the
Middle Border, and Hamlin Garland returning to the familiar fields
from his Boston studies felt the depression in every fiber of his
being. This was his land and his people. The blight laid upon men and
women and children by the drab pioneer life was a familiar fact to
him. The Garlands and the McClintocks had suffered from it as their
neighbors suffered, and a rebellious wrath filled his heart as he
contemplated the Middle Border--the barnyards where tired men did the
evening chores, the ungainly houses where tired women stood over hot
stoves, the fertile acres that produced more than the markets consumed.
It was a life without grace or beauty or homely charm--a treadmill
existence that got nowhere. If this were the Valley of Democracy
then the democracy was a mean thing and hopeless, and having himself
escaped from it he would do what he could to help others escape. In
the completeness of his disillusion the glamour of romance was swept
away and he proposed to set down in honest plain words the manner of
life lived by these Middle Border folk, and the sort of earnings won by
their toil. He would speak frankly out of the common bitter experience.
The way to truth was the way of realism.

To a later generation that never knew the pioneer hardships of the
Middle Border, Hamlin Garland seems strangely remote and old-fashioned;
yet his intellectual antecedents are both ancient and honorable. At
bottom he is an idealist of the old Jeffersonian breed, an earnest
soul devoid of humor, who loves beauty and is mightily concerned about
justice, and who, discovering little beauty and finding scant justice
in the world where fate first set him, turned rebel and threw in his
lot with the poor and the exploited. As a young man, consumed with a
desire to speak for his people, he espoused a somber realism, for only
by and through the truth could he hope to dislodge from men’s minds the
misconceptions that stood in the way of justice. The Middle Border had
no spokesman at the court of letters and if he could gain a hearing
there he must not betray his father’s household by glossing ungainly
reality; he must depict the life of the western farmer as it was lived
under the summer sun and the winter cold, what harvests were brought to
crib and what sort of wealth was finally gathered.

And yet in the light of his total work one hesitates to call Garland a
realist. Perhaps more justly he might be called a thwarted romantic,
and his early rebellious realism be traced to its source in a
passionate refusal to be denied the beauty that should be a portion of
any rational way of living; for when later he found himself in a land
of nobler horizons, unsoiled as yet by crude frontier exploitation,
when he looked out upon vast mountain ranges and felt the warm sun on
the gray plains, he discovered there the romance of his dreams and
fell to describing the strange splendors with the gusto of a naïve
romantic. _Main-Travelled Roads_ and _Prairie Folks_ are the protest
of one oppressed with the meanness of a world that takes such heavy
toll of human happiness; _Her Mountain Lover_ is the expression of
a frank romantic who glories in the nobility of nature’s noblemen;
and _The Captain of the Gray-Horse Troop_ is a tale in which romance
is justified by ethics and the hero discovers in the protection of a
weaker race the deepest satisfactions of life. Beauty is excellent, but
beauty should walk hand in hand with service--not art for art’s sake,
but art subdued to the higher good of humanity.

Between these extremes of a stark realism and an ethical romanticism,
stand two books, separated by many years and great changes, that embody
in more finished form the theme which after all was the master passion
of Garland’s life--the Middle Border and the rebellions it bred. _Rose
of Dutcher’s Coolly_ is a full-length portrait of an idealist in revolt
against the narrowness of farm life, and _A Son of the Middle Border_
is an idyll of the past, autobiography done in mellower years when the
passions of youth have been subdued to less exigent demands. These
books, together with the sketches of _Main-Travelled Roads_ and the
militant critical theory of _Crumbling Idols_, contain pretty much the
whole of Hamlin Garland that after years have cared to remember--the
saga of the Middle Border in the days of its great rebellion when the
earlier hopes of boundless prosperity were turning to ashes in the
mouth.

The striking originality of Garland’s work, that sets it apart from
other studies of the local-color school, sprang from the sincerity of
his reaction to environment. His intellectual development followed the
needs of his ardent, inquisitive nature. After quitting the little
Academy at Osage, Iowa, he went forth in quest of an education that
should explain to him the meaning of life as he had known it. In this
search he was singularly fortunate. He was his own mentor and he took
what he needed. Boston had long been the Mecca of his dreams and when
he found himself there--having made a pious pilgrimage as Howells had
done a generation earlier--he threw himself upon his studies with
ascetic zeal. Fortunately he enrolled in the Boston Public Library
instead of at Harvard, and his formless radicalisms there found food
in plenty. Though he lived in Boston some ten years and made friends,
he never penetrated the inner literary sanctuary. A somewhat forlorn
outsider, unknown and unvouched for, he found no welcome as Howells and
Twain had found, and he never entered the pleasant circles where Holmes
and Lowell and Fields and Norton and Aldrich and Howells held sway.

Perhaps that fact unconsciously determined his scornful rejection
of the Boston genteel in literature; at any rate his denial of the
sovereignty of the New England literary rulers left him free to follow
other masters who seemed to him more significant. In his bleak little
room his ear had caught the greater voices then sounding in Europe
and America. His masters were men of intellectual horizons unbounded
by Beacon Street and Harvard Square: Taine and Ibsen and Björnson,
Turgenev and Tolstoi, Zola and Millet, Darwin and Spencer and Fiske,
Walt Whitman and Henry George, and the later Howells with his deeper
sociological concern and graver realism. His three great masters came
finally to be Whitman, Spencer, and Henry George. To these greater
names should be added that of Edward Eggleston, who had been his
boyhood idol, and that of Joseph Kirkland, who did much to stimulate
and guide his earliest sketches. He did not absorb all these men had
to give. He could not stretch his provincial mind suddenly to compass
the intellectual realm of his masters. But something he got and that
something, woven into the fabric of his thinking, was to make him
free. It was the best school of the times, and from his studies Hamlin
Garland emerged an uncompromising radical, one of a group of eager
young men who gathered about B. O. Flower, and in the sympathetic pages
of the _Arena_ published their divers radicalisms to a hostile world.
He was ready to proclaim new social and literary creeds, ready to go
forth to do battle for democratic justice and a democratic art.

The gist of Garland’s new literary creed is set forth in _Crumbling
Idols_, written in the earliest years of the nineties, when Chicago was
preparing the setting for the World’s Fair, and gathered into book form
in 1894. It is realism modified by the local-color school, by French
impressionism, and by Whitman--intensely individualistic, ardently
social, and militantly democratic. It would sweep away every fetish of
great reputations and authoritative schools, and insist that the artist
confront the life that he knows and tell of it truthfully. Following
the French example he calls this iconoclastic realism, Veritism. “The
_theory_ of the veritist,” he says, “is, after all, a statement of his
passion for truth and for individual expression,” and he then goes on:

  Art, I must insist, is an individual thing,--the question of one
  man facing certain facts and telling his individual relations to
  them. His first care must be to present his own concept. This is,
  I believe, the essence of veritism. “Write of those things of
  which you know most, and for which you care most. By so doing you
  will be true to yourself, true to your locality, and true to your
  time.”[767]

But Veritism in the hands of a disciple of Taine, Whitman, Henry
George, and Herbert Spencer must take on ethical values and serve the
common well-being. All art, he insists, is “sociologic,” and realism is
harsh because it is hopeful.

  Because the fictionist of to-day sees a more beautiful and
  peaceful future social life, and, in consequence, a more beautiful
  and peaceful literary life, therefore he is encouraged to deal
  truthfully and at close grapple with the facts of his immediate
  present. His comment virtually amounts to satire or prophesy, or
  both. Because he is sustained by love and faith in the future, he
  can be mercilessly true. He strikes at thistles, because he knows
  the unrotted seed of loveliness and peace needs but sun and the air
  of freedom to rise to flower and fragrance.

  The realist or veritist is really an optimist, a dreamer. He sees
  life in terms of what it might be, as well as in terms of what it
  is; but he writes of what is, and, at his best, suggests what is
  to be, by contrast.... He aims to hasten the age of beauty and
  peace by delineating the ugliness and warfare of the present; but
  ever the converse of his picture rises in the mind of the reader.
  He sighs for a lovelier life. He is tired of warfare and diseased
  sexualism, and Poverty the mother of Envy. He is haggard with
  sympathetic hunger, and weary with the struggle to maintain his
  standing place on this planet, which he conceives was given to all
  as the abode of peace. With his hate in his heart and this ideal
  in his brain the modern man writes his stories of life. They are
  not always pleasant, but they are generally true, and always they
  provoke thought.[768]

It is an excellent self-portrait of the young realist of that early
time when all the rebellions of his blood cried out for expression--the
troubled years between 1887 and 1893 when the Border was rising and
the son of the Border found the flames of his discontent fanned by
many winds. From such roots came the most acrid tales that had as yet
fruited in American fiction. Few as were the stories of _Main-Travelled
Roads_ and _Prairie Folks_, they constitute a landmark in our literary
history, for they were the first authentic expression and protest of an
agrarian America then being submerged by the industrial revolution. No
other man in our literature had known so intimately the Middle Border
as Hamlin Garland--its restless swarmings from the old hive, never
pausing long enough to gather the honey of the new fields, its heedless
venturings for the reputed gold that lay beyond the farthest sunsets.
He had responded to the spell that kept the pioneer moving West; the
allurement of the untamed prairie, the poetry of dawn and twilight. But
the poignant spell had been broken for him by the drab realities that
lay between the dawn and the twilight--the crushing round of toil that
took such heavy toll of men’s development and women’s happiness. He was
familiar with the blight as well as the bloom of the frontier. He had
seen his uncle David McClintock broken by the Border--the great wistful
man with the soul of a musician; he had seen his mother fail under the
burden--the cheerful, uncomplaining wife, joining with her rich voice
in the pioneer’s song of “O’er the hills in legions, Boys!” And after
the disillusion of his final defeat on the bleak Dakota plains--by
1883 woodland and meadow were pretty much alienated from the public
domains and only plains and deserts and mountain valleys and forests
remained--his eyes were opened at last. “I clearly perceived,” he said
afterwards, “that our Song of Emigration had been, in effect, the hymn
of fugitives!” So he turned his face to the East to seek the land of
desire in Boston.

That chapter of his life was ended. He had learned that the old
romantic tales of the Border were lies to him, whatever they may have
been to earlier generations; but he had yet to naturalize himself in
the realm of ideas, and analyze the experiences of his youth in the
light of current social liberalisms. He had begun that work in 1883
on his raw Dakota claim where his leisure hours were given to Taine’s
theory of literary determinism, and Henry George’s new gospel of
single-tax; and he carried it rapidly forward during three years of
eager reading. During those quiet months in Boston when he was making
himself at home in the world of contemporary thought, he sketched the
first of the stories of western life which later he gathered together
in _Main-Travelled Roads_ and _Prairie Folks_. “You’re the first actual
farmer in American fiction,” said his friend Kirkland, “now tell the
truth about it.” This handful of short stories, fierce in the repressed
passion of the writer’s heart, was Garland’s reply to the old romantic
myths of the West. In these acrid pages life is not bucolic, it does
not chew the cud of contentment “knee-deep in June,” but it is stained
with dust and sweat, lacerated by raw nerves, depressed by a sense of
economic failure.

Of the lives of these labor-burdened men and women he intended to tell
the whole truth. But, as he confessed later, he could not. “Even my
youthful zeal faltered in the midst of a revelation of the lives led by
the women on the farms of the middle border. Before the tragic futility
of their suffering, my pen refused to shed its ink. Over the hidden
chamber of their maternal agonies I drew the veil.” It was hard for
him to view it all with the calm detachment of the objective realist;
the Border life was too deeply and intimately personal to him, it had
marked him too harshly. And yet in the sense of conveying the spirit of
reality he succeeded greatly, and these earliest tales remain notable
work which later years have not forgotten. The subdued words of the
Prologue offer the fittest of commentaries on the spirit in which they
were done.

  The Main-travelled road in the West (as everywhere) is hot and
  dusty in summer, and desolate and drear with mud in fall and
  spring, and in winter the winds sweep across it; but it does
  sometimes cross a rich meadow where the songs of the larks and
  bobolinks and blackbirds are tangled. Follow it far enough, it may
  lead past a bend in the river where the water laughs eternally
  over its shallows. Mainly it is long and weariful, and has a dull
  little town at one end and a home of toil at the other. Like the
  main-travelled road of life it is traversed by many classes of
  people, but the poor and the weary predominate.

_Main-Travelled Roads_, in its harsh objectivity, belonged to the
earlier eighties, to the time when the spirit of unrest was still
obscurely fermenting in the western mind, before it had clarified in
definite agrarian movements and measures. It is clouded by doubt and
harassed by uncertainty. No hope offers a way out of the weary tangle.
Its psychology is that of the first mood of dejection that came with
the failure of western agriculture with its virgin fields, its new
machinery, and its specialized crops, to adjust itself to the new
capitalistic order. The simple agrarian mind had not learned to play
the new game. The sons of the Middle Border were children of the Gilded
Age as truly as Colonel Sellers or Commodore Vanderbilt; they were
plungers and speculators in land and crops; but they were no match for
the Main Street plungers and speculators; and when bankruptcy instead
of riches rewarded their hardships, they were embittered. Out of that
very natural bitterness sprang the movement of Populism that proposed
to take government out of the hands of Main Street and make it serve
agriculture. It was the understanding of this fact that made Howells
so sympathetic a critic of Garland. But he would encourage the artist
rather than the reformer.

  ... these stories are full of the bitter and burning dust, the foul
  and trampled slush, of the common avenues of life, the life of the
  men who hopelessly and cheerlessly make the wealth that enriches
  the alien and the idler, and impoverishes the producer.

  If any one is still at a loss to account for that uprising of the
  farmers of the West which is the translation of the Peasants’ War
  into modern and republican terms, let him read _Main-Travelled
  Roads_, and he will begin to understand.... The stories are full of
  those gaunt, grim, sordid, pathetic, ferocious figures, whom our
  satirists find so easy to caricature as Hayseeds, and whose blind
  groping for fairer conditions is so grotesque to the newspapers and
  so menacing to the politicians. They feel that something is wrong,
  and they know that the wrong is not theirs. The type caught in Mr.
  Garland’s book is not pretty; it is ugly and often ridiculous; but
  it is heart-breaking in its rude despair.[769]

Too soon, however, the will to remain objective weakened and his work
took on a different note. “Obscurely forming in my mind,” he says of
the year 1889, “were two great literary concepts--that truth was a
higher quality than beauty, and that to spread the reign of justice
should everywhere be the design and intent of the artist. The merely
beautiful in art seemed petty, and success at the cost of the happiness
of others a monstrous egotism.”[770] With this ethical conception of
art he returned in 1889 to the old home, after a six years’ absence,
to experience a poignant reaction to the change that had come over
the Border. “Another dry year was upon the land and the settlers were
deeply disheartened,” he wrote later. “The holiday spirit of eight
years before had entirely vanished. In its place was a sullen rebellion
against government and against God.”[771]

  Every house I visited had its individual message of sordid struggle
  and half-hidden despair.... All the gilding of farm life melted
  away. The hard and bitter realities came back upon me in a flood.
  Nature was as beautiful as ever. The soaring sky was filled with
  shining clouds, the tinkle of the bobolink’s fairy bells rose from
  the meadow, a mystical sheen was on the odorous grass and waving
  grain, but no splendor of cloud, no grace of sunset, could conceal
  the poverty of these people; on the contrary, they brought out,
  with a more intolerable poignancy, the gracelessness of these
  homes, and the sordid quality of the mechanical routine of these
  lives. I perceived beautiful youth becoming bowed and bent. I saw
  lovely girlhood wasting away into thin and hopeless age. Some of
  the women I had known had withered into querulous and complaining
  spinsterhood, and I heard ambitious youth cursing the bondage of
  the farm. “Of such pain and futility are the lives of the average
  man and woman of both city and country composed,” I acknowledged to
  myself with candor, “Why lie about it?”[772]

In such a mood the call of social justice was too insistent to be
denied. “With William Morris and Henry George I exclaimed, ‘Nature
is not to blame. Man’s laws are to blame’!” And so the young man of
twenty-nine threw himself into the agrarian cause. He took the platform
with Mary Ellen Lease and was glad of the farmers’ approval of the
new doctrine of less corn and more hell. Under the urging of his
friend Flower he planned to put the Populist movement into fiction and
wrote _A Spoil of Office_. The familiar Iowa backgrounds are in the
story--the harsh lives and bent weary figures of men and women--but
there is also an idealized heroine who suggests what life may become
when injustice is done away with and the blighting toil is lessened--a
figure who, as Grange lecturer and Farmers’ Alliance speaker, may
have been suggested by Mary Ellen Lease. Much inferior as it is to
_Main-Travelled Roads_--a social tract rather than a work of art--we
cannot well spare it from our Middle Border literature, for it has
captured and preserves for later times the spirit of the passionate
uprising of the farmers, and it recalls the vast hopes that fermented
in that revolt--not well grounded, perhaps, but warm and human. “The
heart and center of this movement,” says Ida Wilbur, “is a demand for
justice, not for ourselves alone, but for the toiling poor wherever
found.... It is no longer a question of legislating for the farmer; it
is a question of the abolition of industrial slavery.”[773] There are
echoes of an older and simpler America in these pages, of discontents
that were put down but not removed--Jacksonianisms, Greenbackisms,
anti-monopolistic crusades. Yet they look forward to a time when beauty
and well-being shall be the common portion of those who do the work
of the world. The way, alas, is “long and weary, and thousands and
millions of us must die on the road, I am afraid,” says the heroine;
but go forward they must, along other paths than the path of capitalism.

Less significant is _Jason Edwards: An Average Man_ (1891), that is an
elaboration of the note, “The air is full of revolt against things as
they are.” It is a single-tax reply to the question of a young girl,
“Are there any happy people in the world--any working people, I mean?
Are they all cross and tired and worried and full of care, as we are
here?” The story is two chapters in the life of a workingman--his
struggle in Boston as a mechanic, and his struggle in Minnesota,
whither he flees for a refuge on a homestead. Defeat awaits him in
the end, and the conclusion is an illustration of Henry George’s
thesis that poverty is the entail of land rent. In this and in other
studies done under the influence of B. O. Flower, whose appetite for
reform literature was insatiable, Hamlin Garland had ceased to be an
objective realist and turned propagandist, bringing down on his head
the criticisms of conservative readers. One of his friends went so far
as to expostulate over the folly of his course. “It is a mistake for
you to be associated with cranks like Henry George and writers like
Whitman,” he said. “It is a mistake to be published in the _Arena_.
Your book should have been brought out by one of the old established
firms. If you will fling away your radical notions and consent to amuse
the governing classes, you will succeed.”[774]

It is the agrarian background of Garland’s mind that makes him seem
old-fashioned to a generation that has forgotten the agrarian roots
of our past growth. He was so deeply colored by this earlier native
America that he never outgrew it; and when the Populistic revolt had
died down, when this last organized agrarian rebellion against the
exploiting middle class had become only an episode in our history,
he had outlived his day. He was too deeply stirred by Whitman’s
romantic faith in democracy, too narrowly a disciple of Henry George’s
Jeffersonian economics, to fit into an industrializing America. Despite
his discipleship to European realism he refused to go with the group
of young left-wing naturalists who were boldly venturing on new ways
of fiction. He would not follow the path of naturalism. Of Norris’s
_McTeague_ he said, “What avail is this study of sad lives? for it
does not even lead to a notion of social betterment.”[775] He could
not bring himself to accept the major criteria of naturalism as they
were exemplified in the work of Zola and Strindberg and Hauptmann.
A native Jeffersonian, inspired by Whitman and instructed by Henry
George and Herbert Spencer, would reject the somber, mechanistic
background of naturalist thought. He had learned his science of the
Victorian evolutionists, with their grandiose conception of a far-flung
beneficent progress from the homogeneous to the heterogeneous, and
the backgrounds of his mind were radiant with promise. Neither a
mechanistic science nor a regimented industrialism had risen in his
outlook to bank the fires of his hope. No impersonal determinism had
chilled his belief in man as a free-will agent in a moral universe.
The vast bleak chemical cosmos that bewildered Theodore Dreiser
did not rise before him to dwarf the individual nor overwhelm his
aspirations. Like a French romantic of a hundred years before, he
remained a confirmed optimist who believed that the future will correct
the mistakes of the past, and the peace and beauty for which the
human race longs lie immediately ahead. The art of the young man was
becoming old-fashioned in the world of Stephen Crane; his ideals were
Victorian in the days of Mark Hanna. And so after the agrarian revolt
had failed and America lay fat and contented in the lap of McKinley
prosperity, he found himself a man without a country, an alien in
an industrializing order, and he turned away to the newer West and
the romance he had always sought. While America was driving towards
regimentation he traveled backward in time to recover a vanishing world
of individualism, and the distance rapidly widened between them.

In those romantic wanderings through Colorado and California and
into the far Northwest he found a new interest in the frontiersman’s
exploitation of the Indian, and in _The Captain of the Gray-Horse
Troop_ and _The Eagle Heart_ he has wedded his social ethics to French
romanticism, and endowed man in a state of nature with exalted social
responsibilities. The old theme is dressed in new clothes and Captain
Curtis of the Gray-Horse Troop becomes an Indian agent fighting the
lawless and cruel encroachment of the frontiersmen upon the Indian
rights; but the theme remains. Garland hated the frontier as fiercely
as Cooper hated it, and like him he loved the clean free spaces; but
when after his long and somewhat futile rambles he returned to the
Middle Border, he found there a new light upon the familiar fields and
in that light he wrote his saga of the Garlands and the McClintocks.
This was to be his great bequest to American letters. To have sought
the spirit of the Middle Border in its hopes and its defeat, to have
written the history of the generation that swept across the western
prairies, is to compress within covers a great movement and a great
experience--one of the significant chapters in our total American
history.


Footnotes

[765] In Professor Parrington’s plan the section given here was to be
preceded by a first section on “Edward Eggleston and Frontier Realism,”
and a second on “Whitcomb Riley and Folk Romance.”--_Publisher._

[766] Chapter IV, pp. 26-27.

[767] Chapter III, p. 35.

[768] Chapter IV, pp. 51-53.

[769] Introduction to _Main-Travelled Roads_.

[770] _A Son of the Middle Border_, Chapter XXVIII, p. 374.

[771] _Ibid._, Chapter XXIX.

[772] _Ibid._, Chapter XXVIII, pp. 364-365.

[773] _Ibid._, p. 245.

[774] _A Son of the Middle Border_, Chapter XXXI, p. 417.

[775] _Critic_, Vol. 42, pp. 216-218.




Part Two: Proletarian Hopes[776]


Footnotes

[776] The first chapter of this section was to have been “Plutocracy
and the Workingman,” the second “The Rise of the Left.” For the
contents see p. xxxv.--_Publisher._




