Chapter V • Literary Echoes


The Revolutionary upheaval produced no polite literature in any
respects comparable to its utilitarian prose. The expiring wit
literature of England was an exotic that refused to be naturalized, and
the times were unpropitious for the creation of a native poetry. An
occasional dilettante like Mather Byles aspired to be a wit, but the
reputation of the clever Bostonian owed more to his tongue than to his
pen, and he is dimly remembered for the letter that he received from
the great Mr. Pope, rather than for notable verse. Nevertheless in the
early seventies pure literature was beginning to make a perceptible
stir in New England. Clever young men in the colleges were turning
moderns and making ready to wage a new battle of the books. They
preferred the refinements of verse to the didacticism of sermons; they
were discovering the charm of playful satire; and they found in the
currently fashionable tetrameter a brisk vehicle for their attacks on
academic dullness. They admired Churchill, then at the height of his
brief fame, but they were restrained by a decent modesty and dared
not go his length in brutal frankness. It was from these young men,
amateurs in verse writing and amateurs likewise in politics, that the
American cause mainly recruited its literary defenders. They might be
flaming Whigs but they were also well-bred young gentlemen who studied
the amenities and sought to unite patriotism with good form.


I • The Whig Satirists


1. John Trumbull

There was the best of Yankee blood in the veins of John Trumbull.
Among his kinsmen were the Reverend Benjamin Trumbull, historian
of Connecticut, Governor Jonathan Trumbull--Washington’s “Brother
Jonathan”--and John Trumbull the painter. On his mother’s side he was
descended from the vigorous Solomon Stoddard, grandfather of Jonathan
Edwards. His father was a scholarly minister, long a trustee of Yale
College, at which school the son spent seven years as undergraduate and
tutor. He was a precocious youth with a strong love of polite letters,
and a praiseworthy desire to achieve literary distinction. Greek and
Latin had been the toys of his childhood and when he was seven years of
age he passed the entrance examination to college. During the period
of his tutorship he joined with Timothy Dwight and Joseph Howe in
the work of overhauling the stale curriculum, supplementing Lilly’s
Grammar and Calvin’s Institutes with Pope and Churchill. Like other
aspiring youths of the day he dabbled in Spectator papers, practiced
his couplets, and eventually produced _The Progress of Dulness_, the
cleverest bit of academic verse till then produced in America. At heart
Trumbull was thoroughly academic, and nothing would have suited his
temperament better than the life of a Yale professor; but the prospects
proving unfavorable, he began to mingle Blackstone with the poets in
preparation for his future profession.

He was thus engaged during the middle years of the long dispute with
England, the bitter wranglings of which seem to have disturbed him
little in his quiet retreat. But in 1773 he resigned his tutorship
to prepare himself further in the law. Removing to Boston he entered
the office of John Adams, then rising to prominence as a spokesman
of the popular party; and he took lodgings in the house of Caleb
Cushing, Speaker of the Massachusetts Assembly. Placed thus at the
storm center of provincial politics, he was soon infected with the
Whig dissatisfactions and joined himself to the patriotic party. When
Adams went to Philadelphia to sit in the Continental Congress, Trumbull
withdrew to Hartford, where he established himself. Before quitting
Boston he had published an _Elegy on the Times_, a political tract that
seemed to Adams so useful to the cause that he marked the young poet
for future service, and the year following he encouraged the writing
of _M’Fingal_, the first part of which appeared in 1775. So great was
the prestige it met with that Trumbull tinkered with it for seven
years, publishing it finally in its completed form in 1782. The law
seems to have been a jealous mistress then as now, and his dreams of
further literary work were inadequately realized. He is believed to
have had a hand in _The Anarchiad_, and he wrote some minor poems; but
he soon drifted into politics, went on the bench, finally removed to
Detroit in 1825, and died there in 1831, at the age of eighty-one. He
had outlived his Revolutionary generation, long outlived his literary
ambitions, and was pretty much forgotten before he died. His collected
works, published in 1820, proved a losing venture for the printer.
America in 1820 was turning romantic, and few, it seems, cared to
invest in two volumes of echoes.

Trumbull’s reputation rests exclusively on _M’Fingal_. It was so
popular in its time that more than thirty pirated editions were
issued. It was broadcasted by “news-papers, hawkers, pedlars, and
petty chapmen,” and it served its partisan purpose. The author was
complimented by the Marquis de Chastellux on fulfilling all the
conditions of burlesque poetry as approved since the days of Homer;
but in spite of the indisputable cleverness of some of the lines,
it is not a great work. In its final form it is spun out to extreme
length, and pretty much swamped by the elaborate machinery on which the
poet visibly prided himself. Even in the thick of attack Trumbull did
not forget his academic reading, but he explains his allusions with
meticulous care. He seems, indeed, rather more concerned about the laws
of the mock epic than the threatened rights of America. The Scotch Tory
hero is a figure so unlike the real Tory--the Olivers and Leonards and
Hutchinsons, with their love of power and dignified display--that the
caricature loses much in historical veracity. Trumbull’s patriotism
was well bred and unmarked by fierce partisanship. His refined tastes
were an ill equipment for the turmoil of revolution. The ways of the
radical were not lovely in his eyes; the Sons of Liberty with their
tar-pots and feather-beds were too often rough fellows, and although
they provided him with comic material to set off the blunderings of
the Squire, they probably seemed to him little better than tools of
demagogues. Very often this tousle-headed democracy behaved like a mob,
and Trumbull in his tie-wig did not approve of mobs.

The more thoughtfully one reads _M’Fingal_, throwing upon it the light
of the total career of its author, the more clearly one perceives
that John Trumbull was not a rebellious soul. In the year 1773, while
projecting some fresh ventures in the Spectator vein, “he congratulated
himself on the fact ‘that the ferment of politics’ was, as he supposed,
‘pretty much subsided,’ and that at last the country was to enjoy a
‘mild interval from the struggles of patriotism and self-interest,
from noise and confusion, Wilkes and liberty.’” He had then no wish for
embroilment in civil war, no dreams of political independence. All his
life he seems to have suffered from ill health, which probably sapped
his militancy and lessened his pugnacity. From this temperamental
calmness came a certain detachment that allowed his partisanship to
remain cooler than the hot passions of the times commonly suffered. He
could permit himself the luxury of a laugh at the current absurdities;
and it is this light-heartedness that made _M’Fingal_ so immediately
effective. The rollicking burlesque of the Tory argument, the telling
_reductio ad absurdum_ of the Tory logic, must have tickled the ears of
every Whig and provoked many a laugh in obscure chimney-seats. Laughter
is a keen weapon, and Trumbull’s gayety laid open weak spots in the
Tory armor that were proof against Freneau’s invective. It was a rare
note in those acrimonious times, and one likes Trumbull the better for
minding his manners and engaging in the duel like a gentleman. After
all, this son of Yale had certain characteristics of the intellectual,
and if his environment had been favorable and the law had not claimed
him, very likely he would have given a better account of the talents
that were certainly his. He wrote with ease if not with finish, and he
possessed the requisite qualities of a man of letters. A lovable man he
seems to have been, but somewhat easy-going, too lightly turned away
from his purpose; and in consequence his later life failed to realize
the expectations of his early years.

That he was not a Loyalist was probably due in large measure to
environment and his family connections. Considering his temperament,
it is not easy to discover any logical reason why he should have
turned Whig. He had never suffered in his own fortune from existing
arrangements; he was not a political idealist to throw the glamor of
republicanism about the struggle; he had not subjected the colonial
question to critical analysis. He was an academic dilettante,
unconcerned with political principles, little more than an echo of the
Connecticut gentry in such matters; and if he espoused the Whig cause
it is a pretty good indication that Yale College was indoctrinated
in Whig principles. An echo he remained throughout his life. When
later he became a Federalist and enjoyed some of the emoluments of
party victory, and when later still democracy lifted up its head in
Connecticut, wearing the French cockade, and bringing down upon it
the wrath of all respectable people, he reflected faithfully the views
of his class. John Trumbull was a moderate liberal, but no leveler, no
democrat, no friend to Jeffersonian heresies. Democracy he detested
heartily, and he joined with the other Hartford Wits to draw its
portrait in unflattering terms. As a Connecticut gentleman he was
insistent on the supremacy of the tie-wig in government as well as in
society; he would scarcely have been a Connecticut gentleman had he
thought otherwise.


2. Francis Hopkinson, Esq.

If the career of Trumbull indicates that Whiggery existed among the
young collegians of Connecticut, the career of Francis Hopkinson
suggests that the culture of Philadelphia, the great center of
fashion and wit, was Whiggish also. That it should have been so is
the more noteworthy, for the Quaker spirit of Philadelphia was far
less militant than the Puritan spirit of Boston; more peaceful, if
not more conservative. The city had long been dominated by a group
of sober merchants who detested the leveling tendencies of New
England. But the domination of these older men was passing; a younger
generation, more aggressive in trade and speculation, was rising to
power; and that Philadelphia finally went with the Whigs was due to the
influence of these younger merchants. When it became clear that the
commercial interests of men like Robert Morris and George Clymer were
disadvantaged by the connection with England, the ardor of patriotism
grew stronger, and talk of independence became common. No sooner had
business come out for independence than culture swung over; the wit
which would gladly have remained loyal applauded the comments of the
countinghouse, and the newspaper essay reflected the new patriotic
sentiments.

Chief among the Philadelphia wits was Francis Hopkinson, Esq., a
charmingly versatile dilettante, who to the vocation of the law and the
bench of admiralty, joined the polite avocations of painting, music,
natural philosophy, and literature. He was indisputably clever, full of
innumerable sprightly enthusiasms, and master of cultivated speech and
manners. Of his skill in painting and music we cannot judge, but of his
literary accomplishments the record has been preserved. Life seems to
have been an agreeable experience to him, and if his dainty enthusiasms
were a marvel to John Adams,[283] it would indicate that society in
Philadelphia in 1775 was far more refined than in provincial Boston.

Hopkinson possessed ample means to gratify his polite tastes, and
had long moved in the most exclusive circles. The son of an eminent
lawyer, he had received the best education available in the colonies,
after which he went abroad to acquire old-world polish. Some fourteen
months were spent in England, where, as a near kinsman of the Bishop
of Worcester, he frequented the best English society, made the
acquaintance of eminent men, and even enjoyed the distinction of
dining with my Lord North. On his return he prudently fell in love
with an heiress of the Bordens, of Bordentown, and turned Jerseyman
the better to administer his wife’s estates. He entered the law, and
doubtless at the solicitation of his kinsman the Bishop, he became a
beneficiary of ministerial patronage: receiving appointment in 1772
to a sinecure post as collector of customs at Newcastle, and two
years later being made mandamus councilor for New Jersey--a somewhat
hazardous post, considering the nature of the office and the temper
of the people. Already in Massachusetts certain gentlemen had learned
that the compliment of royal recognition might cost too dear a price.
That Hopkinson should have been tendered such an appointment as late as
1774, shows that he was regarded by the ministry as good Tory material.

During the anxious months of 1774, when intelligent Americans were
trying to forecast the outcome of the growing radicalism of the
colonial temper, Hopkinson must have done some serious thinking; with
the result that when in September the Continental Congress assembled
in Philadelphia, he offered to the members as his contribution to the
discussion a clever little allegory wherein the whole question at issue
between England and the colonies was sketched with a light touch that
is an agreeable relief from the arguments of the official debaters. In
_A Pretty Story_ Hopkinson is frankly pro-colonial, and offers his wit
to the service of his country. It is not a great work, but it shows
that he had definitely put aside the ministerial temptation--probably
to the disgust of the good Bishop--and had gone over to the Whigs. Two
years later he took a seat in the Congress, and within a week voted
for the Declaration of Independence, aligning himself against the
conservative group led by his fellow townsman, John Dickinson.

What impelled Hopkinson to so momentous a shift in political
opinion can be explained by no records that have been preserved,
and must remain a matter of conjecture. Even less than Trumbull was
he revolutionary in temper. His Whiggery was probably commercial
in origin, a reflection of the economic interests of the merchant
class with which he mingled. That he went so far as to attack the
aristocratic spirit of the English government--its debauching of public
servants and its sordid motives--may have been due quite as much to a
refined integrity as to partisan advantage; but for an aristocrat to
attack the aristocratic principle of government was unusual as it was
dangerous for his class. But though he turned Whig he was no agrarian
to substitute the majority will for the royal prerogative; and when the
war was over and political re-alignment was under way, Hopkinson went
with his group, became a stout Federalist, defended the Constitution,
and enjoyed his share of the party emoluments. His wit was unembittered
by the acrimonious disputes of Jacobin days, and his partisanship
retained its note of casual sprightliness through the dogdays of the
nineties.

His chief contributions to the debate over the Constitution were _The
New Roof_ and _Objections to the Proposed Plan of a Federal Government
for the United States, on Genuine Principles_. They are delightfully
clever, but the cleverness cannot conceal a good-natured contempt for
the democratic underling and all his ways. The attitude of aristocratic
superiority is the more striking for its easy bearing. The first is
an implied eulogy of James Wilson, Scotch lawyer of Philadelphia, who
as master-architect finds his plans for erecting a splendid roof over
a “certain Mansion-house” violently opposed by Margery, a slattern
midwife, for no better reason than that “in the construction of the
new roof, her apartments would be considerably lessened.” Margery, of
course, is agrarian democracy, and to further her interests she incites
three worthless servants to testify that the old leaky roof is better
than the one proposed. Naturally their flimsy arguments are laughed out
of court, and the wisdom of the architect is apparent to all except a
“half-crazy fellow”[284] who filled the air with his “fustian,” making
himself a general nuisance to the disgust of all respectable people.

In the second of the two works, Hopkinson gives freer rein to his
polite fancy, figuring the opposition to the Constitution under the
form of a Wheelbarrow Society at the city gaol. Within those walled
precincts, he suggests, the most advanced advocates of natural liberty
may be found, and there the monstrous crime of the Constitution is
most eloquently exposed. How foolish is this America that persists in
believing what able lawyers and reputable gentlemen say of the merits
of the document, and refuses to intrust the making of a fundamental law
to such true liegemen of democracy as these knights of the chain-gang!
It is all very witty, and provokes its laugh, and serves its purpose
of heaping on the head of the opposition the class prejudice that was
indignant at the insolence of plebeians in holding contrary views on
a subject quite beyond their comprehension. But times change, and the
sprightliest wit may lose its savor. Those old Federalist skits are as
dead today as the marvelous pageant got up by Hopkinson to celebrate
the adoption of the Constitution, an affair which greatly pleased the
amiable little gentleman, a detailed account of which he prepared
for the definitive edition of his works, where it may be read by the
curious.

If Francis Hopkinson is no very important figure in our literary
history, he is not without significance as a representative of our
colonial culture that deliberately chose to be Whig rather than Tory.
He risked much and he was amply rewarded. For years he sat on the bench
of the Court of Admiralty, sparkled at dinners, and was a respected
and influential member of a genteel society. If the recompense for his
services during the perilous days was greater than fell to the lot of a
democrat like Philip Freneau, who will wonder? Like rewards like, and
the days of democratic rewards were not yet come in America.


II • The Tory Satirists


1. Jonathan Odell

Amongst the occasional writers who dedicated extemporized couplets
to the defense of Toryism in America, there can be no doubt to whom
belongs the primacy. Jonathan Odell was easily first as a purveyor of
virulent Loyalist rhyme. Of the sternest Puritan ancestry, Odell was
educated in medicine, and saw service in the West Indies as surgeon
to his Majesty’s forces. Turning Anglican he was ordained priest
in London, and came home to his native colonies as a missionary, to
further the cause of episcopacy. Busily engaged with parochial duties,
he chose to remain aloof from all political disputes, and during the
early months of the war he refrained from taking sides. Unfortunately,
however, he made acquaintances among some captive British officers,
for whom he wrote a song in honor of the King’s birthday, which was
sung with much drinking of wine on June 4, 1776, the news of which
getting abroad stirred the Whig partisans to anger. Soon thereafter
matters grew too warm for Odell to remain longer neutral; he suffered
certain humiliating personal experiences and was driven to seek refuge
within the British lines. Thenceforth none was more ardent in the royal
cause. He busied himself with innumerable intrigues to undermine the
Whig strength, amongst others serving as a go-between in the unlucky
André-Arnold affair. He remained implacable to the end, and not until
the last Redcoat was withdrawn from the independent states, did he
leave off urging reprisals. When it was all over he withdrew sullenly
to Nova Scotia, was amply rewarded by his King, and sat down to nourish
to the end of a long life the most virulent hatred of all Whigs and
republicans. “Toryissimus,” Professor Tyler calls him, borrowing Sir
Walter’s word; and the term hits to a nicety the bitter arrogant nature
which so closely resembled in its essentials the “proud prelate Laud,”
from whom his ancestors had fled a hundred and fifty years before.

A vigorous man was Jonathan Odell, strong, capable, uncompromising,
possessing a clear intellect and a heart little touched by Christian
charity--a stern Hebraist who would sweep away with the besom of wrath
all the enemies of his God and his King. He felt no hesitation in
making out the list of the proscribed: the enemies of the King were
_ipso facto_ the enemies of God--rebels who were daily signing their
own death warrants in overt acts of treason. Watching the seditious
crew of “Congress men” seducing the colonials into unnatural rebellion
against the best of kings and fathers, he took it to be his Christian
duty to lay the rod of correction upon their shoulders. If they would
not be warned they must be hanged. Not content with active intrigue, he
pressed his pen into service, and during the year 1779 he wrote four
pieces which for bitterness of satire outdid Freneau at his frankest.
Freneau was bitter and brutal in all conscience, but he was never
nasty; there were infamies of personal insult that he would not stoop
to, vulgarities of innuendo that he was not guilty of. If he studied
the art of Churchill, he stopped short of Churchill’s grossness. But
Odell the priest was unhampered by scruple; the meanest gossip found
a place in his “acrid rhyme.” No Christian charity spread its mantle
over the shortcomings of his enemies, no Christian forgiveness found
lodgment in his unforgiving heart. He was a son of the Old Testament
and he girded up his righteousness with prayer.

  Ask I too much? then grant me for a time
  Some deleterious pow’rs of acrid rhyme:
  Some ars’nic verse, to poison with the pen
  These rats, who nestle in the Lion’s den![285]

The four satires which embody his holy wrath and which were little
calculated to spread sweetness and light in a world sorely in need of
them, are _The Word of Congress_, _The Congratulation_, _The Feu de
Joie_, and _The American Times_--all written, probably, in the last
months of the year 1779. Of these the first and the last are the most
suggestive in their denunciation. The spirit which prompted him to turn
to satire is given in the preface to the 1780 edition of _The American
Times_.

  The masters of Reason have decided, that when doctrines and
  practices have been fairly examined, and proved to be contrary to
  Truth, and injurious to Society, then and not before may Ridicule
  be lawfully employed in the Service of Virtue. This is exactly
  the case of the grand American Rebellion; it has been weighed in
  the balance, and found wanting: able writers have exposed its
  principles, its conduct, and its final aim. Reason has done her
  part, and therefore this is the legitimate moment for Satire.
  Accordingly the following Piece is offered to the Public. What it
  is found to want of Genius, the Author cannot supply; what it may
  want of Correction, he hopes the candor of the Public will excuse
  on account of the fugitive nature of the subject: next year the
  publication would be too late; for in all probability there will
  then be no Congress existing.

When we examine the work of Odell to discover the deeper springs of his
thought, we come upon naked class prejudice, undiluted Toryism. His
social philosophy is erected upon that unstable foundation; the actions
of men are judged solely by that light. Of any valid or reasoned
philosophy, social or political, he was as wanting as a child. Of any
real understanding of his fellow Americans who had espoused the Whig
cause, he was as lacking as General Clinton, whose “warfare,” Odell
asserted, “was the war of God.” The colonial grievances which other
Tories acknowledged to have some foundation, Odell casually ignored.
There was no cause in heaven or earth for colonial disloyalty, he
was convinced, except Whiggish perversity, and for such perversity
there must be due punishment--the rope. In his mind’s eye he sees the
“impious crew,” one after another silenced by the halter. There must be
no ill-judged mercy; the best of the rebels must swing with the worst,
for they are all sedition-mongers, all attainted traitors. From his
vast ignorance Odell derived an equally vast confidence in the ultimate
triumph of truth. There is a note of finality in his judgments that
amazes, an infallibility that amuses. The Reverend Jonathan frankly
acknowledges himself to be the boon companion of Reason, the favored
suitor of Truth--from them only has he taken instruction and in their
name he professes to speak. Whereas the Whigs are poor fellows who have
held commerce with neither.

Odell is careful of his workmanship and organizes his materials with
an eye to climax. _The American Times_ is formally divided into three
parts. The poem opens with a summoning of the infernal crew of sedition
and the abuse of them severally, rising to a rhetorical conclusion in
an address to Washington; then the leering portrait of the mother of
all mischiefs. Democracy, is painted; finally comes a pure and lofty
strain which summons Reason to decide in the great cause. Taxation,
Independence, are haled before her august throne and there condemned,
and the whole concludes with a vision of Britannia’s guardian angel
bearing a two-edged sword and proclaiming:

  At length the day of Vengeance is at hand:
  The exterminating Angel takes his stand:
  Hear the last summons, rebels, and relent:
  Yet but a moment is there to repent.
  Lo! the great Searcher ready at the door,
  Who means decisively to purge the floor:
  Yes, the wise Sifter now prepares the fan
  To separate the meal from useless bran.
  Down to the centre from his burning ire
  Ye foes of goodness and of truth, retire:
  And ye, who now lie humbled in the dust,
  Shall raise your heads, ye loyal and ye just;
  Th’ approving sentence of your Sovereign gain,
  And shine refulgent as the starry train.
  Then, when eternal justice is appeas’d;
  When with due vengeance heav’n and earth are pleas’d;
  America, from dire pollution clear’d,
  Shall flourish yet again, belov’d, rever’d:
  In duty’s lap her growing sons be nurs’d,
  And her last days be happier than her first.[286]

Into this framework Odell has fitted a surprising number of personal
attacks. His ink blots out the good name of every Whig on whom it
drips. To the present generation it furnishes food for wonder to
see what a paltry appearance the fathers make in the verse of this
plain-speaking Tory. Jefferson, Paine, Morris, Adams, Washington, and
a host of others, are shallow creatures, in the judgment of Odell,
bereft of reason, void of honor, the very scum of the revolutionary
pot; whereas Clinton and Gage, Hutchinson and Galloway, are holy
instruments in the hand of God to cleanse the land of pollution. The
attack is rankly and grossly partisan, with no saving grace of humor or
humanity. The alpha and omega of Odell’s political faith was loyalty to
the crown, and the bankruptcy of such a creed in revolutionary America
is nowhere thrust into harsher relief than in the bitter verses of
this bitter heart. Empty Jonathan Odell of prejudice, class interest,
passion for the prerogative, with their corollary of praise for an
unmanly truckling to the King, and nothing remains, the empty sack
collapses. It was a hardship that he should have been driven out of his
native country upon the failure of the King’s cause, but what could
be done with a fellow who insisted that his empty sack was stuffed
with all the virtues? He was harshly intolerant in his Toryism, and he
encountered a victorious republican harshness.


2. Samuel Peters

It is amusing to turn from the implacable Odell to the mendacious
Peters, only to meet with another tale of abortive missionary zeal.
The Anglican clergy played a conspicuous part during the Revolutionary
troubles--a part that in many cases inspired small regard for the
establishment in the minds of a dissenting laity. Not in vain did
the church teach loyalty to authority, for while the British Empire
was breaking asunder, the Anglican ministers were visible pillars of
prerogative and with pen and voice lent effective aid to the royal
cause. Sometimes their ardor outran their intelligence, their devotion
betrayed their discretion; nevertheless their zeal contributed notably
to the number and quality of the Loyalist writings.

For some inconceivable reason Samuel Peters was seized with a desire
to plant the Anglican church in Congregational Connecticut--surely
the strangest of desires and the strangest of men to undertake such
a work. To uplift the banner of episcopacy in a commonwealth that
for over a hundred years had been militantly Separatist, that did
not want bishops and would not have them--here was missionary zeal
that a plain man understands with difficulty. To have made headway
at all there was need of apostolic fervor and an ingratiating tact;
and Samuel Peters possessed neither. He was a gentleman who preened
himself on his quality, exuding in speech and action a pride of caste
that led him to speak of the American farmers as peasants--the only
native Loyalist who thus aped the English. His abilities were far from
mean, but his better qualities were corroded by overweening conceit.
Possessed of all the arrogance of a lord and all the ostentation of a
brewer, he was scarcely the man to serve the Connecticut laity with
due Christian humility. He pointed out the truth authoritatively and
then took it as a personal affront if his hearers failed to agree with
him. And so, after explaining to the Congregationalists of Connecticut
the infallible truth of the Anglican way, and being ready to minister
to them according to that way, he fell into a pet when they refused to
turn churchmen. The more he argued the more he got himself disliked,
and when his tactless loyalism brought down the Sons of Liberty upon
him and he was driven to Boston--whence he sailed for England where he
survived for thirty-one years--he took a spirited revenge by writing
his _History of Connecticut_, a work that solaced the early years of
expatriation, and provided material for many an after argument.

It is an amazingly provocative book, over which the sons of Connecticut
have disputed acrimoniously for a hundred years without coming
to agreement. Fortunately those disputes are of far less concern
today than the political philosophy tucked away in the pages of the
_History_; the scandal is far less interesting than the shrewd comment
on the causes of the American Revolution. Samuel Peters was a high Tory
with the virtue of frankness, which defeat had made the more open. From
his secure refuge in England he looked back upon the revolutionary
upheaval, and his analysis of causes is the more suggestive from the
fact that he had nothing to gain from truckling to popular opinion. His
judgments are interesting even when he exaggerates. The colonial Tory
is no longer serving immediate partisan ends, but after the battle has
been fought and lost he takes a grim pleasure in pointing out to the
English government its costly blunders. Affairs went ill in America,
not because of too much Toryism on the part of government, but because
of too little and too late applied. The explanation of the origin
and spread of unrest in America, Peters regarded as very simple. The
tap-root of the disaffection was republicanism, which through the
criminal negligence of government was not severed in the days when the
plant was small, but which was suffered to grow till the tree could not
be pulled up or destroyed.

  It appears to me, that the British government, in the last century,
  did not expect New-England to remain under their authority; nor did
  the New-Englanders consider themselves as subjects, but allies,
  of Great Britain. It seems that England’s intent was to afford an
  asylum to the republicans who had been a scourge to the British
  constitution; and so, to encourage that restless party to emigrate,
  republican charters were granted, and privileges and promises given
  them far beyond what an Englishman in England is entitled to.
  The emigrants were empowered to make laws, in church and state,
  agreeable to their own will and pleasure, without the King’s
  approbation.[287]

  From the first they have uniformly declared, in church and state,
  that America is a new world, subject to the people residing in it;
  and that none but enemies to the country would appeal from their
  courts to the King in Council. They never have prayed for any
  earthly king by name. They always called themselves republicans
  and enemies to kingly government.... They hate the idea of a
  parliament.... They never have admitted one law of England to be
  in force among them, till passed by their assemblies.... They hold
  Jesus to be their only King, whom if they love and obey, they will
  not submit, because they have not submitted to the laws of the King
  of England.[288]

The natural fruits of this pernicious root of republicanism were the
colonial hostility to the monarchical and aristocratic elements of
the British constitution, together with all the domestic turbulence
and lawlessness which have marked the history of New England from the
first. If gentlemen wished an object lesson in republicanism, none
better than Connecticut could be had; there from the earliest days,
“republicanism, schisms, and persecutions,” have gone hand in hand;
and it was to make this clear to the world that Samuel Peters took the
trouble to write his _History_.

  In the course of this work, my readers must necessarily have
  observed, in some degree, the ill effects of the democratical
  constitution of Connecticut. I would wish them to imagine, for
  I feel myself unable adequately to describe, the confusion,
  turbulence, and convulsion, arising in a province, where not only
  every civil officer, from the Governor to the constable, but also
  every minister, is appointed as well as paid by the people, and
  faction and superstition are established. The clergy, lawyers, and
  merchants or traders, are the three efficient parties which guide
  the helm of government.... _En rabies vulgi_--I must beg leave to
  refer my readers to their own reflections upon such a system of
  government as I have here sketched out.[289]

That such a people would respect the King’s laws at a late day, when
those laws lessened their profits, was foolish to expect. There had
been much complaint from ministerial gentlemen in respect to colonial
smuggling; but how idle was it to complain of the natural consequences
of ministerial laxness chronic for a hundred years!

  Smuggling is rivetted in the constitutions and practice of the
  inhabitants of Connecticut ... and their province is a storehouse
  for the smugglers of the neighboring colonies. They conscientiously
  study to cheat the King of those duties, which, they say, God and
  nature never intended should be paid. From the governor down to
  the tithing-man, who are sworn to support the laws, they will aid
  smugglers, resist collectors, and mob informers.[290]

In contemplating these open and notorious facts, which every member of
government must have known, Samuel Peters came very near anger at the
gross stupidity of the ministerial policy. The way to have met these
difficulties was plain--the itch of democracy should have been cured
with the salve of aristocracy. The natural leaders in the several
colonies should have been taken care of by a judicious distribution of
titles of nobility.

  The people of New-England are rightly stiled republicans: but a
  distinction should be made between the learned and unlearned, the
  rich and poor. The latter form a great majority; the minority,
  therefore, are obliged to wear the livery of the majority, in
  order to secure their election into office. Those very republican
  gentlemen are ambitious, fond of the power of governing, and grudge
  no money nor pains to obtain an annual office. What would they not
  give for a dignity depending not on the fickle will of a multitude,
  but on the steady reason and generosity of a King?[291]

There was shrewd, unclerical wisdom in the comment of Samuel Peters.
If the gentlemen of England had founded their colonial policy on the
principle of sharing the emoluments of rank and power with ambitious
gentlemen in America, there might well have been quite another story
to tell. But because they begrudged the small rewards, because they
would have the shadow as well as the substance, they lost everything.
An outcome so untoward and so stupid hurt Samuel Peters to the quick;
but it was not his fault, and he doubtless found a crumb of malicious
satisfaction in pointing out the ministerial stupidity after the
mischief was done.


Footnotes

[283] See _Familiar Letters of John and Abigail Adams_, p. 217.

[284] “Philadelphiensis,” one of the anti-Federalist pamphleteers.

[285] _Loyalist Poetry_, p. 55.

[286] _Loyalist Poetry_, p. 36.

[287] _A General History of Connecticut_, Appendix, p. 374.

[288] _Ibid._, p. 290.

[289] _Ibid._, pp. 282-285.

[290] _Ibid._, p. 320.

[291] _Ibid._, p. 377.




Book Three: Liberalism and the Constitution • 1783-1800




Part One: The Agrarian Defeat • 1783-1787




