Chapter III • John Marshall • Last of the Virginia Federalists


Unlike John Taylor of Caroline, whose fame lies buried with his cause,
the reputation of John Marshall has taken on immense proportions with
the later triumph of his principles. There is abundant reason for the
veneration in which he has come to be held by present-day disciples of
Hamilton. More than any other man he saved the future for Federalism.
During the critical years of the Jeffersonian and Jacksonian assaults
upon the outworks of nationalism, he held the inner keep of the law,
and prepared for the larger victories that came long after he was in
his grave. His strategic judicial decisions served as a causeway over
which passed the eighteenth-century doctrine of the sovereignty of the
law, to unite with the new philosophy of capitalistic exploitation. The
turbid waters of frontier leveling and states-rights democracy washed
fiercely about him, but he went on quietly with his self-appointed
work. He was one man who would not bow his neck to the majority yoke,
would not worship the democratic Baal. He profoundly distrusted the
principle of confederation. Convinced that the “continental belt”
must be buckled tightly, he gave unstinted service to the cause of
consolidation. The imperative need of a sovereign political state
to curb the disintegrating forces of America was axiomatic in his
thinking. Looking upon all democratic aspirations as calculated to
destroy federal sovereignty, and convinced that the principle of
equalitarianism was a bow strung to wield against society, he stoutly
upheld the principle of minority rule as the only practical agency of
stable and orderly government. Holding such views it was a matter of
high and patriotic duty with Marshall to use his official position
to prevent the majority will from endangering interests which were
far more sacred in his eyes than any natural rights propagated in the
hothouse of French philosophy. He was the last of the old school of
Federalists and the first of the new.

That John Marshall should have come out of Virginia is perhaps the
most ironical fact in the political history of the Old Dominion. Quite
unrepresentative of the dominant planter group that had gone over
to Jefferson, bitterly hostile to the agrarian interests that spoke
through John Taylor, he was the leader of a small remnant of Virginians
who followed Washington through the fierce extremes of party conflict.
He was the last and ablest representative of that older middle-class
Virginia, given to speculation and intent on money-making, that was
being superseded by a cavalier Virginia concerned about quite other
things than financial interests. He belonged rather to Boston than to
Richmond. His intense prejudices were primarily property prejudices.
He was the Fisher Ames of the South, embodying every principle of
the dogmatic tie-wig school of New England Federalists. Profoundly
influenced by Hamilton and Robert Morris, he seems to have found the
Boston group more congenial in temper and outlook. The explanation
of his strong property-consciousness is to be discovered both in
his material ambitions and his professional interests. He was a
business man rather than a planter. He was heavily involved in land
speculation and held stock in numerous corporations launched to exploit
the resources of the state. Robert Morris, whose daughter married
Marshall’s younger brother, was his financial adviser and advanced
money with which to purchase the Fairfax estate, an investment that
cost the buyers the very considerable sum of fourteen thousand pounds
and numerous lawsuits. He was a director in banks and a legal adviser
in important cases involving property rights. His financial interests
overran state boundaries and his political principles followed easily
in their train, washing away all local and sectional loyalties.

Like his kinsman Jefferson, Marshall was bred on the Virginia
frontier, and to the end of his life he retained the easy and careless
democracy of dress and manners that marked his early environment. In
his deportment he was far removed from the prim respectability of
the Boston Federalists. A friendly, likable man, fond of pitching
horseshoes and sitting in a game of cards, he was outwardly a genial
member of the crude little Richmond world where politics and law and
speculation engrossed the common attention. An easy-going nature, he
was wholly wanting in intellectual interests. Strangely ill-read in the
law, he was even more ignorant of history and economics and political
theory. His mind took an early set, and hardened into rigidity during
the reactionary years that lay between Shays’s Rebellion and the
rise of Napoleon. Of social and humanitarian interests he was utterly
devoid. One might as well look for the sap of idealism in a last year’s
stump as in John Marshall. French romantic philosophy he regarded as
the mother of all vicious leveling. There is no indication that he
had ever heard of the Physiocratic school of economics, or had looked
into the writings of Rousseau or Godwin or Paine. The blind sides of
his mind were many; his intellectual contacts were few; yet what he
saw and understood he grasped firmly. The narrowness of his outlook
intensified the rigidity with which he held to his fixed opinions; and
his extraordinary courage coupled with a dominant personality clothed
his strategic position as Chief Justice with fateful influence on the
later institutional development of America.

Although Marshall’s later fame is the fame of a lawyer, he was in
reality a politician whom fate in the person of John Adams placed on
the Supreme Court bench at a critical moment, where his political
opinions translated themselves into the organic law of the land, and
shaped the constitution to special and particular ends. Masterful,
tenacious, manipulating his fellow judges like putty, he was a judicial
sovereign who for thirty-five years molded the plastic constitution
to such form as pleased him, and when he died the work was so
thoroughly done that later generations have not been able to undo
it. His political opinions, therefore, become a matter of very great
importance to the historian, for they help to explain the peculiar
direction taken by our constitutional development. Materials for a
just estimate of his remarkable career were long wanting, but with the
appearance of Beveridge’s able and explicit _Life of John Marshall_
it is now possible to view him in exact historical perspective.
Carefully documented, the work is a genial and readable interpretation
that will go far to revivify the fame of the great Federalist. And
yet in spite of its abundant documentation--drawn perhaps somewhat
overmuch from Federalist sources--it is essentially a _biographie à
thèse_ that is careful to magnify the nationalism of its hero and to
minify the property consciousness. It provides a picturesque setting,
but it is a bit careless in its evaluation of the rival philosophies
then struggling for supremacy. Concerning the economics of the great
contest between Federalism and Republicanism it offers very inadequate
information, with the result that Jefferson is reduced to the status
of a master politician set over against the constructive statesman. The
intellectual limitations of the lawyer have reacted in these pages upon
his political enemy. Certain of the old Federalist prejudices have come
to life again in these entertaining pages.

The two fixed conceptions which dominated Marshall throughout his long
career on the bench were the sovereignty of the federal state and the
sanctity of private property; and these found their justification in
the virulence of his hatred of democracy. No man in America was less
democratic in his political convictions. Underneath the free and easy
exterior of the Chief Justice was as stalwart a reactionary as ever
sat on the Supreme Court bench. He was utterly indifferent to popular
views, and he calmly overturned the electoral verdicts of his fellow
Americans with the deliberateness of a born autocrat. Not only were
his important decisions political opinions, but they were Federalist
opinions. America had made definite choice between the Federalist
and Republican theories of government. It had repudiated the rule of
“gentlemen of principle and property” and set up a very different
rule. But to this mandate of the supposedly sovereign people Marshall
declined to yield. Defeated at the polls, no longer in control of the
executive and legislative branches of the government, Federalism found
itself reintrenched in the prejudices of John Marshall. He boldly
threw down the gage to the majority will, and when the long fierce
struggle was over, he had effectively written into the fundamental law
of the land the major tenets of the repudiated philosophy. “Judicial
statesmanship,” Mr. Beveridge calls these political decisions, and bids
us admire statesmanship on the bench; yet the phrase runs so far as to
merge the judge in the politician--an honest but somewhat indiscreet
admission that the law may be twisted to partisan ends. The frankly
political nature of Marshall’s decisions was universally recognized at
the time, and this explains the intense partisanship they evoked, the
fury of the Republicans and the extravagant praise of the Federalists.
The so-called Jeffersonian assault on the judiciary, of which so much
has been made by the orthodox historians, and which came near to
wrecking the system, was not primarily an attack upon the courts but
upon political judges who used their places to serve party ends. It is
a dangerous thing for the bench to twist the law to partisan or class
purposes, yet to this very thing John Marshall was notoriously given.

As a judicial statesman, then, rather than a lawyer, Marshall is to
be judged, and to such a business the political historian is more
competent than the legalist. His important decisions fall into two main
groups: those like Marbury _vs._ Madison that assert the supremacy of
the judiciary over the legislature--that is, the power of the Supreme
Court to nullify an act of Congress; and those like the Yazoo Fraud
case and the Dartmouth College case, that assert the irrevocable nature
of contracts. The first was an official pronouncement of the principle
that Hamilton had elaborated in _The Federalist_, namely, that the
constitution is a law and as such lies within the field of judicial
interpretation. This was sound Federalist doctrine, and Marshall
welcomed the opportunity to engraft it upon the fundamental law of
the land, going far out of his way to bring it within the judicial
purview.[399] It was a bold and skillful move, and as Beveridge
remarks, it announced a principle that “is wholly and exclusively
American. It is America’s contribution to the science of the law”
(Beveridge, _Life of John Marshall_, p. 142). A contribution, it should
be added, which with the multiplying of republican constitutions in the
later nineteenth century was pretty generally rejected.

Even more partisanly Federalist were the decisions touching the nature
of contract. These reached to the heart of the bitter opposition
of the commercial and financial interests to the legislative acts
of populistic majorities. Suffering heavily from the post-war
confusions, those majorities had struck blindly at the profiteers whose
well-feathered nests were securely protected by the law. The revolt
was natural and human; a rough sense of social justice lay behind it;
but because it struck at the most prosperous and capable members of
society, who held the professional classes in retainer and dominated
the agencies of publicity, it aroused an extraordinarily vindictive
opposition. Dip into the literature of the seventeen-eighties and
nineties anywhere, in the _Anarchiad_ and the _Echo_ of the Hartford
Wits, or the private letters of indignant gentlemen, and the animus
of the respectable classes is clamorously revealed. At bottom it was
no other than this, that the law of business must be made the law of
the land, and that any populistic tampering with such law was wicked
and anarchistic. How determining was this spirit in the matter of
the Constitutional Convention is sufficiently well known. In the
new constitution certain practices of populistic majorities were
estopped--the emission of bills of credit and paper money, and laws
impairing the obligation of contracts; but such provisions, strictly
interpreted, did not reach to all cases. There were still gaps in the
law of business through which populistic majorities might force their
bills. To stop those gaps and complete the great work of rendering
business secure was the problem to which Marshall addressed himself;
and in the Yazoo Fraud case and the Dartmouth College case, he brought
the long Federalistic struggle to a triumphant issue.

An examination of the first of these two celebrated cases will suffice
to reveal the spirit of his judicial statesmanship. The state of
Georgia, through its Legislature, had contracted to sell thirty-five
million acres of land--the great part of the territory now comprising
the states of Alabama and Mississippi--to certain speculative companies
“at less than one and one-half cents an acre.” The passage of the bill
was marked by more than the usual jobbery, so common with a generation
fond of looting the public domain. The fraud was so gross that the
state of Georgia was thrown into a fury that visited itself upon the
corrupt legislators. A new legislature repealed the law and rescinded
the contract; but some of the land had already been resold to investors
in Boston and Philadelphia, who brought their claims before the Supreme
Court. The state of mind in which the chief justice heard the argument
is thus suggested by Beveridge: “Marshall was profoundly interested in
the stability of contractual obligations. The repudiation of these by
the legislature of Virginia had powerfully and permanently influenced
his views upon this subject. Also Marshall’s own title to part of the
Fairfax estate had more than once been in jeopardy. At that very moment
a suit affecting the title of his brother’s to certain Fairfax lands
was pending in Virginia courts” (Vol. III, p. 584). To suggest that a
nicer judicial honor would have inhibited Marshall from sitting in the
case is perhaps going too far if one accepts the principle of judicial
statesmanship. Certainly Marshall discovered none of the scruples that
must have troubled George Wythe. In awarding claims for compensation
to the investors he held that the act of the Georgia legislature was a
contract and as such was inviolable. The crux of the decision, however,
lay in the pronouncement that the courts cannot examine the motives
that induce legislators to enact a law, that the people are bound
by their agents and must suffer the penalties of choosing unwise or
corrupt agents. The upshot of the verdict, in plain language, was that
a legislative contract is sacred no matter how corruptly got. A curious
decision, surely, for one who professed to venerate the common law. A
Virginian of the type of John Randolph would never have reasoned thus
to a conclusion that laid open the public domain to the deals of clever
lobbyists and encouraged the betrayal of official stewardship. He would
scarcely have sacrificed the public interests to the law of business.

The bitter hostility which Marshall’s decisions aroused in his native
commonwealth reveals how far the Virginia of Jefferson had traveled
from the Federalism of the commercial North. The states-rights
philosophy and the philosophy of consolidation were at swords’ points;
the agrarian and capitalistic economies were engaged in a mortal
duel; that it should have been a Virginian who saved the day for the
Hamiltonians, erecting the old Federalism into the law of the land,
and conducting by his decisions straight to an augmented, consolidated
state, under the shadow of whose power the development of corporate
finance might go forward without agrarian let or hindrance, was a
bitter brew for the Jeffersonian planters to drink. As Marshall grew
old he drew farther away from his fellow Virginians. In his last years
he was perhaps the most reactionary man in America. “Should Jackson
be elected,” he wrote in 1828, “I shall look upon the government as
virtually dissolved” (Beveridge, Vol. IV, p. 463). His last hatreds
he divided between Old Hickory and the rising democratic movement. He
bitterly resisted the spread of manhood suffrage; he would make no
change even in the antiquated judicial system of Virginia; he would
have no overturning of anything established. A stubborn autocrat he
remained to the end, and there was a certain ironic fitness in his last
encounter with the executive power. The autocratic lawyer met his match
in the autocratic soldier who grimly remarked, “John Marshall has made
his decision, now let him enforce it.”

  Nearly a century has passed since these happenings [concludes
  Beveridge] and Marshall’s attitude now appears to have been that
  of cold reaction; but he was as honest as he was outspoken in his
  resistance to democratic reforms. He wanted good government, safe
  government. He was not in the least concerned in the rule of the
  people as such. Indeed, he believed that the more they directly
  controlled public affairs the worse the business of government
  would be conducted. He feared that sheer majorities would be
  unjust, intolerant, tyrannical, and he was certain that they would
  be untrustworthy and freakishly changeable. (Vol. IV, p. 507.)

A strong, resourceful, honest, capable man was John Marshall. In so far
there is pretty common agreement. Beyond this, comes in the sundering
blade of political theory. Concerning the wisdom of his judicial
statesmanship it is idle to expect Federalist and Democrat to agree.


Footnotes

[399] For an excellent discussion see Beveridge, _Life of John
Marshall_, Vol. III, Chap. III.




