Chapter II • Liberalism and Calvinism


The first stirrings of new life were felt within the church, the
repository of such learning as Harvard College disseminated through
the Massachusetts villages. For two hundred years the dogmas of Calvin
had lain as a heavy weight on the mind of New England. Revolutions
had taken place in English and continental theology, but New England
Calvinism had kept closely within the narrow confines of its creed,
annually turning over the exhausted soil and reaping an ever scantier
harvest. Since the days of Edwards there had been abundant speculation
and much exercise in syllogisms, but no scrutiny of major premises.
Such an examination was long overdue, with the romantic revolution
under way in France, and new theories of human nature and the relation
of man to society and the state, spreading widely. But unfortunately
the odium which New England conservatism quickly fastened upon the
French school frightened the orthodox. The stigma of atheism was put
upon every harmless bantling of the numerous French brood, and in the
terror of reaction the pulpit, following the lead of the reactionary
pew, aroused itself to cleanse the church of every innovation. English
Arianism, even worse things, it was discovered, had stolen into
Congregational pulpits during the relaxed period of the Revolution;
a dangerous spirit of liberalism had spread silently through the
tidewater churches, capturing the strongholds of Boston orthodoxy.

By the year 1800 it was high time for the old Congregationalism of
Jonathan Edwards to take counsel with itself. “Let us guard against
the insidious encroachments of _innovation_--that evil and beguiling
spirit which is now stalking to and fro in the earth, seeking whom
it may devour,” exclaimed Jedidiah Morse, the arch reactionary, in
the days when French ideas were knocking at the doors of New England.
And by innovation the doughty Jedidiah meant any idea that had been
stumbled on, new since the days of the great Edwards. To go back to the
pure Edwardean doctrine, to purge the church of incipient Arminianism
and Arianism and Socinianism--together with such other innovations as
might show their faces anywhere--became thenceforth the chief business
of the devout New England of 1800. To timid souls the ideas of their
grandfathers seemed far safer than the ideas of their fathers; and so
theology followed politics in turning its back upon the freer, more
generous world that beckoned.

Nevertheless French liberalism slowly won its victories. It needs
high walls to keep out ideas. Excluded from the drawing-rooms and
counting-houses, ostracized in society and politics, romantic
philosophy slipped quietly into Boston by the door of theology, and
took lodgings in the homes of the first families. To those who enjoy
the little ironies of history, the easy subjugation of respectable
Boston by that very Jacobinical heresy against which Boston was so
bitter is too amusing to be overlooked. Changing its name and arraying
itself in garments cut after the best Yankee fashion, the gospel
of Jean Jacques presently walked the streets of Boston and spoke
from its most respectable pulpits, under the guise of Unitarianism.
The heretical doctrines of the excellence of human nature and the
perfectibility of man were preached to Federalist congregations so
persuasively that instead of repudiating them and asserting the total
depravity of their neighbors, simple-minded merchants approved the
doctrines and cheerfully paid their pew-rent. It was a respectable
and bloodless revolution. Under its discreet disguise Unitarianism
accomplished for New England what Jeffersonianism had accomplished
for the South and West--the wide dissemination of eighteenth-century
French liberalism. It opened the New England mind to fresh ideas. Out
of Unitarianism was to come the intellectual renaissance, with its
transcendental philosophies and social reforms, its enlarged conception
of democracy and its Utopian dreams, which made New England count so
effectively in the developments of the half century.

The twenty-five years between 1790 and 1815 were the nascent period of
Unitarianism, when it was reëxamining the old Calvinist dogmas in the
light of the new liberalism, weighing the doctrines of election and
reprobation in the scale with the doctrines of God’s beneficence and
man’s excellence, and coming definitely to reject them as blasphemy
against God and defamation of human nature. And it was during these
critical years that the upholders of the traditional orthodoxy were
most actively concerned to provide a defense for the sacred dogmas
of their grandfathers. The liberal advance produced a conservative
reaction, and the lines of battle were sharply drawn. The capture of
Harvard College by the Unitarians in 1805, and the founding of Andover
Theological Seminary by the Calvinists in 1808, were dramatic events in
a long intellectual and legal struggle that aroused much bitterness and
bequeathed to the churches a rich legacy of unchristian animosities.
Good men on both sides--to recall a contemporary witticism--were quite
too ready “to fight for the glory of God as if the very devil were in
them.”

The traditional Calvinism defended itself with spirit, asserting so
vehemently that it was still a living faith, that the corpse was not
yet an authentic corpse, that it succeeded at least in postponing
its own burial. It was deeply entrenched in the inertia of custom,
but intellectually it was in really desperate straits. It was slowly
disintegrating from dry-rot with which both minister and theology were
stricken. With its major premises tacitly denied by Yankee experience,
it was unfortunate in being defended by as humorless and ungainly a
breed of theologians as ever quarreled over the loving-kindness of God.
Clinging to the defenses which Jonathan Edwards had erected against
the incursion of old-world ideas, it declaimed its dogmas and damned
the human race with tedious iteration. Over-threshed straw makes poor
fodder, and after a two-hour battle with potential infidelities, many a
good minister descended from his pulpit lamenting that his exhortations
had been wasted on “a sermon-proof, gospel-glutted generation.” Yet
he went faithfully back to his study to consume the day in argument
with a suppositious Arminian, and in spinning cobweb systems between
the worm-eaten rafters, quite oblivious to the common-sense world
without his walls. The difficulties in which those old Calvinists
found themselves very likely seemed tragic to them; but to later
generations, endowed with some saving grace of humor, the situation
was not without its spice. The good men were undeniably caught in
a distressing dilemma. They were laboring prodigiously both to sit
tight in the old dogma of determinism and yet wriggle out; to maintain
election and reprobation and yet insert somehow the thin edge of
personal responsibility; to prove to the satisfaction of the pew that
man is both bound and free. It was a hard necessity to be under, to
damn man by predestination, and “yet worry out enough freedom for him
to be decently damned on,” as a late critic has remarked;[440] to
send him to hell by divine decree, yet prove that he went of his own
accord. Yet they must do that impossible thing if they were to justify
their theology to common-sense congregations that were drifting into
indifference.

The whole thing was monstrously unreal and it resulted in hatching such
a brood of tenuous subtleties as we have difficulty in comprehending
today. Theological fame in Massachusetts came to be measured by the
skill with which the logician made out to stand on both sides of the
fence at the same time. Had it not been for Jonathan Edwards New
England Congregationalism would have drifted comfortably with the tide
of liberalism; but his uncompromising spirit held it anchored. This
masterly spinner of theological systems bequeathed to his successors an
unfinished work; but he had clearly envisaged the problem and suggested
a line of attack. In his great inquiry into the nature of will he had
hoped to provide an infallible means of reconciling the irreconcilable
by arguing that the will is dependent on desire. The natural man,
according to the Edwardean logic, is free to serve God as the highest
good if he desires, but he lacks the desire unless God reveals himself
as that highest good, and such revelation rests with God’s pleasure.
“Moral responsibility lies in the choice, not in the cause of the
choice.”[441] With this distinction suggested between natural and moral
freedom, Calvinistic speculation went on hopefully till it attained
its culminating triumph in Nathaniel Walker’s ingenious doctrine of
certainty with power to the contrary. Walker was a pupil of Timothy
Dwight’s, and one of the foundation professors of the new Yale Divinity
School, established to combat Unitarian heresies. A tremendous rattling
of the bones of the Connecticut churches followed his pronouncement
that man’s acts are not necessitated by a rigid law of cause and
effect, but that his choices are so connected with antecedent
conditions of soul and environment, that to God’s perception it is
certain what they will be, although he possesses full power of contrary
choice.[442]

As we contemplate those old theological abstractions, dead now as
Lot’s wife, the universe of our fathers shrinks to a petty compass,
not much larger than the snug little state of Connecticut, curiously
egocentric, curiously anthropomorphic. Obviously such grotesqueries
could not endure indefinitely. Presently there must appear the
common-sense housewife with her broom, and the dusty cobwebs would
disappear. English Arianism, emerging out of English Presbyterianism,
and long under suspicion of the New England fathers, first opened the
windows and let a little fresh air into the New England churches. But
back of Arianism was the total body of eighteenth-century rationalism,
with its theology rooted in new political and social philosophies,
and its doctrines derived from conceptions of God and man hostile to
Calvinistic determinism. There could be no reconciling them. Calvinism
must extirpate English rationalism or be disintegrated by it.

But rationalism refused to be extirpated. Here and there in
Massachusetts pulpits appeared a new order of preachers, young men
who had broken with the old dogmas and were plainly bitten with the
English distemper. Of these the most notable was Jonathan Mayhew, from
1747 to 1766 pastor of the West Church, and the freest-spoken minister
in Boston. Mayhew was a thoroughgoing liberal, not to say radical,
an intimate friend of Otis and John Adams, and chief clerical leader
of the opposition to the English ministry. He had broken through the
narrow parochialism of Boston; he corresponded with the intellectual
leaders of English dissent, and while still a young man was on the
highroad to Arianism. He seems to have been a brilliant fellow, bold
and frank in speech, with great and popular powers as a preacher, and
his early death alone prevented him from anticipating some of the work
of Channing.[443] A like fate abruptly terminated the work of another
able young man, Lemuel Briant, pastor of the Braintree church from
1745 to his death in 1753. Briant was John Adams’s pastor and, like
Mayhew, an Arian, with a ready wit that his adversaries must have
found disconcerting. “I have always tho’t,” he remarked apropos of
the familiar dilemma, “that so far as any Man is pure (let it be in a
greater or lesser Degree) he is not filthy.”[444] But the coming on of
the Revolutionary disputes and the disturbance of war put a stop to the
normal development of the movement; and the general reaction following
the treaty of peace gave encouragement to the Calvinistic reaction
and temporarily strengthened the Edwardean school. Nevertheless the
liberal doctrines of Mayhew and Briant, falling in with the French
philosophy, prepared the way for the conscious Unitarian revolt at the
end of the century.

That revolt was fundamentally ethical rather than theological, and
the name Unitarian, which the liberal movement accepted somewhat
reluctantly from its opponents, very inadequately describes its special
genius. The term derives from the middle eighteenth century, before
religious thought had come under the influence of the new social
philosophy; and it suggests a primary theological bias in a movement
that was far more significantly ethical and social. The early liberals,
forerunners of Unitarianism, were theologians given to probing in
rationalistic spirit, the mystery of the Godhood. Now, denial of the
Trinity has been common to all Unitarians, although individually they
might profess an Arian or a Socinian interpretation of the nature
and rôle of Jesus; but what is more important, they have been from
the first close Scripturists, disliking exact theological systems
and setting biblical authority above human. By the time the name had
come to be generally accepted--about the year 1815--it had already
lost much of its earlier significance, for emphasis had shifted from
the mystery of the Godhood to the problem of the relations existing
between the children and the Father. On the one hand supernaturalism
tended to disappear in morality, and on the other religion tended to
seek an authoritative basis in idealistic philosophy and justify itself
by intuitionism. “The soul,” argued Channing, in his exposition of a
later Unitarian theology, “is the spring of our knowledge of God.”
“Here is our primitive teacher and light.” “The only God, whom our
thoughts can rest on, and our hearts can cling to, is the God whose
image dwells in our own Souls” (_Works_, Vol. VI, Introductory Remarks,
p. 21). Unitarianism, in other words, reversed the thought process of
Calvinism. Instead of debasing man to a mean creature, subject to a
God of wrath, it professed to discover a loving Father in the human
heart of love. Here was a revolution indeed, a revolution in which
were the seeds of transcendentalism, of social Utopias, of pretty much
the entire intellectual awakening of New England. The old Calvinism
had no weapons to meet such an attack; the new creed lay outside its
realm of thought. What that creed finally came to be, under Channing’s
influence, is thus stated by a recent historian:

  Man is God’s child, made in His image and object of His love; his
  reason and conscience are divine witnesses to truth and light, and
  when governed by them he walks in the ways of God, safe in his
  Father’s love and care. The God in whom their opponents believed--a
  God of election and reprobation, capable of dooming an entire
  race because its ancestors disobeyed a God of arbitrary will and
  discriminating grace--seemed to them simply an immoral being and
  they frankly said so. (Fenn, _Religious History of New England,
  etc._, p. 125.)

In its noblest expression Unitarianism became essentially a humanistic
religion, rational, ethical, individual, yet with deep and warm
social sympathies. In Channing’s excellent phrase, it discovered the
apotheosis of religion in “the adoration of goodness.” It issued in
conduct because it developed character. The highest testimony to the
excellence of the faith is the noble company of men and women who
subscribed to its creed. And yet after all, Unitarianism was rather
an attitude of mind than a creed. It was the recovery of the original
principle of New England Separatism, lost during the long years of
orthodox conformity--the principle of the open mind and free inquiry.
Let each devout soul, each group of fellow believers, Unitarianism
announced, seek the truth where it may be found; let each give to it
such outward form as best reveals its divine nature; not seeking to
impose a particular interpretation upon others, but each taking upon
himself full responsibility for his spiritual welfare. Authority it
regarded as the prop of the weak; dogma, as the body of a faith that
is dead. As free souls, mature and self-reliant, the Unitarians would
be their own authority, would fashion their own creed. The Scriptures
lie open and the heedful eye will discover God’s revelation in their
pages. The deeper spirit of Unitarianism is not inadequately embodied
in the text, “Search the Scriptures, for they are they which testify
of me.” No abler or more devout Scripturists ever preached in America
than the Unitarian ministers, and if bolder souls like Theodore Parker
went further than others, if their free handling of old interpretations
gave offense to the timid, that fact provided no sanction to coerce or
stifle free inquiry. Toleration of differences, respect for devout free
thought--this return to the position of Roger Williams two centuries
before was the vital principle of Unitarianism. Like him, the Unitarian
was a seeker, open-minded and free. Others might be intolerant, others
might regard themselves as the sole custodians of truth, but not he.

But if the Unitarians who followed Channing were liberals in
religion, they were conservatives in well-nigh everything else.
Amongst the laity the adoration of goodness was sufficiently tempered
by Yankee thrift to keep it from interfering seriously with the
practical business of getting on in the world; and in consequence
the new faith gathered its supporters from amongst the prosperous
rather than the needy, from Federalists rather than Democrats. The
commercial dominated the intellectual and emotional in their prim
and somewhat cold congregations. “The Unitarians,” it was commonly
said, “were the cult of the arrived.” As successful men, these Boston
merchants and manufacturers did not believe that they were the sons
of Adam, children of iniquity. They thought better of themselves and
of God than Calvinism permitted them to think; “one who was born in
Boston,” the current jest put it, “had no need to be born again.”
Generous in all approved philanthropies these Unitarian laymen might
be, but emotionally religious they were temperamentally incapable of
being. Until the infusion of the rich sap of transcendentalism, that
gave it new life and brought it to bloom, Unitarianism was in grave
danger of dying at the root. But with the spread of the philosophy
of intuitionalism, the negative individualism of Unitarianism became
positive, broke with the respectable conservatism of commercial
congregations, and overflowed in a rich and generous faith. Authority,
dogma, creed, were swept away by this new faith in an indwelling
divinity, with its intuitive sanctions, and Unitarianism merged in the
larger movement of the renaissance.


II • William Ellery Channing

To the austerely spiritual Channing the guiding principle of
Unitarianism was identical with the spirit of primitive New England
separatism--the principle of freedom in religious matters, the
individual speaking his mind frankly, shepherd and flock feeding as
they would, without fear and without coercion. The soul is responsible
to itself and its own conscience; there are no orthodoxies and no
heterodoxies, but a duty is laid upon the individual to seek truth
with an open mind and be steadfast in its service. It was this spirit
of open-minded liberalism that led him along the path of unmilitant
individualism, seeking freedom only to the end of righteousness, and
counting righteousness the fine flower of freedom; desiring peace and
universal fellowship; loath to found a sect; yet driven by those who
denied freedom to themselves as well as others to become the champion
and leader of a great schism that sundered the traditional unity of
Congregationalism, and erected a new faith on the altars of the old.

Channing’s heritage was drawn from the deepest wells of New England
idealism; and filtered through his finely ethical mind it emerged pure
and limpid, the living waters of the new faith. His noble preëminence
was due to the simple spirituality of his nature. Intellectually,
he was neither great nor original. In scholarship he was distinctly
inferior to academic theologians like Andrews Norton and to omnivorous
students like Theodore Parker. Almost wholly introspective he was
influenced slowly by world-currents of thought, and such alien ideas
as found lodgment in his mind took on a native form and color from
his own convictions. Nevertheless though his meditations revolved
about the pole-star of his own experience, his theology cautiously
took shape under the pressure of two ideas that came to him from the
latter years of the eighteenth century--the ideas of God’s beneficence
and of man’s excellence. Once lodged in his mind, those ideas led to
quite revolutionary consequences, not only in their disintegrating
effect upon the Calvinistic dogmas in which he had been reared,
but in the generous romanticism which they bequeathed to Unitarian
theology. His intellectual development was late and halting, yet that
he liberated himself at all was remarkable considering the world that
bred him--Newport, frequented by wealthy planters and enriched by the
slave trade, Cambridge and Boston then in the stagnancy of Federalist
complacency. Of the same generation with Robert Treat Paine and Josiah
Quincy, only a few years older than Rufus Choate and Edward Everett,
as a boy sitting under the preaching of Samuel Hopkins--the rugged
expounder of the Hopkinsian doctrine of willing to be damned for the
glory of God, a doctrine so repugnant to the major tenets of Channing’s
theology--he belonged by temperament and training to the parochial
world that accounted Fisher Ames a great orator, and looked with
suspicion on the new century that was crowding in on its comfortable
preserves.

From the deep New England ruts Channing pulled himself with incredible
difficulty. His frequent reactions almost kept pace with his progress.
For years he oscillated between freedom and dogma, now dominated by
the Hopkinsian influence and thrown back upon a morbid Calvinism by
ill health; then resolutely casting off the evil spell; until the year
1815, when the conservative wing declaring war upon the liberals,
he was drawn into the controversy and took upon himself the burden
of defending the liberal cause. He was then thirty-five, but it was
not till four years later, in the celebrated Baltimore sermon at the
ordination of Jared Sparks, that he offered a definitive statement
of the new theology. The sermon brought him wide fame and fastened
upon him the leadership of the Unitarian movement. Comment upon the
new doctrines was widespread, and the circulation of the sermon in
pamphlet form, according to a late biographer, “was not exceeded by any
American publication until in 1830 Webster made his memorable reply
to Hayne” (John White Chadwick, _William Ellery Channing_, p. 147).
The creative influence of that sermon in clarifying certain doctrines
of Unitarianism and integrating the society should not blind us to
the fact that it embodies only a portion of Channing’s theology--the
idea of God’s beneficence. It is a reasoned attack upon Trinitarian
Calvinism, upon those dogmas which reveal--in Channing’s expressive
phrase--“how mournfully the human mind may misrepresent the Deity”; but
it takes no account of the idea which later he came to place first--the
idea of man’s excellence.

Finer than the Baltimore sermon in its restrained eloquence--an
eloquence that burns with an intensity rare in Channing--and in its
dramatic exposition of the doctrine of the atonement, is the sermon
entitled _Unitarian Christianity most Favourable to Piety_, delivered
in 1826 at the dedication of the second Unitarian church in New York
City. In this sermon Channing made use of a daring comparison which
startled his friends and gave mortal offense to orthodox Calvinists. It
is probably the most dramatic passage to be found in his writings, and
it so well exemplifies the temper of the controversy that it deserves
quotation. After discussing the Edwardean philosophy of infinite
punishment and the nature of atonement, he proceeded:

  Let me, then, set it before you, in new terms, and by a new
  illustration; and if in so doing, I may wound the feelings of some
  who hear me, I beg them to believe, that I do it with pain, and
  from no impulse but a desire to serve the cause of truth.--Suppose,
  then, that a teacher should come among you, and should tell
  you, that the Creator, in order to pardon his own children, had
  erected a gallows in the centre of the universe, and had publicly
  executed upon it, in room of the offenders, an Infinite Being, the
  partaker of his own Supreme Divinity; suppose him to declare, that
  this execution was appointed, as a most conspicuous and terrible
  manifestation of God’s justice, and of the infinite woe denounced
  by his law; and suppose him to add, that all beings in heaven and
  earth are required to fix their eyes on this fearful sight, as the
  most powerful enforcement of obedience and virtue. Would you not
  tell him, that he calumniated his Maker? Would you not say to him,
  that this central gallows threw gloom over the universe; that the
  spirit of a government, whose very acts of pardon were written in
  such blood, was terror, not paternal love; and that the obedience
  which needed to be upheld by this horrid spectacle, was nothing
  worth? Would you not say to him, that even you, in this infancy and
  imperfection of your being, were capable of being wrought upon by
  nobler motives, and of hating sin through more generous views; and
  that much more the angels, those pure flames of love, need not the
  gallows and an executed God to confirm their loyalty? You would all
  so feel, at such teaching as I have supposed; and yet how does this
  differ from the popular doctrine of atonement? (_Works_, Vol. III,
  pp. 197-198.)

In seeking an explanation of Channing’s break with New England
orthodoxy--a breach that widened greatly with years, coming to embrace
politics and economics as well as theology, alienating many of his
own congregation and bringing acute grief to him--one can scarcely
over-emphasize the influence of his Virginia experience. During
the twenty-one months that he spent on the southern plantation,
painfully isolated and lonely, he grappled seriously with a body of
thought from which the environment of his youth had pretty much shut
him away. Virginia in 1798 was ardently Jeffersonian, and French
romantic philosophy was a commonplace in Virginia libraries. While
Channing never went over wholly to Jeffersonianism, but retained
certain Federalist prejudices after the old foundations had turned to
quicksand under his feet, he there began a long process of speculative
brooding that was to carry him far from the political principles of
Boston. French revolutionary thought provided his chief intellectual
stimulus during the critical Virginia period. Rousseau he read with
profound interest, together with Godwin’s _Political Justice_ and Mary
Wollstonecraft’s _Rights of Woman_. The Physiocratic economics that
sanctioned the agrarian bias of Jeffersonian democracy seems to have
made no appeal to a mind primarily ethical in outlook, yet he went so
far as to dabble in communistic theory, and for a time contemplated
joining a communistic community. From France, moreover, he derived
the idea of the excellence of human nature and the perfectibility
of man, ideas which became the mainspring of his later thinking,
creatively determining both his theology and his social philosophy, and
transforming his whole intellectual world.

In July, 1800, eight months before it took formal possession of the
White House, “French infidel philosophy” made its appearance in New
England in the person of a slight, health-broken youth, who returned
to his quiet theological studies, quite unmindful of the gunpowder he
had brought back in his intellectual luggage. It was long before a
spark was to strike home, but the powder was there and would do its
work eventually. In passing through Channing’s mind, the contributions
of French romanticism merged with the native heritage of New England
idealism, and supplemented by contributions from English Arian thought,
slowly assumed definite form that came to issue in three dominating
ideas, namely: God is love, man is potentially noble, religion is an
excellent life. Enveloping these master ideas, in which they were
carried as in a medium, was a pervasive ethical spirit that colored
all his thinking and eventually took form in that striking phrase into
which all of Channing is compressed, “the adoration of goodness--this
is religion.” This constituted his reply to the Edwardean theology that
debased man to the sole end of exalting a monstrous God--the doctrine
of “sweetness and light” was set over against the dogmas of reprobation
and election.

With his profound sense of justice, Channing could not follow “the
adoration of goodness” into an aloof and mystical pietism. The
temptation was strong, for his finely aristocratic and hesitant nature
prompted him to stand apart from all turmoil and partisan struggle.
He disliked controversy and distrusted all dogmatists. The world of
economics and politics was exceedingly distasteful to him; he would
gladly stop his ears against the clamor of organized groups and
strident parties. The Abolitionists, with whose purpose he deeply
sympathized, seemed to him intolerant and their tactics vulgar. There
is a measure of justice in Garrison’s comment after Channing’s death:
“His nerves were delicately strung. The sound of a ram’s horn was
painfully distressing to him. He was firmly persuaded that nothing but
a silver trumpet was needed to cause the walls of Jericho to fall; and
he did his best upon his own.”[445] And yet, however unwillingly, he
was drawn inevitably into an agitation that touched both his religion
and his humanity; and between 1835 and 1837 he issued three notable
contributions to the controversy: _Slavery_, a reply to the Southern
apologists; _The Abolitionists_, an open letter to James Birney, whose
Abolition press had been wrecked by an Ohio mob; and a noble appeal
to Henry Clay against the annexation of Texas. In the latter year he
spoke in Faneuil Hall at a turbulent meeting called to protest against
the murder of Lovejoy, the meeting at which Wendell Phillips made his
dramatic first appearance on the Abolition platform.

The point of view from which Channing approached the problem of
slavery is clearly set forth in his _Introductory Remarks_, written in
1841 for a collected edition of his works, and which constitutes his
_apologia pro vita sua_.[446] In this extraordinarily lucid and just
statement he reduces the master passions of his life to two--respect
for human nature, and reverence for human liberty--passions which were
inseparable in all his thinking. Of the first he says, “The following
writings will be found to be distinguished by nothing more than by
the high estimate which they express of human nature. A respect for
the human soul breathes through them.” This attitude he elaborates at
length:

  An enlightened, disinterested human being, morally strong, and
  exerting a wide influence by the power of virtue, is the clearest
  reflection of the divine splendour on earth.... The glory of the
  Maker lies in his work.... Those men glorify God most, who look
  with keen eye and loving heart on his works, who catch in all some
  glimpses of beauty and power, who have a spiritual sense for good
  in its dimmest manifestations, and who can so interpret the world,
  that it becomes a bright witness to the Divinity.

  I have also felt and continually insisted, that a new reverence for
  man was essential to the cause of social reform.... There can be no
  spirit of brotherhood, no true peace, any farther than men come to
  understand their affinity with and relation to God and the infinite
  purpose for which he gave them life. As yet these ideas are treated
  as a kind of spiritual romance.... The reception of this plainest
  truth of Christianity would revolutionize society, and create
  relations among men not dreamed of at the present day.... Men would
  know the import of the word Brother, as yet nothing but a word to
  multitudes. None of us can conceive the change of manners, the
  new courtesy and sweetness, the mutual kindness, deference and
  sympathy, the life and efforts for social melioration, which are
  to spring up, in proportion as man shall penetrate beneath the body
  to the spirit, and shall learn what the lowest human being is.

Out of this reverence for human nature flowed his “reverence for
Liberty, for human rights; a sentiment which has grown with my growth,
which is striking deeper root in my age, which seems to me a chief
element of true love for mankind, and which alone fits a man for
intercourse with his fellow-creatures.”

  It is because I have learned the essential equality of men before
  the common Father, that I cannot endure to see one man establishing
  his arbitrary will over another by fraud, or force, or wealth,
  or rank, or superstitious claims. It is because the human being
  has moral powers, because he carries a law in his own breast
  and was made to govern himself, that I cannot endure to see him
  taken out of his own hands and fashioned into a tool by another’s
  avarice or pride. It is because I see in him a great nature, the
  divine image, and vast capacities, that I demand for him means of
  self-development, spheres for free action--that I call society not
  to fetter, but to aid his growth.

In such humanitarian idealism did French romantic philosophy come to
flower in the generous mind of this son of New England. He was no
longer narrowly Unitarian; he had become a social revolutionary with
Utopian dreams. The minister’s wealthy parishioners might worship the
common Father complacently under the shadow of slavery, black or white,
but the minister could not; he had caught a glimpse of the Promised
Land and would lead his flock towards it. Unhappily, the vast abyss
of negro slavery lay between, and Channing considered it with growing
concern. In his examination of the problem he was broadly philosophical
rather than narrowly partisan. He rested his case against slavery on an
ethical adaptation of the natural-rights theory.[447] Since man is both
rational and moral, he argued, he cannot be deprived by law or custom
of the essential prerogatives of personality. The inalienable rights
of man are in essence no other than the rights of personality--the
right to exercise his reason, to seek light of his conscience, to enjoy
the fruits of his labor, to enter into domestic relations, in short
to be free to live as a man in a state of civilization. To treat man
as property is the grossest denial and violation of that which by its
nature is inviolable and inalienable. Channing pushed his argument
further and asserted that the institution of slavery was not only
irrational and immoral, but a fundamental denial of democracy. It must
end in perverting the political state to its own evil. The southern
conception of a Greek democracy resting on black slavery he looked upon
as the final prostitution of the democratic ideal. “Those who tell us
that slavery is a necessary condition of a republic, do not justify the
former, but pronounce a sentence of reprobation on the latter.” For
those text-mongerers who professed to justify slavery by Scripture, he
had only scorn. By such methods polygamy might as readily be justified.

Inquiry into the nature and scope of individual rights brought Channing
face to face with the problem of the political state and the duties
of citizenship. Here his break with Boston Federalism was final and
complete. He judged men and institutions by ethical standards; State
Street judged them by economic standards. By his own path he went back
to the eighteenth century, and interpreting the functions and province
of government in the light of Godwin’s _Political Justice_, he arrived
at the conception of a constantly diminishing political state that
should eventually disappear. The dogma of political sovereignty he
denied: “The state is equally restrained with individuals by the Moral
Law” (“Slavery,” in _Works_, Vol. II, p. 37). The expediency of some
restraint upon individual action he accepted, but with the proviso
that it be exercised only to the end of the common well-being. “The
authority of the state to impose laws on its members I cheerfully
allow; but this has limits, which are found to be more and more narrow
in proportion to the progress of moral science” (_ibid._, p. 38). “That
government is most perfect, in which Policy is most entirely subjected
to Justice, or in which the supreme and constant aim is to secure the
rights of every human being” (_ibid._, p. 38). To such a government
loyalty will be given gladly; but in the event that expediency should
prevail over justice, and the state should prostitute its power by
exploiting one class for the benefit of another, then must loyalty be
transferred from the state to the higher law. “Justice is a greater
good than property, not greater in degree, but in kind.” “The good
of the individual is more important than the outward prosperity of
the State” (_ibid._, pp. 40, 44). In such doctrines Channing paid his
respects to the political philosophy of Webster.

The final outcome of his political thinking was a close approximation
to the position of Jefferson. His distrust of power grew more
apprehensive as he reflected on the common abuse of power, and the
cheap and paltry appeals by which the unthinking are swayed. Before
the organized power of the mass, the individual is helpless. In the
_Introductory Remarks_ he went further than he had done in earlier
writings in analysis of the state, and such a passage as this might
have been penned by John Taylor of Caroline County. It is pure
Jeffersonianism.

  So fearful is the principle of which I have spoken, that I
  have thought it right to recommend restrictions on power and
  a simplicity in government beyond what most approve. Power, I
  apprehend, should not be suffered to run into great masses. No more
  of it should be confided to rulers than is absolutely necessary
  to repress crime and preserve public order. A purer age may
  warrant larger trusts; but the less of government now the better,
  if society be kept in peace. There should exist, if possible, no
  office to madden ambition.... One of the tremendous evils of the
  world, is the monstrous accumulation of power in a few hands....
  Is any man pure enough to be trusted with it? Ought such a prize
  as this to be held out to ambition? Can we wonder at the shameless
  profligacy, intrigue, and the base sacrifices of public interests
  by which it is sought, and, when gained, held fast? Undoubtedly,
  great social changes are required to heal this evil, to diminish
  this accumulation of power. National spirit, which is virtual
  hostility to all countries but our own, must yield to a growing
  humanity, to a new knowledge of the spirit of Christ. Another
  important step is, a better comprehension by communities that
  government is at best a rude machinery, which can accomplish but
  very limited good, and which, when strained to accomplish what
  individuals should do for themselves, is sure to be perverted by
  selfishness to narrow purposes, or to defeat through ignorance its
  own ends. Man is too ignorant to govern much, to form vast plans
  for states and empires. Human policy has almost always been in
  conflict with the great laws of social well-being, and the less we
  rely on it the better. The less of power given to man over man the
  better. (_Works_, Vol. VI, pp. 26-27.)

Channing had evidently read his _Political Justice_ to good effect,
for the spirit of eighteenth-century liberalism had passed into his
thought and given shape to his political philosophy. In his hatred of
war, his pacifism, his humanitarian concern, his social-mindedness,
his repudiation of all coercive centralizing power, he proved himself
a child of Godwin. He would have no tyranny, whether by the organized
state or by the unorganized mass. He extended to all men the right
of free thought and free speech. In no other cause did he speak
more vehemently than in defense of this democratic right. When the
Abolitionists were mobbed and their presses broken he rejoiced in their
refusal to be silenced. “From my heart I thank them,” he wrote. “I am
myself their debtor. I am not sure, that I should this moment write in
safety, had they shrunk from the conflict, had they shut their lips,
imposed silence on their presses, and hid themselves before their
ferocious assailants.... I thank the Abolitionists, that in this evil
day, they were true to the rights which the multitude were ready to
betray.” Then follows a passage that is perennially true, considering
how hardly won and easily lost is the right of free speech:

  Of all powers, the last to be entrusted to the multitude of men,
  is that of determining what questions shall be discussed. The
  greatest truths are often the most unpopular and exasperating; and
  were they to be denied discussion, till the many should be ready to
  accept them, they would never establish themselves in the general
  mind. The progress of society depends on nothing more, than on the
  exposure of time-honored abuses, which cannot be touched without
  offending multitudes, than on the promulgation of principles,
  which are in advance of public sentiment and practice, and which
  are constantly at war with the habits, prejudices, and immediate
  interests of large classes of the community. Of consequence, the
  multitude, if once allowed to dictate or proscribe subjects of
  discussion, would strike society with spiritual blindness, and
  death. The world is to be carried forward by truth, which at first
  offends, which wins its way by degrees, which the many hate and
  would rejoice to crush. The right of free discussion is therefore
  to be guarded by the friends of mankind, with peculiar jealousy.
  It is at once the most sacred, and the most endangered of all our
  rights. He who would rob his neighbor of it, should have a mark
  set on him as the worst enemy of freedom. (“The Abolitionists,” in
  _Works_, Vol. II, p. 161.)

High-minded and generous was this child of Puritan idealism who had
gone to school to French infidel philosophy--never untrue to the
principle of free inquiry which in demanding for himself he willingly
granted others. He calmly accepted the fact of disintegration which
is implicit in all liberalism--the denial of traditional authority
and ancient custom--partly because he believed the old ways were
bad, but in part also because he held strongly to his faith in human
nature. Despite failure and discouragement he clung to his cardinal
belief--“My one sublime idea, which has given me unity of mind, the
greatness, the divinity of the soul.” He broke the more willingly with
an ungenerous past because he envisaged a nobler future. An intuitive
individualist, he was a forerunner of transcendental individualism,
and he found himself in hearty accord with Emerson’s doctrines in
the Divinity School address. With the later rationalistic phase of
Unitarianism which began with Theodore Parker’s memorable South
Boston sermon _On the Transient and Permanent in Christianity_, in
May, 1841, he found himself only partly in intellectual sympathy.
He remained a supernaturalist after the younger generation had
rejected supernaturalism; but his sturdy adherence to the principle
of liberalism would not suffer him to join in the Unitarian hue and
cry raised against the young radical. Unitarianism turned orthodox,
and bent on erecting new dogmas, seemed to him treasonable to every
liberal hope. “As to Mr. Parker,” he wrote, “I wish him to preach what
he thoroughly believes and feels. I trust the account you received
of attempts to _put him down_ was in the main a fiction. Let the
full heart pour itself forth!” (John White Chadwick, _William Ellery
Channing_, p. 357.) Sixteen months after he penned those words Channing
was dead, but the spirit of his life was embodied in the great ferment
that was rising about him when he died. “Let the full heart pour itself
forth”--to many sober Bostonians it seemed that New England had taken
that injunction quite too literally and was pouring forth disturbant
and gusty heresies, but Channing would scarcely have disapproved.


Footnotes

[440] See Fenn, _Religious History of New England: King’s Chapel
Lectures_, p. 130.

[441] See Williston Walker, _A History of the Congregational Churches
in the United States_, p. 283.

[442] _Ibid._, p. 356.

[443] _Ibid._, pp. 276-277.

[444] _Ibid._, p. 272.

[445] Compare a fuller estimate in Garrison, _William Lloyd Garrison_,
Vol. III, pp. 239-242.

[446] In the Glasgow edition of 1844 it prefaces the sixth volume.

[447] For a brief discussion, see Merriam, _American Political
Theories_, pp. 217-221.




