Chapter I • Imperial Sovereignty and Home Rule


I • Background Facts

The American Revolution remains after a hundred and fifty years
somewhat of a puzzle to historians. Much careful investigation has
been done in the last two decades, but we still know too little to
speak confidently or with a sense of finality. The appeal to arms would
seem to have been brought about by a minority of the American people,
directed by a small group of skillful leaders, who like Indian scouts,
covered their tracks so cleverly that only the keenest trailers can
now follow their course and understand their strategy. On the other
hand, the philosophy of revolution is familiar to us. Revolutions
are born of an abnormal state of mind, sensitized by an accumulated
body of experience. They are psychological explosions, resulting from
irritations commonly economic in origin, and they are conditioned in
their programs by the stock of knowledge and aspiration peculiar to
their time and place. Two determining facts, then, would seem to lie
at the root of the American Revolution: the American psychology which
shaped the colonial outlook, and the peculiar situation of the British
Empire at the close of the French and Indian war.[193]

In old age John Adams “hazarded an opinion, that the true history of
the American revolution could not be recovered,” for “the revolution
was effected before the war commenced. The revolution was in the
minds and hearts of the people.”[194] Accepting Adams’s thesis of a
change in American psychology, we may hazard a further opinion that
the revolution resulted from the emergence in the two countries of
divergent interpretations of the theory and practice of sovereignty,
which may be sufficiently distinguished by the terms local home rule
and imperial centralization. In the beginning it was a clash of
jurisdiction between colonial self-government and absentee paternalism;
but later it developed into an open challenge of the monarchical
principle. A popular will to self-rule had long been developing in
America, and when the outbreak of hostilities clarified its latent
objective, it speedily asserted a conscious republican purpose. To
many of the early supporters of the colonial protest, this republican
outcome was unforeseen and deeply regretted; but it was implicit in
the whole history of colonial development, and must ultimately stand
sharply revealed, once its aspirations were balked.

If the crisis was precipitated almost casually by the program of
parliamentary regulation, the long drift towards alienation was far
from casual. An American mind had been created by the silent pressure
of environment. A large measure of economic freedom had developed
an American liberalism, frankly and vigorously individualistic. It
was not consciously democratic, or even republican. There were few
avowed democrats in the stolid mass of colonial provincialism; a busy
and commonplace routine offered little opportunity for revolutionary
appeal to a people grown lethargic from economic abundance. Of social
unrest, the common fuel of revolutionary fires, there was practically
none; and but for a blundering ministerial imperialism that challenged
this nascent liberalism, throwing over it the mantle of patriotism,
the colonies would have written a very different history. Once the
crisis was precipitated, however, and it became clear that imperial
centralization was encroaching upon local rights, the liberal impulses
in the background of the American mind assumed a militant form and
purpose.

The existence of this native liberalism had been stupidly overlooked
and ignored by responsible statesmen. With the exception of Franklin,
colonial spokesmen were commonly members of the aristocratic group,
among whom the Tory philosophy was spreading fast. Gentlemen in Boston,
New York, Philadelphia, and Charleston fashioned their manners upon
the polite world of St. James’s and caught the Tory ways in politics
as naturally as the London style in wigs. They associated with the
royal officials, traveled in England, corresponded with members of
Parliament. advised in all matters of colonial policy, and proved
themselves the most shortsighted of counselors. Upon their heads rest
in part the blunders of the ministry. In failing to understand the
native liberalism of America, they not only shared responsibility for
an unwise policy, but they hastened their own destruction. Samuel Adams
could not have played so effectively upon the popular prejudices if
the Hutchinsons and Olivers had not brought the Tory ways into wide
disrepute by their arrogance.

Colonial liberalism, on the other hand, was not so simple and
homogeneous as we long believed. It was rather a somewhat vague
composite of the aspirations of three diverse geographical areas, with
different economic interests, social ways, and political ideals. The
middle and northern coast region, with its mercantile cities, was a
distinct area; the tidewater region from Maryland to Georgia, with its
plantation economy, constituted another; and the indefinite backcountry
beyond the older settlements, stretching from Maine southward along
the Alleghany watershed, constituted a third. The first was dominated
by a merchant group--wholesale importers and exporters--wealthy and
conservative, but with a great majority of the population--small
tradesmen, mechanics and yeomen--far more democratic than the
leaders. The second was controlled by the aristocratic planters,
whose leadership during the crises of the dispute with England was
rejected by an economically strong but socially inferior body of
factors or alien middlemen. The third was composed of thousands of
small freeholders, largely Scotch-Irish and German, who acknowledged
no leadership, were unconsciously democratic in their ways, suspicious
of the seacoast aristocracy, wedded to an agrarian philosophy. The
merchant group was liberal only to the extent that liberalism meant
profit: their commercial relations with England constituted them
the closest tie between the two countries, and their timid love
of established ways made them naturally conservative rather than
revolutionary. The planter group possessed the traditional independence
of English gentlemen: they would tolerate no outside dictation in
matters concerning their own parishes, and their burdensome debts to
English merchants cooled the ardor of their loyalty to Great Britain.
The frontier agrarians, on the other hand, were pronounced liberals by
environment and training to whom English ties were at the strongest
only sentimental. They were republican in temper, and becoming class
conscious during the ten years of debate, they grew rapidly in power
and finally turned America against England. A recent historian has thus
characterized the change of temper which brought these agrarians to the
front as the fighting strength of the republicans:

  A new class, formed within a decade, growing rapidly in numbers,
  was rising to power. In Pennsylvania, as in a number of other
  colonies, it consisted of small farmers in the back country,
  Scotch-Irish and German immigrants, reënforced by the voteless
  laborers and artisans of Philadelphia or other seaboard cities....
  For over a decade this rising democracy had struggled for power
  against the little seaboard aristocracy of wealth and accepted
  social leadership.... The colonial masses could no longer be
  controlled by reverence for the high-born. The Quaker merchants of
  Philadelphia, the holders of manors on the Hudson, the tobacco and
  rice planters of Virginia and South Carolina, and even the great
  merchants, clergy, and professional men of New England, could no
  longer rule without question their social inferiors.... Thus, in
  1774, came the climax in the struggle between rich and poor, East
  and West, those with a vote and those who were voteless, between
  privilege and the welfare of the common man. The two classes might
  work in harmony or might clash on the question of resistance to
  Great Britain, but they were pretty sure to be in opposition on
  the issue of individual rights. A merchant ... might welcome the
  support of the mechanics and small shopkeepers against a grievous
  tax by the British Government, but the price, a right to vote and
  to hold office, he was sure to resent, and he grew more and more
  alarmed as the pressure became more insistent.[195]

From the imperial point of view there were the soundest reasons why,
following the Treaty of Paris in 1763, Parliament should have desired
to set about reorganizing the far-spread British Empire. Within a
few years vast territories had been added to the crown, and if the
scattered parts were to be gathered into a cohesive and powerful whole
there was need of a definite policy of coördination and integration.
The American colonies were only a small part of the total empire, and
it was generally agreed among English statesmen that the old policy of
“salutary neglect” could no longer serve imperial interests. If the
Whig imperialists under the leadership of Pitt had been put in charge
of imperial reconstruction, the outcome very likely would have been
peaceful. But unfortunately for the empire the colonial problem became
embroiled with English domestic politics. The purpose of the King was
to set up a personal autocracy with Tory help, overthrow the rule of
the Whig families, eliminate from the ministry the more intelligent
Old Whig leaders--Pitt, Camden, Barré, Burke, Shelburne--and bring in
a narrow-minded group who held to the obsolete mercantilist theory
of colonial dependency. The immediate outcome was the inauguration
of a policy that ran counter to the economic interests of the three
major colonial regions and aroused the hostility of important colonial
groups. Every successive enactment was a greater blunder, until the
crowning stupidity of the tea monopoly--which used colonial interests
as a pawn in a game of the East India Company--threw the colonial fat
into the fire.

The grievances of the merchants resulting from the regulatory trade
acts were real and serious. However the ministry might justify those
acts before Parliament, their effects were disastrous to substantial
colonial interests, and to American eyes seemed designed to bring
colonial trade into further subjection to English merchants. The
attempt to suppress the widespread practice of smuggling was ill
advised even though logical, for it aroused the consuming public as
well as the middlemen, and gave popular backing to the protests of the
merchants. The total political result was to align against Parliament
the most influential groups in the trading towns--the wealthy importers
and the professional classes--and provided opportunity to the radicals
to spread their propaganda under cover of respectable leadership.
The movement of resistance thus set on foot by the class-conscious
merchants eventually slipped from their control and passed into the
hands of the Sons of Liberty, who drove faster and farther than
conservative business men would willingly follow; yet these latter
soon found themselves coerced by tumultuous forces which they had
unwittingly loosed. In consequence there came a time of divided
counsels, and when independence was finally declared large numbers of
the wealthiest and most dignified merchants turned Loyalist and threw
in their lot with the King. More than two hundred quitted Boston on its
evacuation by General Gage. Others stood apart as neutrals till the
war was over, and then drew together in a compact organization to stem
the tide of post-war agrarianism and assist in setting up a federal
government after their liking.[196]

The grievances of the plantation group were less obvious but none the
less real. Probably more critical than taxation or the debts owed to
English merchants, was the question of the western lands. The Quebec
Act stirred the South as the tea monopoly stirred Boston and New York
and Philadelphia. Involved in that act were certain long accepted
colonial rights of domain, on the strength of which vast speculation
in backcountry lands had been engaged in by English and colonial land
companies and individuals.[197] The question was extraordinarily
complicated, involving the rights of the Indians, the ambition of
the Hudson Bay Company to retain the western wilderness as a vast
fur preserve, the rights of Catholics in the French settlements,
the rights of the imperial treasury to income from the sale of the
lands, the rights of soldiers of the French wars to lands granted by
colonial legislatures, the rights of frontiersmen to free settlement
and exploitation, as well as specific grants to several colonies, in
particular Massachusetts, Connecticut and Virginia. From this mass
of conflicting interests, all eager to exploit an incalculably rich
domain, little hope of satisfactory solution offered, and a wiser
ministry would have kept hands off. But an ill-considered Parliamentary
enactment cut the knot in a way to arouse the quick and keen resentment
of America. Whatever may be said for the solution, one thing is clear;
it set aside by arbitrary statute cherished rights which Virginian
gentlemen, with their eyes on rich plantations to the West, deeply
resented. It was a matter of vital concern to colonies like Virginia
that they should control their wilderness frontier. The Quebec Act not
only alienated thousands of western colonials, but it provided them
with influential leaders like Washington and Robert Morris. It was more
fuel to the radical bonfire.

In the end the fortunes of the revolutionary movement rested with the
yeomanry, and this yeomanry with its agrarian outlook and republican
sympathies, was in a mood to respond to radical appeal. That the farmer
was induced to take down his squirrel rifle and fight King George was
made possible by a number of irritations--his deep-rooted prejudice
against aristocracy, his instinctive dislike of crown officials, his
inveterate localism that resented alien interference--as well as by
substantial class interests. In every colony the party of incipient
populism had been checked and thwarted by royal officials; and it was
this mass of populistic discontent, seeing itself in danger of being
totally crushed, and its interests ignored, that provided the rank and
file of armed opposition to the King. Already Parliament had brought
acute financial distress to the colonies by forbidding the emission
of bills of credit; and other attacks on popular policies followed.
The strength of the popular opposition to royal programs had lain
heretofore in the legislative control of the purse; by threatening to
withhold salaries, the democratic legislatures had been able to coerce
the royal governor and the judges, and keep them somewhat responsive
to the popular will. To the Tories such coercion was proof that the
democratic claws needed cutting, and one of the purposes of the Stamp
Act was the providing of a fund to pay the royal officials out of the
royal chest. It was a skillful plan, but it overreached itself. Party
alignment had become too sharp, agrarian suspicions had grown too
sensitive, for the plan to succeed. The immediate, fatal result was the
accession of a numerous body of fighting men to the other malcontents.

The American Revolution was one of the first fruits of a shortsighted
imperialism. A generous policy of imperial federation would have
returned incredible revenues to Great Britain; but the Tory ministry
was not intelligent enough to let sleeping dogs lie. A sentimental
attachment had kept America loyal. So long as his customary and
traditional rights remained undisturbed, the colonial would throw
up his cap for King George; but if he were driven to choose between
loyalty and self-interest, between sentiment and profit, the choice
was certain. If the heavy debts which the foolish wars of Pitt had
bequeathed to the Empire had not seemed to offer a justification,
the Tory blunderers would not have forced the issue; but once it was
joined, vast numbers of Americans came to believe that the development
of their country had reached a point where it would be hampered by
further overseas regulation; that America must be free to exploit her
resources to her exclusive advantage; and that such economic freedom
would be possible only with political independence. It was the ill
luck of the ministry to present the question so concretely that the
colonial radicals were given an opportunity to awaken the latent forces
of American liberalism and turn them against English sovereignty.
A militant nationalistic psychology resulted from a widespread
propaganda, and the last ties with England were broken.


II • Argument and Propaganda

We understand the ways of propaganda today better than our fathers
understood them, and the official pronouncements of diplomats and
statesmen we have grown somewhat skeptical of. Historians of the
American Revolution have paid rather too exclusive attention to formal
speeches and state papers, forgetting that those speeches and papers
too often served the purpose of obscuring and evading the real issues.
The ten years of dreary debate preceding the clash of arms, during
which theory and precedent were examined by partisan lawyers, did
little more than serve party purposes on both sides of the Atlantic,
investing immediate interests with nationalistic or imperialistic
idealism. Honest men talked themselves into a passion, but they took
good care that their cause should appear dressed to advantage.

On the American side the argument fell into two broad divisions: an
attempt to justify the colonial position by appeal to the British
constitution, and when that failed by an appeal to the extra-legal
doctrine of natural right. To understand the obscure constitutional
wrangle, it must be recalled that important changes in English
constitutional practice had taken place since the colonies were
founded. Parliamentary sovereignty had superseded royal sovereignty,
or in other words, the sovereignty of property had superseded divine
right autocracy; and this in turn was undergoing change in the second
half of the eighteenth century--the sovereignty of landed property
was challenged by the rising capitalism. The Revolution of 1688 had
established the general principle that the state can take no property
in the form of taxes or levies without the consent of the owner, given
by himself or by his representative sitting in Parliament. But in
current practice the system of representation had become so misshapen
that a new theory had arisen to give constitutional sanction to
existing methods. Refusal to reapportion representation had resulted in
the notorious rotten-borough system, control of which boroughs was too
valuable an asset to the ruling oligarchy to be surrendered. To justify
the scandal a new theory of virtual representation was developed--a
theory upon which turned much of the early revolutionary debate. In
brief the theory asserted that as Parliament speaks for the total body
of Englishmen, it makes no practical difference who elects them, where
they live, who they are, or what interests they represent. Within the
halls of Parliament they can be trusted to think and legislate for the
nation as a whole. The essential constitutional principle requires
only that there shall be a respectable body chosen from among the
commons of England, in whose hands shall rest the custody of the purse,
and who shall serve as a check upon the royal prerogative. Such was
the parliamentary situation in 1763, and when appeal was made by the
colonials to the principle of no taxation without representation, it
was answered by appeal to the theory of virtual representation.

American constitutional practice, on the other hand, had developed in
a contrary direction. Quite as consciously as Parliament, the several
colonial legislatures rested on the principle of property rights, but
a different system of representation had developed. By easy logic a
geographical theory had emerged, by the terms of which a legislator
must be a freeman of the district rather than of the realm, that he
should hold power for a short period and frequently submit his conduct
to the scrutiny of the electors, and that a district should bear a just
per capita relation to the total population. The doctrine of virtual
representation was alien to colonial theory, although in fact it might
be applied to the large body of disfranchised non-property-holders.
The broad difference, then, in the legislative practice of the two
countries lay in the important distinction between local, numerical
representation, and a grotesque system of borough jobbing. Both systems
rested on a narrow suffrage, although the colonial basis was very
much broader. The difference was without significance so long as the
traditional relations between America and England continued; but when
Parliament proposed to extend the theory of virtual representation
to the colonies, and treat Massachusetts and Virginia as on a
constitutional footing with Birmingham and Manchester, the difference
became acute. No American colony was willing to become the pawn of
parliamentary placemen, at the mercy of parliamentary jobbery.

The debate over this vital question was involved in obscurities by
reason of the vagueness of the British constitution. If an unwritten
constitution be no other than established practice--and it is true of
the English constitution in spite of the body of principles existing in
such pronouncements as Magna Charta, the settlement of 1689, and the
Common Law--then the current practice of Parliament must be accepted as
constitutional. This was the fatal weakness of the colonial argument,
as it was the weakness of Pitt and other defenders of America in
Parliament. When Pitt exclaimed with characteristic grandiloquence,
“I come not here armed at all points with law cases and acts of
Parliament, with the statute-book doubled down in dog-ears, to defend
the cause of liberty,” he abandoned the legal ground to appeal to the
sense of justice and right of Englishmen. But the question could not
so easily be transferred from the domain of constitutional law. For
upwards of a hundred years Parliament had been sovereign, and for the
colonials now to deny its sovereignty meant one of two things: either
to go back to the obsolete principle of divine right, or to postulate
an extra-parliamentary body of constitutional law, unknown to English
practice. A sovereignty inhering neither in King nor Parliament,
but in a super-constitution, was a conception that had been played
with by Coke in an endeavor to exalt the Common Law, and hinted at
by later Whig statesmen, but which had never established itself in
practice. The colonials recognized the dilemma and made half-hearted
attempts to evade it. John Adams and Franklin endeavored to argue
that as the colonial charters were from the crown, and antedated the
rise of Parliament, Americans owed allegiance to the King and not to
Parliament, and hence parliamentary pretentions to sovereignty over
America were only a new form of unconstitutional prerogative. But
the argument was taken seriously by neither side, and was soon put
away.[198]

It finally became clear to American leaders that if their cause were
to make headway, appeal must be made to broader principles. Their
case must rest on philosophical rather than on legal grounds. This
suffices to explain the shift from constitutionalism to abstract
rights, which marked the middle period of the debate. By 1773 it had
become evident to thoughtful observers that the cause of American
liberalism must fail, or become revolutionary in purpose and intent,
and to become such it must seek justification in extra-constitutional
principles. And this justification it discovered in the writings of
English liberals of the seventeenth century--in Sidney and Milton, and
above all in Locke. The influence of Locke had long been paramount in
English political speculation. He had been the apologist and defender
of the settlement of 1689; the principles which he expounded lay at the
base of the dynastic rights of the reigning house, and were nominally
accepted by all the parliamentary leaders. The relations between
natural rights and parliamentary sovereignty had not wholly clarified,
and in the background of English constitutional thought still lingered
a vague notion of certain natural rights above the constitution, and
limiting parliamentary statutes. Thinkers as different as Blackstone
and Camden subscribed to such doctrine, but it daily became more
tenuous in the face of a growing acceptance of unlimited parliamentary
sovereignty.[199]

In turning to Locke, therefore, the colonial debaters went back a
century and picked up the argument of liberalism as it existed before
it had been nullified by later English practice. They occupied a
position similar to that defended by him a hundred years before;
they were combating the same arbitrary rule that had brought on the
Revolution of 1688. He had laid down the basic principle of revolution
in the doctrine of certain natural rights of the subject which no state
may subvert without peril to the original compact; he had asserted
that taxation without representation constituted such subversive
tyranny; and he gave high sanction to the right and duty of resistance
to an encroaching sovereignty. The noble words, “Chains are but an
ill wearing how much soever we gild or polish them,” uttered a note
of defiance to arbitrary power which struck a responsive chord in the
breast of the colonial liberal. In short, Locke’s two _Treatises on
Civil Government_, aimed at Sir Robert Filmer’s absurd _Patriarcha_,
were turned against Parliament and became the textbook of the American
Revolution.

The ground had been well prepared. The argument of Locke went home
with such convincing force to the colonial liberal because it embodied
conclusions towards which America had long been moving. It was an
eloquent confirmation of native experience, a sober justification
of the psychology of individualism. The self-governing state had so
long been an established fact in colonial life as to have assumed the
complexion of a natural right. The political compact had taken form in
American political thought, a generation before Locke gave currency to
the theory, and Jefferson was expressing native conclusions drawn from
American experience when he argued that “governments derive their just
powers from the consent of the governed,” and that “all men are created
equal, that they are endowed by their Creator with certain unalienable
Rights, that amongst these are Life, Liberty and the pursuit of
Happiness.” It is not true to assert that Jefferson was only reciting
Locke, with modifications derived from the French humanitarians. It is
nearer the truth to say that he made use of old-world philosophy to
express and justify certain native tendencies then seeking adequate
statement.

To such an experience, armed with such a philosophy, there must
come eventually the conviction that both monarchy and aristocracy
were irrational; that the ambitions of a coercive alien sovereignty
were fraught with danger to the rights of the American citizen.
The resurgent absolutism of Stuart times, with its doctrine of
the omnicompetent state, which the King was reviving through the
instrumentality of Parliament, was broken by the stubborn colonial
resistance. Absolutism under whatever form was doomed in America,
however slowly it might linger out its life. Jonathan Boucher might
seek to revive Sir Robert Filmer, and preach to Americans the dogma of
divine right through royal primogeniture from Adam, and other colonial
Tories might applaud; but they were fast becoming anachronisms.
The Revolution was to overthrow for Americans the principle of the
absolutist state, and substitute a modified sovereignty, circumscribed
by the utilitarian test of its relation to the common well-being of its
citizens. For the first time in modern history it was discovered that
“the true meaning of sovereignty,” as a recent student has put it, is
to be sought “not in the coercive power possessed by its instrument
[the state,] but in the fused good-will for which it stands.”[200]


III • Certain Social Consequences

The swift crystallization of colonial sentiment in favor of
republicanism, as the crisis developed, produced the American
revolution of which John Adams wrote. The long leveling process of
a hundred and forty years, with its psychology of decentralization,
fruited naturally in a new political philosophy fitted to new-world
conditions. Monarchy, with its social appanage of aristocracy, was
a caste institution wholly unsuited to an unregimented America. The
war brought this revolutionary fact home to the consciousness of
thousands of colonials; and the liberalism that before had been vaguely
instinctive quickly became eager and militant. The old order was
passing; the day of the Tory in America was over for the present; the
republican was henceforth to be master of the new world. Out of this
primary revolution were to come other revolutions, social and economic,
made possible by the new republican freedom.

The swift rise of a political philosophy traditionally regarded as
mean and traitorous was inexplicable to Tory gentlemen, and aroused a
fierce retaliatory opposition. A social war of the classes, bitter,
vindictive, followed upon hostilities against England. The arrogance of
the gentry during those brisk days when the new spirit was rising is
scarcely comprehensible to later Americans unused to such frankness.
The republicans were scorned by the superior classes as unprincipled
sedition-mongers, plotting treason against the King and society. If
commoners flocked to town-meetings and outvoted the gentlemen, the
latter were outraged at the presumption of the “mobsters” in flouting
their betters. For the plain people to take things into their own hands
was no other than anarchy. The familiar records of the day are filled
with such aristocratic jests as this:

  Down at night a bricklayer or carpenter lies,
  Next sun a Lycurgus, a Solon doth rise.[201]

“The dirty mob was all about me as I drove into town,” said Mistress
Peggy Hutchinson, as she looked out on turbulent Boston from her
father’s chariot; and her feminine contempt for the common people was
an echo of the universal Tory contempt for republican mechanics and
farmers. It was the duty of the vulgar, as loyal subjects, to pay taxes
and not lay them; to obey the law and not make it. By far the most
important consequence of the Revolution was the striking down of this
mounting aristocratic spirit that was making rapid headway with the
increase of wealth. It sifted the American people as the migrations
of the seventeenth century had sifted the English people, keeping
the republicans at home and sending forth the Tories, weakening the
influence of the conservatives and increasing the influence of the
liberals. Few experiences in our history have proved so momentous in
results as this shift of power and change in personnel that resulted
from the great schism. A middle-class America was to rise on the ruins
of the colonial aristocracy.

The unfortunate Loyalists were victims of their own blindness. They did
not rightly estimate the driving power of the liberal forces released
by the struggle, and failing to understand, they staked everything on
the issue, and lost, and were driven rudely out of the land by the
plebeian republicans whom they despised. The disruption of colonial
society resulting from the expulsion of the Loyalists was far graver
than we commonly assume. Shiploads of excellent gentlemen, and among
them the most cultivated minds in America, were driven from their
firesides and sent forth to seek new homes, whether in “Hell, Hull
or Halifax” mattered little to the victors. Upward of forty thousand
sought refuge in Canada; thousands more went to the Bahamas; and still
other thousands returned to the old home. “There will scarcely be a
village in England without some American dust in it, I believe, by
the time we are all at rest,” wrote the Loyalist Dutchman, Peter Van
Schaak. Much suffering was endured and much bitterness engendered, and
if for years the dominant temper in Canada was fiercely hostile to
the United States, the mood is traceable to the expatriated gentlemen
who transmitted to their children a grudge against the victorious
republicans. It was an unhappy business, but it was scarcely avoidable
once appeal was made to the sword. There was no longer place in America
for the foolish dream of a colonial aristocracy.

The change of temper that came over American society with the loss of
the Loyalists, was immense and far-reaching. For the first time the
middle class was free to create a civilization after its own ideals.
In rising to leadership it brought another spirit into every phase
of life. Dignity and culture henceforth were to count for less and
assertiveness for more. Ways became less leisurely, the social temper
less urbane. The charm of the older aristocracy disappeared along
with its indisputable evils. Although a few of the older wits like
Mather Byles lingered on bitterly, and others like Gouverneur Morris
accepted the situation philosophically, they belonged to the past. A
franker evaluation of success in terms of money began to obscure the
older personal and family distinction. New men brought new ways and a
vulgar clamor of politics went hand in hand with business expansion.
The demagogue and the speculator discovered a fruitful field for
their activities. The new capitalism lay on the horizon of republican
America, and the middle class was eager to hasten its development.
But a new economic order required a new political state, and as a
necessary preliminary, the spirit of nationalism began that slow
encroachment upon local frontiers which was to modify profoundly the
common psychology. Americanism superseded colonialism, and with the new
loyalty there developed a conception of federal sovereignty, overriding
all local authorities, checking the movement of particularism, binding
the separate commonwealths in a consolidating union. This marked
the turning point in American development; the checking of the long
movement of decentralization and the beginning of a counter movement of
centralization--the most revolutionary change in three hundred years of
American experience. The history of the rise of the coercive state in
America, with the ultimate arrest of all centrifugal tendencies, was
implicit in that momentous counter movement.


Footnotes

[193] An excellent short statement of the causes of the American
Revolution is given by A. M. Schlesinger in _New Viewpoints in American
History_, Chapter VII. Compare C. H. Van Tyne, _The Causes of the War
of Independence_.

[194] Letter to Mr. Niles, January 14, 1818.

[195] Van Tyne, _Causes of the War of Independence_, pp. 424-426.

[196] For an admirable study, see A. M. Schlesinger, _The Colonial
Merchants and the American Revolution: 1763-1776_.

[197] This important subject has been examined by C. W. Alvord, _The
Mississippi Valley in British Policies_: C. A. Beard, _An Economic
Interpretation of the Constitution_; C. H. Van Tyne, _The Causes of the
War of Independence_.

[198] For an excellent discussion of the constitutional questions
involved, see C. H. Van Tyne, _The Causes of the War of Independence_,
Chapters VIII and IX.

[199] For this see Van Tyne, _ibid._, pp. 234-238.

[200] H. J. Laski, _The Problem of Sovereignty_, p. 12; see also
Appendices A and B.

[201] Moore, _Diary of the Revolution_, Vol. II, p. 22.




