Chapter I • Disintegration and Reintegration


The figures of the Gilded Age, colossal yet grotesque, belonged to an
America that was passing. Another world of thought and experience was
rising above the horizon--a world in which the divinities were science
and the machine--that was to disintegrate the traditional society of
the dispersion and reshape the plastic materials in new forms. The long
tide that for two centuries and a half had been running out had come
at last to the turn. For six generations the pattern of life had been
woven by the impulse of dispersion that in scattering men along a wide
frontier had disintegrated the philosophies and rejected the social
order brought from the old world, transforming America into such a
society of free men as the Enlightenment had dreamed of--decentralized,
individualistic, democratic. Dispersion, disintegration, individualism,
anarchism--such was the inevitable drift under the compulsions of a
fluid economics and frontier ways, of which the ultimate philosophical
expression had been Thoreau at Walden Pond, discovering in his bean
patch the same anarchistic principles that Godwin had learned of the
French naturists--of which the prophet had been Walt Whitman, dreaming
amidst the formless crowds of Manhattan his generous dreams of the
democratic brotherhood--and of which Jay Gould the sordid wrecker in
Wall Street was the prosaic reality.

Then had come the Industrial Revolution that in creating great cities
and in drawing men from the plow to the machine was to undo in a few
brief years the long work of the dispersion, repudiate the ideals of
the Enlightenment, and provide a new pattern for a consolidating urban
society. Thenceforward the drift was increasingly toward concentration,
with its compulsions to reintegration and conformity--the imperious
subjection of the individual to a standardizing order, the stripping
away of the slack frontier freedoms in the routine of the factory, the
substitution of the ideal of plutocracy for the ideal of Jacksonian
democracy. And this revolutionary work of the machine was hastened
by the new spirit of science that spread silently through the land,
effecting a revolution in men’s thinking as great as the machine was
effecting in men’s lives. Provincial America had been theological-
and political-minded; but with the staying of the dispersion and the
creation of an urban psychology, the ground was prepared for the
reception of new philosophies that came from the contemplation of
the laws of the material universe. The incoming of science had two
immediate results: the application of technology to industry that was
to further the Industrial Revolution; and the impact on speculative
thought of the newly discovered laws of science that was to create
a new philosophy. In the second of these twin influences lay an
intellectual revolution that was to disintegrate the old theological
cosmos, push far back the boundaries of space and time, reorient the
mind towards all ultimate problems, and bring into question all the
traditional faiths--political and social as well as theological and
philosophical. Out of science was to come a new spirit of criticism and
realism that was to set the pattern for later thought.

The story of disintegration and reintegration is a striking chapter
in American life, a story that runs through two generations--the
generation that came to maturity in the seventies, and the generation
that came to maturity in the nineties. Between 1870 and 1900 the
broad movement of thought passed through two sharply differentiating
and contradictory phases: the extension of the philosophy of the
Enlightenment, and the final rejection of the Enlightenment in
consequence of a more rigid application of the law of causality in
the light of a mechanistic universe. During the seventies biological
evolution was interpreted in the light of earlier philosophies that
had come out of the eighteenth century. It was reckoned a fulfillment
and justification of the ideals of the Enlightenment, sanctioning
the doctrine of progress that had risen from the conception of human
perfectibility by a teleological conception of cosmic progress,
glorifying the ideal of democratic individualism, and putting the seal
of scientific approval on the philosophy of anarchism that had been the
flower of two and a half centuries of the dispersion. And then in the
nineties the clouds drew over the brilliant Victorian skies. With the
substitution of physics for biology came a more somber mood that was
to put away the genial romanticism of Victorian evolution, substitute
a mechanistic conception for the earlier teleological progress, and
reshape its philosophy in harmony with a deterministic pessimism that
denied purpose or plan in the changing universe of matter. It was an
unconscious return to the dark spirit long before brought hither by
Puritanism from the complexities of English society--the spirit that
dominated Calvinistic dogma before it disintegrated in the freedoms
made possible by the great dispersion.

The great changes came swiftly because the machine had made ready
the soil. Farmers and bankers do not think alike; country and town
create different psychologies. A simple, decentralized America had
been content with theology and metaphysics, and the intellectual
history of New England for two hundred and forty years is not greatly
skimped by being compressed into three words, Calvinism, Unitarianism,
Transcendentalism. What was true of New England was true of America
generally, except for the lesser influence of metaphysics. So long
as society was mainly agricultural--and in those portions where the
frontier spirit lingered on into later days--the church would retain
its dominant influence and theology would still bound men’s thought.
But with the revolutions in economics and industry, with the rise of an
urban society, the mind of America was making ready for the reception
of science and the realism that was eventually to spring from science.

Venturesome pioneers had been at work long before, digging about under
the thick crust of theology. Even in theocratic Massachusetts Increase
and Cotton Mather had professed a zeal for scientific investigation,
and the latter was vastly proud of his membership in the Royal Society.
In the eighteenth century Franklin and Rittenhouse and William Bartram
were evidences of a new spirit, and at Yale College President Ezra
Stiles made a small beginning of scientific study that was swept away
by his successor Timothy Dwight. In the early decades of the nineteenth
century an interest in science was spreading widely, as _Silliman’s
Journal_ witnesses. Asa Gray, Le Conte, and Agassiz encouraged the
general interest in geology, and in the sixties and seventies Lewis H.
Morgan turned to anthropology and R. L. Dugdale stimulated sociology by
his significant study of the Jukes family.

Our present concern, however, is not with the contributions of America
to abstract science, but rather with the changing mental attitude that
resulted from familiarity with scientific methods--the shift from
deductive reasoning to inductive investigation, with the consequent
breakdown of theology and the slow drift from metaphysical idealism
to scientific materialism; and such a changing attitude concerns us
because of its enormous influence on the fabric of our later thinking,
the total body of our intellectual and cultural life. Considered in
this light the intellectual revolution that resulted when the mind of
America, long shaped by theological dogmas, turned away from those
dogmas to consider the new universe presented by science, cannot be
made too much of. With the pushing out of the frontiers of space and
time, the discovery of a vast impersonal cosmos that annihilated the
petty egocentric world of good and evil postulated by the theologians,
the substitution of universal energy for a beneficent providence,
the conception of a ceaseless flux and flow that took no account of
teleological ends, the assumption of universal law and universal
causality, the mind of America quitted its quiet theological retreats
and set forth on a great adventure that was to carry far and the
results of which were to unsettle what before had been sure.

In this great work we have been engaged since European science first
rose on our horizon a half-century and more ago. To speak exactly,
it is not so much science that has taken possession of the mind, as
certain postulates of science, certain philosophies presumably derived
from science and justified by science, which we have felt bound to
incorporate in our thinking as a hundred years before the conclusions
of the Enlightenment had been incorporated. In that earlier philosophy
of the Enlightenment the whole drift had been towards a dissolvent
individualism, a disintegration of the earlier integration. In the new
interpretation after 1870 the emphasis came to rest on the whole rather
than the parts: in sociology, upon the historical growth of human
societies; in biology, upon the evolution of the higher from lower
forms. The individual, thus conceived of socially and politically, is
no longer an isolated, self-determining entity, but a vehicle through
which is carried the stream of life, with a past behind and a future
before. He is a portion of the total scheme of things, tied by a
thousand invisible threads to the encompassing whole. From the parts to
the totality, from freedom to determinism--such has been the drift of
thought that science has laid upon us and from which there is no easy
escape.

With the advent of such a conception the long movement towards
philosophical anarchism was brought to a stop. The integrating
principle of unity must eventually shoulder aside the disintegrating
principle of individualism; order must supersede willfulness. In the
outcome a conception so coercive was to deny all the aspirations of
our traditional social philosophy, surrendering society to a new
regimentation and reducing the individual to an impotent victim of
things as they are. Out of it was to spring the passionate protests
of later rebels like Theodore Dreiser and Thorstein Veblen. Yet for
the moment the rigid determinism of the premise was overlooked and man
was accepted as the first-born and heir of God’s benevolent universe.
In the seventies the new postulates of science were looked upon as no
other than fresh sanctions for the Comtean principle of continuity--of
evolution from lower to higher in biology, of growth and progress in
sociology. It was this middle ground that Herbert Spencer came to
occupy in the minds of his American disciples--holding to the older
individualism with its implications of anarchism, yet creating a cosmic
philosophy that foreshadowed the eventual dwarfing of the individual.


I • The Victorian Mood

The sturdy optimism that was a genial hallmark of the Victorian,
was erected on more substantial foundations than a middle-class
prosperity arising out of the Industrial Revolution; it was founded on
a systematic philosophy, built of excellent materials and laid up with
nice mortar-work, to which many hands contributed and in the finality
of which many minds believed. Its master idea was the conception of
growth, a conception that by contrast with the ideal of the static
of earlier times, was profoundly revolutionary. Perhaps the most
stimulating suggestion that came out of the Enlightenment, it was
evolved by Turgot in France and by Price and Priestley in England,
from the psychology of John Locke. If the human mind at birth is an
empty vessel, wanting in innate ideas and waiting to be filled by sense
perceptions, or if--to accept the familiar figure--it is a clean slate
on which the finger of experience writes what it will, then it follows
from the philosophy of Locke that the shaping of the individual is
determined by the environment that cradles him. It is not an unfolding
from within but a molding from without. Hence the idea of growth, and
hence the vast preoccupation of the Enlightenment with sociology--or
the science of environment--the hand of the sculptor that models the
plastic clay. From such a conception the principle of progress was an
inevitable deduction.


1 • Sociology and the Enlightenment

It is convenient, if not quite exact, to trace the rise of the new
gospel to Condorcet, who in the midst of the Terror and whilst in
hiding from the Jacobins, wrote his stimulating _History of the
Progress of the Human Mind_[682]--a work that was early reprinted in
America and profoundly influenced Jefferson, who professed to find its
principles exemplified in the history of his native Virginia. Condorcet
was a humane and liberal spirit, a mathematician, a physicist, a
sociologist, one of those eager Revolutionary minds passionately
devoted to the creation of a more generous social order; and his
celebrated work deserves a distinguished place in the history of social
thought. He begins as a good Lockean with the psychology of sense
perception, on which he erects his entire superstructure. Here is his
opening paragraph:

  Man is born with the faculty of receiving sensations; of perceiving
  and distinguishing the simple sensations of which they are
  composed; of retaining them, reproducing them, combining them; of
  comparing these combinations; of grasping what they have in common
  and what sets them apart; of fixing signs on all such objects
  in order to reproduce them more clearly and to facilitate new
  combinations.[683]

He then proceeds to trace the growth of the scientific attitude from
the time of Bacon, till it culminated in the rise of social science,
with the new politics of natural rights and the new conception of man
as perfectible. It is commonly believed that the philosophers of the
Enlightenment were speculative dreamers who created a fantastic natural
man that flouted the sober realism of experience. Such a notion is
grossly absurd. Condorcet was immersed in the scientific spirit of his
age; it was to science that he looked for guidance and he had acquired
a remarkable understanding of the data already gathered in western
Europe. When he set down the following passages, therefore, he was
writing not as a speculative dreamer, but as a sociologist who relied
solely on scientific inquiry to find a way out of the social mess into
which western civilization was plunged by the selfish stupidity of
rulers who were hostile to scientific truth.

  After long errors, after having lost their way in incomplete or
  vague theories, the publicists have finally come to recognize the
  true rights of man, to deduce them from this single truth, that he
  is a being endowed with sense perceptions (_un être sensible_),
  capable of shaping a train of reasoning (_capable de former des
  raisonnements_), and of acquiring moral ideas.[684]

  Finally, we have seen a new doctrine appear.... It is that of the
  indefinite perfectibility of the human species, a doctrine of which
  Turgot, Price and Priestly, were the first and most distinguished
  apostles; it belongs to the tenth epoch, in which we shall develop
  it broadly.[685]

In such passages is contained the kernel of Condorcet’s philosophy, the
grounds of that hope for human betterment which awakened his generous
sympathies. The _Esquisse_ is a noble contribution to the work which
the heirs of the Enlightenment, from Turgot to Comte, so eagerly and
hopefully engaged in--the work of tracing scientifically the changes of
the past in order to forecast the path of the future. After dividing
the history of social evolution into nine periods, Condorcet projects
the outlines of the tenth which is still to come.

  If man can predict, with almost complete assurance, the phenomena
  of which he knows the laws; if, while they are still unknown in
  him, from the experience of the past he can forecast, with much
  probability, the events of the future; why should one regard as a
  chimerical undertaking the attempt to trace with some likeness the
  picture of the future destiny of the human species, in accordance
  with the facts of its history (_d’après les résultats de son
  histoire_)? The sole ground of faith in the natural sciences is
  this idea, that the general laws, known or unknown, that rule the
  phenomena of the universe, are necessary and constant; and on what
  grounds would this principle be less true for the development of
  the intellectual and moral faculties of man, than for the other
  operations of nature? Finally, since opinions formed from the
  experience of the past, in matters of the same kind, are the
  sole rule of conduct for the wisest men, why should one deny the
  philosopher the right to rest his conjectures on the same base,
  provided he does not attribute to them a certainty beyond that
  which springs from the number, the constancy and the exactness of
  his observations?

  Our hopes for the future state of the human species may be
  reduced to these three important points: the destruction of
  inequality between nations; the progress of equality amongst a
  common people; finally, the growth of man towards perfection
  (_le perfectionnement réel de l’homme_). May not all nations one
  day approach the state of civilization to which have arrived the
  most enlightened peoples, the freest, the most emancipated from
  prejudice, such as the French and the Anglo-Americans? The vast
  distance that divides these peoples from the servitude of nations
  subject to kings, from the barbarism of African tribes, from the
  ignorance of savages, must it not gradually disappear?[686]

Condorcet was an idealist, and the grand object towards which he was
working was an adequate social philosophy that should interpret justly
the evolution of civilization. True to the genius of the Enlightenment
he believed that in reason and in the moral sense man possessed the
keys to his own progress--that the general reason under the guidance
of humane feeling must assure a progressive amelioration of life that
will eventuate in the common well-being of men in a rational society.
The age of the Enlightenment, he believed, had “opened new paths to the
political and moral sciences,” and laid bare what to him were “the true
principles of social happiness.” The American Federalists, who were
prodigal of vituperative rhetoric in assailing all French theorists,
might have read the pages of Condorcet with profit.

The idea of progress with its corollary of a philosophy of history,
thus elaborated by Condorcet, was taken over by Saint-Simon, but
came to its most elaborate expression in the work of Auguste Comte.
The grandiose philosophy of history to which Comte gave the name
of Positivism, was an attempt to formulate the law of progress in
civilization; and his dynamic sociology, which emerged naturally
from his conception of history, was an attempt to apply that law to
society. That the principle of progress is the law of nature Comte
professed to discover in the unity of all natural processes and the
historical unfolding of all systems; there are no breaks and no fresh
beginnings, but everywhere and always, continuity. From this principle
emerged the Comtean law of historical evolution with its three phases:
the theological, the metaphysical, and the scientific-industrial.
If continuity is the law of nature, such continuity presupposes an
objective--presumably benevolent; and in view of such continuity
towards a benevolent objective, it is only logical to endeavor to
dispose the forces of society in harmony with the teleological purpose,
and through the application of positive knowledge hasten the advent
of the Golden Age. Hence the grand science, hitherto neglected, is
sociology. Earlier generations had placed the Golden Age in a dim past;
Comtean philosophy, in harmony with the Enlightenment, placed it in
the future as the ultimate goal of an evolving society. To forecast
the lines along which such progress will move, to read the future as a
child of the past, became therefore a prime objective of the new school
of history. The tracing of social laws was the great business at hand,
and as the founder of a new social science Comte carried further and
systematized the work begun by the Physiocrats. Before Comte history
had been little more than chronicles, without pattern or meaning,
unconcerned with the sources of change and providing no basis for
forecast; after Comte history became an interpretation and a philosophy.

One would have supposed that Positivism would have appealed to
American intellectuals, as it appealed to liberal English thinkers
like Mill and Spencer. Not only has the American mind taken kindly
to sociology, but the history of America, as Woodbridge Riley has
pointed out, offers too pat an illustration of the Comtean law of
progress to be overlooked.[687] The three centuries of American
existence--the seventeenth with its theocracy, the eighteenth with its
abstract theories of political rights and its faith in constitutions,
and the nineteenth with its industrialism based on science--would
seem to be pages out of the Positivist philosophy of history. That
Comte made so slight an impression on the mind of New England was
due, no doubt, to the current influence of transcendentalism with its
metaphysical backgrounds. Although eager young intellectuals like John
Fiske might accept it while awaiting a more adequate evolutionary
philosophy, the country was not yet ripe for Positivism. When that
time came it was Spencer rather than Comte who became the master of
American intellectuals--Spencer and in a lesser degree John Stuart
Mill. Both Spencer and Mill had come under the influence of the French
sociological school, and it was through their writings that the new
social philosophy penetrated America.[688]


2 • Biology and the Enlightenment

The appeal of Spencer to the generation born after the Civil War was
extraordinary. Ardent young minds, for whom the candles of theology
were burnt out and who were seeking new light to their feet, were drawn
to him irresistibly. Young rebels who had thrown off the guidance of
their elders and were bent on discovering fresh paths through the
tangle of dead faiths--independent souls like Hamlin Garland and
Jack London and Theodore Dreiser who were to become leaders of the
realistic revolt against the genteel tradition in life and letters and
faith--went to school to him to prepare themselves for the great work
of freeing the American mind from the old theological inhibitions.
Young men in colleges no longer read _Butler’s Analogy_, as their
fathers had done before the war, but turned with zest to Spencer’s
_Data of Ethics_ to discover a more scientific theory of conduct.
Everywhere the influence of the great Victorian penetrated, and
wherever that influence spread the old theological prepossessions
disintegrated. It is probably no exaggeration to say that Spencer laid
out the broad highway over which American thought traveled in the later
years of the century.

If the supreme excellence of Comte, as has been suggested by Lester
F. Ward, was his insistence on the ultimate unity of all processes
of nature,[689] if before him the continuity of forces had been
inadequately understood, his intellectual kinship with Spencer
cannot fail to be remarked. The latter’s master conception, which he
arrived at independently of Darwin and which life-long he applied
systematically to the several fields of thought, was the master
creative conception of the nineteenth century--the conception of
pervasive unity and organic growth. In his well-known phrase it
was the law of continuous development from the homogeneous to the
heterogeneous, from the simple to the complex; and this principle he
found exemplified in the total history of nature and man. Here then
is the Comtean law of continuity, but vastly strengthened and given a
cosmic significance by deductions from the new science. Lamarck and
Darwin laid the foundations for Spencer’s philosophy, as Condorcet and
Saint-Simon had provided the backgrounds for Comte. Trained thus in
the new school of biology, Spencer erected his synthetic philosophy
upon the broadest foundations; the principle of organic evolution
sufficed to explain for him not only the history of civilization,
but the total history of life in a physical universe; and biology,
psychology, sociology, politics, ethics--all the congeries of ideals
and institutions and bodies of knowledge that shape civilization--were
but variant expressions of the development from the homogeneous to the
heterogeneous.

The final effect of the synthetic philosophy was not to overset but
to confirm the major postulates of the Enlightenment. In his social
theory are unforeseen confirmations of the glowing hopes of Turgot
and Condorcet. From his studies in biology Spencer had come to think
primarily in terms of the individual, and only secondarily in terms of
the species and the genus. Now variation is the mark of the individual,
for strictly considered, nature knows no duplication of life forms,
but always and everywhere individual differentiation; yet since
likenesses are far greater and more cohesive than unlikenesses, the
instinct of gregariousness impels individuals to associate in ever
larger groups, interacting through association and coöperation, whence
arises a human society that tends continuously to pass from the simple
to the complex. On these two major premises then--individual variation
and the instinct of association--Spencer established his social and
political theory; and when the elaborate data drawn from biology and
ethnology and psychology are stripped away, the underlying conceptions
reveal a curious likeness to the master principles of French romantic
philosophy. This likeness becomes more striking as he explores the
fields of sociology and politics; and his final deductions tally so
closely with earlier theory as to warrant a disciple of Jefferson in
becoming a disciple of Spencer.

There is no break between Condorcet and the synthetic philosophy.
The great Victorian completed the work of the Enlightenment. In
establishing his individualism on the principle of biological
variation, Spencer was only restating in scientific terms the earlier
metaphysical individualism; in establishing his psychology upon an
unbroken sequence “from the simple reflex action by which an infant
sucks, up to the elaborate reasoning of the adult man,” with its
corollary of continuously expanding powers, he was rebuilding on the
foundation of Locke a fresh argument for the doctrine of indefinite
development, or perfectibility; in establishing his sociology on
the organic principle of “natural development,” which shapes the
individual to social ends, with an accruing wealth of individuation
that is the final objective of true social life, he justified the
French enthusiasm for liberty as the great desideratum, but liberty
enriched and augmented by association in a free society; and finally,
in establishing his ethics on the principle that “increasing fullness
of life is the ‘end’ of evolution,” and the “highest conduct is that
which conduces to the greatest length, breadth, and completeness of
life”--that the ultimate criterion of social ethics is justice and that
“every man is free to do that which he wills, provided he infringes not
the equal freedom of any other man”--he rephrased the earlier Godwinian
principle that rational liberty under the reign of justice is the
ultimate end of society.[690]

That Spencer’s social theory should have been shot through with
older ideals is not surprising when one considers his origins and
training. Sprung from radical nonconformist stock, a congenital rebel,
extraordinarily self-sufficient and coming to intellectual maturity in
the tempestuous forties with their Benthamism, their Chartism, their
exigent democracy, he was molded by forces that in large part were a
reëmbodiment of the aspirations nullified by the Napoleonic wars and
the Tory reaction, and now come again to birth. As a consequence his
political theory, like Mill’s, was deeply affected by the revolutionary
heritage. He accepted the social contract as a “theoretical, though
not a historical, basis of political authority and institutions”;[691]
the doctrine of natural rights, which, with Jefferson, he interpreted
in terms of the rights to life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness;
and the theory of a constantly diminishing political state, on the
hypothesis that the ultimate form of society--as in Godwin’s _Political
Justice_--will, be anarchistic.

At least, such he conceives to be the forecast suggested by the law
of social evolution. As the coercive authority of the political
state diminishes, its place will be supplied by the cohesive force
of association, until voluntary coöperation extends to all the
necessary functions of society; and since the state tends to disappear
with the growth of a rational society, the great desideratum is an
adequate sociology rather than a political theory. The net result,
therefore, of Spencer’s wide studies was a fresh justification, based
on the findings of Victorian science, of the master principles of
eighteenth-century speculation; its individualism, its liberalism, its
passion for justice, its love of liberty and distrust of every form of
coercion. The power of the majority must be curbed equally with that
of the minority and he concluded his _The Man versus the State_ with
the well-known words, “The function of Liberalism in the past was
that of putting a limit to the powers of kings. The function of true
Liberalism in the future will be that of putting a limit to the powers
of Parliament.” In the scientific speculations of the great Victorian
the aspirations of romantic thought came to fresh vitality; embodied in
a comprehensive evolutionary system they were given a fresh currency.
Herbert Spencer completed the work begun by Locke a hundred and fifty
years before, and his _Synthetic Philosophy_ brought to conclusion the
greatest intellectual movement of modern times.

As the young intellectuals, trained in the school of Spencer, looked
out on the universe in the last quarter of the nineteenth century,
they discovered, amid all its complexities an encompassing unity, a
continuous growth, a creative purpose; and from such assumptions they
justified the theory of progress, cosmic in scope and plan, that opened
wide the doors to a vaster future. If in the backgrounds of their minds
lurked the conception of determinism, it gave them no concern, for a
benevolent determinism that shapes all things to a divine end, is no
monster to be feared. In the evolutionary science were the grounds of
a genial optimism that nothing could shake. If they had lost something
of the jauntiness of the transcendental faith that beheld God plowing
furrows at Brook Farm, they were armed with a scientific faith that
by tapping stones and comparing fishes they should find His plan in
an evolving series of life forms. Browning’s Fra Lippo was a good
Spencerian in his vigorous pronouncement:

              This world’s no blot for us,
  Nor blank; it means intensely, and means good:
  To find its meaning is my meat and drink.

That progress was the law of the universe was held to be axiomatic
by the new evolutionary school, and the American read in the new
philosophy an added confirmation of a prepossession common to all
Americans since Franklin and Jefferson, and become the common faith
after the War of 1812. In sober minds it led to a complete reshaping
of the outlook upon life, and in unbalanced minds it ran riot in all
sorts of blowsy enthusiasms. Freedom, love, benevolence, progress
towards a millennial perfection--these were the clarion notes in a huge
symphony in praise of human perfectibility that assaulted American
ears in the Gilded Age. Not Henry Ward Beecher alone was the prophet
of the new day. In the early seventies Mrs. Victoria Woodhull, one of
the minor prophetesses, established a paper dedicated to the high end
of “the Universal Religion of the Future ... the Universal Home ...
the Universal Science, called Universology, based on the discovery and
demonstration of Universal Laws ... and an accompanying Philosophy of
Integralism”--the “organ of the most advanced thought and Purpose in
the World ... the Organ of Cardinary News ... News of the Aspiration
and Progression of Mankind toward Millennial Perfection.”[692] By
contrast with such rhythmic enthusiasms the familiar lines of Tennyson
are sober prose.

  Yet I doubt not thro’ the ages one increasing purpose runs,
  And the thoughts of men are widen’d with the process of the suns.

How logically to young intellectuals of the seventies it all followed
from the premises! If man is a rational being, potentially excellent
and capable of indefinite development, the idea of a humane and
rational progress in civilization is an inevitable deduction; and the
evolutionist above all men was certain to build into his philosophy
the cardinal idea of a unified progress, but given a cosmic sweep,
accepted as the master principle in all fields of the material and the
spiritual. It was the law of life, as the static was the law of death.
No thinker who had grasped the idea of organic growth, could escape
its larger implications; and no student in the seventies could think
seriously without coming upon it.


3 • The End of the Hopes of the Enlightenment

Then a film of haze slowly gathered upon the face of the brilliant
sun and the light of men’s hopes grew dimmer. As physics encroached
upon the interest in biology, and leadership in speculation based
on scientific findings passed from Spencer to Ernst Haeckel, young
Americans of the next generation found the membership of the current
philosophical trinity changed for them, and instead of unity, growth,
purpose, they discovered unity, flux, chance. Purpose had disappeared
from the grim face of the material universe, and they found themselves
in the coils of a determinism that was more likely to prove malignant
than benevolent. The idea of progress slipped quietly from their
minds, and in its stead was only a meaningless and purposeless flux
of things. But unity remained to bind the individual upon the whole
and dwarf him to a pin-point in a vast macrocosm. The intellectual
history of the last quarter of the nineteenth century--in America as
well as elsewhere--in its teleological aspects is the history of the
shift from the benevolent evolutionism of Spencer to the mechanistic
materialism of Haeckel, with all the dislocations and readjustments
involved in the cataclysmic change; and _The Education of Henry Adams_,
that curiously suggestive study in disillusion, is saturated with the
pessimism that followed upon the transition--a pessimism exuding from
the contemplation of the bleak unity of a mechanistic universe. Of the
earlier period before hope was gone, he wrote thus:

  For the young men whose lives were cast in the generation between
  1867 and 1900, Law should be Evolution from lower to higher,
  aggregation of the atom in the mass, concentration of multiplicity
  in unity, compulsion of anarchy in order; and he would force
  himself to follow wherever it led, though he should sacrifice five
  thousand millions more in money, and a million more lives.[693]

Was there purpose in it all? To this Adams and the younger men more and
more declined to make answer. Yet this much is clear, for them the end
of the theological age had come, and the end also of the great hopes of
the Enlightenment. The idea of progress was given over henceforth to
the middle class to become the plaything of material expansion.


II • The School of Spencer--John Fiske

Of the distinguished group that labored to naturalize in America
the philosophy of evolution John Fiske was the most authoritative
spokesman. As a brilliant popularizer of the Synthetic Philosophy, and
an historian who applied the Comtean law of continuity to the American
past, he brought to the Gilded Age the revolutionary influence of
English and French thought. Deeply immersed in Victorian speculation,
he threw over his acquisitions the genial mood of his generation and
infused the doctrines of evolutionary science with the spirit of
religion. He reveled in the cosmic philosophy of Herbert Spencer, but
within the material cosmos the scientists were revealing, controlling
its eternal flux, he perceived a directing will that was shaping man’s
destiny to noble ends. New England scholarship had served God for too
many generations to put aside its teleological prepossessions, and John
Fiske was too completely New England to deny his spiritual obligations.
The duty laid upon his conscience was plain. It was not enough to lay
open to the New England mind the wealth of evolutionary science; he
must justify its conclusions by binding them back upon the old faith
and discover God revealed in biology as before he had been revealed in
the Bible. And so in the heyday of Spencerian influence, before the
bleak conception of a mechanistic universe had risen upon the horizon
of men’s thought to disperse the genial glow of optimism, this learned
son of Connecticut was the prophet in America of the new order of
thought.

John Fiske was a brilliant Yankee with a voracious appetite for ideas
and a passion for cosmic syntheses. In certain respects he was the most
richly endowed of the young students of his generation of Americans.
Intellectually curious and acquisitive, he refused to be confined
by orthodox fences but ranged far in pursuit of knowledge. The pale
negations of the current New England theology, on which he had fed in
his youth, soon lost their savor, and following his natural impulses he
sought out the strongest food available. While still in his teens he
had absorbed Emerson, Theodore Parker, and other New England radicals,
and was reaching out for an ampler diet. That was in the late fifties,
when a new cosmos was taking shape in men’s minds and old faiths were
disintegrating. The several rivulets of science--geology, zoölogy,
chemistry, physics--that hitherto had followed diverse and vagrant
courses, were slowly converging and making ready to mingle their waters
in a vast common stream. Some further dredging needed to be done first,
and on that great job Darwin had long been patiently engaged. It was
a time of high hopes and young John Fiske, about to enter Harvard
College, was not one to miss the significance of so great an awakening.

Amidst his quiet Connecticut lanes he had already been making his own
discoveries. Although he had early gone through a form of conversion
to dogmatic Calvinism he had not long been content with its arid
provender, but turned to the English disciples of Positivism--George
Henry Lewes, Buckle, Mill--and was absorbing Comte with the help
of Voltaire and Goethe. In June, 1860, two months before taking
his examinations for advanced standing at Harvard, he came upon a
prospectus of Herbert Spencer’s proposed system of philosophy, and this
boy of eighteen was one of the first dozen Americans to subscribe to
the undertaking. It was a golden day in his life, that was to determine
his whole intellectual development. He became a devoted disciple of
Spencer, dedicating his labors to the great cause of evolution. To that
end he felt called to study prodigiously. As a Harvard undergraduate
he found it difficult to treat his conventional instructors with
due respect, for while his classmates were struggling with Greek
roots he was exploring the whole field of philology and rioting in
Comtean sociology. Instead of exhausting his energies with the usual
undergraduate themes, he wrote in his junior year, at the age of
nineteen, a critical examination of _Buckle’s History of Civilization_
for the _National Quarterly Review_; and while preparing for his final
examinations he wrote a learned article on “The Evolution of Language”
that was accepted by _The North American Review_.

Such intellectual precocity, suggesting to timid souls a lack of
respect for orthodox opinions, was not without its dangers. From
his first entrance to Harvard he was marked by certain tutors as a
dangerous influence. Positivism and evolution were in ill repute in
the college circles, and he was eventually summoned before the faculty
and admonished for undermining the faith of Harvard undergraduates.
Outside the college he was becoming known as the “young atheist of
Cambridge.” The reasons for such a reputation were quite sufficient
to Unitarian dogmatists who had forgotten the cardinal principle of
Unitarianism--the principle of devout free thought--for young John
Fiske had already gathered a huge pile of combustible materials that
threatened the established orthodoxy. Before entering Harvard he had
planned to write a history of early Christianity, but his interest in
science drew him into other fields--the new sociological interpretation
of history that he discovered in Grote’s _History of Greece_, and
the broad field of scientific speculation that opened to him in
Humboldt’s _Cosmos_. To this latter field he turned greedily, reading
amongst other works Cuvier’s _Règne Animal distribué d’après son
Organisation_, Herschel’s _Outlines of Astronomy_, Laplace’s _Système
du Monde_, Agassiz’s _Zoölogy_ and his _Essay on the Classification
of the Animal Kingdom_ (1857), and with the joy of a great discovery
Darwin’s _Origin of Species_ (1859). From Agassiz’s defense of special
creation he dissented vigorously, and this dissent prepared him for an
enthusiastic reception of Darwin’s careful exposition. Certainly no
other young student in America followed so closely or so intelligently
the unfolding of the English school of evolutionary thought. In solid
acquisition and in intellectual curiosity he was far in advance of
Henry Adams, then a young diplomat in London.

Upon his graduation in 1863 he determined upon the law, read through
the two-year course of the Harvard Law School in nine months, was
admitted to the bar, waited two years for clients who never came, threw
it over, and turned to his first love, the life of the scholar. He had
his eye on a chair at Harvard, but so long as the old orthodox _régime_
lasted no opening offered there. In the first year of President Eliot’s
administration (1869) an opportunity was provided and he was invited to
give a course of lectures in Holden Chapel on the Positive Philosophy.
The opposition was still too strong to permit the offer he sought--a
chair in history--but he was eventually given a place as Assistant
Librarian, where he spent five years amongst the books of Gore Hall.
Driven to other means of support he turned to lecturing, was received
with immense applause in London, and thereafter to the end of his
life he suffered much of his vast energy to drain off into that most
fruitless of jobs for a creative mind. A certain genial egoism was to
blame for his playing willingly the rôle of lackey to women’s clubs. He
liked to talk to sympathetic audiences, and he was greatly effective
on the platform. The inevitable result was that he fell short in
accomplishment of the fine promise of his early years. His style became
diffuse, his materials picturesque rather than solid, his thinking
flabby. Pretty much all his significant work was done before he was
forty.

The greater part of Fiske’s intellectual life, despite his later
incursions into certain waste places of history, was dedicated to the
indoctrination of the American people in the principle of evolution
as that principle was outlined in Spencer’s _Synthetic Philosophy_.
He was a man of one idea, but that idea was so vast and germinal,
so comprehensive in its implications and so constructive in its
suggestions, as to set afoot the greatest intellectual revolution in
western civilization. He called himself a philosopher, but he meant by
the term not a metaphysician, but a cosmic historian whose business
was to interpret the universe in the light of the great laws that
science was revealing. By 1860 science had revealed three such general
laws: the law of gravitation, the law of biological variation and the
survival of the fittest, and the law of the conservation of energy; and
from them Spencer had deduced the principle of a unitary cosmos, with
a common force sustaining both the organic and the inorganic, working
to a single “far-off divine event, to which the whole creation moves.”
An intimate friend of Fiske’s, and an ardent Spencerian, puts the
intellectual situation in these terms:

  The conceptions of the Universe generally held at the time when
  Fiske was in college were fragmentary and chaotic, each phenomenon
  or each group of phenomena being, like language, a special
  creation of an anthropomorphic God, turning out different jobs
  piecemeal like a man. The conception of one power behind all had
  been a dream of not a few philosophers and poets, but as a fact
  comprehensible by the average mind, it was not known until the
  discovery about 1860 of the Conservation of Force. About the same
  time was discovered the unity of all organic life, in its descent
  from protoplasm, and the identity of its forces with those of the
  inorganic universe. The nebular cosmogony, the persistence of
  force and the biologic genesis, united together, showed the power
  evolving, sustaining and carrying on the entire universe known to
  us, to be _one_, and constantly acting in one unified process;
  and that every detail--from the most minute known to the chemist,
  physicist and biologist, up to the greatest known to the geologist
  and astronomer, and including all known to the psychologist,
  economist, and historian--was caused by a previous detail. It
  having been established that the same causes always produced the
  same results, these uniformities were recognized as Laws, and it
  was also recognized that conduct in conformity with these laws
  produced good, and conduct counter to them produced evil....

  These great discoveries were at once grasped by Fiske’s great
  intelligence, and welcomed with enthusiasm. To their dissemination
  he mainly devoted his next twenty years, and to their illustration
  in the origins and foundation of our national commonwealth, the
  rest of his career.[694]

While still at Harvard, as a result of the publication of his two
undergraduate essays already referred to, he was sought out by Edward
L. Youmans and urged to join with him in spreading the new evolutionary
philosophy.[695] Youmans was an ardent proselytizer who had volunteered
for the job of instructing the American people in the meaning of
science. He attached himself to Spencer as spokesman and publicity
agent, and was on the lookout for helpers. Encouraged thus by Youmans,
Fiske threw himself impetuously into the work of furthering the new
philosophy of evolution. As the task unfolded before his maturing mind
it came to involve three major problems: to dissociate in the popular
mind the potential theism of Spencer’s _First Principles_ from the
materialism of Comte’s Positivism, with which it was widely confused;
to elaborate the teleological implications of evolution and demonstrate
that the grand objective of all natural processes was “the production
of happiness, and that, despite occasional lapses, all records of them
prove that, on the whole, they tend not only to produce happiness, but
to increase it”;[696] and finally to apply the principles of the cosmic
philosophy to historical writing and reveal how the law of evolution
determines the forms of social institutions--to do more adequately in
the field of American history what Buckle had tried to do in a larger
field without the aid of evolution.

In all his intellectual interests and attitudes Fiske was a complete
New England Victorian, but scarcely a British Victorian. In his
erection of the doctrine of progress into a cosmic law, and in his
resultant optimism, he was at one with Spencer and the English group.
But he was a son of New England before he was an evolutionist, and
although he had broken with the grotesque, anthropomorphic dogmas of
Calvinism, he remained profoundly religious, and like Henry Drummond
he sought to transfuse science with spiritual qualities. He was
effectively a Unitarian, the leader of the Cambridge intellectuals who
were carrying on the work that Theodore Parker would have done had
he lived twenty years longer--the work of bridging the chasm between
science and religion. To that end his vast concern with teleology--that
God is the great wellspring out of which flows the unfolding cosmos,
and that the unfolding is guided and controlled to beneficent ends.
Natural law, working in a realm of causation, and shaping matter to
forms more and more complex, to John Fiske was no other than the
beneficent purpose known to theology as Divine Providence.

Pretty much all that he had to say on the question is contained in
the four volumes of _Outlines of Cosmic Philosophy_, published when
he was only thirty-two. Written with great enthusiasm and complete
confidence, it was an attempt to summarize and restate the conception
of cosmic evolution as Spencer had defined it in _First Principles_,
and partly elaborated it in his _Biology_ and _Psychology_. It
was a timely presentation, and with its lucid exposition of the
evidence drawn from the several fields of science it furthered the
spread of the evolutionary philosophy. But it sought to do more.
Not content with arraying in due order the scientific proofs of a
vast unitary cosmos--as Spencer had done--Fiske essayed the rôle of
apologist and supplemented the facts of science with ontological and
teleological speculations. Whereas Spencer had remained agnostic,
refusing to speculate on the unknowable, and clearly implying a
deterministic cosmos, Fiske took high theistic ground, asserting
that evolution implies the existence of a creative mind, vaster than
the anthropomorphic conceptions of theology and far nobler, whose
cosmic plan unfolding in the material universe compels a belief in
a benevolent God, and a belief also in the “eternal source of a
moral law which is implicated with each action of our lives, and in
obedience to which lies our only guarantee of the happiness which is
incorruptible.” And this “eternal Power, not ourselves, that makes
for righteousness”--to use Arnold’s phrase which Fiske was fond of
quoting--is making also for altruism and the spirit of love that lies
at the heart of Christianity; for is not the prolongation of infancy
with its demands on altruism--a principle that was Fiske’s contribution
to evolution, of which he was justly proud--a master biological device
for individual variation? In consequence the evolutionist becomes not
only a theist, but a Christian in the truest meaning of the term. The
fatherhood of God and the brotherhood of man--to which New England
Unitarianism had come to restrict its dogmas--are in reality “two great
interrelated cosmic truths--the existence of righteousness as an active
principle in the Infinite Power or Reality back of the cosmos, and its
correlative manifestation in the altruistic consciousness of man.”[697]

Such speculation concerning the unknowable exercised an increasing
fascination for Fiske as his deeply religious nature slowly colored
the acquisitions of the scientist, and in a succession of tracts--_The
Destiny of Man_ (1884), _The Idea of God_ (1885), _Through Nature to
God_ (1899), and _Life Everlasting_ (1900)--he definitely rejected
the negative attitude of agnosticism that was a common mark of the
English evolutionary school, and turned to outline the religious faith
of an evolutionist. George Eliot’s dictum that God is unknowable and
immortality is unthinkable, was too thin a diet for his robust nature;
instead he elaborated the argument that faith in God and immortality
is reasonable in the light of the evolving cosmos that science was
revealing. To John Fiske that cosmos was not bleak and impersonal,
a vast congeries of physical forces that reduced man to the status
of a flea on the epidermis of earth, but the expression rather of a
benevolent will unfolding in accordance with a divine purpose. “The
process of evolution is itself the working out of a mighty Teleology,
of which our finite understandings can fathom but the scantiest
rudiments.” To Henry Holt this recovery of teleology was Fiske’s great
contribution to evolutionary thought.

  He did more just there than any modern philosopher, perhaps than
  any philosopher, to show that this teleology is beneficent, and to
  restore in this way the attitude of mind which it may not yet be
  too late to call Faith in God and Immortality.[698]

No doubt it was due to such emphasis on the theistic implications of
evolution that the doctrine was so quickly accepted in New England
amongst the Unitarians and liberals; but for Fiske it marked the end of
his intellectual leadership. After the battle had been won he turned
away to engage in less fruitful activities, no longer followed keenly
the new discoveries of science, and finally set himself to write the
history of America. The venture on the whole was not fortunate. In
his attempt to reinterpret the American past he suffered from grave
handicaps, an inadequate knowledge and an inadequate philosophy. He was
led into the field of history by his interest in the English school
of Grote and Maine and Stubbs and Freeman, and his ultimate purpose
was to present “the drama of American civilization, of which the
political organization of the United States was the crowning feature,
as an evolutionary development from antecedent causes and of great
significance to the future civilization of the world.”[699] But for
this undertaking he was inadequately equipped and his conscious search
for a Comtean continuity in social growth did him a real disservice.
The economics of historical change he seems never to have considered,
and his analyses of social forces are never acute or penetrating.
Although he attempted to apply sociological evolution to history he
was really little more than a political and military historian with
a special fondness for wars and the details of battle strategy. In
his first venture, _American Political Ideas_--written for his London
lectures of 1880--he simplified American political development to two
germinal ideas--the town meeting and the principle of federation, and
these two conceptions he traces back to the Teutonic folkmote and the
Teutonic principle of shire representation. The theme with which he
deals is thus stated in the preface:

  The government of the United States is not the result of special
  creation, but of evolution. As the town-meetings of New England
  are lineally descended from the village assemblies of the early
  Aryans; as our huge federal union was long ago foreshadowed in the
  little leagues of Greek cities and Swiss cantons; so the great
  political problem which we are (thus far successfully) solving is
  the very same problem upon which all civilized peoples have been
  working ever since civilization began. How to insure peaceful
  concerted action throughout the Whole, without infringing upon
  local and individual freedom in the Parts,--this has ever been the
  chief aim of civilization, viewed on its political side; and we
  rate the failure or success of nations politically according to
  their failure or success in attaining this supreme end. When thus
  considered in the light of the comparative method our American
  history acquires added dignity and interest, and a broad and
  rational basis is secured for the detailed treatment of political
  questions.[700]

Only a New England historian could write so naïvely as that, for only
to a New Englander does the town meeting become a germinal source of
American democracy. Not a great historian, Fiske ceased to be in his
wandering later years a great intellectual influence. The rare promise
of his young manhood he never fulfilled, but like his generation he
suffered his energies to be dissipated and he ended in a somewhat
blowsy optimism. To Henry Holt he was a very great and learned man, but
to a later generation it is difficult to make out his vast stature.
Nevertheless as a purveyor of Victorian science to the American people
he did a useful and important work.


Footnotes

[682] The French title is, _Esquisse d’un tableau historique des
progrès de l’esprit humain_. See _Œuvres_, Vol. VI, Paris, 1847.

[683] _Œuvres_, Vol. VI, p. 11, Paris, 1847.

[684] _Ibid._, p. 176.

[685] _Ibid._, Vol. VI, pp. 194-195.

[686] _Ibid._, _Dixième Époque_, pp. 236-237.

[687] _American Thought_, p. 172, New York, 1915.

[688] Woodbridge Riley, _American Thought_, Chapter XI.

[689] _Ibid._, p. 401.

[690] For a brief exposition of Spencer’s major ideas see, William
Henry Hudson, “Herbert Spencer,” in _Philosophies Ancient and Modern_,
London, 1908.

[691] William Archibald Dunning, _A History of Political Theories from
Rousseau to Spencer_, New York, 1920, p. 400.

[692] Quoted in Constance Mayfield Rourke, _Trumpets of Jubilee_, p.
201.

[693] _The Education of Henry Adams_, p. 232.

[694] Henry Holt, _Garrulities of an Octogenarian Editor, with Other
Essays somewhat Biographical and Autobiographical_, Boston, 1923, pp.
327-328.

[695] See John Spencer Clark, _Life and Letters of John Fiske_, Vol. 1,
pp. 273-278.

[696] Henry Holt, _op. cit._, p. 328.

[697] John Spencer Clark, _op. cit._, Vol. II, p. 50.

[698] Henry Holt, _op. cit._, p. 339.

[699] John Spencer Clark, _op. cit._, Vol. II, p. 456.

[700] John Fiske, _American Political Ideas_, Preface, pp. 4-5.




