Chapter II • Two Spokesmen of the West


I • Andrew Jackson • Agrarian Liberal

Clay’s pleasant dream of a paternalistic prosperity for America got
its first rude awakening from General Jackson and his motley following
of western equalitarians and eastern proletarians. Gentlemen were
suddenly reminded that the plain people had been overlooked in the
distribution of benefits. The waters of prosperity, it would seem, had
been trickling somewhat too scantily to them from the great reservoirs
where they were impounded; and as they saw the wealth pouring into
private ponds through governmental pipe lines, a natural human envy
took possession of them. In theory the pipe lines belonged to them,
and the impounded waters were to be used for common irrigation; but
in practice the mains seemed to conduct only to Lowell industrialists
and Philadelphia and New York capitalists, and the waters turned out
to be privately owned. As the recognition of this fact came home to
the producing mass it provided a rallying point for an anti-monopolist
movement and determined the great objective of the Jacksonian attack,
the assault on the Bank.

The driving force of the new Democracy was the same class-feeling
that had done service a generation before, the will to destroy the
aristocratic principle in government. This conscious class-feeling
had been strengthened by the spread of the dogma of equalitarianism
through the frontier, and this in turn had brought about an extension
of manhood suffrage which enfranchised a numerous body of voters who
turned against an aristocracy that had long resisted their demands for
the vote. The spirit of 1798 was rising afresh, and the re-alignment
assumed the form of a democratic-aristocratic struggle, which for
the moment obscured the more significant fact of an emerging middle
class. The battle seemed to lie between homespun and broadcloth for
control of government, and this serves to explain the odium that
quickly attached to Jacksonian Democracy in polite circles. In drawing
together mechanics and frontiersmen, the new party inevitably became
a lower-class instrument, offensive to gentlemen of the old school
of politics. The records of the times carry abundant evidence, often
amusing, of this aristocratic contempt. In the early forties a girl
of seventeen living on a Mississippi plantation, describing Jefferson
Davis--whose wife she afterwards became--was surprised at the contrast
between his politics and his manners. “Would you believe it,” she
wrote, “he is refined and cultivated, and yet he is a Democrat!”
(_Jefferson Davis, A Memoir by his Wife_, Vol. I, p. 192.)

There were quite evident reasons for this aristocratic contempt. The
new Democracy was heavily weighted with what gentlemen were pleased to
call the rabble. Fresh Democratic recruits had been gathering since
Jefferson molded the first party of protest. Industrialism was creating
a city proletariat, and the frontier was producing the coonskin voter;
neither as yet possessed any adequate political philosophy, but they
needed no philosophy to enlist against the traditional privileges and
perquisites of broadcloth. They had had their fill of such rule. The
stake-in-society theory was worn threadbare, and other philosophies
were preparing. Meanwhile in the person of Old Hickory they saw the
visible embodiment of their vague aspirations, and they turned to
him with an unquestioning loyalty that nothing could weaken. He was
our first great popular leader, our first man of the people. If he
aroused a wild enthusiasm in breasts covered by linsey-woolsey, it
was because he believed that linsey-woolsey had its stake-in-society
equally with broadcloth. He was one of our few Presidents whose heart
and sympathy were with the plain people, and who clung to the simple
faith that government must deal as justly with the poor as with the
rich. Believing so, he could not be turned aside from his course by
paid clamor, but with a courage rare in the White House he dared make a
frontal attack on the citadel of exploitation in the face of an army of
mercenaries.

The dramatic career of Andrew Jackson, so unlike that of Jefferson,
which was determined by a speculative temperament and founded on a
critical examination of diverse systems of society and politics, was
shaped in large measure by prejudice and circumstance. A man of iron
will and inflexible purpose, he was almost wholly lacking in political
and social philosophy. His conclusions were the reactions of a simple
nature of complete integrity, in contact with plain fact. Fundamentally
realistic, he cherished few romanticisms. There was no subtlety in his
mental processes and this lack kept him free from the temptation to
follow devious paths beloved of politicians. He must take the shortest
way to his objective, crashing through such obstacles as lay in his
path. He was never a bookish man. He was surprisingly ill read, and his
grammar and spelling were those of the plain people. He loved horse
racing and was a master of profanity; yet in spite of characteristics
that link him with Davy Crockett, he possessed an innate dignity and
chivalry that set him far above the wag of the canebrakes. He was a
born leader whose headlong onslaughts and rash mistakes might imperil
the cause but could not shake the confidence of his followers. All
who knew a man when they saw one respected Andrew Jackson. Imperious
and dictatorial, he knew how to command but not to obey; he took
orders from no one, not even his superiors, unless such orders fell
in with his own plans. In short General Jackson represented the best
which the new West could breed in the way of capable and self-reliant
individualism, and the backwoodsmen loved him for the enemies he made,
and backed him loudly in his fight against the aristocratic East.

When Jackson settled in Nashville in 1788, at the age of twenty-one,
the Cumberland valley had somewhat under five thousand inhabitants
scattered a distance of eighty-five miles along the river. The first
settlements had been made only nine years before, and Nashville was a
frontier post with frontier manners. Into this rough society the young
Scotch-Irishman fitted easily. His smattering of the law sufficed to
gain him clients and he soon became a local political leader. When
he was only twenty-nine he was sent to Philadelphia as the first
Congressman from the state of Tennessee, where he came in contact with
the “aristocratic Neebobs” of the government and heartily disliked
them. The next year he was sent to the Senate, but a single session
satisfied him and he resigned to accept a judgeship in the state
Supreme Court, which post he held for six years. During these early
years he was unconsciously following the path that conducted straight
to a middle-class philosophy. He threw himself into speculation,
bought and sold land in great blocks, traded in horses and slaves,
set up a general store, and was well on the road to wealth when the
panic of 1795 caught him unprepared. He lost most of his extensive
holdings, including his homestead and many of his slaves, and removed
to a six hundred and forty acre tract eight miles from Nashville--the
Hermitage--which was to become one of the famous places of America.
With this removal his middle-class ambitions fell away and he became a
planter with a simple agrarian point of view; and this old-fashioned
agrarianism became in later years the determining force in all his
political thinking.

He was fifty-eight when he emerged as a potential candidate for the
Presidency in 1822, and for years his sole interests, other than those
of his plantation, had been military. He was singularly wanting in any
formulated political philosophy, and his reëlection to the Senate two
years later did little to supply the lack. He had picked up some shreds
of the protectionist theory and in a letter written in 1824 he went so
far as to declare for a “judicious” protective tariff, basing his view
on the grounds of the country’s economic unpreparedness at the time
of the War of 1812, on the lack of markets for the produce of western
farms, and on the desirability of drawing labor from the farm to the
factory. But he added a significant passage that reveals the agrarian
bias of his mind. To the end of his life he insisted that he was an old
Republican of 1798, and this comment of 1824 suffices to connect his
later attack on the Bank with Jefferson’s attack on Hamilton’s fiscal
policy.

  Beyond this, I look at the Tariff with an eye to the proper
  distribution of labor and revenue; and with a view to discharge our
  national debt. I am one of those who do not believe that a national
  debt is a national blessing, but rather a curse to a republic;
  inasmuch as it is calculated to raise around the administration
  a moneyed aristocracy dangerous to the liberties of the country.
  (Quoted in Bassett, _Life of Andrew Jackson_, Vol. I, p. 346.)

The tariff was the only question on which he was receptive to Whiggish
arguments, and although he never openly repudiated a protectionist
policy he soon grew lukewarm in its support. Such other fragments of
Whiggery as found accidental lodgment in his mind were swept away in
the fierce struggles that marked his years in the White House. During
those eight years Jackson found himself, and the man who emerged from
the struggle was an agrarian of the old Virginian school. As he came to
understand the significance of the principle of exploitation he learned
to interpret social classes in terms of economics. He instinctively
hated all aristocrats, extending his dislike to the circle that
pretended to social preëminence in Tennessee, speaking of them
contemptuously as the “aristocrats of Nashville.” But in these later
years a change in his vocabulary appeared; his favorite phrases became
“the monied capitalists” and the “hydra of corruption.” He had come to
associate aristocracy with the control of the economics of society. He
was learning how aristocracies are built up through the instrumentality
of the state; and as that lesson sank into his mind his opposition to
such class favoritism hardened into adamant. He would put a stop to
such practices, cost what it might. His attack on the Bank was perhaps
the most courageous act in our political history; he knew how fiercely
it would be defended; yet he was amazed at the number of hornets that
issued from the shaken nest. “Such has been the scenes of corruption
in our last congress,” he wrote in 1833, “that I loath the corruption
of human nature and long for retirement, and repose on the Hermitage.
But until I can strangle this hydra of corruption, the Bank, I will
not shrink from my duty.” And a little later, “I want relaxation from
business and rest, but where can I get rest; I fear not on this earth”
(Bassett, _Life of Andrew Jackson_, Vol. II, pp. 635, 637).

As his policy unfolded it became clear that Jackson had not changed
with the changing times. He remained to the last the product of an
earlier domestic economy, with an old-fashioned horror of debt. He
was too generous to be frugal, too kind-hearted to be thrifty, too
honest to live above his means. He desired a simple independence for
himself and for his country. He believed that the government should
pay its debt, reduce its revenues, and live simply. In his austere
personal rectitude he exhibited a Puritan conviction of the sacredness
of stewardship; he must return to the common people, who had put their
trust in him, an honest reckoning of that trust. It was not in his
nature to betray their faith. He would have nothing to do with the
new theory that government is an agency to help business. To take
profits from an instrument erected supposedly for the common good was
abhorrent to his old-fashioned views; it was impossible for him to
lend the sanction of his office to particular or special interests;
and when circumstances made the Bank the central vexing problem of his
administration, his position was predetermined by every conviction of
his mind. While he was President he would not allow the government to
be used for business ends; he would not permit its funds or credit to
be turned to private profits; he would not tolerate a money monopoly,
no matter how conventionally correct its operations might be proved to
be, that challenged the sovereignty of the national government. The
twin powers of the purse and sword--to recall Clay’s famous phrase
that every Whig orator used on the stump--were in Jackson’s opinion
the ultimate tests of sovereignty; and to turn over the money of the
government to private hands for private use, he believed, was as grave
an abrogation of sovereign rights as would be the use of the army and
navy by private interests for private ends.

In the judgment of many critics Jackson, in his ignorance of the
intricacies of capitalistic finance, wantonly destroyed a necessary
credit system, thereby bringing a devastating panic on the country.
Whether or not that judgment is true is of little importance today.
More interesting historically is the fact that in his attitude towards
the Bank, as in his attitude towards internal improvements, Jackson
returned to the agrarian position of Jefferson and John Taylor,
nullifying for a time the victories gained by the middle class
during the boom period of nationalism. The more he learned about
the methods of capitalistic finance, the more he distrusted it. His
prejudices were his strength. He disliked speculation and he could
see nothing permanently wise or sound in a speculative economy that
put American industry at the mercy of bankers to expand or contract
credit. With an old-fashioned love of a stable currency he gave his
warm support to the project to return the country to a specie basis.
“The great desideratum, in modern times,” he said in his message to
the twenty-fourth Congress, “is an efficient check upon the power of
banks, preventing that excessive issue of paper whence arise those
fluctuations in the standard of value which render uncertain the
rewards of labor.” The establishment of additional mints to provide an
adequate coinage of gold or silver became therefore a natural corollary
of his attack upon bank currency. It was John Taylor’s economics
written into the law of the land.

In his attitude towards the state Jackson followed the nationalistic
tendencies of the West. He was as patriotic as Clay, and in spite of
strong states-rights sympathies he contemptuously rejected Calhoun’s
theory of nullification. But he had no love for an omnicompetent
state. More and more he drifted back to the Jeffersonian position in
his conception of the powers and duties of the federal government.
Replying to the vote of censure of 1834, he stated his ideal of
government in words that would have become Jefferson’s first inaugural
speech. He had been charged with being ambitious, to which he replied:

  The ambition which leads me on, is an anxious desire and a fixed
  determination, to return to the people, unimpaired, the sacred
  trust they have confided to my charge--to heal the wounds of the
  constitution and preserve it from further violation; to persuade
  my countrymen, so far as I may, that it is not in a splendid
  government, supported by powerful monopolies and aristocratical
  establishments, that they will find happiness, or their liberties
  protected, but in a plain system, void of pomp--protecting all, and
  granting favors to none--dispensing its blessings like the dews of
  heaven, unseen and unfelt, save in the freshness and beauty they
  contribute to produce. It is such a government that the genius of
  our people requires--such a one only under which our States may
  remain for ages to come, united, prosperous, and free. (Benton,
  _Thirty Years’ View_, Vol. I, p. 427.)

The evils entailed on America by the Jacksonian revolution were many,
but they cannot properly be charged against Andrew Jackson. They
came in spite of him, and they came as a result of the great object
lesson in the manipulation of the majority will that his popularity
had laid bare. His instincts and the main outline of his policy were
Jeffersonian; but neither he nor any other man was strong enough
to stop the current of middle-class individualism then running.
The American people were wanting in an adequate democratic program
suited to the changing times, as they were wanting in desire for a
social democracy. And when his capable hands fell from the machine
he had created, it was seized by the politicians and used for narrow
partisan ends. Yet one far-reaching result survived the movement, the
popularization of the name of democracy and the naïve acceptance of the
belief that the genius of America was democratic. In choosing a party
name the Jacksonians were shrewder politicians and better prophets than
the Whigs. For better or worse the American masses, and in particular
the nationalistic West, had espoused the principle of democracy, and
interpreted it in terms of political equalitarianism--a principle that
had inspired a fanatical hatred in the breasts of old Federalists.
To gentlemen of that earlier school democracy had meant the right of
the propertyless majority to plunder the minority in the name of the
law. The later Whigs did not make so blundering a mistake. Instead of
proclaiming democracy the mother of all mischiefs, they welcomed it as
an effective aid in vote-getting. Learning their lesson from Jackson,
the Whig politicians outdid him in democratic professions. They had
discovered that business has little to fear from a skillfully guided
electorate; that quite the safest way, indeed, to reach into the public
purse is to do it in the sacred name of the majority will. Perhaps the
rarest bit of irony in American history is the later custodianship
of democracy by the middle class, who while perfecting their tariffs
and subsidies, legislating from the bench, exploiting the state and
outlawing all political theories but their own, denounce all class
consciousness as unpatriotic and all agrarian or proletarian programs
as undemocratic. But it was no fault of Andrew Jackson if the final
outcome of the great movement of Jacksonian democracy was so untoward;
it was rather the fault of the times that were not ripe for democracy.


II • Lincoln • Free-Soil Liberal

The equalitarian West that bred Andrew Jackson bred Lincoln also,
a man with the same homespun mind, the same sterling integrity of
nature, the same instinctive democracy, but shaped by an environment
in which the new philosophy of progress had displaced the older
agrarianism. The road of middle-class ideals he traveled further
than Jackson, but in the end he also turned back to pick up once
more the democratic faith then being repudiated by the proponents
of slavery, north as well as south. Long an ardent Whig of the Clay
school, and thoroughly indoctrinated in a paternalistic nationalism,
he was brought, as every thoughtful American of the times was brought,
to weigh the program of slave imperialism in the scales with the
Declaration of Independence. The doctrines of that great document lay
before every man’s feet in those uncertain days, to get over as one
could. They could not easily be evaded or got round; they must be
dealt with. Rufus Choate, representing Boston Toryism, had come upon
them and dismissed them as “glittering and sounding generalities.”
Calhoun, representing southern imperialism, had come upon them and
essayed to destroy them by a critical realism. Lincoln, embodying the
spontaneous liberalism of the West, came upon them and paused to take
his bearings afresh. He could neither wave them aside nor destroy
them. The deep-rooted equalitarianism of his simple social philosophy
found in them an eloquent pronouncement of its democratic faith, that
set him upon considering how such doctrine might be squared with the
reality of slavery. The agrarianism of John Taylor and the Whiggery of
Henry Clay could tell him nothing about that; he must seek elsewhere;
and the solution he found in an amalgamation of equalitarianism and
free-soilism, in an adaptation of western Whiggery to Jeffersonian
principles.

Whatever party name he might call himself by, in his love of justice
and his warm humanity Lincoln was essentially Jeffersonian. He
respected property rights, but other rights he believed more sacred.
And as he watched the emergence in the South of the ideal of a Greek
democracy, as he considered how the party of Jackson had become
the party of Calhoun and Douglas, bent solely on strengthening and
spreading the institution of slavery, his equalitarianism took alarm.
He could not sit quiet while the principles of the Declaration of
Independence were being openly flouted; he must speak out; he must
arouse the idealism of the people to deal with the iconoclasts. In an
important pronouncement written in 1859, he set the problem before them
thus:

  Remembering ... that the Jefferson party was formed upon its
  supposed superior devotion to the personal rights of men, holding
  the rights of property to be secondary only, and greatly inferior
  ... it will be ... interesting to note how completely the two
  [parties] have changed hands as to the principles upon which they
  were originally supposed to be divided. The Democracy of today hold
  the liberty of one man to be absolutely nothing, when in conflict
  with another’s right of property; Republicans, on the contrary,
  are for both the man and the dollar, but in case of conflict the
  man before the dollar.... But, soberly, it is now no child’s play
  to save the principles of Jefferson from total overthrow in this
  nation.... The principles of Jefferson are the principles and
  axioms of free society. And yet they are denied and evaded, with
  no small show of success. One dashingly calls them “glittering
  generalities.” Another bluntly calls them “self-evident lies!”
  And others insidiously argue that they apply to “superior races.”
  These expressions, differing in form, are identical in object and
  effect--the supplanting the principles of free government, and
  restoring those of classification, caste, and legitimacy.... They
  are the vanguard, the miners and sappers of returning despotism.
  We must repulse them, or they will subjugate us. (Letter to H. L.
  Prince and Others, April 6, 1859, in _Works_, Vol. V, pp. 125-126.)

Two conceptions were here competing in Lincoln’s mind, the older
equalitarianism that sprang from French humanitarianism and the newer
economics that came from English _laissez faire_; and the attempt to
reconcile them suggests how far he had traveled along the path of
western Whiggery. With the spirit of enterprise he had no complaint;
the ideal of progress was associated in his mind with a fluid economics
that permitted the capable to rise through skillful exploitation. He
had no love for the stable economics of the eighteenth century that
Jackson preferred; the profit motive, functioning freely, he regarded
as the legitimate driving force of society; but he was concerned that
competition should be open to all on equal terms. As he watched the
transition from an agrarian to an industrial order, he found himself
more in sympathy with the new than the old. Accepting the principle
of exploitation he came to the position of the little capitalist who
believed that in America capitalism could be democratized by the simple
method of keeping the opportunities for exploitation open to every
citizen. It was common view of western Whiggery, and in so far Lincoln
remained a Whig, content with a system which he accepted as peculiarly
suited to the genius of the American people. In a late speech he summed
it up thus:

  What is the true condition of the laborer? I take it that it is
  best to leave each man free to acquire property as fast as he
  can. Some will get wealthy. I don’t believe in a law to prevent a
  man from getting rich; it would do more harm than good. So while
  we don’t propose any war upon capital, we do wish to allow the
  humblest man an equal chance to get rich with anybody else. When
  one starts poor, as most do in the race of life, free society is
  such that he knows he can better his condition; he knows that
  there is no fixed condition of labor for his whole life.... I want
  every man to have a chance--and I believe a black man is entitled
  to it--in which he can better his condition--when he may look
  forward and hope to be a hired laborer this year and the next, work
  for himself afterwards, and finally to hire men to work for him.
  That is the true system. (Speech at New Haven, March 6, 1860, in
  _Works_, Vol. V, pp. 360-361.)

But as a western man Lincoln was far more concerned over the
application of _laissez faire_ to the problem of western lands, and as
he contemplated the practical workings of “squatter sovereignty” he
learned how the free functioning of _laissez faire_ may be interfered
with by economic imperialisms. That lesson determined his final stand.
The virgin prairies beyond the Mississippi were coveted equally by
northern and southern exploiters; and who should finally possess them,
whether the small freeholder or the slave-master, was a question that
could not be put off forever. None knew this better than the small
farmers who were already staking out homesteads there. If Congress
yielded to the pro-slavery demands their economic future would be
endangered. It was the free-soil West that sent the first anti-slavery
men to Washington and provided the backbone of the new party. Not the
respectable West, but the plain people, Whig as well as Democrat. “Much
of the plain old Democracy is with us,” said Lincoln in 1858, “while
nearly all the old exclusive silk-stocking Whiggery is against us. I
don’t mean nearly all the old Whig party, but nearly all of the nice
exclusive sort” (Letter to A. C. Henry, in _Works_, Vol. V, p. 95). It
was no humanitarian regard for the rights of the negro that welded them
into a militant party. Racially and economically the free-soiler was
hostile to the black, whether slave or free. The Topeka constitution
adopted by the Kansas free-soilers barred all negroes from the new
state; Kansas was to be a white man’s country. The free labor of the
West wanted no competition with an alien race, and was prepared to
fight both the white master and free black for exclusive possession of
the national domain. There were few John Browns among these western
homesteaders--uncompromising idealists who rebelled at the injustice
done the negro. The free-soiler hated slavery because it threatened
his immediate interests; nevertheless as the great struggle developed,
the moral injustice of slavery was thrust to the fore and imparted a
humanitarian motive to the free-soil argument. This humanitarian motive
Lincoln seized upon, wedded it to the ideal of national union, and thus
doubly armed went forth to the fight.

To amalgamate idealism and economics is no easy task. “Public opinion,”
he said in a speech at Hartford, “is founded, to a great extent, on a
property basis.” But it is not the sole basis. The ideal of justice
comes in to upset all purely economic calculations. “The property basis
will have its weight. The love of property and a consciousness of right
and wrong have conflicting places in our organization, which often make
a man’s course seem crooked, his conduct a riddle” (_Works_, Vol. V, p.
330). Beyond question it was this recognition of the perennial conflict
between economics and justice, between realism and idealism, that
explains the hesitancies and harassing doubts that marked Lincoln’s
development. To reconcile the principle of exploitation with the
Declaration of Independence it was necessary to stick like a flea to
_laissez faire_--to eliminate slave labor and accept only free labor.
Lincoln was a slow man and cautious, and he pulled himself forward
to such a position by main force. He was not a rare intellect like
Thoreau, to think swiftly to a conclusion and abide the consequences.
He was a political leader rather than an intellectual, and he could
advance only a little ahead of the slow-moving mass he sought to draw
after him. A hundred invisible ties held him back--his belief in
the rights of local democracies, his respect for law and order, his
devotion to the Constitution, his recognition of property interests in
the slave, his understanding of the complexity of the problem, with
the entire economy of the South resting on a slave basis. Here were
difficulties enough to trouble an honest mind. His practical sense,
which is only another name for political realism, restrained his
idealism and made him of necessity an opportunist, willing to yield
much if he might save the Union. A simple, tolerant, easy-going man,
he was at bottom a realist who had come to understand what may be
considered the greatest truth in political science, namely, that an
enduring state must rest on willing allegiance. Force cannot compel
loyalty; authority may put down revolt but it cannot destroy the
seeds of discontent; for that only the sovereignty of good will is
competent, and in free states the sovereignty of good will must rest
upon compromise. Lincoln was a better democrat than Jackson, for he
would rather persuade than drive. If Hamilton embodied the aristocratic
principle of coercive government, Lincoln embodied the democratic
principle of give and take, that prefers compromise to bayonets. With
a cause resting on the common good will it might safely be trusted to
muddle through.

Slowly pushed forward by his cautious realism, Lincoln was forty-nine
before he reached the “divided house” position of the Douglas debates,
that was to entail such consequences. It was a bold pronouncement to
address to a generation desperately engaged in erecting sham defenses
against reality, in fleeing from the truth that cried aloud to be
heard. But he would not let men stop their ears longer; the truth must
be spoken to their understanding.

  In my opinion [he said] agitation will not cease until a crisis
  shall have been reached and passed. “A house divided against
  itself cannot stand.” I believe this government cannot endure
  permanently half slave and half free. I do not expect the Union to
  be dissolved--I do not expect the house to fall--but I do expect
  it will cease to be divided. It will become all one thing, or all
  the other. Either the opponents of slavery will arrest the further
  spread of it, and place it where the public mind shall rest in the
  belief that it is in the course of ultimate extinction; or its
  advocates will push it forward till it shall become alike lawful in
  all the States, old as well as new, North as well as South. (Speech
  at Springfield, June 16, 1858.)

The situation could not have been put more neatly. It was an appeal of
honest realism to put away all shoddy romanticisms, all mean evasions,
and to face the situation fairly; and it cut across the murky clouds
like a flash of lightning. Thenceforth there could be no longer a
conspiracy of silence; the problem of slavery had been brought home to
the common mind and common conscience, the question of its relation to
our national unity and national well-being had been brought out into
the realm of homely discussion. It is the democratic way, and as an
honest democrat, Lincoln stripped away all the protective coloring of
lies that politicians use and appealed to the honesty of plain men. The
same method he applied to the Dred Scott decision. He proposed to bring
to the bar of the majority opinion the stale legal romanticisms of the
Supreme Court. He refused to accept the divine right of the courts to
rulership, he denied the sovereignty of the judiciary, and proposed
to make a political issue of the matter. He would have it settled
in town-meetings and at the polls, by the plain people, and not by
lawyers and judges. It was a reversion to Jeffersonian principles, to
the simple democratic creed that fundamentals of public policy must be
determined by the people themselves.

Lincoln had thought his way slowly to the “divided house” position,
but he could not pause there. Those were hurrying times, and the
liberalism of yesterday was inadequate for the liberalism of today. A
weak man or a time-server would have gone upon the rocks, and a man of
unyielding policy must have broken; to be certain of one’s conclusions
was possible only to one who saw less than the whole. Patience and an
open mind alone could be relied on, an intelligent opportunism alone
would serve during the months the country was fiercely debating with
itself; and the heart-breaking hesitation of Lincoln, the troublesome
doubts and perplexed questionings, reveal as nothing else could the
simple integrity of his nature. He must go forward, but he must carry
the people with him, the North as a whole, the border states it
possible, even the rebellious South if charity might suffice. Though in
arms, they were Americans, and their hearts must be brought to willing
allegiance; how otherwise could a democratic people emerge from the
bitterness of civil war? He was not made for a dictator, and blood and
iron he accounted poor cement to mend the sundered democracies. He
trusted the better impulses of men to prevail in the end, because with
Jefferson he believed in the essential justice of the plain people. In
this faith he exemplified his democracy. Not a great political thinker,
he was a great leader because he never forgot that he was one with
those he led.

The slow unfolding of Lincoln’s mind is sufficiently revealed in the
changing quality of his speeches. He was rarely eloquent--never after
the ornate fashion of the time; and the bits of Hebraic poetry that
have come to be associated with his name are singularly few and belong
to the last years of his life. His usual style was plain homespun,
clear and convincing, but bare of imagery and lacking distinction of
phrase. The thought seems to break into speech hesitatingly, in the
way of a man visibly seeking to adapt his words to his meaning. Matter
he judged to be of greater significance than manner. Few men who have
risen to enduring eloquence have been so little indebted to rhetoric.
Very likely his plainness of style was the result of deliberate
restraint, in keeping with the simplicity of his nature. When he let
himself go he discovered a well of poetry in his heart. When he chose
he could even play the rhetorician. In those rare moments when he put
caution behind him, his words fell into a stately rhythm that suggests
the orator. Witness such a passage as this:

  In those days our Declaration of Independence was held sacred
  by all, and thought to include all; but now, to aid in making
  the bondage of the negro universal and eternal, it is assailed
  and sneered at and construed, and hawked at and torn, till, if
  its framers could rise from their graves, they could not at all
  recognize it. All the powers of earth seem rapidly combining
  against him. Mammon is after him, ambition follows, philosophy
  follows, and the theology of the day is fast joining the cry.
  They have him in his prison-house; they have searched his person,
  and left no prying instrument with him. One after another they
  have closed the heavy iron doors upon him; and now they have him,
  as it were, bolted in with a lock of a hundred keys, which can
  never be unlocked without the concurrence of every key--the keys
  in the hands of a hundred different men, and they scattered to a
  hundred different and distant places; and they stand musing as to
  what invention, in all the dominions of mind and matter, can be
  produced to make the impossibility of his escape more complete than
  it is. (Speech at Springfield, June 27, 1857, in _Works_, Vol. II,
  pp. 327-328.)

But he did not often let himself go. As one reads his speeches one
feels that an English diffidence held him back--this and the strong
prose of his environment. Like a true Anglo-Saxon he was reluctant
to speak out, afraid to let his emotions seize upon his speech. Only
at the last did that diffidence yield to complete unconsciousness.
The Gettysburg speech and the Second Inaugural are marked by the
sincerity and self-effacement that ennobled the words of John Brown
in the Virginia court-room--it is the eloquence which rises from the
heart when life has been felt in its tragic reality, an eloquence that
Webster could not rise to. Such words come only to those who have been
purified by fire; they are the distillation of bitter experience.
But the mass of his speeches are in quite another manner--that of
the simple, everyday world that bred him. He had none of the itch of
publicity that afflicts the second-rate mind. Webster was a magnificent
poseur; Edward Everett repeated the same academic oration a hundred
times; but Lincoln was too modest to pose and too honest to turn parrot
and speak by rote. He was a man who loved to talk with his neighbors
in homely metaphor, and it was then that his thought clothed itself in
whimsical humor. He did not wear his heart on his sleeve, but like Mark
Twain he let it slip out in a witticism.

Even more than Washington has Lincoln suffered at the hands of the
myth makers. Of late years he has come to be looked upon too often as
the invaluable asset of the political party that he honored in its
founding, and too rarely as the embodiment of the kindly, liberal soul
of our native democracy in the simpler days of a fluid economics and
an unsophisticated equalitarianism. With his instinctive kindliness,
his abiding faith in the good will of men, his dislike of coercion,
his readiness to compromise, he may seem old-fashioned to a generation
that has grown intolerant--but that is a reflection on our own times
rather than on Lincoln. The real Lincoln can grow old-fashioned no
more than Jefferson. As he went back in a day of sordid imperialisms
to the earlier liberalism of the great Virginian, seeking to rescue
the idealism of the Declaration of Independence from the desecration
of the market place where it was openly flouted, so in a day of vaster
imperialisms and greater complexity we may take counsel of his
humanitarianism, his open-mindedness, his trust in tolerance and good
will, his democratic faith that held firm in spite of disappointment.
The market place is mighty now as it was then, and liberalism finds as
few friends there; but when did its gods become immortal?




