Chapter IV • James Fenimore Cooper • Critic


Fenimore Cooper is one of the puzzling figures of his generation.
In his substantial character was embodied what may well appear no
more than a bundle of contradictions. Romancer and social critic,
feudal-minded yet espousing a republican faith, he pretty much baffled
his own generation in its testy attempts to understand him, as he has
pretty much baffled later times. No other major writer, unless it be
Whitman, has been so misunderstood, and no other offers a knottier
problem to the student of American letters. The stubborn clay of
his nature was molded to a pattern unlike that of his fellows, and
the difference was long accounted to him as a grave shortcoming.
His outspoken individualism was a constant irritant to a sensitive
majority, and his aloofness from the common enthusiasms was reckoned
no better than treason to his native land. The right of the individual
to question the herd pronouncements was a right not acknowledged by
the herd, and the more it tried to silence Cooper’s tongue the more
caustic and loquacious it became. He refused to be silenced though
it should come to open warfare. His later years in consequence were
rendered unhappy by a thousand petty vexations, and his creative work
was brought only this side of shipwreck.

How and why so great a misadventure befell him are questions of
prime importance to which little attention has been given. That his
tactlessness was at fault is commonly believed--his tactlessness and a
certain pugnacious virtue that would inculcate righteousness by means
of a broken head. But such an explanation, true enough so far as it
goes, does not go far enough. The trouble lay deeper than that; it lay
in the mind of Cooper himself, in the doubts and uncertainties that
dwelt side by side with stubborn dogmatisms, troubling his speculations
and perplexing his plainest counsels. And that trouble must be traced
to an underlying conflict between the man and his age, between the
ideal and the real, between high loyalties and petty fact. Fenimore
Cooper was the barometer of a gusty generation, sensitive to every
storm on the far horizon. No other observer of that changing generation
suffered so keenly in mind and conscience from the loosening of ancient
ties, and none labored so hard to keep his countrymen to the strait
path of an old-fashioned rectitude. His busy life covered the middle
years of the great shift from an aristocratic order to a capitalistic
order, and this revolutionary change provided him ample materials for
brooding speculation. At every turn in the road fresh doubts assailed
him. The perplexities and dogmatisms that clutter so many of his later
pages, playing havoc with his romantic art, are a testimony to the
confusions of a generation in the midst of epic changes. As honest a
man as ever spoke his mind frankly, he endeavored to reconcile the
irreconcilable, and establish sure standards amid the wreck of all
standards. He could not drift. He must discover some working agreement
between the old America and the new, between the reputed excellencies
of the traditional aristocratic order, and the reputed justice of the
democratic ideal. But unfortunately for this difficult business he was
temperamentally ill-equipped. He was always at war with himself. His
loyalties and his conscience ran at cross-purposes. His mind was packed
with prejudices as an egg with meat. He was too partisan to compromise,
and too honest to be content with the shoddy. His instinctive
romanticisms were always being buffeted by fact, and his troubled mind
in consequence was forever constructing laborious defense-mechanisms.

For those deep confusions that marred his later work and brought
such bitter misunderstanding upon him, his heritage was much to
blame. A romantic at heart, he was out of sympathy with the dominant
romanticisms of his generation. Certain hold-overs from the past held
him back from hearty participation in the present. He loved the world
that was falling into decay too much to put away its virtues with its
smallclothes; he would preserve what was excellent in the old to enrich
and dignify what was excellent in the new; he would have the young
democracy learn the decorum of a staid aristocracy. It is this fond
lingering between worlds that sets Cooper apart from his fellows. He
was an English squire of the old school turned republican, who did not
quite like the company he found himself in. He was equally puzzled at
the bumptious leveling of the coonskin democracy, and the exploitative
spirit of Wall Street Whiggery. But though he railed at the newfangled
ways with the testiness of a squire, he was too confirmed a republican,
too deeply concerned that the great venture in republicanism should
demonstrate its wisdom, to overlook its shortcomings. He would have
it be so true to its ideal that the world would acknowledge its
excellence. He could not circumscribe his duties to election-day
hurrahs; he must ferret out treason in the market place; he must be
faithful in counsel though he utter unwelcome truths. It was the very
faithfulness of Cooper to his conception of an ideal republic that
brought him into collision with his fellows and filled his later days
with bitterness.

It is easy to see where Cooper got those stubborn notions that marked
him as the last of our eighteenth-century squires and left him obsolete
after the adoption of the Constitution of 1821. From his father, from
the Tory rector of St. Peter’s, Albany, who first schooled him, from
the Loyalist family of De Lancey into which he married, from Governor
Jay and the old gentry with whom he was brought up, he imbibed certain
stalwart conservatisms--political, religious, social, economic--that
mingled in his blood and nourished the tissues of caste prejudice
from which his maturer social philosophy struggled in vain to escape.
In spite of his deliberate acceptance of the democratic principle,
as he understood that principle, he remained at heart as sturdily
eighteenth-century as any fox-hunting master of English acres. He
had early been bred in the old traditions at Otsego Hall where he
spent his boyhood. His father, Judge William Cooper, “a testy and
choleric gentleman easily wrought into passion,”--whom he idealized as
Judge Temple in _The Pioneers_--was an old-school politician of high
Federalist persuasion, a vigorous, not to say truculent, embodiment of
the stake-in-society principle of statecraft. Smitten with the common
itch for large land holdings, he had got his hands on a huge virgin
tract which he managed in the old baronial fashion. He was a real lord
of the manor and late in life he recalled that “there were 40,000 souls
holding land, directly or indirectly, under me”; and in the year 1800
“he set up a claim to having placed the plough upon more acres than any
other man in America” (quoted in D. R. Fox, _The Decline of Aristocracy
in the Politics of New York_, p. 136). Otsego Hall in Cooperstown was
a frontier citadel of Federalism defending the western marches against
Jeffersonian democracy, and Judge Cooper used his economic power
over tenants with telling effect. He “rode far and wide in the cause
of Jay and later Aaron Burr, always preaching the musty doctrine that
government had better be left to gentlemen, and that simple folk should
vote as they were told” (_ibid._, pp. 136-137). When persuasion failed
he resorted to threats, and in 1792 he was before the legislature on
impeachment charges. From the testimony it appears that the patriarchal
Judge used direct methods with tenants in arrears; he “had been round
to the people and told them that they owed him, and that unless they
voted for Mr. Jay, he would ruin them” (_ibid._, p. 140). By such
arguments it was thought some seven hundred votes had been brought into
the Federalist column by this exemplar of the old virtues.

But Cooper had drifted with his age far from such old-fashioned methods
of class domination. In spite of his great love for his father he
seems never to have espoused the latter’s political creed. With the
disintegration of Federalism the young man went with the country in
its turning towards French romanticism. When and why he adopted the
democratic faith is not apparent, but until middle life it would seem
that he concerned himself little with political theory. He remained a
provincial American with an intense pride of patriotism. But his long
stay in Europe, lasting from June, 1826, to November, 1833, and the
Jacksonian revolution that took place during his absence, put him upon
an anxious examination of first principles, and thereafter to the end
of his life the social and political problems of America were a burden
on his conscience. He arrived late at a reasoned political faith, as
he arrived late at his literary art, and it is impossible to trace the
steps of his intellectual development; yet confused though his thinking
was, and shot through with narrowing prejudices, he persistently sought
for the light; and the germinal source of his dissatisfactions was the
deepening conviction that, in Franklin’s phrase, the affairs of this
world are preposterously managed. From this conviction Cooper never
swerved. The contrast everywhere between the real and the ideal took
hold of his mind as an obsession, and put an end to his contentment.
His romantic art suffered from the intrusion of realism; the romancer
was constantly impelled to turn critic. It was his travels more than
anything else that destroyed his provincial contentment. The perturbing
influence of that experience abroad has never perhaps been adequately
considered by his critics. No other American was so unsettled by
contact with European civilization. It was a Europe in the throes
of revolution and Cooper threw himself with enthusiasm into French
politics, hoping for a wise republican issue from the overturn. But
it was a Europe also of dignified and generous culture that was a
challenge to his Americanism. It made a critic of him and turned his
mind to political and social problems. Europe appealed to his native
aristocratic prejudices, but repelled his democratic; Jacksonian
America appealed to his democratic prejudices, but rode roughshod
over his aristocratic. He found himself nowhere at home. Puzzled and
perturbed, he leveled his shafts at both worlds and sought a haven of
refuge in vicarious existence, at times in the wilderness beyond the
soil and smutch of the Jacksonian frontier, at times in the Utopian
world of _The Crater_ where an honest man could find free play for his
creative energy, until the trouble makers came upon him.

In temperament and outlook this later Cooper was another John Adams
modified by changing times. A realist in his long brooding over social
and political evils, he was at heart an idealist greatly concerned
with justice amongst men, with a romantic fondness for dwelling on
the virtues of earlier days. Like Adams he understood very well that
equality is a Utopian dream; that social classes exist in every society
that has accumulated property, and that sovereignty in the long run
will fall into the hands that control the social economics.[425] The
problem he set himself to consider was the problem of reconciling this
universal fact with his own predilection in favor of democracy. That
he regarded himself as a democrat his emphatic assertions suffice
to prove; but no more than Emerson was he deceived by the spurious
democracy of the times. “The writer believes himself to be as good a
democrat as there is in America,” he said in the Introduction to _The
American Democrat_. “But his democracy is not of the impracticable
school. He prefers a democracy to any other system, on account of its
comparative advantages, but not on account of its perfection. He knows
it has evils; great and increasing evils, and evils peculiar to itself;
but he believes that monarchy and aristocracy have more. It will be
very apparent to all who read this book, that he is not a believer in
the scheme of raising men very far above their natural propensities.”
He would lift his voice in no hurrah for the majority, for he knew
that the majority was very likely to be the tool of the demagogue. He
saw no peculiar virtue or special intelligence in a coonskin cap, and
he discovered no advantage in log cabins and hard cider as a training
school for statesmen. He had watched the disgraceful campaign of 1840
with concern that gentlemen should stoop to the demagoguery that marked
that electoral debauch; and it confirmed him in the conviction that
“old-fashioned, high principled gentlemen” of an earlier age would
never have been guilty of such traffic in votes--men like Chancellor
Livingston who devoted his later years to raising Merino sheep, or John
Jay who after filling with dignity many high offices retired to his
estate to concern himself with new varieties of melons.

Hating all humbug, Cooper made it his business to free his mind from
the several varieties of cant that were overrunning America like
pigweed. “Had a suitable compound offered,” he said of _The American
Democrat_, “the title of this book would have been something like
‘Anti-cant.’” Roughly, the history of his essays in criticism falls
into two broad phases: the struggle to pull himself out of the bog
of eighteenth-century caste philosophy--from that stake-in-society
theory which his father upheld; and the struggle to escape the
fallacies of the nineteenth-century philosophy rising about him--from
the rude equalitarianism of Jacksonian democracy, and the materialism
of capitalistic exploitation. His abandonment of the principle of
gentleman-rule marks his definite break with the philosophy of
Federalism and the substitution of democracy. It cost him a prolonged
struggle, for the social-stake theory ran with many of his oldest
predilections, and the evidence of that struggle is scattered broadly
through the pages written in the late thirties; but having convinced
himself of the social wrong involved in the principle, he was tireless
in refutation. In _The American Democrat_ he laid down the principle
that “A government founded on the representation of property, however
direct or indirect, is radically vicious.... It is the proper business
of government to resist the corruptions of money, and not to depend
on them” (_On Property_, p. 141). But it is _The Monikins_, a strange
book much laughed at by the critics, rarely read and little understood,
that concerns itself most largely with the theory. Sadly bungled though
the satire quite obviously is, it is nevertheless a spirited attack on
the social-stake principle that reveals how far Cooper had traveled
from the doctrines of Hamilton and Webster, of Federalist and Whig.
Both England and America--Leaphigh and Leaplow--show meanly under his
caustic analysis, the former perhaps more meanly than the latter; their
institutions, societies, politics, manners, are an unlovely compound of
cant and hypocrisy; and the root of the common meanness he discovers
in human selfishness. He conceives of man as a queer mixture of good
and evil from whom much is not to be expected; something nearer to
Swift’s conception than William Ellery Channing’s; with too much of the
Monikin in him to pass for a child of God; prone to error even under
a republican system; insolent, tyrannical, loving fetishes, given to
brag, too poor-spirited to be free, gilding his fetters and belying
Locke’s saying that chains are an ill wearing. There are depths of
bitterness in _The Monikins_ that startle the reader. It is a tale of
doubt and disillusion, Gulliver-like in its fierceness of attack, that
strikes through all the shoddy romanticisms of the times and reduces
the current democracy to humbug. Subjected to such analysis the old
Federalist shibboleth of men of principle and property is no more than
the East wind in empty bellies. The possession of money does not change
human nature; rich as well as poor are driven by selfish interest, and
to give a loose to property power is to invite political disaster.

  Your social-stake system supposes that he who has what is termed a
  distinct and prominent interest in society, will be the most likely
  to conduct its affairs wisely, justly, and disinterestedly. This
  would be true, if those great principles which lie at the root of
  all happiness were respected; but unluckily, the stake in question,
  instead of being a stake in justice and virtue, is usually reduced
  to be merely a stake in property.... Now, all experience shows
  that the great property-incentives are to increase property, to
  protect property, and to buy with property those advantages which
  ought to be independent of property, viz., honors, dignities,
  power and immunities. I cannot say how it is with men, but our
  [Monikin] histories are eloquent on this head. We have had the
  property-principle carried out thoroughly in our practice, and the
  result has shown that its chief operation is to render property as
  intact as possible, and the bones, and sinews, and marrow of all
  who do not possess it, its slaves. (_The Monikins_, Chapter XXVII.)

But though Cooper might deny the validity of the eighteenth-century
social-stake theory, he saw no valid reason to abandon his
eighteenth-century economics. In his preference for a social order
founded on agriculture he was as confirmed a Physiocrat as Franklin or
Jefferson; and this preference determined his judgment on the economic
revolution under way in America. A people living close to the soil was
living more wholesomely, he believed, than a city people immersed in
trade and manufacture. For the capitalistic expansion that followed the
new fiscal system of the seventeen-nineties, he felt an instinctive
repugnance. Banking and the manipulation of credit seemed to him mean
and sordid, and the spirit of speculation that was overrunning the
land he believed was destructive of common morality. The activities
of Wall Street he looked upon with the eyes of an English squire. To
expect any sane progress from such worship of money, to assume that a
high and excellent civilization could result from such worship, seemed
to him plain madness. “God protect the country that has nothing but
commercial towns for capitals,” he wrote his wife in 1839 (Cooper,
_Correspondence of James Fenimore Cooper_, Vol. II, p. 404), and the
comment found amplification in many a caustic passage in his novels of
criticism. A materialistic middle class with its gospel of progress
interpreted in terms of wasteful exploitation seemed to him the hateful
progeny of a period of “moral occultation”; and against this “Yankee”
philosophy he waged an unrelenting warfare. In _The Monikins_ he drew
a gloomy picture of the America of the thirties when the land had come
under a great moral eclipse; and in _Home as Found_ and _The Redskins_
he commented bitterly on the universal restlessness that was driving
thousands to the new West to seek their fortunes. The settlement of
the Inland Empire was no romance for him. The Great Migration seemed
to imply the break-up of the older America he loved; and the impact of
the frontier spirit upon the country seemed likely to destroy the last
excellence of an earlier age. It marked for Cooper the final triumph
of the acquisitive Yankee spirit, grasping and lawless in its crude
leveling.

From these germinal sources--his love of the dignified ways of the old
manorial families, his contempt for the middle class, his dislike of a
bumptious leveling, his hatred of brag and cant and enterprise--came
those sharp contrasts in his pictures that set the vulgar present
over against the dignified past. His criticism was in no small part
the reaction of a romantic to the unlovely works of an economic
revolution. From his loyalty to the old came that subtle romanticizing
of the eighteenth century that lends a charm to his tales, and from it
came also that vindictive hatred of the frontier that spurred him to
ill-balanced criticism. He could not like the new that was destroying
the old. Like Emerson he was a man without a party, but unlike him he
sought consolation in the past rather than the future. The excellence
he yearned for he found in that older world whose stable ways were as
yet unsettled by the romantic revolution, and from the meanness of the
present he stole away to find consolation in the dignity and worth of
honester times. The late eighteenth century became, therefore, his
romantic haven and City of Refuge to which he returned gladly. He
was always seeking to revitalize the old in an environment where, as
he lamented, “the eighteenth century may be set down as a very dark
antiquity.”

That Cooper unconsciously romanticized the past is only too evident.
Too often he accepted its self-proclaimed virtues as sober fact and
created a race of squires that never existed outside his pages.
Realist though he was in certain moods, he abandoned his realism in
the presence of the tie-wig gentry. His father was as graspingly
eighteenth century as Gouverneur Morris and saw to it that his own nest
was well feathered; yet the son failed to perceive that the dignified
professions of those old gentlemen were little more than splendid
gestures. He made the mistake of taking them at their face value.
Honest himself, he attributed an equal honesty to the older generation,
and he watched with unfeigned regret the disintegration of an order
that seemed to him the repository of much that was excellent. Fragments
of its ideals he clung to; its dignity, its concern for breeding
and manners, its fine distinction. Fragments also of its political
convictions: its concern for law and order, its belief that all just
law is founded in morality, its insistence that American government
is one of principles and not of men. He put his finger shrewdly on
certain fallacies of eighteenth-century theory, but he took too many
of its values at par. The twilight is a mighty sorcerer and Cooper was
bewitched by the half light that lingered softly on the familiar past.

This suffices to explain the grounds of the charge of aristocratic
leanings that Cooper was persistently brought under. His bold defense
of the landed gentry gave mortal enmity to the Jacksonians, and the
tactlessness with which he pointed out the crude provincialisms of
America--the bumptious plebeians he set over against the priggish
gentlemen--was rubbing salt on open sores. _Home as Found_ and _The
Redskins_ were onslaughts on the ways of the sacred majority that
America could not forgive him for. Yet no counter criticism ever moved
Cooper from his conviction that gentlemen of an earlier generation
possessed dignity, principles, character, far beyond the speculators
and politicians and “small-potato lawyers” of the present time of
“moral occultation”; and the difference in favor of the old he traced
to the economic basis of the tie-wig gentry. Believing with John Adams
that an aristocracy is implicit in every established society, he
frankly preferred a landed to a capitalistic aristocracy. Gentlemen of
the old school were neighborhood patriarchs. Secure in position and
possessions they disdained to keep an ear to the ground or court a
silly popularity. They were squires with a high sense of responsibility
to themselves and society. Their stake in the land was a stabilizing
influence in their lives; and their ample way of living, their
well-bred leisure, their courteous bearing learned from a cosmopolitan
experience, seemed to Cooper a desirable influence in a society lacking
refinement and exact standards. To supplant them with the new gentry of
Wall Street seemed to him plain folly, and he watched the decay of the
old families with a pathetic concern. The Anti-Rent novels are a long
defense of a thesis that comes to final expression in such a passage as
this from _The Redskins_:

  I say that, in a country like this, in which land is so abundant
  as to render the evils of a general monopoly impossible, a landed
  gentry is precisely what is most needed for the higher order of
  civilization, including manners, tastes, and the minor principles,
  and is the very class which, if reasonably maintained and properly
  regarded, would do the most good at the least risk of any social
  caste known. (Chapter XXVI.)

It is not hard, indeed, to understand Cooper’s preference for Stephen
Van Rensselaer the Patroon, to John Jacob Astor the fur trader, or
Commodore Vanderbilt the ferryman; yet such preference was charged
against him as un-American.

It was this revulsion from the meanness of the present that sent
Cooper into the wilderness or out on the high seas, to seek adventure
in the company of nature’s noblemen, and forget the sordidness of the
real. Here again the French school prompted his thinking, if only to
supplement the romance of his boyish recollections. Natty Bumppo is
quite evidently man as he came from the hand of nature, uncorrupted by
the vices of the settlements; indeed one might question whether the
back-to-nature literature can show another figure so enduringly vital
as the Leatherstocking. From this same material is fashioned Uncas
and the younger Chingachgook and still other lovable figures of his
romances. They belong to the free wilderness beyond the settlements,
where the dramatic flight and pursuit go on unchecked by impertinent
fences. Here their native virtues expand and their generous gifts find
ample play. They shunned the settlements as Cooper shunned them. On the
frontier, the middle ground between nature and civilization, Cooper’s
spirits flagged. He had no love for the stumpy clearings, the slovenly
cabins, the shiftless squatters; the raw devastation of the ax grieved
him and he breathes contentedly only after he has left the last scars
behind and is in the deep woods beyond the smell of rum. Such a man
obviously was unfitted to write a just account of the frontier as
it straggled westward. He hated its ways too fiercely to do justice
to it, and when he comes upon it in his tales, when he introduces a
frontier figure such as Ishmael Bush in _The Prairie_ or old Aaron
Thousandacres in _The Chainbearer_, it is to depict the unhappy state
of society where the virtues of nature are gone and the refinements
of civilization not yet come. No writer has set down a more sweeping
indictment of the frontier than Cooper, and he set it down because the
frontier seemed to him the muddy source of the vulgar leveling he hated
so heartily. A gentleman, whether Indian or squire or scout, Cooper
loved to be with; but a vulgarian he could not endure, and a rascal
stirred his Puritan wrath. In consequence there runs through his work
little of the amusing picaresque strain that the heartier nature of
Gilmore Simms delighted in, and that made him a truer chronicler of
frontier ways.

Democrat though he professed to be, Cooper shrank from the logical
application of the democratic principle. The adoption of manhood
suffrage in New York brought in its train a sorry scramble of
demagogues to sway the popular will, a debasement of the press, and
a vulgarizing of political life that proved a sore trial to Cooper’s
faith. He was too severely moralist to enjoy the little weaknesses of
human nature, but must set himself up as custodian of public morals.
Affronted by a bumptious vulgarity, he became the assailant rather than
the critic of Jacksonian ways. The land to which he returned in 1833
was a broad target for his shafts and he sent them into the white. The
America of log cabins and hard cider seemed to him to have repudiated
the traditional standards, moral as well as cultural, and he attributed
the disintegration to the corruption that came from the extension of
the suffrage to classes unprepared to use it wisely. It was this that
embittered his criticism in the caustic pages of _Homeward Bound_ and
_Home as Found_. He was startled and resentful at the changes. “You
have been dreaming abroad,” remarked one of the characters in the
former, “while your country has retrograded, in all that is respectable
and good, a century in a dozen years” (_Homeward Bound_, Chapter XVII).
The colossal brag, the meaningless unrest, the abysmal provincialism,
he marked as the natural by-products of the mob mind. In throwing off
its old restraints America was coming to deny all standards of decency
and excellence. “What then do you deem our greatest error--our weakest
point?” asks one of his characters, and the reply is explicit:

  Provincialisms, with their train of narrow prejudices, and a
  disposition to set up mediocrity as perfection, under the double
  influence of an ignorance that unavoidably arises from a want of
  models, and of the irresistible tendency to mediocrity in a nation
  where the common mind so imperiously rules. (_Home as Found_,
  Chapter XXV.)

It was during the bustling decade of the forties, when the agrarian
unrest in York State was putting in jeopardy the old manorial system,
that Cooper’s antagonism to the spirit of leveling became bitterest;
and it was in defense of the old system that he wrote the Anti-Rent
trilogy that should always be set over against the Leatherstocking
tales. Taken together the two series contain pretty much the whole
of Cooper, his sea tales excepted; either alone gives an inadequate
and partial view. The one is a social study, the other a romantic
epic. The one gives a picture of the changes the years have brought
to a given region, the other follows the retreating wilderness as the
frontier moved westward. The Anti-Rent novels present the reverse of
the romantic picture of the Leatherstocking tales. Their central figure
is Aaron Thousandacres the squatter, who has come out of Connecticut
to possess what pleases him, regardless of legal rights. Offspring of
generations of covetous, psalm-singing Puritans, he has no difficulty
in justifying his lawlessness by Yankee logic. The devil can quote
Scripture, and in this respect old Thousandacres is the devil’s own
son. When Scripture fails the easy gospel of natural rights comes to
his aid; the written law may be on the side of the title-holder, but
natural law is on the side of the squatter.

  “There’s two rights to all the land on ’arth, and the whull world
  over,” the squatter replied to Chainbearer’s legal argument. “One
  of these rights is what I call a king’s right, or that which
  depends on writin’s, and laws, and sich like contrivances; and
  the other depends on possession. It stands to reason, that fact
  is better than any writin’ about it can be.” (_The Chainbearer_,
  Chapter XXV.)

Such lax doctrine, to Cooper, was the evil fruit of the spirit of
lawlessness that was laying a blight upon America. A retributive bullet
ends the fierce career of old Thousandacres, but his tigress wife,
his rough sons and slattern daughters are driven from their home to
plunge deeper into the wilderness, there to beget other generations of
squatters whose vicious doctrines return to plague society. No romance
blends with the tale of their lives; no sympathy softens the picture of
the stern old Yankee. He has set himself against law and order and must
yield or be destroyed. It is the old story of the struggle for land, a
struggle that went on for generations between speculator and squatter,
between rich and poor, with much wrong and much right on both sides;
yet Cooper’s sympathies are cold to the squatter’s plea and he enlists
God, morality, and the law, in defense of a title to forty thousand
acres wheedled from the Indians for ninety-six pounds, York currency,
spent in trinkets. Righteousness without a sense of humor is not easy
to live with.

In much of his later work Cooper’s romantic impulses are held in check
by a growing tendency towards realism. It was there from the first but
as he grew more critical it spread over more of his pages. He tried
to hold the scales of his judgment even, but his realism was marred
and distorted by his vehement nature. A mind exuding prejudice is
ill equipped to deal objectively with material, and Cooper was too
inveterate a moralist to accept the principle of impersonal detachment.
He prided himself on facing fact, but he loved to preach; and having
pointed out the wrongfulness of vicious morals he must follow it
with a vigorous homily on right conduct. And yet despite his gross
shortcomings there is a deal of realism scattered through his volumes.
He consciously tried to be a chronicler of manners, to depict America
truly, to recreate fairly present and past, red man and white, Dutch
and Yankee. His prejudices certainly got the better of him in dealing
with New England, and his romance certainly got the better of him in
describing the Mohicans. Yet though he might romanticize Uncas he
did not romanticize Saucy Nick in _Wyandotté_, but drew an excellent
picture of the struggle between the drunkard and the warrior in the
heart of the Tuscarora that reveals much of the Indian nature--an
analysis that holds the scales more evenly than they are held in _The
Last of the Mohicans_ or in Bird’s _Nick of the Woods_. The book as a
whole, indeed, is an excellent example of Cooper’s desire to substitute
a critical for a romantic treatment of materials. In his discriminating
analysis of the motives separating families in the Revolutionary war,
there is no glorification of partisanship, no prejudiced espousal of a
sacred cause, no division of sheep and goats. Cooper will have none of
the cheap romance of patriotism, but probes skillfully into the motives
and impulses that divided honest men amid the difficulties of civil
war. More than that, he makes his villain one of the patriot party who
uses the unsettlement of the times to cover his dirty tracks. It is a
characteristic document that deserves to stand beside _Satanstoe_ as an
example of his later work.

Politics was all about Cooper while he was writing these tales, and
his sporadic incursions into criticism led him into the field of
political theory. So doughty a warrior must break a lance when all
America was engaged in a great political tourney. While Whig and
Democrat were loudly professing allegiance to the new doctrine of
majority rule, Cooper was making his way back to the principles of
the eighteenth century and discovering the essence of good government
in self-restraint. The mistake of the new school, he was convinced,
lay in confusing the present will of the majority with the rule of
the people; the mistake of the old school lay in confusing the will
of the minority with the rule of the people. Above and beyond both
majority and minority is the eternal principle of justice, and any
government that flouts that principle is bad government, no matter
how sanctioned. In a republic which foolishly believes that the voice
of the people is the sole criterion of right, the problem of justice
is peculiarly difficult, for what remedies are available in cases “in
which the people themselves happen to go astray, _en masse_”? It is the
problem that attends every ethical interpretation of sovereignty, and
it awakened acute concern in Cooper’s mind. He could find no solution
except in the good sense of the people, and with a vicious press and
persuasive demagogues doing their best to befuddle the public mind,
the outlook seemed dark. It was not the people he distrusted, but the
self-seekers who set up to be leaders of the people. All the noise was
made by demagogues who proclaimed their own mouthings to be authentic
public opinion. How ineffectively Cooper struggled with the problem is
written down in many a passage in his critical novels.

  God help the nation [he said in _The Redskins_] where
  self-government, in its literal sense, exists.... When a people
  that has been properly educated by experience calmly selects its
  agents, and coolly sets to work to adopt a set of principles to
  form its fundamental law or constitution, the machine is on the
  right track, and will work well enough so long as it is kept there;
  but this running off and altering the fundamental principles every
  time a political faction has need of recruits, is introducing
  tyranny in its worst form--a tyranny that is just as dangerous to
  real liberty as hypocrisy is to religion. (Chapter XIII.)

  Some observers pretend that ... respect for law is gradually
  decreasing among us [he argued in _The Chainbearer_] and that
  in its place is sensibly growing up a disposition to substitute
  the opinions, wishes, and interests of local majorities, making
  the country subject to men instead of principles. The last are
  eternal and immutable; and coming of God, men, however unanimous
  in sentiment, have no more right to attempt to change them, than
  to blaspheme His holy name. All that the most exalted and largest
  political liberty can ever beneficially effect is to apply these
  principles to the good of the human race, in the management of
  their daily affairs; but when they attempt to substitute for these
  pure and just rules of right, laws conceived in selfishness and
  executed by the power of numbers, they merely exhibit tyranny
  in its popular form, instead of in its old aspect of kingly and
  aristocratic abuses. It is a fatal mistake to fancy that freedom
  is gained by the mere achievement of a right to govern, unless the
  manner in which that right is to be both understood and practised
  is closely incorporated with all popular notions of what has been
  obtained. The right to govern means no more than the right of the
  people to avail themselves of the power thus acquired to apply the
  great principles of justice to their own benefit, and from the
  possession of which they had hitherto been excluded. It confers
  no power to do that which is inherently wrong, under any pretense
  whatever. (Chapter XXVIII.)

Like Hugh Henry Brackenridge before him, Cooper was a democrat who
criticized the ways of a reputed democracy because of his love for
an ideal republic. Too few of his kind have arisen in America; too
few who dare to speak their minds unterrified by public opinion. An
individualist of the old English breed, he could not be intimidated
or coerced in the matter of his rights by any clamor, whether of
newspapers or mobs. He had his shortcomings in plenty, both as
romancer and critic. Testy, opinionated, tactless, forever lugging
in disagreeable truths by the ears, he said many wise things so
blunderingly as to make truth doubly offensive, and he hewed at his art
so awkwardly as well-nigh to destroy the beauty of his romance. Yet the
more intimately one comes to know him, the more one comes to respect
his honest, manly nature that loved justice and decency more than
popularity. His daily life became a long warfare with his fellows, who
exacted of him a great price for his idealism; but later generations
should love him none the less for the battles he fought. That America
has been so tardy in coming to know him as a man and a democrat, as
well as a romancer, is a reflection upon its critical acumen.


Footnotes

[425] See the Preface to _The Redskins_.




