CHAPTER XXIII.

    _Attacked by Dr. Ekebom—Visits France—Letter to Hartley, and
    Hartley’s Opinion of Swedenborg._


In the spring of 1769, Swedenborg published at Amsterdam, A Brief
Exposition of the Doctrine of the New Church, “in which work,” he says,
writing to Dr. Beyer, “are fully shown the errors of the existing
doctrines of justification by faith alone, and of the imputation of the
righteousness or merits of Jesus Christ.” He sent the little book to all
the clergy throughout Holland, and to the most eminent in Germany; but,
on second thought, sent only one copy to Sweden, to Dr. Beyer, requesting
him to keep it to himself, for true divinity in Sweden was in a wintry
state.

Swedenborg’s long preservation from attack and controversy, at this
time came to an end. On the 22d of March, 1769, Dr. Ekebom, Dean of the
Theological faculty of Gottenburg, laid before the Consistory there
a series of objections against Swedenborg’s theological writings,
laden with untruth, and full of personal invective. The Dean branded
his doctrine “as in the highest degree heretical, and, on points the
most tender to every Christian, Socinian.” He stated, further, that
he “_did not know Assessor Swedenborg’s religious system, and should
take no pains to come at the knowledge of it_.” As for Swedenborg’s
chief works, he “_did not possess them, and had neither read nor seen
them_.” Swedenborg’s written reply, transmitted from Holland, was mild
and effectual. He cited his writings themselves, and proved that,
according to Scripture, the Apostolic Creed, and whatever was not
self-contradictory in the orthodoxy of the churches, his doctrine was
anything but heretical. But the self-acknowledged ignorance and prejudice
of the Dean were not to be removed by anything he might say. “Was not
this,” to quote Swedenborg’s own words, “to be blind in the forehead,
and to have eyes behind, and even those covered with a film? To see and
decide upon writings in such a fashion, can any secular or ecclesiastical
judge regard as otherwise than criminal?”

About the end of May, or the beginning of June, Swedenborg left Amsterdam
for Paris, “with a design which,” in writing to Dr. Beyer, he says,
“must not be made public beforehand.” We hardly understand the remark,
except that he anticipated some difficulty with regard to the object
of his journey,—the publication of another little work, entitled, “The
Intercourse Between the Soul and the Body,” in the French capital.

On his arrival in Paris, Swedenborg submitted his tract to M. Chevreuil,
Censor Royal, who, having read it, informed him that a tacit permission
to publish would be granted, on condition, as was customary in the case
of doubtful books, that the title should say, “printed at London,” or
“at Amsterdam.” This, Swedenborg’s nice sense of truth and honor could
not submit to, and he abandoned his intention of publishing it in Paris.
His enemies in Gottenburg then circulated a report that he had been
ordered to quit Paris, which he, in a letter to Dr. Beyer, pronounced a
direct falsehood, and appealed for the truth of the case to the Swedish
Ambassador to France.

“Rumor also,” writes Wilkinson, “has been busy with Swedenborg upon
this journey. The French ‘Universal Biography’ connects him with an
artist,—Elie,—who, it is alleged, supplied him with money, and furthered
his presumed designs. Indeed, he has been accused of a league with
the _illuminés_, and with a certain politico-theological freemasonry,
centuries old, but always invisible, which was to overturn society,
and foster revolutions all over the world. We can only say that our
researches have not elicited these particulars, and that every authentic
document shows that Swedenborg stood always upon his own basis,
accepted money from no one, and was just what he appeared—a theological
missionary, and nothing more.”

The short visit to Paris was terminated by his departure for London,
where, unfettered by censors, he published his little book—“The
Intercourse Between the Soul and the Body.”

One of Swedenborg’s warmest and most intelligent English friends, was the
Rev. Thomas Hartley, A. M., rector of Winwick, Northamptonshire,—himself
an author, and assistant translator of the first English edition of
“Heaven and Hell.” At this time he wrote to Swedenborg, fearing that
he might be in want of money, and offering to supply his needs; also
requesting an account of his past life and connections, as a means of
refuting calumnies. In his reply, Swedenborg satisfied him on these
points. He says to Mr. Hartley: “I take pleasure in the friendship you
express for me in your letter, and return you sincere thanks for the
same: but as to the praises you bestow upon me, I only receive them as
tokens of your love of the truths contained in my writings, and so refer
them to the Lord and Saviour, from whom is all truth, because he is the
Truth. John xiv. 6.

“I live on terms of familiarity and friendship with all the bishops of
my country, who are ten in number; as also with the sixteen senators,
and the rest of the nobility; for they know that I am in fellowship with
angels. The King and Queen also, and the three princes, their sons, show
me much favor. I was once invited by the King and Queen to dine at their
table,—an honor which is, in general, granted only to the nobility of
the highest rank; and likewise, since, with the hereditary Prince. They
all wished for my return home,—so far am I from being in any danger of
persecution in my own country, as you seem to apprehend, and so kindly
wish to provide against; and should anything of the kind befall me
elsewhere, it can not hurt me. But I regard all that I have mentioned as
matters of little moment; for, what far exceeds them, I have been called
to a holy office by the Lord himself, who most graciously manifested
himself in person to me, his servant, in the year 1743; when he opened my
sight to the view of the spiritual world, and granted me the privilege
of conversing with spirits and angels, which I enjoy to this day. I am
a Fellow, by invitation, of the Royal Academy of Sciences at Stockholm:
but I have never sought admission into any other Literary Society, as I
belong to an angelic society, wherein things relating to heaven and the
soul are the only subjects of discourse and entertainment; whereas the
things which occupy the attention of our Literary Societies are such as
relate to the world and the body. As for the world’s wealth, I have what
is sufficient, and more I neither seek nor wish for. Your letter has
drawn the mention of these things from me, with the view, as you suggest,
that any ill-grounded prejudices may be removed. Farewell! and from my
heart I wish you all felicity in this world and in the next; which I
make no doubt of your attaining, if you look and pray to our Lord.—E.
Swedenborg.” Dated, London, 1769.

Mr. Hartley, in 1781, when far advanced in years, thus gives his opinion
of Swedenborg:—

“The great Swedenborg was a man of uncommon humility. He was of a
catholic spirit, and loved all good men of every church, making at the
same time all candid allowance for the innocence of involuntary error.
However self-denying in his own person, as to gratifications and
indulgences, even within the bounds of moderation, yet nothing severe,
nothing of the precisian, appeared in him; but on the contrary, an
inward serenity and complacency of mind were manifest in the sweetness
of his looks and outward demeanor. It may reasonably be supposed that I
have weighed the character of our illustrious author in the scale of my
best judgment, from the personal knowledge I had of him, from the best
information I could procure respecting him, and from a diligent perusal
of his writings; and according thereto, I have found him to be the sound
divine, the good man, the deep philosopher, the universal scholar, and
the polite gentleman; and I further believe, that he had a high degree
of illumination from the spirit of God, was commissioned by Him as an
extraordinary messenger to the world, and had communication with angels
and the spiritual world far beyond any since the time of the Apostles.
As such, I offer his character to the world, solemnly declaring, that,
to the best of my knowledge, I am not herein led by any partiality or
private views whatever, being now dead to every worldly interest, and
accounting myself as unworthy of any higher character than that of a
penitent sinner.”

Two others of Swedenborg’s English friends were Dr. Messiter and
Dr. Hampé, who had been preceptor to George I. From a letter of Dr.
Messiter’s, we extract the following remarks on Swedenborg’s character:—

“I have had the honor of being frequently admitted to Swedenborg’s
company, when in London, and to converse with him on various points
of learning, and I will venture to affirm that there are no parts of
mathematical, philosophical, or medical knowledge, nay, I believe I might
justly say, of human literature, to which he is in the least a stranger;
yet so totally insensible is he of his own merit, that I am confident he
does not know that he has any; and as he himself somewhere says of the
angels, he always turns his head away on the slightest encomium.”

Swedenborg’s stay in England at this time does not seem to have been
longer than sufficed for the transaction of his business; for in
September, 1769, he sailed for Stockholm, arriving there at the beginning
of October. But we must now suspend the narrative of his life to offer a
few remarks on his little works,—“A Brief Exposition of the Doctrine of
the New Church,” and “The Intercourse Between the Soul and the Body.”




