CHAPTER XVII.

    _The Divine Love and Divine Wisdom—The Continuation of the Last
    Judgment._


The treatise on the Divine Love and Wisdom, is a book which, when
mastered, affords a key to the whole philosophy of the New Church, and to
a rational understanding of all the writings of Swedenborg. When we say
this, it will be easily understood that it is not a book to be read in a
few hours, or hastily glanced over. Every page is pregnant with thought,
and many of its paragraphs might be expanded into volumes. It is a book
which, full of thought on the deepest subjects, demands an exercise of
like thought on the part of its reader; and if he has patience, and a
simple love of truth for its own sake, happy will he be when he has made
himself familiar with the divine thoughts which, like stars, gem every
page of this matchless treatise.

The book is divided into five Parts. The First Part sets forth, in the
simplest language, the doctrine of the Divine Nature. The Lord’s essence
is shown to be Infinite Love, and its manifestation to be Infinite
Wisdom. It is proved that the Divine Love is the only life in the
universe, and that in God “all things live, move, and have their being.”
The Lord is also proved to be very and essential Man, yet above and
independent of all space and time, filling all spaces of the universe
without space, and all time without time; and being in the greatest
and the least things evermore the same. These statements may appear
inconsequential, but in our limited space, we can not explain more
fully. We could not give the proofs satisfactorily, without quoting the
volume itself. Argument is so linked to argument, that they hardly admit
of separation.

The Second Part of the work treats of the sun of heaven, and the sun of
our world. It is shown that from the Lord flows a Divine Sphere, which
appears in the spiritual world as a sun. From its heat, angels and man
have their love, and from its light their wisdom, thus their life. This
sun is not God, but it is the first proceeding from the Divine Love and
the Divine Wisdom of God-Man. By means of this sun the Lord created the
universe and all things in it. The sun of the natural world is pure fire,
and therefore dead; and since nature derives its origin from that sun, it
also is dead. Without two suns, the one living and the other dead, there
could be no creation. The end of creation is, that all things may return
to the Creator, and conjunction may exist in its ultimates.

Part Third declares that in the spiritual world there are atmospheres,
waters and earths, as in the natural world; but that the former are
spiritual, whereas the latter are natural. We are then introduced to the
doctrine of degrees—a doctrine which must be studied and understood,
before any one can with justice speak of Swedenborg; for it is a doctrine
which lies at the basis of that peerless spiritual philosophy of which he
was the promulgator. All that we can do here in the way of exposition,
is to quote the heads of his articles which express the truth far more
lucidly than we could do.

“There are three degrees of Love and wisdom, and thence degrees of
heat and light, and degrees of atmosphere. Degrees are of two kinds,
degrees of altitude and degrees of latitude. The degrees of altitude
are homogeneous, and one derived from the other in a series, like end,
cause, and effect. The first degree is in all the subsequent degrees.
All perfections increase and ascend with degrees, and according to
degrees. In successive order the first degree constitutes the highest,
and the third the lowest; but in simultaneous order, the first degree
constitutes the inmost, and the third the outmost. The ultimate degree is
the complex, continent, and basis, of the prior degrees. The degrees of
altitude in their ultimate, are in their fullness and power. There are
degrees of both kinds in the greatest and least of all created things.
There are three infinite and uncreated degrees of altitude in the Lord,
and three finite and created degrees in man. These three degrees of
altitude are in every man from his birth, and may be opened successively,
and as they are opened, a man is in the Lord, and the Lord in him.
Spiritual light flows into man by three degrees, but not spiritual heat,
except so far as he avoids evils as sins, and looks to the Lord. If the
superior or spiritual degree is not opened in a man, he becomes natural
and sensual. The natural degree of the human mind, considered in itself,
is continuous, but by correspondence with the two superior degrees, while
it is elevated, it appears as if it were discrete.

“The natural mind, being the tegument and continent of the higher degrees
of the human mind, is a re-agent; and if the superior degrees are not
opened, it acts against them, but if they are opened, it acts with them.
The abuse of the faculties which are proper to man, called rationality
and liberty, is the origin of evil. A bad man may enjoy these two
faculties as well as a good man; but a bad man abuses them to confirm
evils and falses, while a good man uses them to confirm goods and truths.
Evils and falses, when confirmed, remain; and become parts of a man’s
love and life. The things which become parts of a man’s love and thence
of his life, are communicated hereditarily to his offspring.

“All these evils and consequent falses, both hereditary and acquired,
reside in the natural mind. Evils and falses are entirely opposed to
goods and truths; because evils and falses are diabolical and infernal,
and goods and truths are divine and heavenly. The natural mind, which is
in evils and falses, is a form and image of hell, and descends by three
degrees. These three degrees of the natural mind, which is an image and
form of hell, are opposed to the three degrees of the spiritual mind,
which is a form and image of heaven: thus the natural mind which is a
hell, is in complete opposition to the spiritual mind which is a heaven.
All things of the three degrees of the natural mind, are included in
works, which are performed by acts of the body.”

Part Fourth teaches that the Lord from eternity, who is Jehovah, created
the universe and all things therein from Himself, and not from nothing;
this would not have been possible if the Lord were not a Divine Man; He
from himself producing the sun of the spiritual world, and by it creating
all things. In the substances and matters of which earths consist, there
is nothing of the Divine in itself; but still they are from the Divine
in itself. All created things in the created universe, viewed from uses,
represent man in an image; this testifies that God is Man. All things
created by the Lord are uses; and they are uses in the order, degree, and
respect, in which they have relation to man, and by man to the Lord their
Creator. Evil uses were not created by the Lord, but originated together
with hell, after man’s fall. The visible things in the created universe
testify that nature has produced nothing, and does produce nothing; but
that the Divine has produced and does produce all things from Himself,
and through the spiritual world.

Part Fifth is devoted to a description of man’s spiritual nature. It
is shown that “the Lord has formed and created in man two receptacles
and habitations for Himself, called the will and the understanding;
the will for His Divine Love, and the understanding for His Divine
Wisdom. The will and understanding are in the brains, in the whole and
every part thereof, and thence in the body, in the whole and every part
thereof. There is a correspondence of the will with the heart, and of the
understanding with the lungs; and all things that can be known of the
will and understanding, or of love and wisdom, consequently all that can
be known of man’s soul, may be known from the correspondence of the heart
with the will, and of the understanding with the lungs.”

There are many volumes in the world whose thinly spun thought, spread
over page after page, it would be easy to condense into one brief
paragraph; but the treatise on the Divine Love and Wisdom is not such a
work. It is one of those rare books which suggest and expand thought,
but can bear no abridgment or compression. We have well studied it, but
do not expect to finish it during our life on earth. Time was, when,
immersed in man made systems of faith, and wont to walk abroad in the
green fields and woods, by the sea-side, and on the mountains—we found
it difficult, nay we should rather say impossible, to see the God we
read of in our books, and thought of in our chamber, to be the same kind
Father to whom those wide and beauteous scenes owed their existence.
Justification by faith—Jerusalem—the Jews—ephod and teraphim—the Temple,
and the sacrifice—seemed to have no connection with the landscape, the
wind, the falling rain, the flowing river, and the broad and limitless
ocean. We knew it should not be so. If the Bible were God’s book, it must
have some closer affinity with his great work of nature. We knew that
one Lord was over all, and that this disunity should by no means exist.
Much mental pain and travail were our portion. The easy soothsayings of
Atheism beguiled us. We “wandered in the wilderness in a solitary way,
and found no city (doctrine) to dwell in.” We longed for the rest of
Zion. We sighed not in vain. The divine philosophy of this precious book
was revealed to us, and we knew the blessing of a faith which finds a
confirmation in every item and phase of creation, and makes the Bible and
nature evermore at one, each confirming and illustrating the other. It
gave to life new aims and aspects. It brought a mental peace we had never
hoped to enjoy, and we went on our journey of life rejoicing.

“The Continuation of the Last Judgment,” is a small pamphlet forming a
supplement to the treatise on the Last Judgment, with which it is now
generally published. It contains a very interesting account of the Last
Judgment upon the Reformed. By the Reformed, upon whom the Last Judgment
was effected, Swedenborg means those who professed a belief in God, read
the Word, heard sermons, partook of the sacrament of the Supper, yet
lived in all manner of evils. Living like Christians in externals, and
outwardly in unity with heaven, while inwardly united with hell, they
were permitted after death to form societies, and to live as in the
world; and by arts unknown in the world, to cause splendid appearances,
and by this means to persuade themselves and others that they were in
heaven. From this outward appearance, therefore, they called their
societies heavens. The heavens and the lands in which they dwelt, are
understood by the “former heaven, and the former earth, which passed
away.” Rev. xxi. 7.

At the time of the Last Judgment, the hypocrisy of these spirits was
revealed in the light of heaven, and the simple good with whom they had
associated, separated themselves with horror from them. No longer able
to simulate Christian lives, they rushed with delight into evils and
crimes of every description, openly appeared as devils, and found for
themselves the hells corresponding to their loves. At the same time all
the splendid appearances they had made for themselves vanished away;
their palaces were turned into vile huts; their gardens into stagnant
pools; their temples into piles of rubbish; and the hills on which they
dwelt, into heaps of gravel, in correspondence with their depraved
dispositions and lusts.

“After the Judgment was effected,” writes Swedenborg, “there was joy
in heaven, and also light in the world of spirits, such as was not
before. A similar light also then arose on men in the world, giving
them new enlightenment. I then saw angelic spirits, in great numbers,
rising from below, and elevated into heaven. They were the sheep there
reserved, and guarded by the Lord for ages back, lest they should come
into the malignant sphere of the dragonists, and their charity be
suffocated. These are they who are understood in the Word by those who
went forth from the sepulchers; also by the souls of those slain for the
testimony of Jesus, who were watching; and by those who are of the first
resurrection.”

After this follows a description of many things seen in the spiritual
world. He writes: “There are lands in the spiritual world, just as in the
natural world: there are hills and mountains, plains and valleys, also
fountains and rivers, lakes and seas; there are paradises, and gardens
and groves, and woods, and palaces, and houses; there are writings, and
books, functions, [_functiones_,] and employments; there are precious
stones, gold and silver; in short, there are all the things, in general
and in particular, which exist in the natural world; but in the heavens
all these things are infinitely more perfect.”

He then describes “the noble English nation” in the spiritual world;
the more excellent of whom are in the centre of all Christians, because
they have interior intellectual light. This light they derive from the
liberty they enjoy of thinking, and thence of speaking and writing. The
Dutch are then described, and then the Papists, and the Popish saints.
The Mohammedans, the Africans, and the Gentiles follow; and finally
the Jews, the Quakers, and the Moravians. The description of all these
people, as they appear beyond the grave, has an interest of a most
absorbing kind; and the light thrown by Swedenborg on their internal
character, serves to show cause for much that happens in the external
world, otherwise difficult of explanation.




