CHAPTER XX.

    _The Apocalypse Revealed._


Every one who is acquainted with theological literature, knows that
innumerable volumes of speculation have been written in attempted
explanation of the Apocalypse. He is aware that expositors have
differed about it from the earliest times; that Protestants have found
Catholicism the subject of all its denunciations, and that Catholics
have discovered that Paganism and Protestant heresy were in reality the
matters alluded to; that sceptics have proved that it refers to none
of these creeds, but is a worthless astrological treatise; and that
many good Christians, vexed and wearied with this endless contest of
opinion, have wished the book expunged from the canon of Scripture, as
altogether incomprehensible, and a mere breeder of strife. And still the
controversy goes on. The press swarms with volumes and pamphlets, all
professing to have found the key to the mystery, informing the world of
the future destiny of Europe, of the result of its wars and battles, the
precise month of the fall of the Papacy, and the time of the descent of
the New Jerusalem, the Second Advent, and the restoration of the Jews to
Canaan, and, so far as the political arrangement of the kingdoms of the
earth is concerned, almost superseding the necessity of newspapers to
the credulous believer. Wise men generally now turn a deaf ear to these
soothsayings, convinced by long and repeated experience of their utter
futility, and thinking shrewdly enough that had the Divine Providence
intended that man should know the future, the foreknowledge would have
been communicated intelligibly and not through the medium of mysteries
interpreted by men more conspicuous for temerity than for any endowment
of wisdom or common sense above their fellows. “It is a part of this
prophecy,” as Sir Isaac Newton remarks,—and the same principle is
applicable to all prophecies,—“that it should not be understood before
the last age of the world; and therefore it makes for the credit of
the prophecy that it is not yet [about 1710] understood. The folly of
interpreters has been, to foretell times and things by this prophecy, as
if God designed to make them prophets. By this rashness, they have not
only exposed themselves, but brought the prophecy also into contempt.
The design of God was much otherwise. He gave this, and other prophecies
of the Old Testament, not to gratify men’s curiosity by enabling them
to foreknow things, but that, after they were fulfilled, they might be
interpreted by the events; and his own Providence, not the interpreters,
be then manifested thereby to the world. For the event of things,
predicted many ages before, will then be a convincing argument that the
world is governed by Providence. For, as the few and obscure prophecies
concerning Christ’s first coming, were for setting up the Christian
religion, _which all nations have since corrupted_; so the many and
clear prophecies concerning the things to be done at Christ’s second
coming, are not only for predicting but also for effecting a recovery and
re-establishment of the long-lost truth, and setting up a kingdom wherein
dwells righteousness. The event will prove the Apocalypse; and this
prophecy, thus proved and understood, will open the old prophets; and all
together will make known the true religion, and establish it.”

With no claim to superior understanding or acuteness did Swedenborg
present his exposition of this mysterious book to the world. He humbly
declares that the mysteries of the Apocalypse are totally beyond the
power of human intellect to unravel, and that whatever of truth is to be
found in his work, owed its existence to the immediate illustration of
his mind by the Lord. We shall presently show what powerful reason there
was for this protestation on his part.

The Apocalypse, we are taught, is a portion of the Divine Word. It
was dictated directly by the Lord,—John, in Patmos, being simply an
amanuensis.

The Apocalypse is a prophetic book, descriptive of the decline and
consummation of the Christian Church, and the establishment of the new
and spiritual dispensation signified by “the New Jerusalem descending
from God out of heaven.” Being a prophetic book, it would have been
at variance with the laws of the Divine Providence for man to have
understood its prophecies until after the events it described were past;
for, as we have seen, a knowledge of the future would take from man all
freedom of action, all inclination to labor, and the whole hope and
pleasure of life. Therefore it was that the Apocalypse remained a sealed
book until the Christian Church had reached its consummation, and the
Last Judgment was effected, in 1757, when the Lord graciously opened
the eyes of Swedenborg and manifested to him, in clear light, the deep
mysteries of this prophecy.

Wilkinson, in his admirable Biography, well says: “A volume, unless it
were a reprint, would not give an analysis of the Apocalypse Revealed.
When we say that the commentary takes the text word by word, and
translates it into spirit, we still convey but a slender idea of what
is done. Our own first impressions on reading the work will not soon be
forgotten. Following the writer through the long breadths and flights of
this vast empyrean, we were momently in anxious fear that to sustain a
context of such was impossible. Each fresh chapter seemed like a space
that mortal wing must not attempt; and yet the fear was groundless, for
our guide sailed onward with a tranquil motion as if he knew the stars.
History and common sense, panting and grasping science, philosophy in its
better part, above all, the confidence in a Divine support and a supernal
mission, appeared to be covertly and unexpectedly present, to annihilate
difficulties, and pave the skyey way of this humble voyager. And when
we had again alighted from that perusal which strained every faculty to
the utmost, it was as though we had been there before, so entire was the
impression of self-evidence that was left upon the mind. Genesis and the
Revelation were closely at one in this marvellous Apocalypse—thenceforth
the most open of the Bible pages: the two ends of the Scripture called to
each other; an arch of Divine light spanned the river of the Word, and
the original Eden blossomed anew in the midst of the street of the holy
city.”

The Rev. O. P. Hiller, in his Memoir of Swedenborg, writes: “In the
Apocalypse Revealed, the mysterious book is taken up and examined chapter
by chapter, verse by verse, word by word, in the same manner as was
done with the books of Genesis and Exodus in the Arcana Cœlestia; and
the interior meaning, the spiritual sense, of every part, set forth in
such a manner as to present a clear, connected, and rational meaning
throughout the whole book, from the first chapter to the last. And what
is especially to be remarked, the spiritual sense of this book, the last
of the New Testament, is shown to be founded on the same principles, and
discovered by the same rules of interpretation, as the spiritual sense of
the books of Genesis and Exodus, the first of the Old Testament, written,
as they were, by other hands, and more than fifteen hundred years before;
a strong proof, certainly, that however varied the human instruments
there was One Divine Author of the whole. Thus, with any particular word,
for instance, occurring in the book of Genesis, and declared to have a
certain spiritual signification,—when that word occurs in the book of
Revelation, it is shown to have the same signification; and this holds
good in all cases. And, moreover, while all these various significations,
taken together, make in the book of Genesis a complete spiritual sense,
so in the book of Revelation they make their own complete spiritual
sense. Now it will be readily seen, that such a coincidence would be
altogether unaccountable, nay, impossible, unless there really existed
such a spiritual sense in the Word of God: and it is, indeed, this
uniform spiritual sense, full of high and heavenly truth, that raises
the holy volume infinitely above all other works of history or morals;
and the existence of such a sense is the strongest proof of the Divine
character of those writings which we call the Sacred Scriptures. And
truly, had Swedenborg done only this, he would have deserved the
gratitude of all who seriously revere the Word of God, for thus bringing
a new and most powerful argument from internal evidence, in favor of the
inspiration and divinity of the sacred volume.”

Well, then, might Swedenborg disclaim the authorship of the ideas in
the Apocalypse Revealed, and ask: “What man can draw such things from
himself?” Those who tell us that Swedenborg was self-deceived, must
either know very little of what they speak about, or must be quite as
ignorant of the capacity of the human mind and its powers of invention.
For ourselves, we could as readily believe that Swedenborg created the
world, as we could believe that the spiritual sense of the Apocalypse,
and of the whole Word, was a fiction of his brain. Were the spiritual
sense of the Word such a fiction, then it must be said that there lived
a man in the last century, with an intellect and creative faculty,
compared with which those of all the philosophers and poets of past
and present time combined, were as nothing. We leave revilers of
Swedenborg to make their choice; either to admit the existence of the
spiritual sense of the Word; or, denying its existence, and pronouncing
Swedenborg’s discovery either a delusion or an imposture, to admit that
Swedenborg was a man wholly unique—a genius infinitely surpassing any
which the world has ever known, and endowed with a power of invention
which the mind of a nation incarnate in one man could never hope to rival.

But it will never come to such a pass. Anyone who will take the trouble
candidly to examine the subject, will become convinced of the spiritual
sense of the Word, and of the truth of Swedenborg’s revelations regarding
it. The denial and mockery of them can only coexist with an ignorance,
more or less profound, of their nature; or, worse still, from a hatred
of the truth, grounded in the life and love of evil. The spiritual sense
of the Word is no invention. It is a discovery,—accomplished by Divine
means, however,—just as the finding of Australia was a discovery; and we
shall believe in its existence if we become _practically_ acquainted with
it through reverent thought and study; even as We should know Australia
best, did we go there.

It may be said: “Well, suppose the spiritual sense of the Apocalypse does
describe the fall of the Christian Church, and the inauguration of the
New Church; and typifies the doctrine of justification by faith alone by
the Dragon; and the Romanists and their lust of dominion and atrocious
deeds by Babylon and the great Harlot sitting upon many waters; what
then? It is true such descriptions must ever have a certain interest,
but not sufficient to render them subjects of universal study in all
ages, and worthily forming a part of that Divine Book which is read by
angels in heaven, as well as by men on earth.” The objection is a sound
one so far as it goes, but it is made in ignorance of a great but very
simple truth, namely, that all that is true of a church is true of an
individual. The trust in mere truth in the intellect, and the lust of
power and glory,—the former signified by the Dragon, and the latter by
Babylon,—are evils which exist in all minds to a greater or less degree;
and the Divine description of their nature and awful consequences may be
thought of apart from any idea of Geneva or Rome. The Apocalypse being a
divine work, has infinite applications, and will be read to eternity in
spheres where the names of Romanist and Protestant are unknown; and in
societies of glorified spirits, compared with whose number and influence
this world is insignificant.




