CHAPTER XXIX.

    _Last Days on Earth._


On Christmas eve, 1771, a stroke of apoplexy deprived Swedenborg of his
speech, and lamed one side. He lay afterwards in a lethargic state for
more than three weeks, taking no sustenance beyond a little tea without
milk, and cold water occasionally, and once a little currant jelly. At
the end of that time, he recovered his speech and health somewhat, and
ate and drank as usual. Mr. Hartley and Dr. Messiter at this time visited
him, and asking him if he was comforted with the society of angels,
as before, he answered that he was. They then asked him to declare
whether all that he had written was strictly true, or whether any part
or parts were to be excepted. “I have written,” answered Swedenborg,
with a degree of warmth, “nothing but the truth, as you will have more
and more confirmed to you all the days of your life, provided you keep
close to the Lord, and faithfully serve Him alone, by shunning evils of
all kinds as sins against Him, and diligently searching His Word, which,
from beginning to end, bears incontestable witness to the truth of the
doctrines I have delivered to the world.”

At this time Swedenborg seemed to love privacy, and saw but little
company. His old friend, Springer, the Swedish Consul in London, called
upon him a week or two before his decease. Springer asked him when he
believed that the New Jerusalem, or the New Church of the Lord, would
be manifested, and if this manifestation would take place in the four
quarters of the world. Swedenborg replied: “No mortal can declare the
time, no, not even the celestial angels; it is known solely to the Lord.
Read the Revelation, chapter xxi. 2, and Zechariah, chapter xiv. 9,
and you will find that it is not to be doubted that the New Jerusalem,
mentioned in the Apocalypse, which denotes a new and purer state of the
Christian Church, than has hitherto existed, will manifest itself to all
the earth.”

About this time, says Springer, Swedenborg told him that his spiritual
sight was withdrawn, after he had been favored with it for so long a
course of years. This, of which the world knew nothing, and for which it
cared nothing, it was the greatest affliction to him to lose. He could
not endure the blindness, but cried out repeatedly, “O my God! hast thou
then forsaken thy servant at last?” He continued for several days in this
condition, but it was the last of his trials: he recovered his precious
sight, and was happy.

About this time he wrote a note, in Latin, to the Rev. John Wesley, to
the following effect:—

            “GREAT BATH STREET, COLD BATH FIELDS, _February, 1772_.

    “SIR,—I have been informed, in the world of spirits, that you
    have a strong desire to converse with me. I shall be happy to
    see you, if you will favor me with a visit.

                 “I am, sir, your humble servant,

                                              “EMANUEL SWEDENBORG.”

When the note was handed to Mr. Wesley, he was in company with some of
his preachers, arranging their preaching circuits for the year. Wesley
read the note aloud, and frankly confessed that he had been strongly
actuated by a desire to meet Swedenborg, but he had revealed his wish to
no one. He wrote for answer, that he was then occupied in preparing for
a six months’ journey, but would wait upon Swedenborg on his return to
London. Swedenborg, in reply, stated that the proposed visit would be
too late, as he should go into the world of spirits on the 29th day of
the next month, (March,) never more to return. Wesley did not call, and
they never met. Had he been wise, he would; in spite of engagements, have
embraced this opportunity of conversing with that wonderful man, after an
invitation of such a character. Had they met, Methodism might have been a
different thing from what it is. But let us believe that all such seeming
accidents are overruled for the best.

The authority for this anecdote is the Rev. Samuel Smith, a Methodist
preacher, who was present when Wesley received Swedenborg’s letter. It
excited his curiosity to know something of the writings of so remarkable
a man; and the result was, a firm conviction of the rationality and truth
of the heavenly doctrine promulgated in them, and a zealous activity in
their diffusion, throughout the remainder of his life.

Mr. Bergstrom, the landlord of the King’s Arms tavern in Wellclose
square, at whose house Swedenborg had once lodged, called to see him in
his last days. Swedenborg told him, that since it had pleased the Lord
to take away the use of his arm by palsy, his body was good for nothing
but to be put under ground. Mr. Bergstrom asked him whether he would
receive the Sacrament. Somebody present at the time proposed sending for
the Rev. Mr. Mathesius, a minister of the Swedish Church. Swedenborg at
once declined having that gentleman, for he had sent abroad a report that
Swedenborg was out of his senses. (Mathesius himself, in later years,
became deranged.) The Rev. Arvid Ferelius, another Swedish clergyman,
with whom Swedenborg was on the best terms, and who had visited him
frequently in his illness, was then sent for. Ferelius observed to him,
that “as many persons thought he had endeavored only to make himself a
name, or acquire celebrity in the world, by the publication of his new
theological system, he should now be ready, in order to show justice to
the world, to recant either the whole or a part of what he had written,
since he had now nothing more to expect from the world which he was so
soon to leave forever.” Upon hearing these words, Swedenborg raised
himself half upright in his bed, and placing his sound hand upon his
breast, said, with great zeal and emphasis, “As true as you see me before
you, so true is everything which I have written. I could say more, were
I permitted. When you come into eternity, you will see all things as I
have stated and described them; and we shall have much discourse about
them with each other.” Ferelius then asked him if he would take the
Lord’s Holy Supper. He replied, “You mean well, but I, being a member
of the other world, do not need it. However, to show the connection
and union between the church in heaven and the church on earth, I will
gladly take it.” He then asked Ferelius if he had read his views on the
Sacrament. Before administering the Sacrament, Ferelius inquired whether
he confessed himself to be a sinner. “Certainly,” said Swedenborg, “so
long as I carry about with me this sinful body.” With deep and affecting
devotion, with folded hands, and with his head uncovered, he confessed
his own unworthiness, and received the Holy Supper. He then presented
Ferelius with a copy of his Arcana Cœlestia, expressing his gratitude to
him for his kind attentions.

He knew that his end was near. He told the people of the house on what
day he should die, and Shearsmith’s servant remarked, “he was as pleased
as I should have been, if I was going to have a holiday, or going to some
merrymaking.”

His faculties were clear to the last. On Sunday, the 29th day of March,
1772, hearing the clock strike, he asked his landlady and her maid, who
were both sitting at his bed-side, what o’clock it was; and upon being
answered it was five o’clock, he said, “It is well; I thank you; God
bless you;” and in a little moment after, he gently departed. He was then
84 years, 8 weeks, and five days, old.

His body was taken to the undertaker’s, where it lay in state; and then
was, on the 5th day of April, deposited in three coffins, in the vault of
the Swedish Church, in Prince’s square, Radcliffe Highway, with all the
ceremonies of the Lutheran faith,—the service being performed by the Rev.
Arvid Ferelius.

There the body still lies. No stone, or inscription marks the spot.
Swedenborg of all men, least requires monumental commemoration.
Every year enshrines his memory in increasing numbers of grateful
hearts;—grateful to him, as a medium, whereby the Infinite Wisdom and
Goodness might reach its end in blessing mankind by the advent of
spiritual truth, and leading them within the gates of the Holy City, New
Jerusalem.




FOOTNOTES

[1] The following account of Charles XII., written by Emanuel Swedenborg,
was printed in the “Gentleman’s Magazine,” for September, 1754. It is
a portion of a letter which Swedenborg wrote to M. Nordberg, while the
latter was engaged in writing his “Life of Charles XII.,” in which work
the letter appeared at full length. It is too long to be quoted here; the
following extracts contain the pith of it. It may be proper to observe,
that it was written by the author prior to his being called to the sacred
office which occupied the last twenty-nine years of his life. This
accounts for his speaking of the celebrated Swedish hero with so much
greater respect than he is known to have afterwards entertained for his
memory.

“Having been frequently admitted to the honor of hearing his late most
excellent Majesty, Charles XII. discourse on mathematical subjects, I
presume an account of a new arithmetic invented by him, may merit the
attention of my readers.

“His Majesty observed then, that the denary arithmetic, universally
received and practiced, was most probably derived from the original
method of counting on the fingers; that illiterate people of old, when
they had run through the fingers of both hands, repeated new periods over
and over again, and every time spread open both hands; which being done
ten times, they distinguished each step by proper marks, as by joining
two, three, or four fingers. Afterwards, when this method of numeration
on the fingers came to be expressed by proper characters, it soon became
firmly and universally established, and so the denary calculus has been
retained to this day. But surely, were a solid geometrician, thoroughly
versed in the abstract nature and fundamentals of numbers, to set his
mind upon introducing a still more useful calculus into the world,
instead of ten, he would select such a perfect square, or cube number, as
by continual bisection, or halving, would at length terminate in unity,
and be better adapted to the subdivisions of measures, weights, coins,
etc.

“Thus intent on a new arithmetic, the hero pitched upon the number
eight, as most fit for the purpose, since it could not only be halved
continually down to unity, without a fraction, but contained within it
the square of 2, and was itself the cube thereof, and was also applicable
to the received denomination of several sorts of weights and coins,
rising to 16 and 32, the double and quadruple of 8. Upon these first
considerations, he was pleased to command me to draw up an essay on an
octonary calculus, which I completed in a few days, with its application
to the received divisions, coins, measures, and weights, a disquisition
on cubes and squares, and a new and easy way of extracting roots, all
illustrated with examples.

“His Majesty having cast his eye twice or thrice over it, and observing,
perhaps from some hints in the essay, that the denary calculus had
several advantages not always attended to, he did not at that time
seem absolutely to approve of the octonary: or, it is likely he might
conceive, that though it seemed easy in theory, yet it might prove
difficult to introduce it to practice. Be this as it may, he insisted
on fixing upon some other that was both a cube and a square number,
referrible to 8, and divisible down to unity by bisection. This could be
no other than 64, the cube of 4, and square of 8, divisible down to unity
without a fraction.

“I immediately presumed to object that such a number would be too prolix,
as it rises through a series of entirely distinct and different numbers,
up to 64, and then again to its duplicate 4,096, and on to its triplicate
262,144, before the fourth step commences; so that the difficulty of such
a calculus would be incredible, not only in addition and subtraction, but
to a still higher degree in multiplication and division; for the memory
must necessarily retain in the multiplication table, 3,969 distinct
products of the 63 numbers of the first step multiplied into one another;
whereas only 49 are necessary in the octonary, and but 81 are required
in the denary arithmetic; which last is difficult to be remembered and
applied in practice, by some capacities. But the stronger my objections
were, the more resolute was his royal mind upon attempting such a
calculus.

    Obstructions made him eagerly aspire
    All to surmount, and nobly soar the higher.

He insisted that the alleged difficulties might be overbalanced by very
many advantages.

“A few days after this I was called before his Majesty, who, resuming
the subject, demanded if I had made a trial. I still urging my former
objections, he reached me a paper written with his own hand, in new
characters and terms of denomination, the perusal of which, he was
pleased, at my entreaty, to grant me; wherein, to my great surprise, I
found not only new characters and numbers, (the one almost naturally
expressive of the other) in a continued series to 64, so ranged as easily
to be remembered, but also new denominations, so contrived by pairs,
as to be easily extended to myriads by a continued variation of the
character and denomination. And further casting my eye on several new
methods of his for addition and multiplication by this calculus, either
artificially contrived, or else inherent in the characters of the numbers
themselves, I was struck with the profoundest admiration of the force of
his Majesty’s genius, and with such strange amazement, as obliged me to
esteem this eminent personage, not my rival, but by far my superior in my
own art. And having the original still in my custody, at a proper time I
may publish it, as it highly deserves; whereby it will appear with what
discerning skill he was endowed, or how deeply he penetrated into the
obscurest recesses of the arithmetical science.

“Besides, his eminent talents in calculation further appear by his
frequently working and solving the most difficult numerical problems,
barely by thought and memory; in which operations others are obliged to
take great pains and tedious labor.

“Having duly weighed the vast advantages arising from mathematical and
arithmetical knowledge in most occasions of human life, he frequently
used it as an adage, that _he who is ignorant of numbers is scarce half a
man_.

“While he was at Bender, he composed a complete volume of military
exercises, highly esteemed by those who are best skilled in the art of
war.”

[2] The bookseller referred to was Mr. Bohn, of Henrietta street, Covent
Garden.

[3] It is not to be supposed that this time was wasted in sleep. In his
meditations and spiritual intercourse, he, no doubt, loved the seclusion
of his quiet chamber.

[4] This is quite a mistake. His work he had in contemplation for some
years. It is probable the revisal, alterations, and additions in the MS
and in the proofs, led Paulus into this misconception.

