
                                  LIFE
                                   OF
                           EMANUEL SWEDENBORG.

                              TOGETHER WITH
          A BRIEF SYNOPSIS OF HIS WRITINGS, BOTH PHILOSOPHICAL
                            AND THEOLOGICAL.

                            BY WILLIAM WHITE.

                             [Illustration]

                              PHILADELPHIA
                         J. B. LIPPINCOTT & CO.
                                  1880.




PREFACE.


During the few past years many biographies of Swedenborg have been
offered to the public. Dr. Tafel, of Tübingen, in 1839, collected into
one volume the testimonies of Swedenborg’s personal friends, his letters,
and various documents relating to him which were scattered through
many volumes. This “Book of Documents” was translated into English,
and edited by the Rev. J. H. Smithson, of Manchester, in 1841; and was
again reprinted in America and re-edited by Professor Bush, of New York,
in 1847. From this “Book of Documents,” all the biographies which have
appeared, have been more or less indebted. Nathanael Hobart, of Boston,
arranged these documents into a connected biographical form, interspersed
with judicious remarks of his own, and published it as a “Life of
Swedenborg.” This “Life” has passed through three editions, and well
deserves the success it has attained. In 1849, Elihu Rich published, in
London, “A Biographical Sketch of Emanuel Swedenborg.” The edition was
exhausted in the course of a few months, and the work has not since been
reprinted. In the same year, J. J. G. Wilkinson produced his “Emanuel
Swedenborg: a Biography,” a work which, alike for its artistic excellence
as a biography, and the originality and poetic beauty of its thought,
has, I believe, no equal in the English language. The comparative silence
of our literary critics, in reference to this work, proves that any
one who cares to appreciate what is best in the world, had better not
be content to trust solely to _their_ eyes. From the quotations I have
made in the course of the following narrative, the reader will be able
to appreciate a few of the good things contained in this Biography by
Wilkinson. In 1854, Edwin Paxton Hood published “Swedenborg: A Biography
and an Exposition,” a work which has been the means of introducing
Swedenborg to a large circle hitherto almost ignorant of his existence.
In the same year, Woodbury M. Fernald published, in Boston, Mass., “A
Compendium of the Theological and Spiritual Writings of Swedenborg,” to
which an excellent life of the Author was prefixed, compiled in great
part from previous biographies. In other forms, many sketches of the
life of Swedenborg have been published. The Rev. O. P. Hiller gives an
excellent little biography in his volume of “Gems from Swedenborg.”
Emerson tells the story of his life, in his own way, in “Representative
Men;” and a Lecture by George Dawson, on Swedenborg, is now circulating,
as a tract, by thousands throughout the land. All these things evidence a
growing interest in the greatest teacher of modern times.

The present work does not enter into competition with anything that has
before been written. It pretends to nothing but simplicity, and would
be ranked as a hand-book, a guide, a directory. If it should lead any
to form an acquaintance with the writings of “the most _unknown_ man in
the world,” as Mr. Fernald calls Swedenborg, and I may add, the most
abused man in the world, my end will be gained. I believe the day is not
far distant when it will be the greatest reproach of these times that
the works of Swedenborg lay in our midst, and only a few men cared for
them. Happily this number is steadily increasing; and, by and by, we may
expect a general acknowledgment of the fact, that Swedenborg was, without
exception, the most gifted and extraordinary man that has ever lived.

    36 BLOOMSBURY STREET, LONDON.




CONTENTS.


                                                                      PAGE

                               CHAPTER I.

    Birth and Parentage. Swedenborg’s First Ideas of Religion, and
      his Scholastic Life.                                              21

                               CHAPTER II.

    Travels, Becomes Author, and is crossed in Love.                    26

                              CHAPTER III.

    Travels again. Publishes five Scientific Pamphlets, and
      “Miscellaneous Observations.” Returns Home and enters on the
      Duties of his Assessorship. Writes his “Opera Philosophica
      et Mineralia,” and goes abroad to publish it.                     35

                               CHAPTER IV.

    “Opera Philosophica et Mineralia.”                                  40

                               CHAPTER V.

    Doings and Travels.                                                 47

                               CHAPTER VI.

    “The Economy of the Animal Kingdom,” and “The Animal Kingdom.”      51

                              CHAPTER VII.

    His Life, as a Man of Science, ends.                                57

                              CHAPTER VIII.

    His Spiritual Sight opened, and the Conditions of his Seership.     62

                               CHAPTER IX.

    Prepares for his New Office. Resigns his Assessorship. His
      “Adversaria.” His “Spiritual Diary.” The death of Polheim.        73

                               CHAPTER X.

    “The Arcana Cœlestia.”                                              78

                               CHAPTER XI.

    Anecdotes.                                                          89

                              CHAPTER XII.

    “The Last Judgment.”                                                95

                              CHAPTER XIII.

    “Heaven and Hell.”                                                 102

                              CHAPTER XIV.

    “The White Horse.” “The Earths in the Universe.” “The New
      Jerusalem and its Heavenly Doctrine.”                            130

                               CHAPTER XV.

    Anecdotes.                                                         136

                              CHAPTER XVI.

    “Doctrine of the Lord; The Sacred Scripture; Faith; and Life.”     142

                              CHAPTER XVII.

    “The Divine Love and the Divine Wisdom.” “The Continuation
      of the last Judgment.”                                           151

                             CHAPTER XVIII.

    “Angelic Wisdom concerning the Divine Providence.”                 159

                              CHAPTER XIX.

    Life in Amsterdam. Character of the Dutch. Meets Dr. Beyer.
      Republishes his “New Method of Finding the Longitudes.”
      “The Apocalypse explained.”                                      169

                               CHAPTER XX.

    “Apocalypse Revealed.”                                             173

                              CHAPTER XXI.

    Travels. Habits. Anecdotes.                                        180

                              CHAPTER XXII.

    “Conjugial Love.”                                                  191

                             CHAPTER XXIII.

    Attacked by Dr. Ekebom. Visits France. Letter to Hartley, and
      Hartley’s opinion of Swedenborg.                                 204

                              CHAPTER XXIV.

    “Brief Exposition of the Doctrines of the New Church,” and the
      “Intercourse between the Soul and the Body.”                     210

                              CHAPTER XXV.

    Persecution. Letter to the Academy of Sciences. Leaves Stockholm
      for the last time.                                               219

                              CHAPTER XXVI.

    Swedenborg in Intercourse with General Tuxen and Paulus ab
      Indagine. His reply to Dr. Ernesti. Letter to the Landgrave
      of Hesse Darmstadt.                                              227

                             CHAPTER XXVII.

    “The True Christian Religion.”                                     236

                             CHAPTER XXVIII.

    Anecdotes and Traits of Character.                                 256

                              CHAPTER XXIX.

    Last Days on Earth.                                                262




LIFE AND WRITINGS OF EMANUEL SWEDENBORG.




CHAPTER I.

    _His Birth and Parentage—His first ideas of Religion, and his
    Scholastic Life._


Authors are never wiser than when they trust to time for justice. The
poor thinker, neglected by his age, unseen amid the glare of mere show
and pageantry, need not fret himself. Time will roll on, the false and
meretricious will sink into forgetfulness, while his true words will
become accepted, and his thoughts the stars by which wise men guide their
course across the dark ocean of life.

It was the lot of Emanuel Swedenborg to be cast on a shallow, sceptical,
and perverse age. Living a life of the utmost purity, and teaching truths
which we esteem it our great felicity to know, he had but poor thanks so
far as fame and disciples went. But the dawn of his day of justice is
approaching. His name, which in past times has too often been used to
point a sarcasm at whatever is visionary and transcendental, has of late
years been slowly rising into estimation. Here and there, one eminent man
after another has spoken some brave words in honor and admiration of the
great Swede. Slowly, but surely, his writings are claiming attention; his
disciples, though still few, are quietly earnest and enthusiastic, and
ever and anon there is seen in the newspaper or periodical, the name of
Swedenborg mentioned with respect, if not with reverence. Considerable
curiosity exists in large circles to know more of him, of what he
did, what were his doctrines, and the nature and number of his books.
To satisfy, in some measure, these queries and if possible to incite
a desire for an intimate personal acquaintance with the writings of
Swedenborg, is the purpose of the present work.

Emanuel Swedenborg was born at Stockholm, on the 29th Jan., 1688. The
year is a memorable one, as being that in which outraged England drove
the faithless Stuarts from the throne. His father’s name was Jesper
Swedberg, and his mother’s, Sarah Behm; both descended from families of
worth and usefulness in Sweden. His father, at the time of his birth, was
chaplain to a regiment of cavalry. After passing through several offices,
one of which was a professorship of theology in the University of Upsal,
Jesper Swedberg was, in the year 1719, elevated to the bishoprick of
Skara in West Gothland. His character stood high in Sweden. Simple,
patriotic, and honest, he was, without being brilliant, a learned and
industrious man. He wrote much, and published occasionally, as the
following extract from his diary proves: “I can scarcely believe that
anybody in Sweden has written so much as I have done; since, I think,
ten carts could scarcely carry away what I have written and printed at
my own expense, and yet there is much, yea nearly as much, not printed.”
Of the professions of his sons, he wisely remarks; “I have kept my sons
to that profession to which God has given them inclination and liking:
I have not brought up one to the clerical office, although many parents
do this inconsiderately, and in a manner not justifiable, by which the
Christian Church and the clerical order suffer not a little, and are
brought into contempt.” Writing in his diary forty years after Emanuel’s
birth, he says: “Emanuel, my son’s name, signifies ‘God with us,’ a name
which should constantly remind him of the nearness of God, and of that
interior, holy, and mysterious connection, in which, through faith, we
stand with our good and gracious God. And blessed be the Lord’s name! God
has, to this hour, been with him; and may God be further with him, until
he is eternally united with Him in his kingdom.”

Of Swedenborg’s childhood we have little record. In a letter which,
late in life, he addressed to Dr. Beyer, he remarks; “With regard to
what passed in the earliest part of my life, about which you wish to be
informed: from my fourth to my tenth year, my thoughts were constantly
engrossed by reflections on God, on salvation, and on the spiritual
affections of man. I often revealed things in my discourse which filled
my parents with astonishment, and made them declare at times, that
certainly the angels spoke through my mouth. From my sixth to my twelfth
year, it was my greatest delight to converse with the clergy concerning
faith; to whom I often observed, that charity or love is the life of
faith; and that this vivifying charity or love is no other than the love
of one’s neighbor; that God vouchsafes this faith to every one; but that
it is adopted by those only who practise that charity. I knew of no other
faith or belief at that time, than that God is the Creator and Preserver
of Nature; that He endues men with understanding, good inclinations,
and other gifts derived from these. I knew nothing at that time of the
systematic or dogmatic kind of faith, that God the Father imputes the
righteousness or merits of the Son to whomsoever, and at whatever time,
He wills, even to the impenitent. And had I heard of such a faith, it
would have been then, as now, perfectly unintelligible to me.”

This confession very vividly shadows forth the future man. We see how
earnestly his sound, practical mind perceived and clung to the real and
substantial in theology. His experience of the doctrine of justification
by faith alone, finds parallels in the lives and experience of many
eminent men. It was not until after many years’ preaching, that the
fact of the existence of such a doctrine was presented to the mind of
Dr. Chalmers, to whom also it was quite unintelligible; yet, overcome
by the sphere of learning and prestige with which the doctrine was
environed, Chalmers yielded assent to it, and fancied, as thousands do,
he believed what by no possibility he could ever understand. Swedenborg
was too single-eyed in his pursuit of truth to be led aside by authority,
however imposing; and often, in the following narrative, we shall have to
observe with what independence, yet with what humility and simplicity, he
recorded the truths which it was his mission to reveal.

This excellent son of good Bishop Swedberg received the best education
that the times and his country could afford. In his twenty-second year,
at the University of Upsal, he took his degree of Doctor in philosophy.
The dissertation which he wrote for his degree was afterwards published.
It consisted of a selection of sentences from Seneca, Publius Syrus
Mimus, and other Latin writers, enriched by comments of his own, and
notes illustrating the obscurities of the Latin text. This work was so
highly thought of, as to occasion a poetic eulogy, written in Greek, to
be inscribed to its author. Swedenborg dedicated this, his first literary
production, to his father, in a prelude full of veneration and love. Its
length alone prevents our gratifying the reader with the perusal of this
beautiful tribute of filial affection. Among his many virtues, it should
not be accounted the least, that Swedenborg was a loving, dutiful son.

The same year he published, in a work of his father’s, a Latin version of
the twelfth chapter of Ecclesiastes, which proved, in a high degree, his
mastery of the Latin language.

In 1710, was finished the strictly scholastic period of Swedenborg’s
life. He had now reached manhood, and must live as a man among men.
His youth manifests less precocity than solid and regular development
of mind. The record of his life at this time, evidences a common-sense
appreciation of life and its duties, an honest love of virtue, and a
desire to be useful in his day and generation. The sequel will show that
his day of life was not unworthy of its dawn.




