CHAPTER VIII.

    _His Spiritual Sight opened, and the Conditions of his
    Seership._


We will now proceed, without circumlocution, to lay before our readers,
in all its fullness, the claim which Swedenborg made, at this period,
to open intercourse with the spiritual world, under the sanction and
protection of the Lord. This assumption runs through the whole of his
after life, and without a clear idea of its nature and conditions, we
shall be unable rightly to appreciate aught else that follows. In one of
his letters, he says, “I have been called to a holy office by the Lord
himself, who most graciously manifested himself to me, his servant, in
the year 1743, when he opened my sight to a view of the spiritual world,
and granted me the privilege of conversing with spirits and angels, which
I enjoy to this day. From that time, I began to print and publish various
arcana that have been seen by me, or revealed to me; as respecting
heaven and hell, the state of man after death, the true worship of God,
the spiritual sense of the Word, with many other most important matters
conducive to salvation and true wisdom.” Again, in the preface to his
work entitled, “Arcana Cœlestia,” he writes: “Of the Lord’s Divine
mercy, it has been granted me now for several years to be constantly and
uninterruptedly in company with spirits and angels, hearing them converse
with each other, and conversing with them. Hence it has been permitted
me to hear and see stupendous things in the other life, which have never
before come to the knowledge of any man, nor entered his imagination.
I have there been instructed concerning different kinds of spirits, and
the state of souls after death; concerning hell, or the lamentable state
of the unfaithful; concerning heaven, or the most happy state of the
faithful; and particularly concerning the doctrine of faith which is
acknowledged throughout all heaven.”

We are aware that these pretensions will be received by many with
ridicule, and by some with contempt, arising from a distaste for
spiritual subjects; while by a few they will be treated with respectful
attention. All that we ask, is, a little patience; and to readers of
every class, we would say,—Do not be hasty; do not prejudge the matter;
condemn not till you are conversant with the whole circumstances of
the case. Swedenborg’s claim, we admit, does appear startling; but to
greet its announcement with the laugh of scepticism, and to deny its
validity, as many do, without an attempt at examination, is anything but
philosophical—is anything but righteous.

No reader of this sketch can have failed to perceive the high
philosophical genius, and perfect truthfulness of Swedenborg; and
all must agree with us in believing that wilful deception was an
impossibility with such a man. No explanation of what Swedenborg himself
calls the opening of his spiritual sight, can be offered, that is more
transparently ridiculous than that of imposture. The degree of vehemence
with which some have preferred this charge against him, may be taken as
an accurate index of their ignorance of the man, or of their inability to
discern a truthful and earnest spirit.

No denial of the possibility of such spiritual vision as is claimed by
Swedenborg, can be accepted from the Christian. Such denial is alone the
privilege of the professed materialist. We all know how much of our loved
and common faith rests on claims that are quite as startling as those
of Swedenborg. From the visions of Abraham to those of John in Patmos,
the whole Scriptural narrative is interwoven with supernatural incident.
Now, how is it that we yield such ready faith to whatever is related
in Scripture, however marvelous, and have so much wonder to spare over
the unbelieving Jews? The Rev. O. Prescott Hiller, in a short memoir of
Swedenborg, prefixed to a collection of “Gems” from his writings, has
some very apposite remarks on this subject. He says: “Swedenborg states
that there are three heavens; so does Paul, for he speaks of the ‘third
heaven.’ Swedenborg affirms, calmly, that his spiritual senses were
opened and elevated in such a manner that he might have a perception of
that state of existence, and see and hear what is there. So does Paul.
Swedenborg states that he had, in spirit, been permitted to behold the
Lord: so does Paul:—‘Have I not seen,’ said he, ‘Jesus Christ our Lord?’
(1 Cor. ix. 1.) Thus parallel are the cases. But, exclaims the prejudiced
observer: ‘Paul! Paul! Paul was an apostle! Paul was one of the founders
of the Christian Church! Paul lived eighteen hundred years ago! There
are no visions now-a-days! The case is entirely different!’ To these
exclamations it may be replied: Your last remark is but a begging of the
question under consideration. We affirm that though indeed unfrequent,
yet there are occasionally spiritual visions in these times, as well
as in former, and that there is good and very strong testimony that a
remarkable case of the kind exists in the instance of this philosopher,
Swedenborg, not by any means on account of his own declaration merely,
but from the nature of the truths and statements brought forth by him, of
which our own minds, enlightened, we trust, by reason and God’s Word, are
the judges. The burden of proof—it may be continued in answer—falls upon
you to show by what law of Divine order, by what change in the character
and structure of man’s mind, a spiritual vision can not exist now, as
well as in the time of Paul,—in the eighteenth or nineteenth, as well as
in the first century. The truth is, antiquity has a wonderful charm for
the mind, and a great power over it: ‘distance lends enchantment to the
view.’ It is not difficult to believe anything, however wonderful, to
have taken place in that misty and mysterious region, the distant _past_;
but now in these dull, common times, to believe such strange things to
be capable of happening, seems absurd. But do you not suppose that those
times, to the men then living, appeared as dull and common-place as our
times to us? Did not the regardless rain fall on Paul’s head, as well as
on yours and mine? and this very sun and moon light his steps as well
as ours? Did not Paul, do you think, rise often in the morning with a
heavy heart, and after breakfast, go forth to his duties, or sit down to
write his epistles, sad and oppressed in spirit, dejected at the thought
of the heavy responsibilities upon him, and awed with the idea that he
must address the Athenians to-morrow? And when at length he stood before
them and began, did they not ask: ‘Who is this?’ Think you that gaping
crowd knew anything about any great and celebrated Paul, whose name has
become so familiar to our ears? They had not heard of such a person.
‘And some said, What will this babbler say? others, He seemeth to be a
setter forth of strange gods; because he preached to them Jesus, and the
resurrection. And when they heard of the resurrection of the dead, some
mocked; and others said, We will hear thee again of this matter. Howbeit
certain men clave unto him, and believed; among whom was Dionysius the
Areopagite, and a woman named Damaris, and others with them.’ (Acts xvii.
16-34.) Here we have a picture of human nature, as it was, and as it
still is. A new person comes forward, a stranger, unheard of before, and
utters strange ideas, something new and unusual, something different
from what men have been accustomed to hear, and think of, and believe;
most of the hearers jeer and mock, and turn away, calling him a babbler;
some are rather pleased at some things they have heard, but the interest
has not taken sufficient hold of them to make them anxious to pursue the
subject farther just now, and they go away and forget what they have
heard; a few, whose minds were in a receptive state, whose hearts had
been prepared, perhaps, by torturing doubts, and secret meditations, and
by trials and sufferings of spirit—these at once perceive and seize upon
the truths they have heard, clasp them to their bosoms as something long
looked for, as precious treasure, and go away rejoicing in their new
faith, and resolved to sell all they have and follow the Lord. Gradually
the truth spreads; these few tell what they have heard to others, their
friends, who they know have been troubled with similar doubts and
difficulties. By and by these believers meet together and form a little
congregation, and appoint the ablest of their number to preach to them in
regard to these new truths, both for their own fuller instruction and for
the information of strangers. Years roll away. It becomes an established
religious society. Similar societies in neighboring cities league with
them; and they form a General Church, which begins to have a name—the
‘Christian Church.’ Ages roll on, and this becomes a vast establishment,
extending over whole nations, and reaching to distant quarters of the
globe. This Paul, who was once a nameless preacher, ‘a babbler,’ and
‘mad,’ is now looked back upon with the utmost veneration; his words are
oracles of truth; whatever he affirmed, whether in regard to himself or
others, is implicitly believed. Custom, general acceptance, the belief of
ages, undoubting confidence in the opinions of our parents and friends,
all go to render the mind perfectly ready to believe those things.
Faith is now an easy and natural thing, and we wonder at those strange
and hard-hearted unbelievers of Paul’s own time, who had the glorious
opportunity of listening to him with their own ears. ‘Oh! that we could
have enjoyed such an opportunity,’ exclaim many, ‘how gladly would we
have listened!’

“But these persons know not what they say, nor the nature of the human
mind. If they are so anxious to have such an opportunity, so ready to
be tested, and to show that they would have discernment enough to see
genuine truth, though heard for the first time, and to acknowledge
a great teacher and apostle, though yet unknown to the world—that
opportunity is now before them. A Paul is again preaching to the
Athenians and to the world. A great teacher is again uttering new and
sublime truths. The Lord Himself has come a second time, not in Person,
but in Spirit; not as the ‘Word made flesh,’ as before, but as the
essential Word, by the opening of the interior truth—the _spiritual
sense_—which it contains. Those who believe, that, had they been on
earth, they would have acknowledged the Lord at His First Coming, or
would have readily received the teachings of His Apostles, have now the
opportunity of making trial of their faith; of showing whether they are
able to overcome the inveteracy of custom, the natural opposition of
prejudice, the fear of public opinion, the love of the world and its
powers and pleasures, (all which difficulties the first Christians had
to encounter,) whether, in the face of all these, they can, looking for
the truth with a single eye, discern it now at its feeble dawn; and,
advancing steadily and earnestly towards it, be among the first to hail
the rising day.”

What more can be said on the subject? The Christian has no choice but to
acknowledge, or refute, Swedenborg’s claims on the ground of their own
intrinsic merit.

Swedenborg was gifted with peculiar powers of respiration. From early
childhood, when on his knees at prayer, and afterwards when engaged in
profound meditation, he found that his natural respiration was for the
time suspended. As we have seen in his work on the “Animal Kingdom,”
his attention to the correspondence between thought and respiration had
been of long continuance,—probably from the fact that his own system
supplied him with such constant illustrations of its nature. This power
of suspended respiration under deep thought, common to all men, was
preternaturally developed in Swedenborg. At this period he discovered
the use to which these peculiar powers of his were to be applied; for
he writes: “My respiration has been so formed by the Lord, as to enable
me to breathe inwardly for a long period of time, without the aid of
the external air; my respiration being directed within, and my outward
senses, as well as actions, still continuing in their vigor, which is
only possible with persons who have been so formed by the Lord. I have
also been instructed that my breathing was so directed, without my being
aware of it, in order to enable me to be with spirits, and to speak with
them.” Those who have studied mesmerism and clairvoyance know many facts
that confirm and illustrate this position of Swedenborg’s with regard to
respiration; and it is quite evident that the Hindoo Yogi are capable
of a similar state. There is this great difference, however, between
such instances and the case of Swedenborg, that his powers were natural,
and continuous in their exercise, and not sought after and induced by
himself; while theirs are only occasional, and are frequently brought
about by artificial means.

Swedenborg’s intromission into the spiritual world was a gradual process;
and for this reason the date of his illumination is variously given,
ranging between 1743 and 1745. It appears, however, that he came into the
full exercise of his spiritual seership while living in London.

Of late years it has become common to talk of Swedenborg as a
clairvoyant, to associate him with mesmeric subjects, and make him a
kinsman of French and American spiritualists, such as Cahagnet, and
Andrew Jackson Davis. This mistake is made through ignorance. It is a
law of the spiritual world that every man is associated with his like.
Supposing, therefore, that any man’s spiritual sight were opened, he
would come into conjunction only with spirits like himself; that is,
with those who would echo his own ideas and opinions, and repeat his own
feelings. It is evident, then, that in such a case the nature of the
revelations are entirely dependent upon the character of the revelator,
and in all cases must be suspiciously received by the lover of truth.
Now Swedenborg claims to have been under the special protection of the
Lord, and to have received the doctrines he promulgated directly from
Him, and not in any case from spirits. Of course, every one will decide
for himself as to how far he can receive this assertion; but it is well
that all should be informed of the precise character of Swedenborg’s
claim, and of his own testimony as to the source of his information. In
his Diary, written about this time, he says, that “spirits narrate things
wholly false, and lie. When spirits begin to speak with man, care should
be taken not to believe them; for almost everything they say is made
up by them, and they lie; so that if it were permitted them to relate
what heaven is, and how things are in heaven, they would tell so many
falsehoods, and with such strong assertion, that man would be astonished;
wherefore it was not permitted me, when spirits were speaking, to have
any belief in what they stated. They love to feign. Whatever may be the
topic spoken of, they think they know it, and form different opinions
about it, altogether as if they knew; and if man then listens and
believes, they insist, and in various ways deceive and seduce.”

Any one who has paid attention to the phenomena of spirit-rapping, and
to the communications received through clairvoyants from the world of
spirits, and has observed the very Babel of contradictions uttered by
these “mediums,” will be able to appreciate the truth of the passage we
have quoted, as well as our desire to draw a broad and distinct line
between such and Swedenborg.

It is a very natural question, and one often put by those unconversant
with the nature of spiritual intercourse, how it happens that such a
man as Swedenborg, sitting quietly in his chair, could see and speak
with angels and spirits, and travel through vast spaces in the spiritual
world. It is thus: Space and time are attributes of matter alone. Their
appearances do, indeed, exist in the spiritual world, but not as the
fixed and mensurable things of our material sphere. Did not our subject
forbid digression, it would be easy to bring this truth down to the
comprehension of every one, by reference to a few items of experience
which must at some time have fallen to the lot of all. We are all, as
to our minds, in constant, though insensible, communion with spirits;
and from them we receive thoughts and feelings of every kind. A good man
and a wicked man may be, as to the body, in the same room, while between
their minds there may be the wide gulf that separated Dives and Lazarus.
Now if the spiritual sight of these two men were opened, where would they
be? One would be in heaven, and the other in hell; and that, too, without
either moving from the place where he stood. It was in virtue of this
principle of the spirit’s perfect independence of space, that Swedenborg,
under the Divine guidance and protection, was led through spiritual
societies of all kinds: and in his various works we have the record of
the wondrous things thus heard and seen.

Again, it may be asked: What is the nature of this spiritual sight so
often referred to? In the words of Paul we answer: “There is a natural
body, and there is a spiritual body;” and, as a consequence, there is a
natural sight, and there is a spiritual sight. The natural body lives
from the spiritual body, and derives its form and parts from it. The
natural body is the instrument of the spiritual body, and through it as
a medium, it is enabled to exist in this lower world, and in constant
contact with matter. Now it is possible for the spiritual body to be
raised partially above the natural body, without causing death, or
the entire withdrawal of its life from the natural body. This partial
withdrawal of the spiritual body, and the enjoyment of sight in the
spiritual world, is what is meant by the opening of the spiritual sight.
Time forbids us to draw upon the innumerable illustrations of this fact
which the history of the past and the experience of the present, in
conjunction with the Word of God, afford. Let one instance from the Bible
suffice. In 2 Kings, vii. 8-17, we read that Elisha, compassed about with
horses, chariots, and a great host, sent by the king of Syria to seize
him, was on a mountain with his servant, who, full of terror, exclaimed:
“Alas! my master, how shall we do? And he answered, Fear not, for they
that be with us are more than they that be with them. And Elisha prayed
and said, Lord, I pray thee _open his eyes_, that he may see. And the
Lord _opened the eyes_ of the young man, and he _saw_: and behold, the
mountain was full of horses and chariots of fire round about Elisha.”
Here is a case quite to the point. The natural eyes of the young man were
already open; for how otherwise could he have seen the Syrian host, and
have been afraid? Elisha prayed that his eyes might be opened. What eyes?
Why, clearly, the eyes of his spiritual body; which done, he was enabled
to perceive the heavenly guardianship which was extended over his master.
Every one will now understand what we mean, when we shall have occasion
to speak of the opening of man’s spiritual sight.

Having thus defined the conditions of Swedenborg’s spiritual vision, and
cleared away some questions which, if answered, would have impeded our
narrative, we will now proceed with our history.




