CHAPTER XVIII.

    _Angelic Wisdom Concerning the Divine Providence._


Still living in Amsterdam, Swedenborg published, in 1764, his work
entitled “Angelic Wisdom Concerning the Divine Providence.” Its purpose
is to

                “assert eternal Providence,
    And justify the ways of God to man.”

In the first place, it is shown that the Divine Providence is the
government of the Love and the Wisdom of the Lord. This Providence has
for its sole end the formation of a heaven from the human race, and thus
has respect only to what is infinite and eternal. In the Divine sight,
things temporal and natural are of no importance except so far as they
contribute to man’s salvation.

Although the Lord thus wills and works for man’s eternal happiness, yet,
after all, heaven can only be attained through man’s coöperation. The
Lord ever performs his share of the work, but man too often fails to do
his. Weeping over Jerusalem, the Lord exclaimed: “O Jerusalem, Jerusalem,
thou that killest the prophets, and stonest them that are sent unto
thee, how often would I have gathered thy children together, even as a
hen gathereth her chickens under her wings, _and ye would not_!” Matthew
xxiii. 37. How powerfully and tenderly is here expressed the Divine
willingness to save, and how pointedly and decisively is man’s misery
attributed to his own obstinacy. As the Lord Jesus is another place
says: “Ye _will not_ come to me that ye might have life.” John v. 40.

In all the operations of the Divine Providence, human freedom is
respected. The Lord forces no man to do what is good, or believe what
is true. He drives none to heaven. It is of the Divine Providence that
whatsoever a man hears, sees, thinks, speaks, and does, should appear
altogether as his own. Without this appearance, men would have no
reception of Divine Truth, no determination to do good, no appropriation
of love and wisdom or of charity and faith, and thence no conjunction
with the Lord; consequently no reformation and regeneration, and thereby
salvation. Without this appearance, it is evident there could be no
repentance and no faith; and man would not be man, but void of rational
life like a beast. It is plain, then, that in order that man may be
saved, he must be induced to live a good life by means which in nowise
trench upon this appearance of free and independent life. Regeneration is
effected by man’s removing evils from his external life, _as of himself_;
yet, knowing that all good and truth is from the Lord, he acknowledges,
as a consequence, that all power to remove these evils is derived from
the Lord alone.

Intensely as the Lord desires that man should shun evils and lead a holy
life in obedience to his commandments, yet He only seeks to win man to
peace and heaven by means which do not infringe upon his freedom. It is a
law of His Divine Providence, that man should not be forced by external
means to think and will, and so to believe and love the things which are
of religion. It has been asked by atheists, “If there be a God, why does
he not write so on the sun, and so save men from unbelief?” Swedenborg
answers this question most satisfactorily, by showing that miracles,
signs, visions, conversations with the dead, threats, and punishments,
are totally ineffective to produce that state of love and spiritual life
which make true happiness and heaven; because these force, and destroy
the rationality and liberty which constitute the inmost life of humanity,
and by the exercise of which, man can alone be delivered from evil.

Let us read Swedenborg’s testimony on miracles. He writes: “That such
is the nature of miracles, may plainly appear from those wrought before
the Jewish and Israelitish people. Although they saw so many miracles in
Egypt, afterwards at the Red Sea, others in the Desert, and especially
upon Mount Sinai, when the law was promulgated, yet, in the space of a
month, when Moses tarried upon that mountain, they made themselves a
golden calf, and acknowledged it for Jehovah who brought them out of
the land of Egypt. The same also may appear from the miracles wrought
afterwards in the land of Canaan, notwithstanding which the people
so often departed from the worship that was commanded; and from the
miracles which the Lord wrought before them when he was in the world,
notwithstanding which they crucified him. The reason why miracles were
wrought among the Jews and Israelites was, because they were altogether
external men, and were introduced into the land of Canaan merely that
they might represent a church and its internal principles by the external
things of worship; and a wicked man may be representative, as well as a
good man. The external things of worship among them were rituals, all
which signified spiritual and celestial things. Even Aaron, although
he made the golden calf, and conducted the worship of it, could,
nevertheless, represent the Lord and his work of salvation. And as they
could not, by the internal principles of worship, be led to represent
these things, therefore they were led, yea forced and compelled, to
do it by miracles. The reason why they could not be brought to such
representation by the internal principles of worship was, because they
did not acknowledge the Lord, although the whole Word, which was among
them, treats of Him only; and he who does not acknowledge the Lord, can
not receive any internal worship. But after the Lord manifested himself,
and was received and acknowledged in the churches as the eternal God,
miracles ceased.

“The effect of miracles upon the good, however, is different from what
it is upon the wicked. The good do not desire miracles, but they believe
the miracles which are recorded in the Word; and if they hear anything
of a miracle, they attend no otherwise to it than as a light argument
which confirms their faith; for they think from the Word, consequently
from the Lord, and not from a miracle. It is otherwise with the wicked:
they indeed may be driven and forced into faith, and even into worship
and piety, but only for a short time; for their evils being shut in,
the inclinations thereto, and the delights thence derived, continually
act against the external of their worship and piety; and in order that
these evils may escape from confinement and break out, they think
about the miracle, and at length call it a delusion, or an artifice,
or an operation of nature, and so return into their evils; and he who
returns into his evils after worship, profanes the truths and goods
of worship, and the lot of profaners after death is the worst of all.
Besides, if miracles were to be wrought before those who do not believe
in consequence of the miracles recorded in the Word, they must be
continually performed, and constantly presented to their view. From these
considerations, the reason may appear why miracles are not performed at
this day.”

It is thus seen that the Lord will not force a man to lead a good life;
because, in forcing him, his humanity would be destroyed, and all that
makes life worthy and manly would be lost, seeing that the exercise of
rationality and liberty would be annihilated.

It is a law of the Divine Providence, that a man should be led and taught
from the Lord out of heaven by the Word, and by doctrine and preaching
from the Word, and this in all appearance as from himself. The Lord, as
we have before seen, is the Word; and when man reads the Word, he brings
his thought into contact with the Divine Wisdom, and when he obeys its
teachings he is in very truth led by the Lord. Yet we all see that this
teaching and leading of the Lord is effected without any violation of
man’s freedom, for he is led and taught in externals to all appearance as
of himself.

It is a law of the Divine Providence that a man should not perceive and
feel anything of the operation of the Divine Providence, but yet should
know and acknowledge it. If a man perceived and felt the operation of the
Divine Providence, he would not act from liberty according to reason,
nor would anything appear to him as his own. It would also be the same
if he foreknew events. “The reason why it is not granted man to foreknow
events, is, that he may be able to act from liberty according to reason;
also, that there is nothing that a man revolves in his reason which is
not from a desire that it may come into effect by thought. If, therefore,
he knew the effect or event from divine prediction, reason would become
quiescent, and with reason love; for love, with reason, terminates in the
effect, and from that begins anew. It is the very delight of reason, that
from love in the thought it may see the effect,—not in the effect, but
before it, or not in the present, but in the future. Hence a man has what
is called Hope, which in reason increases and decreases, as it sees or
expects the event. This delight is fulfilled in the event, but afterwards
is obliterated with the thought concerning the event; and it would be the
same with an event foreknown.” The whole zest of life would be dissipated
could man foreknow the future.

While the operation of the Divine Providence is thus veiled from man’s
eyes, and it appears to him that he is alone in the world, and that on
his small prudence hangs all things,—if he would be wise he must not
be led by appearances, but rising above them, acknowledge the truth
“that self-derived prudence is nothing, and _only appears as if it were
something_, [and ought so to appear;] but that the Divine Providence in
things most singular is universal.” And because our life and intelligence
are momentarily derived from the Lord, it follows as a necessary
consequence, that all which we do that is orderly and effective, is done
by the Lord, through our yielding ourselves to Him as His instruments.

It is often urged as a reason against believing in an overruling
and universal Divine Providence, that the world is full of evil and
wickedness; and if there be an omnipotent God, he would surely never
suffer such things to exist. Swedenborg enters very fully into this
question. The reasons why Adam was permitted to fall, and Cain to slay
Abel; Solomon to establish idolatrous worship, and many kings after
him to profane the holy things of the church, the Jews to crucify the
Lord; why impiety is allowed to exist, and the impious and profligate
to be promoted to riches and honors, while the worshipers of God and
the doers of righteousness remain in contempt and poverty; why wars are
permitted, men slaughtered, the property of the innocent destroyed, and
victories go with force and not with justice; why the earth is permitted
to remain covered with idolatries, and the Christian religion to occupy
so small a place, and even there to be deeply corrupted and devastated
with heresies,—are stated at length and most satisfactorily. It is made
plain, that, were the Lord to interfere and prevent such evils by force,
it would defeat the end for which He created man, namely, salvation and
eternal life in heaven. Now as man can only be regenerated and enter
heaven through the free exercise of his understanding and free choice
of his will, any external interference of the Divine Providence with
outward circumstances would suspend the action of man’s faculties; would,
in short, dehumanise the race, and leave only animals to be dealt with.
It is not of the Lord’s will, indeed, that evil should exist; and His
Providence is unceasingly exerted to modify and mitigate it, alike in its
origin and in its effect; but, since to prevent its manifestation would
be to take from man all that makes him man, its permission is a necessity.

It was said that the Providence of the Lord is unceasingly exerted
to modify and mitigate evil, alike in its origin and in its effects.
Swedenborg very beautifully and amply illustrates this truth, and shows
that the Divine Providence is equally with the wicked and the good. The
wicked man, of his own free choice, continually plunges himself more and
more deeply into evil; because as he wills and does evil, he introduces
himself more and more deeply into infernal societies. But the Lord, by a
thousand invisible means, continually withdraws him from evil; and where
a cure or complete prevention is impossible, mitigates his fearful fate
by providing circumstances and situations in life which serve to lead
the evil into less hurtful developments. The operation of the Divine
Providence in saving man begins at his birth, and continues to the end
of his life. The Lord sees what a man is, and what he desires to be,
consequently what he will be; therefore the Lord foresees his state after
death, and provides for it from his birth to the end of his life; with
the wicked He provides by permitting and continually withdrawing them
from evils; with the good He provides by leading them to good. Thus the
Divine Providence is continually in the effort to save men; but more
cannot be saved than desire to be saved. Those who acknowledge God and
are led by Him, desire to be saved; and those who do not acknowledge
God, but guide themselves, do not desire to be saved: for the latter do
not think of eternal life and salvation, but the former do. This the
Lord sees; but still He leads them according to the laws of His Divine
Providence, against which He cannot act, for to act against them would be
to act against Himself. Now, as the Lord foresees the states of all after
death, and knows the places of those who are not willing to be saved, He,
as far as is consistent with human freedom, labors to soften man’s evil;
and if He cannot lead him to heaven, still preserves him from sinking to
the lowest hell.

From this it follows that every man may be reformed, that there is no
such thing as predestination, and that it is a man’s own fault if he is
not saved. All are created for heaven, and none for hell; and if man
sink into perdition, he does so through his own obstinacy, and through
the deliberate choice of a life of evil. As saith the Apostle: “The Lord
is long-suffering to usward, _not willing that any should perish_, but
that all should come to repentance.” 2 Peter iii. 9. And the Lord himself
says: “Fear not, little flock; it is your _Father’s good pleasure to give
you the kingdom_.” Luke xii. 32.

Such, in brief, are a few of the principles in the treatise on the Divine
Providence. Nothing but a perusal of the work can give an adequate idea
of its multiplicity of details, from the laws which regulate the affairs
of kingdoms, to those which govern games of chance; and all expounded
with a lucidity of thought, which finds few parallels in works on
such recondite themes. No book in the whole circle of literature more
satisfactorily disposes of the objections against religion, current
among secularists and worldlings. The inward temptations and doubts of
the devout heart, and the weariness, cares, and fret of life, are shown
in its pages to be all permitted by that Divine Love which suffers
not a sparrow to fall unheeded; and the minutest incidents of life are
seen to be forever encircled by that Omniscience, which knows how most
effectually to guard us from evil and draw us into the holy courts of
heaven.

Any view which we take of the Divine Providence that does not recognize
this life as a beginning, a progress, and not a consummation, is
necessarily erroneous. Life here is but a discipline, an apprenticeship.
It is a school wherein we are scholars, learning such lessons as will
fit us for uses in a higher and eternal sphere. Were life consummated by
what men call death, we might have reason to complain that the comforts
and pleasures of existence were so unequally distributed; and the natural
man might exclaim with the Psalmist: “I was envious at the foolish, when
I saw the prosperity of the wicked. They are not in trouble as other
men; neither are they plagued like other men. Their eyes stand out with
fatness: they have more than heart could wish. Behold, these are the
ungodly who prosper in the world; they increase in riches.” But when we
look at the matter from higher grounds, and in the light of the Divine
wisdom, or as the Psalmist did when he said: “I went into the sanctuary
of God; then understood I their end: how are they brought into desolation
as in a moment! they are utterly consumed with terrors:”—“The evil doers
shall be cut off; but those that wait upon the Lord, they shall inherit
the earth: for yet a little while, and the wicked shall not be; yea thou
shalt diligently consider his place, and it shall not be: for the Lord
loveth judgment, and forsaketh not his saints;”—then we obtain a right
view of the matter, and find an all-sufficient reason for being patient
and not fretting ourselves. Hard though our lot in life may seem, let us
remember that

    “The vain and fleeting things of earth,
      (Though counted vain, alas! by few,)
    In his esteem are nothing worth,
      Who keeps eternal ends in view.”

Or, as Cowper says:

    “The path of sorrow and that path alone,
    Leads to the land where sorrow is unknown.
    No traveler ever reached that blest abode
    Who found not thorns and briers in his road.”




