CHAPTER VII.

    _His Life, as a Man of Science, ends._


The biographer of Swedenborg can feel no difficulty in distributing under
proper heads the principal events of his life. It divides itself so
distinctly into two parts, at this juncture, that, between his past and
his future there is what he himself would call a “discrete degree.”

In 1745, when the merely scientific phase of Swedenborg’s life closed, he
had arrived at the mature age of fifty-seven years. As we have seen, he
had, from early manhood, united an active and practical, with a deeply
philosophic, life. An earnest student of nature, he had never become so
engrossed in thought as to forget the end of all thought—the improvement
and the happiness of mankind. His long series of scientific works had
gained him a wide-spread reputation, and wherever he went, he was hailed
as a friend and brother by the thoughtful and philosophical. In Sweden,
as before said, he was well connected; and had he been desirous to live
at home, and immerse himself in the cares and politics of his country,
he might have reached the highest offices and honors which royalty
could confer. At the age of fifty-seven, with Swedenborg’s attainments,
success, and fame, a worldly man might have been content. Such a one
would, probably, have taken his ease, reposed upon the past, and have
been content with the competence of comfort and reputation which he had
attained. But Swedenborg was a man of a very different character. Love
of ease formed no part of his constitution, and if he had not been led
by the hand of Providence to the contemplation of the spiritual world and
its glorious realities, he would, to the end of his life, have remained a
zealous and single-eyed seeker after the truths of the natural world.

The annals of science do not furnish an instance of any one who surpassed
Swedenborg in that humility of spirit, and that simple desire for truth,
which is the crowning grace and glory of the true philosopher. Although,
at times, he propounded views which he knew were antagonistic to the
ideas of some of the leading savans of his time, yet we never find him
getting angry or attempting to scold the world into belief with him. He
simply lays down what he believes to be the truth; and with the most
charming modesty trusts for its acceptance among men, to its agreement
with reason and facts. Full of this trustful spirit we find him saying
in the “Principia:” “In writing the present work, I have not aimed at
the applause of the learned world, nor at the acquisition of a name or
popularity. To me, it is a matter of indifference whether I win the
favorable opinion of every one, or of no one; whether I gain much or no
commendation. Such things are not objects of regard to one whose mind is
bent on truth and true philosophy. Should I, therefore, gain the assent
or approbation of others, I shall receive it only as a confirmation of
my having pursued the truth. I have no wish to persuade any one to lay
aside the principles of those illustrious and talented authors who have
adorned the world, and in place of their principles to adopt mine. For
this reason it is, that I have not made mention so much as of one of
them, or even hinted at his name, lest I should injure his feelings,
or seem to impugn his sentiments, or to derogate from the praise which
others bestow upon him. If the principles I have advanced have more of
truth in them than those which are advocated by others; if they are
truly philosophical, and accordant with the phenomena of nature, the
assent of the public will follow in due time, of its own accord; and in
this case should I fail to gain the assent of those whose minds, being
prepossessed by other principles, can no longer exercise an impartial
judgment, still I have those with me who are able to distinguish the true
from the untrue, if not in the present, at least in some future age.
Truth is unique, and will speak for itself. Should any one undertake
to impugn my sentiments, I have no wish to oppose him; but in case he
desire it, I shall be happy to explain my principles and my reasons
more at large. What need, however, is there of words? Let the thing
speak for itself. If what I have said be true, why should I be eager to
defend it? Surely truth can defend itself. If what I have said be false,
it would be a degrading and silly task to defend it. Why then should I
make myself an enemy of any one, or place myself in opposition to any
one?” And again, in the “Economy,” he remarks: “Of what consequence is
it to me that I should persuade any one to embrace my opinions? Let his
own reason persuade him. I do not undertake this work for the sake of
honor or emolument; both of which I shun rather than seek, because they
disquiet the mind, and because I am content with my lot; but for the sake
of truth, which alone is immortal.” These are long extracts, but they are
well worthy of citation, alike for their own intrinsic truth and beauty,
and for the illustration they afford of the spirit and sentiments of
their author.

The little thought he gave in after years to his scientific writings,
and the little care he seemed to have lest the world should forget
them, is very evident from his subsequent writings, in which they are
scarcely alluded to. Some of the friends he made in the latter portion
of his life, appear to have had very faint ideas of the extent of his
achievements in natural science. Count Hopken, a very intimate friend of
his, for many years, remarks: “Swedenborg made surprising discoveries in
anatomy, which are recorded somewhere in certain literary Transactions.”
Thus it appears that he was entirely ignorant of the existence of
Swedenborg’s great work, the “Animal Kingdom.” What stronger proof could
be given than this, of the sincerity with which the foregoing extracts
were penned, in which he commits his works to the care of the God of
truth, in humble acquiescence in whatever verdict his justice might
pronounce.

Great and manifold were the merits of these scientific works; yet we
should, perhaps, do well to look upon them, as their author seems to
have done, as school-boy exercises. Through the severe training and
development of the whole powers of his mind, by the composition of these
works, his Divine Master was fitting him to gaze upon the awful realities
of the spiritual world, and to become a worthy exponent of the hidden
wisdom of the Holy Scripture.

It must, necessarily, be a matter of interest with many to know what
were the religious opinions of Swedenborg at this period of his history.
Occupying himself so intensely with natural science, it was hardly to be
expected that theology could receive much of his attention. Among his
posthumous papers, however, we find a little treatise on faith and good
works, in which he comes to the wise conclusion that “there is no love
to God if there be none to the neighbor;” or that “there is no faith if
there be no works;” and therefore, that “faith without works is a phrase
involving a contradiction.” Throughout all his scientific writings we
find a simple and open assent to the primary truths of religion, and a
constant endeavor to confirm some truth of religious doctrine by the
natural facts which came under his notice. His religious views up to this
time were generally such as the Christian world held, with here and there
a quiet dissent as to particular points, and a strong tendency to eschew
the merely theoretical and mystical belief, for the practical and active.
We have his own testimony to the fact, that dogmatic and systematic
theology formed no part of his otherwise extensive reading; and thus
he came to the study of the Word of God unperverted by the sophisms
of creed-makers. Of the gentle and earnest piety of his soul, we have
striking proof in his “Rules of Life:”

1. Often to read and meditate on the Word of God.

2. To submit everything to the will of Divine Providence.

3. To observe in everything a propriety of behaviour, and to keep the
conscience clear.

4. To discharge with fidelity the functions of my employment, and the
duties of my office, and to render myself in all things useful to society.

More need not be said on this head than that he kept these vows.

We now close the first book of Swedenborg’s life, and open the second.
Emphatically his was a double life. So rich in thought and action were
both parts, that either would have been reckoned sufficient to render
him a remarkable man. The one life was an orderly and regular growth out
of the other: the first was a providential preparation for the second.
Carefully disciplined by thought and investigation in the outer world,
through a long series of laborious years, the curtain which separated the
seen from the unseen was, for him, drawn aside, and his prepared eyes
saw in clear sunlight those mysteries of life and spirit, which the best
and wisest of men have most ardently desired to see. Let us, then, leave
Swedenborg the Man of Science, and turn to him as the Servant of the Lord
Jesus Christ, the worthy exponent of the spiritual sense of the Word of
God, and the announcer of the New Era in which reason and faith are to be
at one, and men everywhere friends and brothers.




