CHAPTER IX.

    _Prepares for his New Office—Resigns his Assessorship—His
    “Adversaria”—His “Spiritual Diary”—The Death of Polheim._


Called to a high and holy office, Swedenborg set about preparing himself
for the fulfilment of its duties. Leaving London in the beginning of
July, 1745, he took ship for Sweden, where he arrived on the 7th of
August. On this voyage, his spiritual intercourse was suspended. He lived
quietly at home during 1746; probably in the performance and enjoyment
of the settled routine of his Assessorship, and in earnest meditation on
the heavenly arcana now fully opened to his view. In 1747, in order that
he might be more at liberty to devote himself to the mission to which
the Lord had called him, he asked leave of King Frederick to retire from
his Assessorship, and that he might enjoy, during life, as a retiring
pension, half of his official salary; requesting, at the same time, that
no addition to his rank or title might be conferred upon him. The King
yielded to his wishes; but in consideration of his long and faithful
service of thirty-one years, continued to him the whole of his salary.

Meanwhile, he learned Hebrew, and read the Bible through several times in
its original languages. Like all true students, he read and thought with
pen in hand; and as the hidden and Divine wisdom of the Word was opened
to him, he embodied in “Adversaria,” or notes, the truths thus revealed.
These Adversaria extend over the historical books of the Old Testament,
and several of the prophets. They have all been printed of late years,
from their author’s original Latin manuscript, by that indefatigable
and learned Newchurchman, Dr. Tafel, of Tübingen. They have not yet
been translated into English, probably because they were not published
by Swedenborg himself, and are only to be regarded as preparatory
studies for future works. They also abound with indistinct views on many
subjects, which subsequent knowledge rendered clear. As records of their
author’s spiritual progress, as well as for the many valuable facts which
they contain, it is to be hoped that the day is not far distant when the
“Adversaria” will appear in an English dress. We cannot spare anything
which serves to illustrate the mental history of such a man as Swedenborg.

In 1747, he ceased writing his “Adversaria,” and commenced a Spiritual
Diary, which he continued for twenty years. This Diary, written also in
Latin, (as all his theological works were,) has been lately published
by Dr. Tafel in ten closely printed octavos. Two volumes have been
translated and published in England and America, and the remainder will
probably soon follow. It will hardly be necessary for us to go into a
detailed account of the principles and facts scattered throughout its
long and miscellaneous record. We shall meet with all the leading ideas
in noticing the books published by himself, and laid before the world
as matured and finished productions. It may be said, however, that the
“Diary,” as a work, is perfectly unique; for in no literature can we
find its counterpart. We have in it, for twenty years, an almost daily
record of Swedenborg’s spiritual states and temptations; his interviews
and conversations with angels, spirits, and devils; and accounts of
their pleasures, punishments, and thoughts. No one who makes an intimate
acquaintance with this “Diary,” will ever after allow a shadow of doubt
to cross his mind as to the candor and truth of Swedenborg; for in
every page, he will perceive that quiet and solemn earnestness which
belongs alone to the upright and honest in heart. In its whole range
of experience, he will detect no vanity, shuffling, double-dealing,
or anything inconsistent with his published works; but all as
straightforward, open, and unreserved, as truth itself. Although written
in the quietude of his own study, and for his own eye and use alone, he
could not have been more ingenuous and sincere had the whole universe
been looking down upon its pages.

On the page of history, the “Diary” throws some wondrous light. In it,
we read of interviews with many of the famous men of ancient and modern
times. From some names which the world has learned to revere, the mask
of excellence is quite torn away, while the infamy of others is proved
to have been but judgment from appearance, and from scandal. Any one
who is infected with the spiritual disease of hero-worship, should read
the “Spiritual Diary.” He will there discover that the most dazzling
intellect fades into moping idiocy and insanity, when it lacks the
sterling heart, and honest aim; and that goodness alone is the life and
soul of true wisdom. He will also learn why it is so.

We would here say a word upon a jest started by Emerson, (and which has
re-appeared under many forms,) to the effect that all the souls with
whom Swedenborg held converse, talked Swedenborgese. In reply, we would
ask, how they could speak in any other way? Swedenborg did not profess
to be a mimic; and if Cicero or anybody else spoke with him in the
spiritual world and in the spiritual language, Swedenborg, in translating
the speech into his own simple diction, would, of course, seize the
substance, and care nothing for the form. That the language was not
Cicero’s, might be true; but if the ideas were, what matter? The subject
would hardly be worth mentioning, did we not see the jest receiving a
wide currency; but a few words of common sense are all that are necessary
to take the life out of it.

There is no work with which we are acquainted, that can give its readers
a better idea of the reality of the future life, than the “Spiritual
Diary.” No other book, we know, can so stir up a man to set his mind,
or spiritual house, in order here, so that he may be spared the turmoil
and sorrow which otherwise he will encounter beyond the tomb. In its
pages, the life after death is portrayed in all its stern reality; not
as a vague dream, or a shadowy vision, of which the mind can form no
fixed idea. We read of the awful states induced in the other life, by
evil habits contracted in this; from loose speech, jesting upon sacred
subjects, indulgence in idleness and luxury, down to blacker crimes.
We learn from sight, as it were, how evil is its own torment, and how
goodness is its own sweet and rich reward; and in view of the momentous
issues of what we too often regard as the trifles of life, we feel
impelled to make our peace and heaven here, that we may bear them with us
into the Hereafter. Such high uses does the “Spiritual Diary” subserve.

The “Diary” is, however, a work not suited for an early student
of Swedenborg. The principles upon which it is written, not being
understood, a young reader could hardly fail to form erroneous ideas from
it, and misjudge the work itself. It is only after some acquaintance
with the spiritual laws expounded in Swedenborg’s theological writings,
that it can be read with profit. Incidents, which, at first sight, might
appear ridiculous and irrational, are brought within the pale of reason
and belief when the laws upon which they are founded are understood; and
as effects, not causes, constitute the burden of the “Diary,” the need
of this caution will be apparent. When, however, the laws of spiritual
life are understood, the “Diary” becomes a work of peculiar and most
profitable instruction.

While Swedenborg was living in Sweden, in 1751, his old friend and
coadjutor, Polheim, died; and Swedenborg was favored with a view of
_both_ sides of his grave. Writing in his “Spiritual Diary,” he says:
“Polheim died on Monday, and spoke with me on Thursday. I was invited to
the funeral. He saw the hearse, the attendants, and the whole procession.
He also saw them let down the coffin into the grave, and conversed with
me while it was going on, asking me why they buried him, when he was
alive. And when the priest pronounced that he would rise again at the
day of judgment, he asked why this was, when he had already risen. He
wondered that such a belief should prevail, considering that he was even
now alive; he also wondered at the belief in the resurrection of the
body, for he said he felt that he was in the body: with other remarks.”
Such a relation will seem strange, very strange to many. But have
patience. When the laws and principles upon which such phenomena take
place, are comprehended, all their strangeness and improbability will
straightway disappear.




