CHAPTER XXVII.

    _The True Christian Religion._


In the early part of 1771, Swedenborg published his “True Christian
Religion, or, Universal Theology of the New Church;” and in August of the
same year took ship, and left Amsterdam for London. Let us now turn to
the consideration of his last great work,—a summary of the doctrines he
was commissioned to teach.

“The True Christian Religion, containing the Universal Theology of the
New Church,” the last work published by Swedenborg, may be looked upon
as the summary of his spiritual thought, his theological labors, his
heavenly message to mankind. In its ninth English edition, it forms a
large octavo volume of 815 pages, and is a complete body of divinity. It
is divided into fifteen chapters, a Supplement treating of the states of
Luther, Calvin, and Melancthon, the Dutch, English, Germans, Papists,
Romish saints, Mahommedans, and the Africans, in the spiritual world; and
seventy-seven memorable relations of scenes and representations witnessed
in that world, interspersed between the various chapters; altogether
forming a volume unique in literature, ancient or modern. At the risk
of an occasional repetition of what has before been said, let us take a
rapid survey of the contents of this massive and marvellous work.

Chapter I. treats of God the Creator, His Unity, the Divine Esse which
is Jehovah, His Infinity or His Immensity and Eternity, the Essence of
God which is His Divine Love and Wisdom, His Omnipotence, Omniscience,
and Omnipresence, and of the creation of the universe. On these sublime
subjects, themes on which, for ages, the weary reason of man has exerted
itself with the poorest results, Swedenborg, with a mathematical
exactness, sets forth the true doctrine; and with a simplicity of logic
which at every step calls the Word of God, and the reason and common
sense of man, to witness; leading the reader to wonder why truths so
simple, so soul-satisfying, should have been hidden from human eyes so
long. Whilst elucidating subjects commonly supposed to transcend human
ideas, and yet which humanity is ever restless to discover,—reverence is
in nowise deprived of its exercise. It is a great mistake, yet a common
one, to associate mystery with true reverence; to talk of “ignorance” as
“the mother of devotion.” Let any one ask himself whether the reverence
of Sir Isaac Newton for that God whose operations in the universe he
was favored to discover, was inferior to that of an ignorant devotee,
or an illiterate peasant. No. A knowledge of God and His attributes is
no destroyer of faith, reverence, or devotion, but the reverse. Our
knowledge of Him, however extended, is but the enlargement of a circle,
which, as it is enlarged, expands our conception of the infinity beyond.
Hence it is that whilst this chapter on God the Creator, goes into
details which are the death of mysticism, the truths which it opens to
the mind lead to an intelligent and reverential love, to which ignorance
can never attain.

Chapter II. is devoted to the consideration of the Lord the Redeemer.
It tells how Jehovah God descended and assumed humanity, that He might
redeem and save mankind; and how the humanity was united to the Divinity,
and thus God was made man, and man God, in one Person; that Redemption
consisted in bringing the hells into subjection, and the heavens into
order, and in thus preparing the way for a new spiritual Church; and how,
without such Redemption, neither could men have been saved, nor could the
angels have remained in a state of integrity. Thus Redemption was a work
purely divine, and could not have been effected but by God Incarnate.
The passion of the cross was in itself alone not Redemption, but was the
last temptation the Lord endured in His Humanity; and it was the means of
the glorification of that humanity. Hence it is a fundamental error of
the Church to believe the passion of the cross to be Redemption itself;
and this error, together with that relating to three Divine Persons from
eternity, has perverted the whole system of Christian theology.

Chapter III. sets forth the doctrine of the Holy Spirit and the Divine
Operation. The Holy Spirit is the Divine Truth, and also the Divine
Virtue and Operation, proceeding from the One God, in whom there is
the Divine Trinity, thus from the Lord God the Saviour, Jesus Christ.
The Divine Virtue and Operation in and on humanity, signified by the
Holy Spirit, consists, in general, in reformation and regeneration;
and, in proportion as these are effected, in renovation, vivification,
sanctification, and justification; and in proportion as these are
effected, in purification from evils, remission of sins, and finally
salvation. The Holy Spirit being the efflux of Jehovah through the
glorified humanity, did not exist until after the incarnation. Hence it
is nowhere said in the Old Testament, that the prophets spoke from the
Holy Spirit, but from Jehovah God. We have a beautiful and irresistible
confirmation of this truth in these words, “for the Holy Spirit was not
_yet, because_ that Jesus was not yet glorified.” John vii. 39.

In this chapter he also speaks of the Trinity. There is a Divine Trinity,
consisting of Father, Son, and Holy Spirit; and these three are the
three _Essentials_ of One God,—which make a One, like soul, body, and
operation in man. To conceive of a Trinity of Divine _persons_ from
eternity, is to think of three Gods; and no amount of word-playing and
creed-making can prevent the mind from falling into Tritheism, as long as
a Trinity of _persons_ and not of _essentials_ is spoken and thought of.
A Trinity of persons was unknown in the Apostolic Church. The doctrine
was first broached by the Council of Nice, and thence received into the
Roman Catholic Church, and thus propagated among the Reformed Churches.
The Nicene and Athanasian doctrines concerning a Trinity, have, together,
given rise to a faith which has entirely perverted the Christian Church;
and hence has come that “abomination of desolation, and that affliction,
such as was not in all the world, neither shall be,” which the Lord
has foretold in Daniel, the Evangelists, and the Revelation. For when
the Church ceases to know its God, the central point of all faith and
doctrine, all subsidiary points must necessarily become involved in
darkness. And thus it is that the Athanasian creed has given rise to
so many absurd notions about God, and hence, also, to an innumerable
brood of heresies and phantasies on every point of doctrine and life,
so much so, that had not the Lord effected a Last Judgment in 1757, and
established a New Heaven and a New Church, no flesh could have been
saved. The “healing of the nations,” the new life, light and heat, that
have coursed through humanity during the past century, attest the working
of Omnipotence for the salvation and restoration of what is most valuable
and precious in man.

