Chapter VII. discourses of love towards our neighbor, and good works. It
is introduced by the statement that there are three universal loves, the
love of heaven, the love of the world, and the love of self. These three
loves, when they are in right subordination, make a man perfect; but when
they are not in right subordination, they pervert and invert him. The
love of self and of the world are not in themselves evil. When the love
of heaven, that is, the love of God, of goodness and truth, is supreme in
the mind, and the world is loved as a means to do good, and self is cared
for that uses to the neighbor may be performed,—then the love of self
and of the world are orderly and justifiable. But when the love of God
and heaven is dethroned, and the love of self or of the world rules, and
a man is religious and just only so far as religion and justice conduce
to self-interest and thus God and justice and all things holy are put to
vile uses, then the soul of man is inverted,—is a form of hell; and in
the light of heaven appears bestial, ugly, and deformed.

Every individual man is the neighbor whom we ought to love, but according
to the quality of his goodness or his life. Man considered collectively,
that is, as a lesser or larger society, and considered under the idea
of compound societies, that is, as our country,—is the neighbor that
ought to be loved. The Church is our neighbor, to be loved in a still
higher degree, and the Lord’s kingdom is our neighbor to be loved in
the highest degree. To love the neighbor is not to love his person, but
the good which is in him. Charity itself consists in acting justly and
faithfully in whatever office, business, and employment a person is
engaged, and with whomsoever he has any connection. Eleemosynary acts
of charity consist in giving to the poor, and relieving the indigent,
but with prudence. There are public, domestic, and private duties of
charity. Public duties of charity are, more especially, the payment of
imposts and taxes. These are paid with different feelings by those who
are spiritual and by those who are natural: those who are spiritual pay
them out of good will, because they are collected for the preservation
and protection of their country and the church, and as a provision for
the proper officers and governors, who must receive their salaries out of
the public treasury, therefore those who consider their country and the
church as their neighbor, pay such debts cheerfully and with a willing
mind, and consider it a wicked act either to withhold them or to use any
deceit in the payment; whereas those who do not esteem their country
and the church as their neighbor, pay such debts with a reluctant and
unwilling mind, and, as often as they have an opportunity, withhold
them, or use some fraud in the payment; for they regard only their own
house and their own flesh as their neighbor. The domestic duties of
charity are of several kinds, as those of a husband to his wife, and of
a wife to her husband; of parents to their children, and of children
to their parents; likewise of a master and mistress to their servants,
and of servants to their master and mistress. There are so many duties
relating to the education of children, and the government of families,
that it would require a volume to enumerate them. As to what particularly
regards the duties of parents to their children, there is an intrinsic
difference in this respect with those who are under the influence of
charity, and with those who are not, although externally the duties
may appear similar. With those who are under the influence of charity,
parental affection is joined with love toward their neighbor and love
to God, and such parents love their children according to their morals,
virtues, pursuits, and qualifications for the service of the public;
but with those who are not under the influence of charity, there is no
conjunction of charity with parental affection; the consequence is,
that such parents frequently love wicked, immoral, and crafty children,
more than those who are good, moral, and prudent; and thus prefer such
as are unserviceable to the public, before such as are serviceable.
Private duties of charity are also of several kinds, such as paying wages
to workmen, returning borrowed money, observing agreements, keeping
pledges, and other transactions of a like nature, some of which are
duties grounded in statute law, some in civil law, and some in moral
law. These duties, also, are discharged from different motives by those
who are under the influence of charity, and by those who are not; by the
former they are discharged faithfully and justly, for the law of charity
requires that a man should so act in all his dealings, with whomsoever
he may have any connection; but these duties are discharged in a totally
different manner by those who are not influenced by charity. Then there
are convivial recreations of charity, which consist of dinners and
suppers and social intercourse. Every one knows that dinner and supper
parties are in general use, and are given to promote various ends; by
many on account of friendship, relationship, mirth, gain, recompense,
and for party purposes of corruption; among the great they are given on
account of their dignity; and in the palaces of kings, for the display of
splendor and magnificence. But dinners and suppers of charity are given
only by those who are influenced by mutual love grounded in a similarity
of faith. Among Christians in the Primitive Church, dinners and suppers
had this end alone in view, and were called feasts, being instituted that
they might meet together in cordial joy and friendly union. At table, the
guests conversed together on various subjects, domestic and civil, but
particularly on such as concerned the Church; and as these feasts were
feasts of charity, their conversation on every subject was influenced
by charity, with all its joys and delights. The spiritual sphere which
prevailed on such occasions, was a sphere of love to the Lord and toward
the neighbor, which exhilarated every mind, softened the tone of every
expression, and communicated to all the senses a festivity from the
heart; for from every man there emanates a spiritual sphere, derived
from the affection of his love and corresponding thought, which inwardly
affects those in his company, particularly at the time of convivial
recreations.

The first part of charity consists in putting away evils, and the second
in doing actions that are useful to our neighbor. It is believed by many,
at the present day, that charity consists only in doing good, and that
while a man is doing good, he does no evil; consequently, that the first
part of charity is to do good, and the second not to do evil: but the
case is altogether the reverse, it being the first part of charity to put
away evil, and the second to do good. For it is a universal law in the
spiritual world, and thence too in the natural world, that so far as a
person wills no evil, he wills what is good; consequently, so far as he
turns himself away from hell, whence all evil ascends, he turns himself
toward heaven, whence all good descends; and, therefore, so far as any
one rejects the devil, he is accepted by the Lord. In performing the
exercises of charity, a man does not ascribe merit to works, so long as
he believes that all good is from the Lord. Moral life, if it is at the
same time spiritual life, is charity. The friendship of love, contracted
with a person without regard to his spiritual quality, is detrimental
after death. The friendship of love, among the wicked, is intestine
hatred toward each other. There is spurious charity, hypocritical
charity, and dead charity. There can be no such thing as genuine charity,
which is living, unless it make one with faith, and unless both in
conjunction look to the Lord. Spurious charity is such as is the charity
of those who hold to faith alone for salvation, and who say charity is
of no account in leading to heaven. Such charity as these may have is
spurious, because not spiritual, and merely performed from selfish and
worldly motives. Hypocritical charity is predicable of those who, in
public or private worship, bow themselves almost to the ground before
God, pour forth long prayers with great devotion, put on a sanctified
appearance, kiss crucifixes and bones of the dead, and kneel at
sepulchers, and there mutter words expressive of holy veneration toward
God, and yet, in their hearts nourish self-worship, and seek to be adored
like so many deities. Dead charity is predicable of those whose faith
is dead, since the quality of charity depends on the quality of faith.
Faith is dead in all who are without works, and in those who believe not
in God, but in living and dead men, and worship idols as if they were
holy in themselves, after the practice of the old Gentiles.

