CHAPTER XXV.

    _Persecution—Letter to the Academy of Sciences—Leaves Stockholm
    for the last time._


On Swedenborg’s arrival in Stockholm, he found that the long peace he had
enjoyed from external interference and persecution was at an end. The
first manifestation of hostility took place in the seizure of some copies
of his treatise on Conjugial Love, at Norkjoping, which he had sent from
England, intending to present them to his countrymen. The ground of their
seizure was, a law prohibiting the introduction of any works into Sweden
at variance with the Lutheran faith. The seizure having taken place
in the diocese of his nephew Filenius, he naturally turned to him for
explanation and redress. Filenius thereon embraced and kissed his uncle,
and assured him that he would fulfill all his desires, and procure the
restoration of his books. But his actions were the reverse of his words;
for he was, in fact, the prompter of the seizure, and secretly did all
he could to insure their confiscation. By and by Swedenborg discovered
the hypocrisy, and remonstrated with Filenius; whereupon he dropped the
mask, and insisted on the books undergoing clerical revision before they
could be surrendered. Swedenborg urged that as his treatise was not
theological, but chiefly moral, its revisal by the clergy was absurd,
and that such censorship would pave the way for a dark age in Sweden.
But Filenius was unmoved; and Swedenborg, now fully convinced of his
double dealing, likened him, as he well might, to Judas Iscariot, and
said that “he who spoke lies, lied also in his life.” Having brought some
copies of his treatise on Conjugial Love with him to Sweden, he presented
them to many of the Senators, the Bishops, and the royal family. He had
no fear of the result of free and open criticism. But worse things lay
in store. Dean Ekebom, of Gottenburg, was indignant that Doctors Beyer
and Rosen should have embraced Swedenborg’s views, and the clerical
deputies from that town were instructed to complain of Swedenborg and
his disciples to the Diet. They found in bishop Filenius, then President
of the House of Clergy, a willing instrument to further their designs.
They plotted to have Swedenborg put upon his trial, presuming that when
questioned he would openly assert his divine commission and powers of
spiritual intercourse, and then they would pronounce him insane, and have
him committed to a mad-house. Count Hopken revealed to Swedenborg this
cunning device of his enemies, and advised him to fly the kingdom. At
this news, Swedenborg was much afflicted; and going into his garden, he
fell on his knees, and prayed to the Lord to direct him what to do. After
this prayer, he received the consolatory answer that _no evil should
touch him_. And so it turned out. His inoffensive bearing, his rank
and connections, all tended to intimidate his adversaries, and prevent
the execution of their designed outrage. Had he been a farmer’s or a
tradesman’s son, instead of being a bishop’s, his fate might have been
very different.

Bishop Filenius, however, succeeded in gaining the appointment of
a committee of the House of Clergy on the Swedenborgian case. Its
deliberations were kept secret. Nothing came of it that was unfavorable
to Swedenborg. They disregarded the charges of Filenius, and spoke “very
handsomely and reasonably of Swedenborg.”

Filenius gained one point, however, in the presentation of a memorial
to the king, requesting the attention of the Chancellor of Justice
to the troubles at Gottenburg. To this request the king yielded; and
the members of the Consistory of Gottenburg were commanded to send
in an unequivocal representation of the light in which they regarded
Swedenborg’s principles. On January 2d, 1770, Dr. Beyer, as one of the
members of the Consistory, rose, and gave his bold and honest testimony
in favor of Swedenborg and his writings. He said: “Convinced by
experience, I must in the first place observe, that no man is competent
to give a just and suitable judgment on those writings, who has not
read them; or who has read them superficially, or with a determination
in his heart to reject them, after having perused, without examination,
some detached parts only; neither is he competent, who rejects them as
soon as he finds anything that militates against those doctrines which
he has long cherished and acknowledged as true, and of which perhaps he
is but too blindly enamored; nor is he competent, who is an ardent, yet
undiscriminating biblical scholar, who, in explaining the meaning of the
Scriptures, confines his ideas to the literal expression or signification
only: and, lastly, neither is he competent, who has altogether devoted
himself to sensual indulgences, and the love of the world.” He then
entered into the details of New Church doctrine, and concluded in these
words: “In obedience, therefore, to your Majesty’s most gracious command,
that I should deliver a full and positive declaration respecting the
writings of Swedenborg, I do acknowledge it to be my duty to declare,
in all humble confidence, that as far as I have proceeded in the study
of them, and agreeably to the gift granted to me for investigation and
judgment, I have found in them _nothing but what closely coincides with
the words of the Lord himself, and that they shine with a light truly
divine_.” These were noble and brave words to speak in the midst of
enemies.

The debate on his doctrines dragged its slow length along. His enemies,
full of spite, were yet full of fear, and seemed to dread the result of
an open attack upon Swedenborg. Still the petty persecution continued,
until, at last, May 10th, 1770, Swedenborg took up his pen and addressed
himself directly to the king. In this letter, he complains that he had
met with usage the like of which had been offered to none since the
establishment of Christianity in Sweden, and much less since there
had existed liberty of conscience. He recapitulated his grievances.
He said that he had been attacked, calumniated, and menaced, without
the opportunity of defending himself; though truth itself had answered
for him. He reminded his Majesty of their former interview. With great
simplicity, he says: “I have already informed your Majesty, and beseech
you to call it to mind, that the Lord our Saviour manifested himself
to me in a sensible personal appearance; that he has commanded me to
write what has been already written, and what I have still to write;
that He was afterwards graciously pleased to endow me with the privilege
of conversing with angels and spirits, and of being in fellowship with
them. I have already declared this more than once to your Majesty in
the presence of all the royal family, when they were graciously pleased
to invite me to their table, with five senators, and several other
persons; this was the only subject discoursed of during the repast. Of
this I also spoke afterwards to several other senators; and more openly
to their Excellencies Count de Tessin, Count Bonde, and Count Hopken,
who are still alive, and were satisfied with the truth of it. I have
declared the same in England, Holland, Germany, Denmark, and at Paris,
to kings, princes, and other particular persons, as well as to those in
this kingdom. If the common report is to be believed, the Chancellor has
declared that what I have been reciting are untruths, although the very
truth. To say that they cannot believe and give credit to such things,
therein will I excuse them; for it is not in my power to place others in
the same state in which God has placed me, so as to be able to convince
them, by their own eyes and ears of the truth of those deeds and things
I publicly have made known. I have no ability to capacitate them to
converse with angels and spirits, neither to work miracles to dispose or
force their understandings to comprehend what I say. When my writings
are read with attention and cool reflection, (in which many things are
to be met with, heretofore unknown,) it is easy enough to conclude,
that I could not come to such a knowledge but by a real vision, and by
conversing with those who are in the spiritual world. This knowledge is
given to me from our Saviour, not for any private merit of mine, but
for the great concern of all Christians’ salvation and happiness; and
as such, how can any one venture to assert that it is false? That these
things may appear such as many have had no conception of, and which, of
consequence, they can not easily credit, has nothing remarkable in it,
for scarcely anything is known respecting them.” He concluded by throwing
himself upon the king’s protection, and requesting him to command for
himself the opinion of the clergy on the case; also the production of
various documents that had been produced at Gottenburg and elsewhere; in
order that he, and those maligned together with him, might be heard in
their defence, this being their right and privilege. He protested, that
the only advice he had given to Doctors Beyer and Rosen, was to address
themselves to our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ, as a means to heavenly
good and blessedness; for He only has all power in heaven and on earth.
Matthew xxviii. 18. Were this doctrine of the Supreme Divinity of the
Lord Jesus Christ taken away, he averred that he would rather live in
Tartary than in Christendom.

Had the Consistory declared this doctrine heretical, it must have led to
many strange issues. But the Consistory came to no decision, and their
report on Swedenborg’s writings was never written. A short time before
Swedenborg left Stockholm for the last time, the king said to him: “The
Consistory has been silent on my letters and your works;” and, putting
his hand on Swedenborg’s shoulder, he added, “We may conclude that they
have found nothing reprehensible in them, and that you have written in
conformity to the truth.”

Throughout all this affair, Swedenborg remained perfectly calm; and,
though a very old man, worked on as industriously as ever. It might seem,
from what has been said, that the controversy had terminated entirely in
his favor. But it was not so, as he, in the following year, 1771, found
out; for then it appeared that his adversaries had succeeded in obtaining
a strict prohibition against the importation of his writings into Sweden.
It was his intention to send in a formal complaint to the States General,
appealing against this prohibition; but it does not appear whether he
fulfilled his intention, or not.

Finally, he addressed a letter to the Universities of Upsal, Lund, and
Abo, asserting that each of the estates of the kingdom ought to have its
own Consistory, and ought not to acknowledge the exclusive authority of
that of Gottenburg. He declared that religious matters belong to others
as well as the priests. Thus ends our account of this affair. It may be
said to be the only thing approaching to persecution that Swedenborg
endured; and considering the many heterodox opinions that he broached, we
can not but think that he had, on the whole, but little to complain of.
Many who have followed him in the propagation of the new theology, have
not gone so far, yet have fared worse. The gentleness and simple prudence
which, during so many years, shielded him from interference, we can not
too highly admire. But, above all, we must be struck with the remarkable
providence of the Lord, shown in his protection: the Divine promise was
truly kept, that he _should not be harmed_.

His old associates of the Royal Academy of Sciences at Stockholm,
received, at this time, his last communication. He wrote them a letter
explaining some of the correspondences of Scripture, and their origin.
In it, he says: “The science of correspondences was esteemed, by the
ancients, the science of sciences, and constituted their wisdom; it
would surely be of importance for some one of your society to devote
his attention to it. Should it be desired, I am willing to unfold the
meaning of the Egyptian hieroglyphics, which are nothing else but
correspondences; these being discovered and proved from the Word, in
the Apocalypse Revealed; and to publish their explications, is a work
which no other person could accomplish.” We have no record as to how the
Academy received this proposal. A copy of this letter was sent to Mr.
Hartley, and Swedenborg desired that he and his friends would think over
the subject. The letter is now published as an appendix to his treatise
on the White Horse.

Swedenborg now prepared to leave Stockholm for another journey. Writing
under date of July 23d, 1770, to Dr. Beyer, he says: “As I am going, in
a few days, to Amsterdam, I shall take my leave of you in this letter,
hoping that our Saviour will support you in good health, preserve you
from further violence, and bless your thoughts.”

Robsahm tells us that, on the day that Swedenborg departed, he called
on him, and “I then asked him,” says he, “if we should meet again. He
answered me in a tender and touching manner: ‘I do not know whether I
shall return; but I am assured I shall not die before I have finished
the publication of the book entitled the True Christian Religion; and for
which only I am now about to depart. But should we not see one another
again in this lower world, we shall meet in the presence of the Lord our
Heavenly Father, if so be that we observe to do his commandments.’ He
then took a cheerful leave, and started on his last journey, with the
apparent vigor of a man of thirty years of age, although he was then
eighty-two. He took ship for Amsterdam, leaving his native land, never
again, in the body, to return.”




