CHAPTER XV.

    _Anecdotes._


The trite observation that the lives of literary men are devoid of those
incidents which make up a stirring and lively biography, applies with
great truth to the career of Swedenborg. His quiet and unostentatious
life afforded but few materials for anecdotes; hence we have but faint
traces of his outward course. While writing the works we have just
noticed, from 1747 to 1758, the principal portion of his time must have
been passed in London. Few men in those days were capable of sympathy
or communion with the elevated and spiritualized mind of Swedenborg.
Yet though living as it were alone, he could not have been melancholy
or desolate. Under the care and guidance of the Lord, favored with
the company and converse of angels, and enjoying the consciousness of
fulfilling high and holy duties, he had every reason to be the cheerful
and contented man that contemporary testimony represents him. His
evenings he used often to spend with his printer, Mr. Hart, of Poppin’s
court, Fleet street. Mrs. Lewis, his publisher’s wife, knew him, and
“thought him a good and sensible man, but too apt to spiritualize
things.” Beyond a few particulars such as these, we know nothing of his
private life.

On the 19th of July, 1759, we find Swedenborg at Gottenburg. Here
occurred the following circumstance, of which Immanuel Kant, the
celebrated transcendentalist, is the narrator.

“On Saturday, at 4 o’clock, P. M.,” says Kant, “when Swedenborg arrived
at Gottenburg from England, Mr. William Castel invited him to his house,
together with a party of fifteen persons. About 6 o’clock, Swedenborg
went out, and after a short interval returned to the company, quite pale
and alarmed. He stated that a dangerous fire had just broken out in
Stockholm, at Sundermalm, (distant three hundred miles from Gottenburg,)
and that it was spreading very fast. He was restless, and went out often.
He said that the house of one of his friends, whom he named, was already
in ashes, and that his own was in danger. At 8 o’clock, after he had been
out again, he joyfully exclaimed: ‘Thank God! the fire is extinguished
the third door from my house.’ This news occasioned great commotion among
the company. It was announced to the governor the same evening. The next
morning, Swedenborg was sent for by the governor, who questioned him
concerning the disaster. Swedenborg described the fire precisely, how it
had begun, in what manner it had ceased, and how long it had continued.
On the same day the news was spread through the city; and as the governor
had thought it worthy of attention, the consternation was considerably
increased, as many were in trouble on account of their friends and
property, which might have been involved in the disaster. On Monday
evening, a messenger arrived at Gottenburg, who was despatched during the
time of the fire. In the letters brought by him, the fire was described
precisely in the manner stated by Swedenborg. On Tuesday morning, a royal
courier arrived at the governor’s with the melancholy intelligence of
the fire, of the loss it had occasioned, and of the houses damaged and
ruined, not in the least differing from that which Swedenborg had given
the moment it had ceased: the fire had been extinguished at 8 o’clock.

“What,” continues Kant, “can be brought forward against the authenticity
of this occurrence? My friend who wrote this to me, has not only examined
the circumstances of this extraordinary case at Stockholm, but also,
about two months ago, at Gottenburg, where he is acquainted with the most
respectable houses, and where he could obtain the most authentic and
complete information, as the greatest part of the inhabitants, who are
still alive, were witnesses to the memorable occurrence.”

This narrative is taken from a letter written by Kant, in 1768, to
Charlotte de Knobloch, a lady of quality. Kant, it may be remarked, was
no adherent of Swedenborg’s. Two years before writing this letter, he
had attacked him in a small work entitled, “Dreams of the Great Seer
Illustrated by Dreams of Metaphysics.” Received from such a source, we
can entertain no doubt as to the truth of the story.

At home, in Stockholm, Swedenborg did not fail to excite much curiosity
and attention, and his conduct and deportment were carefully watched. It
was observed that he seldom went to church, or received the sacrament.
This was owing partly to the contrariety of the Lutheran doctrine to
his own views, and partly, Robsahm says, to the disease of the stone,
which troubled him. In 1760, two bishops, his relations, remonstrated
with him in a friendly manner upon his remissness. He answered, that,
religious observances were not so necessary for him as for others, as
he was associated with angels. They then represented that his example
would be valuable, by which argument he suffered himself to be persuaded.
A few days previously to receiving the sacrament, he asked his old
domestics to whom he should resort for the purpose, for “he was not
much acquainted with the different preachers.” The elder chaplain was
mentioned. Swedenborg objected that “he was a passionate man and a fiery
zealot, and that he had heard him thundering from the pulpit with little
satisfaction.” The assistant chaplain was then proposed, who was not
so popular with the congregation. Swedenborg said, “I prefer him to the
other, for I hear that he speaks what he thinks, and by this means has
lost the good-will of his people, as generally happens in this world.”
Accordingly he took the sacrament from this curate.

“In general,” says Robsahm, “Swedenborg would not enter into dispute on
matters of religion. If he was necessitated to defend himself, he did it
with mildness and in a few words; but if any one would not be convinced,
and became warm in argument, he retired, saying, ‘Read my writings
attentively and without prejudice; they will answer you in my stead, and
will afford you reason to change your ideas and opinions on such things.’

“He used, at first, freely to speak of his visions and spiritual
explications of the Scriptures; but as this displeased the clergy, who
proclaimed him a heretic and madman, he resolved to be less communicative
of his knowledge in company, or, at least, more cautious, lest the
censorious should have room to blame what they could not comprehend like
himself. I once,” says Robsahm, “addressed the rector of the parish where
he lived, an old and respected clergyman, asking him what he thought
of Swedenborg’s visions and explanations of the Bible. The venerable
man answered: ‘God alone can judge of this; but I can not think him to
be such a person as many do; I have myself conversed with him, and in
company where we have been together, and I have found him to be a good
and a holy man.’

“It was remarkable that Swedenborg never endeavored to persuade any
person to receive his opinions. He was in nowise led by that self-love
which is observable in those who publish new opinions concerning church
doctrines; neither did he seek to make many proselytes, not even
communicating his thoughts and sentiments, except to those whom he
thought virtuous, disposed to hear them with moderation, capable of
comprehending them, and lovers of truth.

“It is a very singular circumstance,” continues Robsahm, “that all who
have read the writings of Swedenborg, with a desire to refute them, have
finished the attempt by adhering to his sentiments.” This assertion must
be received, however, with qualification.

Though busied with the composition of his works, and immersed in
spiritual contemplations, Swedenborg was not forgetful of the world
and of his duties to his country. In 1761 he took part in the Swedish
Diet or Parliament. Three of his memorials or addresses to the Diet,
are preserved. In the first of these he congratulates the House upon
its meetings, and counsels the redress of all grievances which cause
disaffection. In the second he advocates an alliance with France instead
of England from prudential motives, at the same time strongly protesting
against the evil of despotic governments, and the danger to liberty in
the extension of the Roman Catholic faith. The third memorial is on
the subject of finance. Count Hopken, the Swedish prime minister at
that time, leaves on record that “the most solid memorials, and the
best penned, at the Diet of 1761, on matters of finance, were presented
by Swedenborg; in one of which he refuted a large work in 4to on the
same subject, quoted the corresponding passages of it, and all in less
than one sheet.” He was likewise a member of the secret committee of
the Diet, an office to which only the most sage and virtuous were
elected. Consider, reader, for a moment, the dignity, the wisdom, and
the abounding common sense which must have permeated the whole being of
Swedenborg, to enable him to live down the obloquy attached to the name
of a “ghost-seer,” and be received with high favor and acceptance by men
of the world, sceptical and sensual!

Soon afterwards Swedenborg left Stockholm; and we find him in July,
1762, at Amsterdam. Jung Stilling received from a friend the following
interesting anecdote respecting him at this time. “I was in Amsterdam,”
says he, “in 1762, in a company in which Swedenborg was present, on the
very day that Peter III., Emperor of Russia, died. In the midst of our
conversation his countenance changed, and it was evident that his soul
was no longer there, and that something extraordinary was passing in him.
As soon as he came to himself again, he was asked what had happened to
him. He would not at first communicate it; but at length, after having
been repeatedly pressed, he said: ‘This very hour, the Emperor Peter III.
has died in his prison,’ mentioning at the same time the manner of his
death. ‘Gentlemen will please to note down the day, that they may be able
to compare it with the intelligence of his death in the newspapers.’ The
newspapers subsequently announced the Emperor’s death as having taken
place on that day.”




