CHAPTER XIII.

    _Heaven and Hell._


The treatise on Heaven and Hell is among the most charming of
Swedenborg’s writings. Its subjects possess a universal attraction; for,
what believer in the immortality of man has not, at times, longed to
penetrate the awful mysteries of the unseen world? And there is nothing
unreasonable in the desire. True it is, that, until Swedenborg came, any
but the most general knowledge of the nature of the future life had been
withdrawn from mankind since the days of primeval innocence; yet not
from anything hurtful in the knowledge itself, but simply because the
sublime facts of the future state transcended the apprehension of men
immersed in worldly loves and cares, and denying and ridiculing every
idea which was not an object of sensual perception. For this reason the
Lord said to his disciples: “I have yet many things to say unto you,
but ye can not bear them now.” (_John_ xvi. 12.) We frequently see this
inability to “bear” things spiritual and divine, manifested in our own
experience. We offer Swedenborg’s treatise, for perusal, to some man of
science, full of self-confidence, with the laws and facts of the universe
at his finger’s ends; or to some deeply-read theologian. The title page
is read,—“Heaven and its Wonders, the World of Spirits, and Hell; being
a relation of things heard and seen.” It is enough. “What nonsense! What
foolishness! The lunatic! What could _he_ know of heaven or hell? How
could he get there? The impostor! None but a fool could write such a
book!” And so on. The title page settles the whole question. Now what can
be said in reply to these railers, of whom the world is full? How can
one argue with, and combat, such inveterate prejudice? Yet these people
are professing Christians. They profess to believe there is a heaven and
a hell. But, does not their condemnation of Swedenborg betray a lurking
infidelity in their hearts? If they really possessed a living faith in
the existence of heaven and hell, it could not appear to them so utterly
preposterous that some account of their nature might in these times have
been revealed, through the abounding mercy of the Lord.

But the world now contains many who are willing to receive, and able to
understand, the truths of the future life. The Lord, who never allows his
children to lack any good thing, has, in due season, given them, through
Swedenborg, this precious and delightful volume. Let us briefly enumerate
its important statements.

The spiritual world divides itself into three great regions,—Heaven, the
World of Spirits, and Hell.

Heaven is formed of all who have loved the Lord on earth by living a life
in accordance with his laws. The laws of spiritual life are known, more
or less perfectly, in all nations, even among the heathen. The lowest
of the Gentiles have some faint rays of the light of spiritual truth;
and if they live in obedience thereto, regeneration, and consequently,
heaven, is attainable by them. Yet heaven has its degrees of bliss. Good
persons of every variety of character pass into it. But the promiscuous
association of these different kinds of character would not be orderly,
and could not be blissful. By the law of spiritual gravitation, (from
which the law of natural gravitation is but a derivation, and of which it
is a type and image,) all who possess similar affections and intelligence
are drawn together, and co-ordinated in the most blissful harmony.
The infinite variety of heaven thus arranges itself, in general, into
two kingdoms; specifically into three heavens; and in particular, into
innumerable societies. The two kingdoms are respectively called celestial
and spiritual. The angels forming the celestial kingdom are characterized
by their exceeding love of the Lord and of goodness; and the angels who
form the spiritual kingdom are distinguished by their exceeding love of
their neighbor and of truth. The celestial angels are immensely wiser
than the spiritual, and their blessedness is ineffable. Specifically
there are three heavens, perfectly distinct, called the first heaven,
the second or middle heaven, and the third or highest heaven; or they
may be called external, internal, and inmost; or natural, spiritual, and
celestial. Of these three heavens the highest or third, together with
the internal of the first or lowest heaven, forms the celestial kingdom;
and the middle or second, together with the external of the first or
lowest heaven, forms the spiritual kingdom. These three heavens and
two kingdoms, arising out of the varieties of the human mind, are not
arbitrary distinctions. The external, first, or natural heaven, is formed
of those who, from a principle of obedience and duty, live in accordance
with the Divine will. The second, spiritual, or middle heaven, is formed
of such as love truth, delight in things intellectual, and at the same
time are in disinterested love to the neighbor. The inmost, third, or
celestial heaven, is formed of those who, full of love to the Lord, are
in innocence. These celestial angels, gifted with the highest wisdom
and peace, yet full of humility, indefinitely exceed all beneath them
in beauty and wisdom. The existence and order of the three heavens was
represented by the courts of the Jewish temple. The celebrated Oberlin,
a diligent reader of Swedenborg, had a plan of the courts of the temple
hung upon the walls of his church, by which he taught his hearers, that,
according to their humility, piety, fidelity, and love of being useful
to each other, would be their elevation in the Lord’s kingdom, either
to the first, second, or third heaven. We think that no one, in whom
reign the heavenly principles of “love” to the Lord and the neighbor;
“joy” in duty under all circumstances; “peace” in every change of state;
“long-suffering” under all provocations; “gentleness” of behaviour;
“goodness” of disposition, ever manifesting itself in good actions;
“faith” or truth, believed, loved, and thence trusted in; “meekness”
in doing and in suffering; “temperance” both in external and internal
delights, Gal. v. 22, would be an unwilling inhabitant of such a heaven
as Swedenborg describes. Is not this at least presumptive evidence that
he has spoken truly?

The three heavens are further subdivided into innumerable societies,
some smaller, and some larger; some consisting of myriads of angels,
and some of hundreds. Their association into societies, is a result of
similarity of character, which similarity is imaged in their faces; and a
general likeness of countenance is observed among the angels who form one
society. All who are in similar love know each other, just as men in the
world know their kindred, relations, and friends; and thus, as it were,
spontaneously associated, they feel at home and in freedom, and thence
in the full delight of their life. From this it also follows that angels
who differ much are far apart; and few depart out of their own society
into another, because to go out from their own society is like going out
of themselves, or out of their own life, and passing into another which
is not so agreeable. Nevertheless all the societies of heaven are bound
together in one perfect form, which is strictly human.

All angels are in the human form, and are just such men and women as they
were on earth, except that they have rejected the material body. That
we should have to write and enforce such truisms—for such they must
appear to a mind really rational,—is owing to the strange and ridiculous
fancies that are commonly entertained on this subject. We often hear the
departed talked of as shades, and thought of as minds without forms, or
mere thinking principles composed of some sort of ethereal vapor; and
when artists draw them, we see perhaps an exquisitely beautiful human
form, but disfigured with large feathery wings, which, having no adequate
muscles, would have no power of motion. None of these vague, shadowy,
and erroneous ideas do we find in the Bible. The angels seen by Abraham,
Lot, Manoah, the prophets, and the Lord’s disciples, were all seen as
men, and talked with as men. Our author writes thus explicitly on this
subject. “The angelic form is in every respect human; angels have faces,
eyes, ears, breasts, arms, hands, and feet; they see, hear, and converse
with each other; and, in a word, no external attribute of man is wanting,
except the natural body.”

And now comes a doctrine which on a first view may appear very mystical,
and yet when pondered over, and understood, commends itself to our belief
by a thousand irresistible evidences drawn from analogy, and confirmed
by right reason. It is, that every society of heaven is in the human
form; and that the universal heaven, viewed collectively, is also in the
human form; and is called by Swedenborg the Grand or Greatest [Maximus]
Man. Wilkinson well expresses this sublime truth. “Heaven,” he says, “is
supremely human—nay more, it is one man. As the members of the body make
one person, so before God, all good men make one humanity: every society
of the angels is a heavenly man in a lesser form, and every angel in a
least. The reason is, that God himself, (the Lord Jesus Christ,) is a
Divine Man, and He shapes His heaven into His own image and likeness,
even as He made Adam. The oneness of heaven comes from God’s unity:
its manhood from His humanity. Heaven has, therefore, all the members,
organs, and viscera of a man; its angel inhabitants, every one, are in
some province of the Grand Man. Indefinite myriads of us go to a fibre
of its humanity. Some are in the province of the brain; some in that
of the lungs; some in that of the heart; some in that of the belly;
some are in the legs and arms; and all, wherever humanized, that is to
say, located in humanity, perform spiritually the offices of that part
of the body whereto they correspond. They all work together, however
spaced apparently, just as the parts of a single man. Their space is but
their palpable liberty, and they touch the human atoms, more closely,
by offices which unite them in God, than the contiguous fibres of our
flesh.” Every society of heaven also increases in number daily, and as it
increases, it becomes more perfect; and from its perfection the universal
heaven becomes more perfect, because heaven is composed of societies.
Since increasing numbers make heaven more perfect, it is evident how
much _they_ are deceived who believe that heaven will be closed when
it becomes full. On the contrary, heaven will never be closed, for the
greater its fullness, the greater its perfection; and therefore the
angels desire nothing more earnestly than to receive new comers.

This part of our subject would require considerable expansion to make it
intelligible to minds that have never meditated on these high themes, and
whose theological education has perverted all perception of the truth on
these matters. The subject is enticing, but our limits command restraint.

It was a remark of a profane wit and epicure that “as to heaven, he had
no great longing, as he could not see what great pleasure there could
be in sitting on a cloud and singing psalms to eternity.” We have in
this expression a thought which we know to be common to many minds, but
respect for the externals of religion forbids its expression. The general
belief respecting the nature of life in heaven, is so vague, and contains
so much of clouds and psalm-singing, that it is not to be wondered at
that some free and daring spirits should openly avow their preference for
the more substantial realities of this life. And is it not a pity that
the divine glories and delights of the heavenly life should become so
veiled in mystery as to lose their attraction, and cease to be desirable?
With the exception of the church’s ignorance of the humanity, unity, and
divinity of its Saviour and Lord, no surer evidence could be adduced
of its consummation, than its inability to answer the simplest child’s
questions as to the nature of life in heaven. Let us be thankful that
man’s utmost wants, in this respect, are satisfied in the writings of
that New Church which the Lord is now raising up, and of which Swedenborg
was the divinely-appointed herald.

The sun of heaven is the Lord. The light of heaven is the divine truth,
and its heat the divine love; both proceeding from the Lord as a sun. The
sun of this world is not seen in heaven. Nature commences from the sun
of this world, and everything which is produced from it, and subsists by
it, is called natural; but the spiritual world in which heaven is, is
above nature, and entirely distinct from it, although it is ever to be
remembered that nature is a derivation from spirit, and communicates with
spirit by correspondences. We shall have more to say on this conjunction
yet perfect separation, between nature and spirit, when we come to speak
of the doctrine of degrees.

The sun of heaven, or the divine sphere of glory surrounding the Lord,
the “light which no man can approach unto,” 1 Tim. vi. 6, appears
variously to the angels of heaven according to their states of love and
intelligence. To the angels of the third heaven, the sun appears fiery
and flaming; to the angels of the second heaven, white and brilliant;
while to those of the first heaven its light is more subdued and veiled
with clouds, yet at intervals bursting forth and pouring his glorious
radiance upon them. Although the Lord is thus seen by the angels as a sun
above them, yet at times He appears in their midst, in an angelic form,
and with a resplendent countenance. What tongue can describe the rapt
adoration and ineffable joy which must thrill angelic bosoms on these
occasions!

Heaven has its times and its seasons, but they are not like those of
earth. In heaven there is no winter and no night. The times and seasons
of heaven are consequences of the variations of the states of angelic
minds. While to all appearance they are objective as on earth, they are
in reality strictly subjective. The external changes of light and heat
correspond to the internal changes of love and wisdom in the angelic
mind. Now as the angels are sometimes in a state of intense love, and
sometimes in a state of love not so intense, morning, noon, evening,
and twilight, exist in heaven as the external emblems of these changes.
Without such changes life would lose its zest. Eternal uniformity would
be eternal dullness.

Since angels are men, and live together in society like men on earth,
therefore they have garments, houses, and other things similar to those
which exist on earth, but of course infinitely more beautiful and
perfect. The garments of the angels correspond to their intelligence.
The garments of some glitter as with flame, and those of others are
resplendent as with light; others are of various colors, and some white
and opaque. The angels of the inmost heaven are naked because they are in
innocence, and nakedness corresponds to innocence. It is because garments
represent states of wisdom that they are so much spoken of in the Word,
in relation to the church and good men. Thus in Isaiah liii. 1, “Awake,
put on strength, O Zion; put on thy _beautiful garments_, O Jerusalem.”
And in Ezekiel xv. 10, the Lord says of his church: “I girded thee about
with fine linen, and covered thee with silk.” And in the Apocalypse iii.
4, 5, it is said: “They who have not defiled their _garments_, shall walk
with Me in _white_, for they are worthy. He that overcometh, the same
shall be clothed in _white raiment_.” What a depth of meaning appears in
these passages when we remember the spiritual signification of garments!

“The garments of the angels,” writes Swedenborg, “do not merely appear to
be garments, but they really are garments; for they not only see them,
but feel them, and have different ones, which they take off and put on,
laying aside those which are not in use, and resuming them when they come
into use again. That they are clothed with a variety of garments, I have
witnessed a thousand times; and when I inquired whence they obtained
them, they told me ‘from the Lord,’ and that they receive them as gifts,
and that they are sometimes clothed without knowing how. They also said
that their garments are changed according to the changes of their state.”

Since there are societies in heaven, and the angels live as men, it
follows that they have habitations, various, like all else in heaven,
according to the degree of love and wisdom in which they are principled.
No words are like Swedenborg’s own on this subject. “Whenever I have
conversed with the angels mouth to mouth, I have been present with
them in their habitations, which are exactly like the habitations on
earth called houses, but more beautiful. They contain chambers, parlors
[conclavia], and bed-chambers, in great numbers; courts also, and around
them gardens, shrubberies, and fields. Where the angels are consociated
their habitations are contiguous, or near to each other, and arranged in
the form of a city, with streets, ways, and squares, exactly like the
cities on our earth.

“I have seen palaces in heaven, magnificent beyond description. Their
upper parts were refulgent as if they were pure gold, and their lower
parts as if they were precious stones: some were more splendid than
others, and the splendor without was equaled by the magnificence within.
The apartments were ornamented with decorations which neither language
nor science can adequately describe. On the south were paradises, in
which all things were similarly resplendent; for in some places the
leaves of the trees were like silver, and the fruits like gold, while
the colors of the flowers which were arranged in beds, appeared like
rainbows; at the boundaries appeared other palaces, which terminated the
view. Such is the architecture of heaven that one might say it is the
very art itself; nor is this to be wondered at, because the art itself
is from heaven. The angels said that such things, and innumerable others
still more perfect, are presented before their eyes by the Lord, but that
nevertheless they delight their minds more than their eyes, because in
everything they see correspondences of things divine.

“The angels who constitute the Lord’s celestial kingdom, dwell for the
most part in elevated places, or mountains; those who form the spiritual
kingdom, on hills; but those who are in the lowest parts of heaven, in
places which appear as rocks. There are also angels who do not live
consociated, but separate. These dwell in the midst of heaven, and are
the best of the angels.

“The houses in which the angels dwell, are not constructed by hand, like
houses in the world, but are given them freely by the Lord, according to
their reception of good and truth. All things whatsoever which the angels
possess, they hold as gifts from the Lord; and they are supplied with
everything they need.”

We thus learn that in heaven there are not external, physical, or mental
occupations to support bodily wants, as in this world.

It was said above that the angels have not wings, as is commonly
supposed. Their power of progression far exceeds anything that wings
could supply. They have no idea of space, such as we have in the world.
All who are of like disposition spontaneously associate together in the
spiritual world. It thus follows that those are near each other who are
in a similar state, and distant who are in a dissimilar state; and that
what appears to be space in heaven is merely an external appearance,
representative of internal differences of mind. From this cause alone the
heavens are distinct from each other, and each society of heaven, and
every individual in each society. Hence also the hells are altogether
separated from the heavens.

From the same cause, any one in the spiritual world appears to be
present if another intensely desires his presence; for from that desire
he sees him in thought, and puts himself in his state. Again one person
is removed from another in proportion as he holds him in aversion; for
all aversion is from contrariety of the affections and disagreement of
the thoughts; therefore many who appear together in one place in the
spiritual world, so long as they agree, separate as soon as they disagree.

Further: when any one goes from one place to another, whether it be in
his own city, in the courts, or the gardens, or to others out of his own
city, he arrives sooner when he has a strong desire to be there, and
later when his desire is less strong; the way itself being lengthened or
shortened according to his desire of arrival. Hence again it is evident
that distances, and consequently spaces, exist with the angels altogether
according to the state of their minds.

These principles settle that often asked question, “Shall we know each
other in the future life?” We shall, if we are in the same state as
to love and truth; but if in different states, we shall not, but shall
be separate; and, moreover, we shall have no desire for acquaintance.
The only friendships in heaven are those formed on the ground of
similarity of character. If this similarity does not exist,—with the
exception perhaps of a short meeting in the world of spirits—death is an
everlasting, though in such case not a mournful, farewell.

There are governments in heaven, various according to the varied classes
of mind which compose the heavenly societies. The government of mutual
love is the only government which exists in heaven. Governors in heaven
are distinguished by love and wisdom more than others, and by willing
well to all from love; and knowing, from their superior wisdom, how
to realize the good they purpose. They do not domineer, and command
imperiously, but minister and serve: not making themselves greater than
others, but less; for they put their own good last, and the good of their
society first: nevertheless they enjoy honor and glory; for they dwell
in the midst of their society, in a more elevated situation than others,
and inhabit magnificent palaces; but they accept glory and honor, not for
the sake of themselves, but for the sake of obedience; for all in heaven
know that they enjoy honor and glory from the Lord, and that, therefore
they ought to be obeyed. These are the things which are meant by the
Lord’s words to his disciples: “Whosoever will be chief among you, let
him be your servant; even as the Son of Man came not to be ministered
unto, but to minister.” Matthew xx. 27, 28. “He that is greatest among
you, let him be as the younger: and he that is chief, as he that doth
serve.” Luke xxii. 26. A similar government prevails also in every house
in heaven; for in every house there is a master, and there are servants,
the master loving the servants, and the servants loving the master, so
that they serve each other from love. The master teaches the servants how
they ought to live, and directs what they ought to do, while the servants
obey, and perform their duties.

Divine worship performed in heaven, is much the same in externals, as
on earth. In the heavens, as on earth, there are doctrines, preachings,
and temples. As the angels have houses and palaces, so also they have
temples in which preaching is performed. Such things exist in heaven
because the angels are continually perfecting in wisdom and love. But
real divine worship in the heavens does not consist, any more than on
earth, in frequenting temples, and hearing sermons, but in a life of love
and usefulness; sermons and prayers being only means whereby the mind is
enlightened to perform its various duties. “To work is to pray,” is a
heavenly precept which we should all do well to engrave upon our hearts.

The sermons of heaven are fraught with such wisdom that nothing of the
kind in the world can be compared with them. They are all drawn from the
Word. The same Bible that we read here, the angels read in heaven; but to
them it is a very different book from what it is to us. Where we read and
think of earthly and material things, they read and think of spiritual
and divine things. To them its spiritual and celestial senses are as open
as the natural sense is to us. From the Word they derive their highest
wisdom; and through continual converse with it, they grow wiser and wiser
day by day. The Word is the wisdom of the Lord, and eternity can not
exhaust it.

All infants go to heaven, whether born within the church or out of it;
whether of pious parents or wicked ones. When infants die, they are still
infants in the other life. They are not angels, but become angels. Every
one, on his decease, is in a similar state of life to that in which he
was in the world; an infant in the state of infancy, a boy in a state
of boyhood, and a youth, a man, or an old man, in the state of youth, of
manhood, or of age; but the state of every one is afterwards changed. As
soon as infants are raised from the dead, which takes place immediately
after decease, they are carried up into heaven, and delivered to the care
of angels of the female sex, who in the life of the body loved infants
tenderly, and at the same time loved God. By these good angels, they
are educated and brought up until they attain a suitable age, when they
are transferred to other teachers. They grow up and become young men
and women; are instructed in wisdom, and trained in the duties of the
heavenly life: and when their character is fully developed, they become
settled in some society, either of the celestial or spiritual kingdom, in
agreement with their inherited genius or disposition. What a delightful
faith is this! Do not its beauty and rationality prove its truthfulness?

Many persons imagine that infants are forever infants in heaven, and that
there is indeed something infantile about all angels. This idea probably
arises from the pictures which are frequently seen, in which angels
are drawn as infants. But this is a great mistake. Children in heaven
grow up into young men and women, and the aged return to the freshness
of early manhood. They who are in heaven are continually advancing to
the spring-time of life, and the more thousands of years they live, the
more delightful and happy is the spring to which they attain; and this
progression goes on to eternity. Good women who have died old and worn
out with age, after a succession of years come more and more into the
flower of youth, and into a beauty which exceeds all the conceptions of
beauty which can be formed from what the eye has seen. In a word, _to
grow old in heaven is to grow young_. It is worthy of note, that the
human form of every man after death, is beautiful in proportion as his
love and practice of divine truths is interior. The angels of the inmost
heaven are consequently the most beautiful, because their love of truth
is the deepest, and their lives are the most perfect. “I have seen,”
says Swedenborg, “the faces of angels of the third heaven, which were so
beautiful, that no painter, with the utmost power of art, could depict
even a thousandth part of their light and life; but the faces of the
angels of the lowest heaven may, in some measure, be adequately depicted.”

It is believed by many in the world that heaven is a place of idleness,
full of refined sensual delights, of pleasant sights and harmonious
sounds; in short, some such place as a laborious tradesman, struggling
for a fortune, fancies he shall enjoy when his gains shall have enabled
him to “_retire_.” But this is a great mistake. Man’s nature remains
the same in heaven as on earth; and who has not felt that his happiest
moments are not those of mere pleasure and idleness, but those in which
he was rendering himself most eminently useful? Happiness is as little
consonant with idleness in heaven as on earth. Jesus himself said:
“My Father worketh hitherto, and I work.” John v. 17. The angels are
employed. All the delights of heaven are conjoined with uses, and are
inherent in them. In proportion to an angel’s usefulness, is his bliss.
Some spirits, we read, conceived the opinion that heavenly happiness
consisted in a life of ease, and in being served by others; but they were
told that happiness by no means consists in mere rest from employment,
because every one would then desire to take away the happiness of others
to promote his own; and since all would have the same desire, none would
be happy; that such a life would not be active but indolent, and that
indolence makes life torpid; and that without activity there can be no
happiness, and that _cessation from employment is only for the sake of
recreation_, that a man _may return_, with new vigor, to the _activity_
of his life. They who entertained the idea that heavenly joy consists in
a life of indolence, and sucking in eternal delight without employment,
were allowed some experience of such a life; and they perceived that it
is most sorrowful, and that all joy being destroyed, they would after a
time loathe and nauseate it.

Some spirits who believed that heavenly joy consists solely in praising
and celebrating God, were instructed that to praise and celebrate God
is not properly an active life; and that God has no need of praise and
celebration. The Lord’s will is that all should perform uses; and the
angels testify that in the performance of good works is the highest
freedom, conjoined with ineffable delights.

From all this it follows that heaven is full of employments, in
comparison with which those of the world are few. There are societies
whose occupation consists in taking care of infants; other societies,
whose employment is to instruct and educate them as they grow up; others
which in like manner instruct and educate the young; others which
instruct the simply good from the Christian world, and lead them in the
ways of heaven; others which perform the same office to Gentile nations;
others which defend novitiate spirits, or those who are newly arrived
from the world, from the infestations of evil spirits; some also are
attendant on those who are preparing in the world of spirits for heaven;
and some are present with those who are in hell, to restrain them from
tormenting each other beyond limit: there are also others who attend
those who are being raised from the dead. In general, angels of every
society are sent to men, that they may guard them, and withdraw them
from evil affections and consequent evil thoughts, and inspire them with
good affections, so far as they are willing to receive them. All these
employments are performed by the Lord through their instrumentality;
and hence it is that by _angels_ in the Word, in its internal sense, are
not meant _angels_, but something of the Lord; and for the same reason,
_angels_ in the Word are called _gods_.

These employments of the angels are their general employments, but every
one has his own particular duty; for every general use is composed
of innumerable others, which are called mediate, ministering, and
subservient uses. But in heaven there are so many offices that it is
impossible to enumerate them on account of their multitude. All angels
feel delight in their employment derived from the love of use, and none
from the love of self or of gain; nor is any one influenced by the love
of gain for the sake of his maintenance, because all the necessaries of
life are freely given them; their habitations, their clothes, their food.

It is De Quincey, we think, who accuses Swedenborg of sensualizing
heaven, and reducing its sublime glories to the common order of things
in this world. The assertion could only have been made through want of
personal acquaintance with the writings of Swedenborg. No one can use
the words, Isaiah lxiv. 4, quoted by the Apostle, 1 Cor. ii. 9: “Eye
hath not seen, nor ear heard, neither have entered into the heart of
man, the things which God hath prepared for them that love him,” with
more fervor and truth than the New Church preacher. Everywhere we are
told by Swedenborg, that the joys and delights of heaven transcend the
highest power of language to express; everywhere we are told that our
highest ideas formed from natural things, fall indefinitely short of the
common realities of the heavenly life. Yet we also learn that the common
humanities and pleasures of this life are not lost in the next; and that
as men and women we carry with us to our eternal home every faculty
of thought and affection which we possess here. In this most rational
doctrine there is gain every way. In thinking of heaven we know we can
never overrate its bliss, think as we will; and yet with this idea is
associated nothing of dreamy vagueness. We feel that as we live well we
are but walking onwards to a pleasant home, in which all that is truest
and best in this life will go with us. What stronger incentive can a man
have to a pure and religious life than this divine faith. Entertaining
it, with what feeling may he, at the close of life, utter the poet’s
words,—

                “Draw near, sweet death;
    Come raise me into life!”

The condition of admission into heaven is the possession of a soul
whose existence is a continual fulfillment of those two commandments
on which the Lord says, “hang all the law and the prophets”—love to
God, and love to man. To enter heaven, we must habitually place self
last, and our neighbor first; and unless we can do this, we can never
know eternal bliss. Now we are born into this world selfish; and hence
it is truly said we are hereditarily depraved. It is the Divine will
to take all to heaven. To do this, it is necessary that we should be
divested of our corrupt hereditary nature; as the Lord said to Nicodemus:
“Verily, verily, I say unto thee, except a man be born again, he cannot
see the kingdom of God.” This regeneration of mind, this change from a
supreme love of self, to a supreme love of God and our neighbor, is, of
necessity, a gradual work. It is not accomplished in a day, nor in a
month, nor in a year. Like all Divine works, it proceeds gradually, step
by step; “first the blade, then the ear, after that the full corn in the
ear.” The regeneration of man is a Divine work, and as the Divine end in
the creation of man was the formation of heaven out of the human race,
the Lord’s providence is unceasingly exerted to draw man out of evil,
by all means consonant with the maintenance of the inalienable freedom
of his will. It thus follows that the Lord, in all his dealings with
man, has respect solely to his eternal state, and amid all the apparent
accidents and vicissitudes of life, he is present, bending them and
making them all conduce to man’s everlasting peace. Life in this world,
its cares, trials, pleasures, comforts, friendships, sympathies, and
affections, form the divinely-appointed regenerative process; and those
who will only believe this great truth, and submit to the Divine leading,
will encounter nothing in life but what is good for them; and existence
here, however bitter and painful at times, will resolve itself into a
series of lessons devised by infinite wisdom to uproot all latent and
known evils, transforming the patient sufferer into a true child of God.
The Lord permits one man to be rich, powerful, and famous, and another
to be afflicted with disease and perplexed with poverty; one to have a
settled and calm peace of mind, while another is tried and tormented
with doubts and anxieties; nor for any ultimate purpose on earth, but
solely as a means of spiritual regeneration,—as a means of making man
happy in the eternal life to come. All man’s states are under the minute
guardianship of the Lord; and each day comes round with its circle of
pleasant and unpleasant occurrences, often, apparently, the result of
accident and chance, but in truth all provided of the Divine Providence
for the eradication of evil, and the growth and nurture of goodness.
There is no trial encountered, no circumstance met, or cross endured, but
has its eternal issue; and man’s conduct in relation to it is looked upon
by the Lord with a love and interest infinitely transcending our highest
conception. All has been foreseen; and these daily recurring tasks are
appointed by that wisdom which guides the stars in their courses, and
by that love which requires eternity to satisfy the ardor with which it
would bless. With what dignity does such a faith clothe existence! What
earnestness and celestial patience must it infuse into life!

From all that has now been said, it will be very evident that heaven
is not a gift of immediate Divine mercy, to be obtained by a verbal
confession of faith at the hour of death. If man could be saved by
immediate mercy, all would be saved; even the inhabitants of hell,
and hell itself would not exist; because the Lord is Mercy itself,
Love itself, and Good itself, and wills the salvation of all, and the
damnation of no one. But man’s spirit is substantial; and if formed to
evil, to change it would be equivalent to annihilation. “The angels
declare that it were easier to change a bat into a dove, or an owl into
a bird of paradise, than to change an infernal spirit into an angel of
heaven.” “Ample experience,” writes Swedenborg, “enables me to testify
that it is impossible to implant the life of heaven in those who have
led an opposite life in the world. There were some who believed that
they should easily receive divine truths after death, when they heard
them from the angels; and that they would believe them then, amend their
lives, and be received into heaven; and the experiment was made on great
numbers of them, in order that they might be convinced that repentance
is not possible after death. Some understood the truths they heard, and
seemed to receive them; but as soon as they returned to the life of their
love, they rejected them, and even argued against them. Some rejected
them instantly, from entire unwillingness to hear them; but others were
desirous that _the life of the love they had contracted in the world,
might be taken away from them; and that angelic life, the life of heaven,
might be infused in its place_. This was permitted; but when the life of
their love was taken away, they lay as if dead, and deprived of all their
faculties. From this it was manifest that no one’s life can possibly be
changed after death, that evil life can not be changed into good life,
nor the life of an infernal into that of an angel; because every spirit
is from head to foot of the same quality as his love, and therefore of
the same quality as his life; and consequently to transmute his life into
its opposite is to destroy him altogether.” All this goes to confirm the
Lord’s declaration before quoted, “Except a man be born again, he can not
see the kingdom of God.” On no other terms can heavenly bliss be gained.

We now come to speak of the World of Spirits, which Swedenborg thus
defines: “The world of spirits is neither heaven nor hell, but an
intermediate place or state between both, into which man enters
immediately after death; and then after a certain period, the duration of
which is determined by the quality of his life in the world, he is either
elevated into heaven, or cast into hell.

“The spirits in the world of spirits are immensely numerous, because
that world is the general assembly of all immediately after their
resurrection, and all are examined there and prepared for their final
abode; but the length of their sojourn in that world is not in all cases
the same. Some only enter it, and are immediately taken up into heaven,
or cast down into hell; some remain there a few weeks, and others several
years, but none (since the Last Judgment,) more than thirty years.”

A belief in the existence of an intermediate state has been entertained
in all times and churches, except among Protestants, who, in their
anxiety to divest themselves of every remnant of Popery, rejected the
doctrine entirely, through aversion to the follies of Purgatory. A
return to the truth is however slowly taking place; not a few Protestant
divines having expressed their faith in the existence of Hades, or the
intermediate state alluded to in the literal sense of Scripture. But the
world of spirits is not to be thought of as a revived idea of Purgatory.
The soul of no man is changed in the world of spirits. “As the tree falls
so it lies.” The discipline of this life is perfected at death, and its
opportunities never return. The world of spirits is a place where the
externals of man are brought into correspondence with his internals; for
no one, either in heaven or in hell, is allowed to have a divided mind,
understanding one thing and willing another. What any one wills, he must
understand, and what he understands he must will; therefore he who wills
good in heaven, must understand truth; and he who wills evil in hell,
must understand falsities. On this account also, falses are removed from
the good in the world of spirits, and there are given them truths which
agree and harmonize with their good; but truths are removed from the
evil, and they take to themselves falses which agree and harmonize with
their evil. Let us explain this subject further.

We suppose the generality of our readers will admit that countless
thousands of good men and women among the Mahommedans, Chinese, Hindoos,
and all the heathen nations, who live according to the measure of their
light, are saved and taken to heaven. But it is very evident that they
can not go to heaven carrying with them false notions on religious
subjects, and knowing nothing of that good Lord into whose kingdom they
are about to pass. They must be instructed. They must have errors removed
from their minds, and truths implanted in their stead. Time is required
to effect these changes, and the world of spirits is the school in which
the process is accomplished. Instruction in truth is readily received by
the simply good; and after being enlightened and purified from falsity,
they are led to their eternal homes among the blessed—to those of a
disposition and order of mind like themselves.

Then, again, among Christians, there are many who die with slight
failings pertaining to them, with infirmities of temper, with bad habits
of one kind and another; yet who are really sound-hearted and good men.
Their lot can not be hell; yet with these flaws in their character, their
presence in heaven could not be pleasant, because their state of mind
is at variance with the perfect order and peace of heaven. Such, then,
remain in the world of spirits, passing through trials, and temptations,
and sufferings, until they reject all that is disorderly and impure. The
processes by which this removal of external evils is accomplished, are
frequently extremely painful, and extend over many years. Their removal
might with less difficulty have been accomplished in the present life.
The Lord warns us of this in these words: “Agree with thine adversary
quickly, while thou art in the way with him; lest at any time the
adversary deliver thee to the judge, and the judge deliver thee to the
officer, and thou be cast into prison. Verily I say unto thee, Thou shalt
by no means come out thence till thou hast paid the uttermost farthing.”
Matthew v. 25, 26. Our adversary is the truth. Truth is ever an adversary
to the evil. Elijah the prophet represented the Divine Truth. When he
approached the wicked Ahab, Ahab cried: “Hast thou found me, O mine
enemy?” “In the way with him” is in the present life; and the “prison”
is the world of spirits, often so called in the Word, out of which we
shall not be delivered until entirely divested of selfish affections,
and false principles of thought. How practical, thus viewed, becomes our
Lord’s advice! But without a knowledge of the world of spirits, and the
spiritual sense of Scripture, it is quite mystical and unintelligible.

There are many in the Christian world who have confirmed their minds in
false ideas on many religious doctrines. With such erroneous ideas they
can not enter heaven, where truth alone prevails. They therefore remain
in the world of spirits until, through instruction, they see and reject
the false persuasions they had contracted on earth. In some cases, where
false doctrine has been deeply reasoned upon, and ground, as it were,
into the mind, the process of its removal and rejection is attended with
deep and prolonged suffering.

As the good reject all false ideas in the world of spirits, so the evil
cast off all true ones. It may be asked, Why? Why should bad be made
worse? Bad is not made worse. It is for the peace of the evil themselves
that they should be divested of all truth. The presence of truth with
the wicked only adds to their torment by the continual protest it makes
against their sin. It is also well that the evil lose all truth, for the
sake of the good, whom they might trouble and disturb through the power
that truth would afford them to assume an angelic appearance; to become
wolves in sheep’s clothing; or as Paul states it, “Satan transforming
himself into an angel of light.” Hypocrites, who have used truth to
subserve their own selfish ends, remain longer than others in the world
of spirits, and endure much suffering ere they allow their means of
subtlety and mischief to depart from them. The process of divesting the
evil of the truths they possess, is described by the Lord in these words:
“Take heed, therefore, how ye hear: for whosoever hath, to him shall be
given; and whosoever hath not, from him shall be taken even that which he
seemeth to have.” Luke viii. 18. What is heard is truth. The good alone
have truth, for their goodness loves truth, and cherishes it. Truth thus
loved, multiplies; therefore it is said, “more shall be given.” The bad
may have truth in their memory, may use it for selfish purposes, and talk
much about it; nevertheless it is not theirs. Their internal evil hates
it. “Every one that doeth evil hateth the light;” and in the future life
the truth which he seemed to have, is taken from him. How just, and at
the same time how merciful, is this judgment!

Hell is the congregation of all evil spirits. As there are many heavens,
so likewise there are many hells. As the inhabitants of heaven are
arranged from similarity of goodness and truth, so the inhabitants of
hell are arranged from similarity of evil and falsity. The hells are
arranged so distinctly according to the differences of evil, that nothing
more orderly and distinct can be conceived. The Lord, speaking through
David, says: Psalm lxxxvi. 13: “Thou hast delivered my soul from the
_lowest hell_.” Thus from Scripture we derive a direct proof, if proof
were wanted, of the gradations of evil. There are several other texts to
the same effect.

The scenery of hell, like that of heaven, is in perfect correspondence
with the states of those there. It is an outbirth from the minds of its
inhabitants; and as _they_ are deformed and full of every pollution, so
their scenery is full of horrors and things abominable. “In hell there is
no sun, but the inhabitants roam in darkness corresponding to themselves,
for they are darkness: their light is artificial, as of coal fires,
meteors, ignes fatui, and the lights of night. They inhabit scenery of
which they are the souls, as bogs, fens, tangled forests, caverns, dreary
deserts, charred and ruined cities. In the milder hells, there appear, as
it were, rude cottages, which are in some cases contiguous, and resemble
the streets and lanes of a city. Within the houses infernal spirits
are engaged in continual quarrels, enmities, blows, and violences,
while the streets and lanes are full of robberies and depredations. The
inhabitants are at continual war, hating and tormenting one another,
and the cruelties they practice are indescribable.” “It is impossible
to give a description of the horrible forms of the spirits of hell. No
two are alike, although there is a general likeness in those who are in
the same evil. They are forms of contempt of others, of menace against
those who do not pay them respect, of hatreds of various kinds, and of
revenge; and in these forms, outrage and cruelty are transparent from
within; but when others commend, venerate, and worship them, their faces
are drawn up, and have an appearance of gladness arising from delight.
Some of their faces are direful and void of life, like corpses; some are
black, and others fiery, like torches; others are disfigured by pimples,
warts, and ulcers; and frequently no face appears, but instead of a face
something hairy and bony, and sometimes nothing but teeth. Their bodies
are monstrous, and their speech is the speech of anger, of hatred, of
revenge; for every one speaks from his own false, and the tone of his
voice is from his own evil. In a word they are all images of their own
hell.”

“And does Swedenborg relate such horrors?” some may ask. For facts,
we answer, Swedenborg is not to blame. Like the Israelites of old, we
would fain have our prophets “speak unto us smooth things.” Let us rid
ourselves of all morbid delicacy, and seek to know the truth. We should
all do well to peruse with patience those pages wherein our author
narrates the horrors of hell, so that we may see, shun, and detest the
evils which make hell. It is well that every man should know whither his
lust, his pride, his avarice, or anger, is leading him. If he shudder, it
is for his eternal good.

The universal hell, like heaven, is as one man,—not of beauty, as heaven,
but a hideous monster. In its collective capacity, it is the Devil and
Satan; the Devil is the name of its evil, and Satan is the name of its
falsity. There is no individual evil spirit ruling hell, and bearing
either of those names. An enlightened view of Scripture confirms this
doctrine in every point, and rids us of the innumerable absurdities which
the commonly received theory in regard to the Devil involves. There is no
spirit in hell who was not once a man on earth. There is no spirit in
hell who was ever an angel in heaven. The Lord himself rules the hells,
and by all means possible restrains their violence and mitigates their
suffering.

Some people believe that God turns away his face from man, rejects him,
and casts him into hell, and that he is angry with him on account of his
evils; and others go still further, and affirm that God punishes man, and
brings evil upon him. They also confirm this opinion from the literal
sense of the Word, in which expressions occur that appear to sustain it.
But these opinions are formed through ignorance of the real sense of
these passages, and from a blind neglect of others, the literal sense of
which teaches that God is goodness and mercy itself, and that fury is
not in him. Isaiah xxvii. 4. True doctrine declares that the Lord never
turns away his face from man, never rejects him, never casts any one into
hell, and is never angry. The Lord is continually withdrawing man from
evil and leading him to good; but man’s freedom is never taken away. If
man _will love_ evil and _will do_ perversely, the Lord does not prevent.
That man should go to hell is at variance with the Divine design; but to
infringe man’s freedom would be to destroy his life and take from him all
that is human, reducing him to the level of a machine or a brute. Those
who are in hell, cast themselves down thither, and keep themselves where
they are. “This is,” as Wilkinson says, “he last dogma of free will,—that
of a finite being perpetuating for ever his own evil, standing fast to
selfishness without end, excluding Omnipotence in all its dispensations,
and making the ‘will not’ into an everlasting ‘cannot,’ to maintain
itself out of heaven, and contrary to heaven.”

This is a very brief abstract of the leading ideas in Swedenborg’s
wondrous treatise on Heaven and Hell. We are well aware how far short it
falls of doing full justice to the work. Let us hope that what has been
said may induce some to make a personal acquaintance with it; and then
they will understand the difficulties we labor under in condensing within
a few pages its multitudinous facts and closely linked logic.

It remains only to add, that the treatise on Heaven and Hell has been
translated into English, French, and German. The English editions have
been many, and in some cases large. The latest may be accepted as a sign
of the times, being in the form of an eighteen-penny volume, a second
edition of which has been called for. We lay no claim to the gift of
prophecy, but we feel certain that the time is coming when Swedenborg’s
“Heaven and Hell” will be the most popular and extensively read of
religious books.




