CHAPTER II.

    _Travels—Becomes Author—Is crossed in Love._


Having completed his university education, Swedenborg entered on his
travels. In his journal, he thus briefly describes a four years’ absence
from Sweden.

“In the year 1710 I set out for Gottenburg, that I might be conveyed, by
ship, thence to London. On the voyage, my life was in danger four times:
first on some shoals, toward which we were driven by a storm, until we
were within a quarter of a mile from the raging breakers, and we thought
we should all perish. Afterwards we narrowly escaped some Danish pirates
under French colors; and the next evening we were fired into from a
British ship, which mistook us for the same pirates, but without much
damage. Lastly, in London itself, I was exposed to a more serious danger.
While we were entering the harbor, some of our countrymen came to us in
a boat, and persuaded me to go with them into the city. Now it was known
in London that an epidemic was raging in Sweden, and therefore all who
arrived from Sweden were forbidden to leave their ships for six weeks,
or forty days; so I, having transgressed this law, was very near being
hanged, and was only freed under the condition that, if any one attempted
the same thing again, he should not escape the gallows.

“At London and Oxford I tarried about a year. Then I went to Holland and
saw its chief cities. At Utrecht I tarried a long time, while Congress
was sitting and ambassadors were gathering there from nearly all the
courts of Europe. Thence I went into France, and passed through Brussels
and Valenciennes to Paris. Here and at Versailles I spent a year. At the
end of this time I hastened, by public coach, to Hamburg, and thence to
Pomerania and Greifswalde, where I remained some time, while Charles
the Twelfth was coming from Bender to Stralsund. When the siege began,
I departed in a small vessel, together with a lady named Feif, and by
Divine Providence was restored to my own country after more than four
years’ absence.”

While traveling he was not idle; for we find that in 1715, while at
Greifswalde, he published an oration on the return of Charles XII.
from Turkey, and a small volume of Latin prose fables. On his return
to Sweden, he issued, at Skara, a little book of poems, written for
the most part during his journeyings. These have been republished at
various times; but, as poems, much cannot be said of them. Wilkinson,
in his “Biography of Swedenborg,” remarks: “These poems display fancy,
but a controlled imagination. If we may convey to the English reader
such a notion of Latin verses, they remind one of the Pope school, in
which there is generally some theme, or moral, governing the flights of
the Muse.” Indeed, it was well that Swedenborg was but slightly endowed
with the poetic faculty. Much of his future mission lay in fields
which require the coolest and calmest of minds to describe; the sight
and contemplation of which, would have sent a Shaksperian or Byronic
temperament into extatic frenzies.

Swedenborg, himself the son of a bishop, was connected with high and
influential families in Sweden. One of his sisters was married to
Eric Benzelius, afterwards Archbishop of Upsal; and another to Lars
Benzelstierna, governor of a province. Other members of the family
held high and responsible offices in the kingdom. A young man thus
situated would find little difficulty in settling for life in a
sphere of usefulness adapted to all his tastes. While on his travels
on the Continent he wrote letters to Eric Benzelius, detailing every
novelty in mathematics, astronomy, and mechanics, which came under his
observation; besides sending home models of all such inventions as he
thought might be useful to his country. These letters and services
won for him considerable notice; and on his return to Sweden, he
assumed the editorship of a new periodical work, entitled “Dædalus
Hyperboreus.” Among the contributors to this magazine, was the celebrated
mathematician, Christopher Polheim, who has been called the Swedish
Archimedes. Swedenborg’s connection with Polheim seems to have led to his
appointment to the office of Assessor of the Board of Mines, which he
held with distinguished honor for many years.

In the year 1716, Polheim invited him to go with him to Lund, on a visit
to Charles XII., who had just escaped from Stralsund. He was very kindly
received by the King, and obtained from him his official appointment as
Assessor. He was to assist Polheim in his undertakings, to have a seat
in the College of Mines, and to give his advice, especially when any
business of a mathematical nature was on hand.

Charles seems to have at once discerned the rare abilities of Swedenborg,
and with a desire of uniting him in still closer bonds of amity with
his favorite Polheim, he advised Polheim to give him his daughter in
marriage. To this proposal Swedenborg appears to have been in nowise
averse. He lived with Polheim, at once as his coadjutor, and as his pupil
in mathematics; and having thus constant opportunities of seeing the fair
Emerentia, Polheim’s second daughter, had become enamored of her graces.
In one of his letters, he remarks: “Polheim’s eldest daughter is promised
to a page of the king’s. I wonder what people say of this in relation to
myself. His second daughter is, in my opinion, much the handsomest.”
The attachment, however, was not mutual, and the lady would not allow
herself to be betrothed. Her father, who deeply loved Swedenborg, caused
a written agreement to be drawn up, promising his daughter at some
future day. This document, Emerentia, from filial obedience signed;
but, as ladies generally do, when forced to love in this way, took to
sighs and sadness, which so affected her brother with sorrow, that he
secretly purloined the agreement from Swedenborg. The paper was soon
missed; for Swedenborg read it over frequently, and, in his grief at its
loss, besought Polheim to replace it by a new one. But as Swedenborg now
discovered the pain which he gave to the object of his affections, he at
once relinquished all claim to her hand, and left her father’s house.
This was his last, as it was his first endeavor after marriage. In after
years, when jocosely asked whether he had ever been desirous of marrying,
he answered: “In my youth I was once on the road to matrimony.” And on
being asked what was the obstacle, with his characteristic simplicity he
said: “She would not have me.” Considering the studious and abstracted
life which he eventually led, it is not to be regretted that he remained
unwedded. That he was no harsh despiser of the sex, we know well from
his writings; and that his life was in agreement with his books, we also
know. The loveliest descriptions of female grace and beauty we have
ever met with, are contained in his works, chiefly in his treatise on
“Conjugial Love.” M. Sandell, a member of the Royal Academy of Sciences
in Sweden, who pronounced a magnificent eulogium on his fellow-member,
Swedenborg, shortly after his death, says: “Though Swedenborg was never
married, it was not owing to any indifference toward the sex; for he
esteemed the company of a fine, intelligent woman as one of the most
agreeable of pleasures; but his profound studies rendered expedient for
him the quiet of a single life.”

Swedenborg seems to have had much intercourse with the King. In one of
his letters, he says: “I found his Majesty very gracious to me; more so
than I could expect. This is a good omen for the future. Every day I
laid mathematical subjects before his Majesty, who allowed everything to
please him. When the eclipse took place, I had his Majesty out to see
it, and we reasoned much thereupon. He again spoke of my ‘Dædalus,’ and
remarked upon my not continuing it; for which I pleaded want of means.
This he does not like to hear of; so I hope to have some assistance
shortly.” But assistance did not come, and “Dædalus” went the way of many
such undertakings. Talking of mathematics one day, Charles remarked that
“he who knew nothing of mathematics, did not deserve to be considered a
rational man;” a sentiment which Swedenborg thought “truly worthy of a
king.”[1]

Charles XII. was now engaged in the siege of Frederickshall, and
Swedenborg’s aid was called in. He very ingeniously planned rolling
machines, by which two galleys, five large boats, and a sloop, were
conveyed from Stromstadt to Iderfjol, overland; a distance of fourteen
miles. Under cover of these vessels, Charles was enabled to transport his
heavy artillery under the very walls of Frederickshall; but it availed
little, for at the siege of this town, on November 30, 1718, (old style,)
this inveterate warrior received the fatal blow which ended his troublous
and eventful career. He was struck in the head with a cannon ball, and
though death must have been instantaneous, he was found with his right
hand firmly grasping the handle of his sword; so prompt was he to put
himself in an attitude of defence.

    “His fall was destined to a barren strand,
    A petty fortress and a dubious hand;
    He left a name at which the world grew pale,
    To point a moral or adorn a tale.”

In 1719 the Swedberg family were ennobled by Queen Ulrica Eleonora,
and Swedenborg from that time took his place with the nobles of the
equestrian order, in the triennial Assemblies of the States. This
distinction conferred little else than a change of name. He was neither a
Count nor a Baron, as has very commonly been supposed.

Emanuel Swedenborg was rapidly winning for himself the name of a deep
thinker and a ready writer. In 1717 he published “An Introduction to
Algebra,” under the title of “The Art of the Rules.” It was highly
praised for its clearness, and the order and force of its examples. The
first portion of the work, however, was all that was published. The
second, containing the first account given in Sweden of the differential
and integral calculus, still remains in MS. His second publication
this year was, “Attempts to find the Longitude of Places by Lunar
Observations.” Both works were written in Swedish.

In 1719 four works proceeded from his increasingly fertile pen. “A
Proposal for a Decimal System of Money and Measures;” “A Treatise on the
Motion and Position of the Earth and Planets;” “Proofs derived from
Appearances in Sweden, of the Depth of the Sea, and the greater Force of
the Tides in the Ancient World;” and “On Docks, Sluices, and Salt Works.”

His work on the Decimal system of coinage and measures was republished in
1795. Swedenborg’s ideas on this and most other subjects were far ahead
of the times in which he lived. In one of his letters he thus alludes
to the discouragements he met with on this account. “It is a little
discouraging to me to be advised to relinquish my views, as among the
novelties the country can not bear. For my part, I desire all possible
novelties; aye, a novelty for every day in the year; for in every age
there is an abundance of persons who follow the beaten track, and remain
in the old way; while there are not more than from six to ten in a
century who bring forward innovations founded on argument and reason.”




