Chapter XIII. is taken up with a like description of the uses of the
Holy Supper. It is shown that it is impossible for any one, without an
acquaintance with the correspondences of natural things with spiritual,
to know the uses and benefits of the Holy Supper. An acquaintance with
correspondences serves to discover the signification of the Lord’s flesh
and blood, and that the bread and wine signify the same; namely, that
the Lord’s flesh and the bread signify the divine good of His love, and
likewise all the good of charity, and that His blood and the wine signify
the divine truth of His wisdom, and likewise all the truth of faith,
and that to eat signifies to appropriate. By understanding this, it may
clearly be comprehended, that the Holy Supper contains, both universally
and particularly, all things of the Church, and all things of heaven.
In the Holy Supper the Lord is entirely present, with the whole of His
redemption. The Lord is present, and opens heaven to those who approach
the Holy Supper worthily; and He is also present with those who approach
it unworthily, but does not open heaven to them; consequently, as baptism
is an introduction into the Church, so the Holy Supper is an introduction
into heaven. Those approach the Holy Supper worthily, who are under the
influence of faith toward the Lord, and of charity toward their neighbor,
thus, who are regenerate. Those who approach the Holy Supper worthily,
are in the Lord, and He in them; consequently, conjunction with the
Lord is effected by the Holy Supper. The Holy Supper is, to the worthy
receivers, as a signing and sealing that they are sons of God.

Chapter XIV., concluding the doctrinal portion of the work, describes
the consummation of the age, the coming of the Lord, and the new heaven
and the New Church. The consummation of the age is the last time or
end of the Church. The present day is the last time of the Christian
Church, which the Lord foretold and described in the Gospels, and in
the Revelation. This last time of the Christian Church, is the very
night in which the former Churches have set. After this night, morning
succeeds; and the coming of the Lord is this morning. The coming of the
Lord is not a coming to destroy the visible heaven and the habitable
earth, and to create a new heaven and a new earth, according to the
opinions which many, from not understanding the spiritual sense of the
Word, have hitherto entertained. This, which is the second coming of
the Lord, is for the sake of separating the evil from the good, that
those who have believed and who do believe in Him, may be saved; and
that there may be formed of them a new angelic heaven, and a New Church
on earth; and without this coming no flesh could be saved. This second
coming of the Lord is not a coming in person, but in the Word, which is
from Him, and is Himself. This second coming of the Lord is effected by
the instrumentality of a man, before whom He has manifested Himself in
person, and whom He has filled with His spirit, to teach from Him the
doctrines of the New Church by means of the Word. This is meant by the
new heaven and the new earth, and the New Jerusalem descending out of
heaven, spoken of in the Revelation. This New Church is the crown of all
the Churches which have existed, to this time, on the earth.

On all these subjects Swedenborg discourses at length, and in a style
which, for its combined simplicity and purity, we believe, is unmatched
in theological literature. Wilkinson says truly of the volume, that,
“viewed as a digest, it shows a presence of mind, an administration of
materials, and a faculty of handling, of an extraordinary kind. There is
old age in it in the sense of ripeness. If the intellectualist misses
there somewhat of the range of discourse, it is compensated by a certain
triteness of wisdom. As a polemic, not only against the errors of the
Churches, but against the evil lives and self-excusings of Christians,
the work is unrivaled. The criticisms of doctrine, with which it abounds,
are masterly in the extreme; and were it compared with any similar body
of theology, we feel no doubt that the palm of coherency, vigor, and
comprehensiveness, would easily fall to Swedenborg, upon the verdict of
judges of whatever Church.”

We have said nothing of the seventy-six memorable relations strewn
through the pages of the “True Christian Religion,” because the limits
to which we are confined forbid anything approaching to an adequate
description of them. They are a great trouble to new readers of
Swedenborg, and many who love and delight in the doctrinal teachings of
the work, pass over, unread, the memorable relations, and try not to
think of them. But this is only for a time. They are only strange and
incomprehensible because the principles upon which they are written are
not apprehended. The Indian king, who was told that in northern lands
water became solid, so that his elephants might walk on it, laughed, and
was an unbeliever. But, had the law or principle by which water becomes
ice, been made plain to him, his laughter and his unbelief would have
ceased. So it is with those who are shocked with Swedenborg’s relations
of things heard and seen in the spiritual world. Let but the great law
of correspondence be understood, and the most marvelous of the relations
straightway attain an interest and reality, which none but those who have
studied them under the bright light of correspondences can understand, or
easily believe possible. A memorable relation, which was to the writer
of this, at one time, a thing to cause pity for the man that wrote
it, is now the pleasant and practical study of a Sunday afternoon. He
knows that his experience in this respect is paralleled by that of most
Newchurchmen.

Count Hopken, in a letter to General Tuxen, says, “I once represented,
in rather a serious manner, to this venerable man, (Swedenborg), that
I thought he would do better not to mix his beautiful writings with so
many memorable relations of things heard and seen in the spiritual world,
concerning the states of men after death,—of which ignorance makes a jest
and derision. But he answered me, that this did not depend on him; that
he was too old to sport with spiritual things, and too much concerned for
his eternal happiness to give into foolish notions; assuring me, on his
hopes of salvation, that no imagination produced in him his revelations,
which were true, and derived from what he had heard and seen.”

“The True Christian Religion” was the last work Swedenborg published; it
was a worthy conclusion of his grand labors. Among his papers, at his
decease, was found an incomplete “Coronis” or Appendix to the work. This
has been translated and published, and contains an elucidation of several
interesting points.




