Chapter VIII. is devoted to the vexed question of Free-Determination,
or Free-Will. The doctrines of the Church, as commonly held, are first
stated, and then the New Church doctrine on the question is explained
under the following heads:—The two trees in the garden of Eden, one
of life, and the other of the knowledge of good and evil, signify the
free-will which man enjoys in respect to spiritual things. Man is not
life, but a recipient of life from God. Man, during his abode in the
world, is held in the midst between heaven and hell, and thus in a
spiritual equilibrium, which constitutes free will.

From the permission of evil, which every man experiences in his
internal man, it is evident that man has free-will in spiritual things.
Without free-will in spiritual things, the Word would not be of any
use, consequently the Church would be a nonentity. Without free-will
in spiritual things, man would have nothing which would enable him to
conjoin himself by reciprocation with the Lord; and consequently there
would be no imputation, but mere predestination, which is detestable.
Without free-will in spiritual things, God would be chargeable as the
cause of evil. Every spiritual principle of the Church that is admitted
and received in freedom, remains, but not otherwise. The human will and
understanding enjoy this free-will; but the commission of evil, both in
the spiritual and natural worlds, is restrained by laws, or else society
in both would perish. If men were destitute of free-will in spiritual
things, it would be possible for all men throughout the whole world, in
a single day, to be induced to believe in the Lord; but this would be in
vain, because nothing remains with man which is not freely received.
Miracles are not performed at the present day because they deprive man of
free-will.

Chapter IX. treats of Repentance. It is shown, in the first place, that
repentance is the first constituent of the Church in man, and that in
proportion as a man practices it, his sins are removed; and as they are
removed, they are forgiven or remitted. Contrition, in the sense of a
mere lip-confession of being a sinner, and of being involved in the guilt
of Adam, without self-examination, is not repentance. Every man is born
with a propensity to evils of all kinds, and unless he remove them, in
part, by repentance, he remains in them; and whoever remains in them can
not be saved. The knowledge of sin, and the discovery of some particular
sin in one’s self, is the beginning of repentance. Actual repentance
consists in a man’s examining himself, knowing and acknowledging his
sins, supplicating the Lord, and beginning a new life. True repentance
consists in a man’s examining not only the actions of his life, but also
the intentions of his will. Those also do the work of repentance, who,
though they do not examine themselves, abstain from evils because they
are sins; and this kind of repentance is done by those who perform works
of charity from a religious motive. In repentance, confession ought to be
made before the Lord God the Saviour, and at the same time supplication
for help, and power to resist evils. Actual repentance is an easy duty to
those who occasionally practice it, but it meets with violent opposition
from those who never practiced it. He that never did the work of
repentance, and never looked into, and examined, himself, comes at last
not to know the nature either of damnatory evil or saving good.

Chapter X. describes the nature of Reformation and Regeneration. Unless a
man be born again, and, as it were, created anew, he can not enter into
the kingdom of God. This new birth, or creation, is effected by the Lord
alone, through the medium of charity and faith, during man’s coöperation.
Since all are redeemed, all have a capacity to be regenerated, every one
according to his state. The several stages of man’s regeneration answer
to his natural conception, gestation in the womb, birth, and education.
The first act of the new birth, which is an act of the understanding,
is called reformation; and the second, which is an act of the will, and
thence of the understanding, is called regeneration. The internal man
is first to be reformed, and by it the external, and thus the man is
regenerated. When this takes place, there arises a combat between the
internal and external man, and then whichever conquers has dominion
over the other. The regenerate man has a new will and understanding.
A regenerate man is in communion with the angels of heaven, and an
unregenerate man is in communion with the spirits of hell. In proportion
as a man is regenerated, his sins are removed; and this removal is what
is meant by remission of sins. Regeneration, can not be effected without
free-will in spiritual things. Regeneration is not attainable without
truths by which faith is formed, and with which charity conjoins itself.

Chapter XI. is devoted to a description of what imputation is, and what
it is not. It is shown that imputation, and the faith of the present
church, which alone is said to justify, are a one. The imputation which
belongs to the faith of the present time is two fold, the one part
relating to the merit of Christ, and the other to salvation as its
consequence. The faith which is imputative of the merit and righteousness
of Christ the Redeemer, first took its rise from the decrees of the
Council of Nice, concerning three divine persons from eternity; and,
from that time to the present, has been received by the whole Christian
world. Faith imputative of the merit of Christ, was not known in the
Apostolic Church, which preceded the Council of Nice, and is neither
declared nor signified in any part of the Word. An imputation of the
merits and righteousness of Christ is impossible. There is such a thing
as imputation, but then it is an imputation of good and evil, and at the
same time of faith. The faith and imputation of the New Church can not
be together with the faith and imputation of the former Church; and, in
case they were together, such a collision and conflict would ensue, that
every principle of the Church in man would perish. The Lord imputes good
to every man, and hell imputes evil to every man. Faith, with whatever
principle it conjoins itself, passes sentence accordingly; if a true
faith conjoins itself with goodness, the sentence is for eternal life,
but if faith conjoins itself with evil, the sentence is for eternal
death. Thought is imputed to no one, but will.

Chapter XII. is a luminous exposition of the uses of Baptism. Without
a knowledge of the spiritual sense of the Word, it is shown no one can
know what the two sacraments, Baptism and the Holy Supper, involve and
effect. The washing which is called baptism, signifies spiritual washing,
which is a purification from evils and falses, and thus regeneration.
As circumcision of the heart was represented by circumcision of the
foreskin, baptism was instituted in lieu of it, to the end that an
internal Church might succeed the external, in which all and everything
was a figure of the internal Church. The first use of baptism is
introduction into the Christian Church, and at the same time insertion
among Christians in the spiritual world. The second use of baptism is,
that the Christian may know and acknowledge the Lord Jesus Christ the
Redeemer and Saviour, and may follow Him. The third and final use of
baptism is, that man may be regenerated. By the baptism of John, a way
was prepared that Jehovah the Lord might come down into the world, and
accomplish the work of redemption.

