CHAPTER XI.

    _Anecdotes._


Of Swedenborg’s external life, during the composition of the “Arcana
Cœlestia,” we know little. From his “Spiritual Diary,” we incidentally
learn that he was in Stockholm on the 23d of July, 1756. A revolution had
been attempted, and the leaders of the conspiracy, Count Brahe and Baron
Horn, were executed on that day. Swedenborg writes of Brahe thus:—“Brahe
was beheaded at ten o’clock in the morning, and spoke with me at ten at
night; that is to say, twelve hours after his execution. He was with me
almost without interruption for several days. In two days’ time, he began
to return to his former life, which consisted in loving worldly things;
and after three days, he became as he was before in the world, and was
carried into the evils that he had made his own before he died.” (S.
Diary, 5099.)

Robsahm, a friend of Swedenborg’s, probably alludes to this circumstance,
when he writes: “One day as a criminal was led to the place of execution
to be beheaded, I was by the side of Swedenborg, and asked him how such a
person felt at the time of his execution. He answered: ‘When a man lays
his head on the block, he loses all sensation. When he first comes into
the spiritual world, and finds that he is living, he is seized with the
fear of his expected death, tries to escape, and is very much frightened.
At such a moment no one thinks of anything but the happiness of heaven,
or the misery of hell. Soon the good spirits come to him, and instruct
him where he is, and he is then left to follow his own inclinations,
which soon lead him to the place where he remains for ever.’” It appears
that whatever happens at the hour of death, is carried into the other
life, and the state is continued for some time. Thus we read in the
“Spiritual Diary” of a person who had been reduced by melancholy to
despair, until being instigated by diabolical spirits, he destroyed
himself, by thrusting a knife into his body. “This spirit came to me,”
writes Swedenborg, “complaining that he was miserably treated by evil
spirits. He was seen by me, holding a knife in his hand, as though he
would plunge it into his breast. With this knife he labored very hard, as
wishing rather to cast it from him, but in vain.”

It soon became widely known that Swedenborg had intercourse with spirits;
and many and various were the demands made upon him, for information of
one kind and another. The Queen of Sweden asked him whether his spiritual
intercourse was a science or art that could be communicated to others. He
said: “No, it is the gift of the Lord.” “Can you then,” said she, “speak
with every one deceased, or only with certain persons?” He answered, “I
can not converse with all, but only with such as I have known in this
world, with all royal and princely persons, with all renowned heroes,
or great and learned men, whom I have known, either personally, or from
their actions or writings; consequently with all _of whom I could form
an idea_; for it may be supposed that a person whom I never knew, and of
whom I could form no idea, I neither could or would wish to speak with.”

The Prince of Prussia was brother to the Queen of Sweden, and shortly
after his death, Swedenborg being at court, the Queen perceiving him
said: “Well, Mr. Assessor, have you seen my brother?” He answered, “No.”
Whereupon she replied: “If you should see him, remember me to him.” In
saying this, she did but jest. Eight days afterwards, Swedenborg came
again to court, but so early that the Queen had not left her apartment
called the white room, where she was conversing with her maids of honor,
and other ladies of the court. Swedenborg did not wait for the Queen’s
coming out, but entered directly into her apartment, and whispered in
her ear. The Queen, struck with astonishment, was taken ill, and did not
recover for some time. After she was come to herself, she said to those
about her: “There is only God and my brother who can know what he has
just told me.” She owned that he had spoken of her last correspondence
with the prince, the subject of which was known to themselves alone.

The following is narrated by J. H. Jung Stilling:—“About the year 1770,
there was a merchant in Elberfeld with whom, during seven years of my
residence there, I lived in close intimacy. He spoke little; but what he
said was like golden fruit on a salver of silver. He would not have dared
for all the world to have told a falsehood. His business requiring him
to take a journey to Amsterdam, where Swedenborg at that time resided,
and having heard and read much of this strange individual, he formed the
intention of visiting him. He therefore called upon him, and found a
very venerable looking, friendly old man, who received him politely, and
requested him to be seated. Explaining his errand, and expressing his
deep admiration of Swedenborg’s writings, he desired that he would give
him a proof of his intercourse with the unseen world. Swedenborg said:
‘Why not? Most willingly.’ The merchant then proceeded to tell that he
had formerly a friend, who studied divinity at Duisburg, where he fell
into a consumption, of which he died. Visiting this friend a short time
before his decease, they conversed together on an important topic. The
question he then put to Swedenborg, was: ‘Can you learn from the student
what was the subject of our discourse at that time?’ Swedenborg replied:
‘We will see; what was the name of your friend?’ The merchant told his
name, and Swedenborg then requested him to call in a few days. Some days
after, the merchant went again to see Swedenborg, in anxious expectation.
The old gentleman met him with a smile, and said: ‘I have spoken with
your friend; the subject of your discourse was _the restitution of all
things_.’ He then related to the merchant, with the greatest precision,
what he, and what his deceased friend, had maintained. The merchant
turned pale; for this proof was powerful and invincible. He inquired
further: ‘How fares it with my friend? Is he in a state of blessedness?’
Swedenborg answered: ‘No, he is not in heaven; he is still in the world
of spirits, and torments himself continually with the idea of the
restitution of all things.’ He ejaculated: ‘My God! What! in the other
world?’ Swedenborg replied: ‘Certainly; a man takes with him his favorite
inclinations and opinions, and it is very difficult to be divested of
them. We ought, therefore, to lay them aside here.’ The merchant took his
leave, perfectly convinced, and returned to Elberfeld.”

An ambassador from Holland, named Martville, died at Stockholm. After his
death, a considerable sum of money was demanded of his widow in payment
of a debt. She felt certain the debt had been paid, but was unable to
find the receipt for the money. Being advised to consult Swedenborg,
who, she was told could converse with the dead whenever he pleased,
she adopted the advice, more from curiosity than from a belief in his
powers. The lady called on Swedenborg and told him her trouble; and he
promised if he met her husband in the spiritual world, he would inquire
of him about the matter. Eight days afterwards Martville appeared to his
wife in a dream, and mentioned to her a private place in his cabinet,
where she would not only find the receipt, but also a hair pin set with
twenty brilliants which had been given up as lost. This happened about
two o’clock in the morning. Full of joy, she arose and found them in
the place designated. She returned again to rest, and slept till nine
o’clock. About eleven Swedenborg was announced. His first remark, before
Madame had time to speak, was, that he had, during the preceding night,
seen several spirits, and among others her late husband. He had wished to
converse with him, but Martville excused himself on the ground that he
must go to discover to his wife something of importance. This account,
attested by the lady herself, was noised through all Stockholm. It may be
added that Madame desired to make Swedenborg a handsome present for his
services, which he, of course, declined.

Sometimes Swedenborg’s announcements of the states of the departed
alarmed his auditors. We read of a case of this kind which took place on
a voyage from Gottenburg to London. The vessel staying at Oresound, the
Swedish Consul invited the officers of the custom house, together with
several of the first people of the town, all anxious to see and know
Swedenborg, to dine with him at his house. Being all seated at table, and
none of them taking the liberty of addressing Swedenborg, who likewise
was silent, the Consul thought it incumbent on him to break silence,
and asked Swedenborg, as he could see and speak with the dead, whether
he had seen Christian VI., King of Denmark, after his decease. To this
he replied in the affirmative; adding, that when he saw him the first
time, he was accompanied by a bishop or other prelate, who humbly begged
the King’s pardon for the many errors into which he had led him by his
counsels. A son of the deceased prelate happened to be present at the
table: the Consul therefore fearing that Swedenborg might say something
further to the disadvantage of the father, interrupted him, saying:
“Sir, this is his son!” Swedenborg replied: “It may be, but what I am
saying is true.”

Such anecdotes might be greatly multiplied, but space forbids. No one,
perhaps, has a lower idea of the worth of these stories, as testimonies
to Swedenborg’s veracity, than the writer; yet they could not well be
omitted from an account of his life. Gossip spread them far and wide in
his own day, as is evidenced by the various forms in which they have come
down to us; and any biographer would fail in his duty did he not show
how the common world of men dealt with, and regarded Swedenborg. These
anecdotes also in some degree manifest what a kind, affable, simple, and
honest man Swedenborg was.

Having finished the “Arcana Cœlestia,” Swedenborg’s pen yet knew no
rest. In 1758 he published in London the five following works:—1. An
Account of the Last Judgment and the Destruction of Babylon; showing
that all the predictions in the Apocalypse are at this day fulfilled;
being a relation of things heard and seen. 2. Concerning Heaven and its
wonders, and concerning Hell, being a relation of things heard and seen.
3. On the White Horse mentioned in the Apocalypse. 4. On the Planets in
our solar system, and on those in the Heavens; with an account of their
inhabitants, and of their spirits and angels. 5. On the New Jerusalem and
its Heavenly Doctrines, as revealed from heaven. Let us now examine these
works in order.




