Chapter IV. is an exposition of the nature of the Sacred Scripture, or
the Word of the Lord, proving it to be the Divine Truth itself. The
spiritual sense of the Word, and the means by which it is unfolded,
together with the law of its composition, are explained at length, and
with great perspicuity. It is shown that the spiritual sense is in all
and every part of the Word, that hence it is divinely inspired, and is
holy in every syllable. Nevertheless the literal sense is not to be
disregarded. It is the basis, the continent, and the firmament of the
spiritual sense; in it the Divine Truth is in its fullness, its sanctity,
and its power; from it the doctrine of the Church is to be drawn and
confirmed; and by it conjunction with the Lord and consociation with the
angels is effected. The Word is in all the heavens, and the wisdom of
the angels is thence derived. The Church exists from the Word, and the
quality of the Church with man is according to his understanding of the
Word. The marriage of Goodness and Truth, and of the Lord and the Church,
is in every part of the Word. Men may collect and imbibe heretical
opinions from the letter of the Word; but it is hurtful to confirm such
opinions. Many things in the Word are appearances of truth, in which
genuine truths lie concealed; and many fallacies arise from the taking
of these appearances of truth for genuine or absolute truth. The literal
sense of the Word is a guard to the genuine truths contained in it, and
in the Word is represented by cherubs. To the wicked, it is a mercy
that spiritual truth is thus hidden; for if known and not obeyed, it is
profaned, and profanation involves the deepest suffering and distress.
The Lord, during his abode in the world, fulfilled all things contained
in the Word, and was thus made the Word, that is, the Divine Truth, even
in ultimates. Previous to the Word which the world now possesses, there
was a Word which is lost, but is preserved in heaven among the angels who
lived as men in those times, and is also extant among certain nations in
Great Tartary, who, however, have probably no true idea of the treasure
they possess. By means of the Word, light is communicated to those who
are out of the pale of the Church, and are not in possession of the
Word. This is effected outwardly by the communications of commerce,
with those nations who have the Word; and internally and insensibly
by that community of soul which makes humanity appear before the Lord
as one man. There is no thought conceived, no deed done, but which
radiates from soul to soul, and produces effects of which the doer is
not conscious. Thus it is that the Church—composed of the men who read,
love, and obey the Word—benefits the world, and conjoins it with heaven
and the Lord. Without the Word, no one would have any knowledge of God,
of heaven and hell, or of a life after death, and much less of the Lord.
The multiplicity of points involved in these statements, receive, in this
chapter on the Sacred Scripture, most copious illustrations, both from
the Word itself, and from the common experience of mankind. In reading
this chapter, every candid person will feel that, strange and novel as
many of the statements are, he is not dealing with a mere theorizer; and
that facts and even Revelation itself must be done away, ere the doctrine
of the Sacred Scripture here revealed can be overthrown or proved
erroneous.

Chapter V. explains the Decalogue, or the Ten Commandments, as to their
external and internal sense. The Decalogue, in the Israelitish Church,
was the very essence of holiness, and from it the ark and the tabernacle
derived their sanctity. In the Ten Commandments are contained all things
which relate to love to God, and love towards our neighbor. In its
literal sense, the Decalogue contains general precepts of doctrine and
life, but in its spiritual and celestial sense it contains all precepts
universally. Swedenborg then takes up each commandment singly, and gives
an exposition of its literal, spiritual, and celestial application; and
when he has done this, we perceive that these Ten Commandments, which
every school-boy repeats and feels he understands, nevertheless contain
all precepts, and are such as may afford guidance to the wisest angel,
and that man can never outgrow them. Taking, for instance, the Seventh
Commandment, (the eighth, according to the common numbering,) “Thou
shalt not steal,” he explains it in the natural sense, after the common
acceptation. In the spiritual sense, he shows that to steal means to
deprive others of the truths which they embrace in faith, in teaching
doctrines known to be false, or teaching for the sake of gain; and in
destroying in others, either by word or deed, those truths which lead
to salvation. In the celestial sense, to steal is to take away divine
power from the Lord, to be vain, to be proud, to arrogate to ourselves
the merit and righteousness which are the divine gifts. All who do such
things, notwithstanding their seeming adoration of God, do not trust
in Him, but in themselves; and likewise do not believe in God, but in
themselves; they steal from God; they are spiritual thieves; and every
one who knows his own heart, must know how often he must refer to this
commandment, in order to govern his life, and restrain his thoughts,
before he can know perfect obedience, and be in truth a child of God. As
with this commandment, so with all. We need to think of them every day,
and to use them in all our states. If we purpose to lead a true and happy
life, we must cherish them as constant companions.

Chapter VI. treats of Faith. Faith, it is said, is first in regard to
time, and charity is first in regard to end; that is, the use of faith is
to lead to charity. A saving faith is a faith in the Lord God the Saviour
Jesus Christ, because He is the visible God in whom is the invisible.
Faith, in general, consists in a belief that the Lord will save all
who live a good life and believe aright; and a man receives this faith
in consequence of approaching the Lord, learning truths from the Word,
and living a life in conformity with them. Faith without charity is not
faith, and charity without faith is not charity; and neither faith nor
charity has any life in it but from the Lord. Although a man has power
given him to procure for himself faith and charity, and the life of faith
and charity, yet nothing of faith, charity, or the life of either, is
from man, but from the Lord alone. Charity and faith are together in
good works; for charity consists in willing what is good, and good works
consist in doing what is good, from and under the influence of a good
will; and both charity and faith are merely mental and perishable things,
unless they are determined to works, and coexist in them, whenever there
is opportunity. The wicked have no faith, because wickedness is of hell,
and faith is of heaven, and all the truth of faith is derived from
heaven. Faith cannot dwell with evil, for evil is like fire,—infernal
fire being the love of evil, which consumes faith like stubble, and
reduces it and all that belongs to it to ashes. Evil dwells in darkness,
and faith in light; and evil by means of the falsehood which it loves,
extinguishes faith, as darkness does light. And because the world is at
this day full of evil, (notwithstanding the morality of life, and the
rationality with which faith is spoken and written about,) of true faith
there is almost none, because of goodness there is almost none.

