CHAPTER V.

    _Doings and Travels._


From 1734 to 1736, Swedenborg remained at home. In July, 1735, his
father died; and a year after, Swedenborg went abroad, as he states in
his diary, “for a sojourn of three or four years, to write and publish a
certain book.” During his absence he resigned half of his official salary
to his substitutes. His father having left him some money, he was the
better able to do so. He journeyed through Denmark, Hanover, and Holland,
and arrived at Rotterdam during the fair. Observing the amusements of the
people, mountebanks, shows, etc., he took occasion to moralize thus upon
the character and prosperity of the Dutch. “Here at Rotterdam, it has
suggested itself to me to inquire why it is that God has blessed a people
so barbarous and boorish as the Dutch, with such a fertile and luxuriant
soil; that He has preserved them, for so long a course of years, from
all misfortune; that He has raised them up in commerce above all other
nations; and made their provinces the mart and emporium of the wealth of
Europe and the world. On consideration, the first and principal cause
of these circumstances appears to be, that Holland is a republic, which
form of government is more pleasing to God than an absolute monarchy. In
a republic, no veneration or worship is paid to any man, but the highest
and lowest think themselves equal to kings and emperors; as may be seen
from the characteristic bearing of every one in Holland. The only one
whom they worship is God. And when God alone is worshiped, and men are
not adored instead of Him, such worship is most acceptable to Him. Then
again, in Holland, there is the greatest liberty. None are slaves, but
all are as lords and masters under the government of the most high God;
and the consequence is, that they do not depress their manliness either
by shame or fear, but always preserve a firm and sound mind in a sound
body; and with a free spirit, and an erect countenance, commit themselves
and their property to God, who alone ought to govern all things. It is
not so in absolute monarchies, where men are educated to simulation
and dissimulation; where they learn to have one thing concealed in the
breast, and to bring forth another upon the tongue; where their minds,
by inveterate custom, become so false and counterfeit, that, in divine
worship itself, their words differ from their thoughts, and they proffer
their flattery and deceit to God himself, which certainly must be most
displeasing to Him. This seems to be the reason why the Dutch are more
prosperous in their undertakings than other nations.” Then, with rare
discrimination, he adds, “but their worshiping mammon as a Deity, and
caring for nothing but gold, is a thing which is not compatible with long
prosperity.” The silent and uninfluential place which Holland now fills
in Europe, places the seal of truth on these quiet lines.

The Roman Catholic Church seems to have attracted much of his attention
in his travels, and the grossness and sensuality of its priesthood were
strongly remarked upon. “The monks,” says he, “at Roye, are fat and
corpulent, and an army of such fellows might be banished without loss to
the State. They fill their bellies, take all they can get, and give the
poor nothing but fine words and blessings; and yet they are willing to
take from the poor all their substance for nothing. What is the good of
bare-footed Franciscans?” In Paris, he spent a year and a half. There
also he was amazed at the clerical riot and corruption. “It is found,”
he observes, “that the tax which they term the dixièmes, yields annually
thirty-two millions sterling; and that the Parisians spend two-thirds
of this amount over their own city. One-fifth of the whole possessions
of the kingdom is in the hands of the clerical order. If this condition
of things last long, the ruin of the empire will be speedy.” He little
dreamed of the fearful verification which these words would receive.

His journal in Paris reveals the fact of his hearty enjoyment of
sight-seeing and amusements. Visits to churches, monasteries, palaces,
gardens, museums, and theatres, evidence with what zest he drank the cup
of life, and with what interest he looked upon men and their affairs. In
this respect we do well to compare Swedenborg with many whom the world
in its ignorance associate with him. At no period of his life was he a
cold self-righteous ascetic, looking abroad upon men with a bitter and
accusing scowl. At no time did he insult his Maker with upbraidings that
his fate was to live in an evil world, and with a wicked generation. He
received life with thankfulness, partook temperately of all its lawful
pleasures, did his duty, and took care while living with the world to
keep himself unspotted from its evil. This social discipline was one of
the Divine means by which he was fitted for the full performance of his
future mission.

We are not informed of the nature of the work which he at this time
went abroad to write and publish. From his manuscripts, however, it
appears that he was preparing materials and disciplining his mind for
his great work, the “Animal Kingdom,” by writing short papers on various
physiological subjects. Many of these papers have been translated and
published under the title of “Posthumous Tracts.”

Leaving Paris in March, 1738, Swedenborg directed his steps toward Italy,
and after visiting its principal cities, arrived at Rome on the 25th
September. Mr. Rich, in his “Biography of Swedenborg,” remarks,—“This
visit should be a memorable one, for it brought the church of the past
and the future into a singular communion with each other;—Rome in the
still atmosphere and fading light of autumn, with all its trophies of
Pagan art, and its hoary traditions; and Swedenborg, the predestined
Seer of the last ages, whose eye was just kindling with the light of
inspiration. We should lose all faith in the instinctive prescience of
the human spirit when great events are at hand, if we might not believe
that a presentiment of something in the shadowy distance, connecting
his future with the strange mystery of the city, did not cross, for a
moment, the mind of Swedenborg, when he entered the once holy and revered
metropolis of the faith.”

After a sojourn of five months, Swedenborg left Rome on the 15th of
February, 1739, varying his homeward route. His journal from the 17th of
March, 1739, when he was at Genoa, is a blank, and his after wanderings
we can only conjecture. “It is most probable,” says Wilkinson, “that
he deposited the manuscript of the “Economy of the Animal Kingdom,” at
Amsterdam, on his way from Leipsic to Sweden, in 1740; that he lived in
his own country from 1740 or 1741 till 1744, and in the latter year went
again to Holland, and from thence came to England, where we meet him in
1745.”

In 1740-41, Swedenborg published at Amsterdam his “Economy of the Animal
Kingdom;” and in 1744-45, the “Animal Kingdom,” Parts I. and II. at the
Hague, and Part III. in London.




