CHAPTER XXVI.

    _Swedenborg in intercourse with General Tuxen and Paulus ab
    Indagine—His reply to Dr. Ernesti—Letter to the Landgrave of
    Hesse Darmstadt._


On the voyage to Amsterdam, the ship that carried Swedenborg being
detained, by adverse winds, off Elsinore, General Tuxen, hearing that
Swedenborg was in the offing, determined to improve the opportunity; and,
taking a boat, went off to see him. Introduced by the captain into the
cabin, he found Swedenborg seated in an undress,—his elbows on the table,
and his hands supporting his face, which was turned towards the door,—his
eyes open and much elevated. The General at once addressed him. At this,
he recovered himself, (for he had been in a state of vision,) rose with
some confusion, advanced a few steps in visible uncertainty, and then
bade him welcome, asking whence he came. Tuxen replied that he had come
with an invitation from his wife and himself, to request him to favor
them with his company at their house; to which he immediately consented,
and dressed himself alertly. The General’s wife, who was indisposed,
received him in the house, and requested his excuse if in any respect she
should fall short of her wishes to entertain him: adding that for thirty
years she had been afflicted with a painful disease. Swedenborg politely
kissed her hand, and answered, “Let us not speak of this; only acquiesce
in the will of God, and it will pass away, and you will return to the
same health and beauty as when you were fifteen years old.” The lady
made some reply, to which he rejoined, “Yes, in a few weeks.” From which
they concluded him to mean that diseases which have their foundation in
the mind, and are supported by infirmities of the body, do not disappear
immediately after death.

“Being then together,” says Tuxen, “in company with my wife, my now
deceased daughter, and three or four young ladies, my relations, he
entertained them very politely, and with much attention, on indifferent
subjects, on favourite dogs and cats that were in the room, which
caressed him, and jumped on his knee, showing their little tricks. During
these trifling discourses,—mixed with singular questions, all of which he
obligingly answered, whether they concerned this or the other world,—I
took occasion to say that I was sorry I had no better company to amuse
him than a sickly wife and her young girls: he replied, ‘And is not this
very good company? I was always very partial to ladies’ society.’ After
some little pause, he cast his eyes on a harpsichord, and asked whether
we were lovers of music, and who played upon it. I told him we were all
lovers of it, and that my wife in her youth had practiced, as she had
a fine voice, perhaps better than any in Denmark, as several persons
of distinction, who had heard the best singers in France, England, and
Italy, had assured her; and that my daughter also played with pretty
good taste. On this Swedenborg desired her to play. She then performed a
difficult and celebrated sonata, to which he beat the measure with his
foot on the sofa on which he sat; and when finished, he said, ‘Bravo!
very fine.’ She then played another by Rutini; and when she had played
a few minutes, he said, ‘This is by an Italian, but the first was not.’
This finished, he said, ‘Bravo! you play very well. Do you not also
sing?’ She answered, ‘I sing, but have not a very good voice, though
fond of singing, and would sing if my mother would accompany me.’ He
requested my wife to join, to which she assented, and they sang a few
Italian duettos, and some French airs, each in her respective taste,
to which he beat time, and afterwards paid many compliments to my
wife, on account of her taste and fine voice, which she had preserved
notwithstanding so long an illness. I took the liberty of saying to him,
that since in his writings he always declared that at all times there
were good and evil spirits of the other world present with man; might
I then be bold to ask, whether now, while my wife and daughter were
singing, there had been any from the other world present with us? To this
he answered, ‘Yes, certainly;’ and on my inquiring who they were, and
whether I had known them, he said it was the Danish royal family, and he
mentioned Christian VI., Sophia Magdalena, and Frederick V., who, through
his eyes, had seen and heard it. I do not positively recollect whether he
also mentioned the late beloved Queen Louisa among them. After this he
retired.”

During this visit to General Tuxen, in the course of other conversation,
Tuxen produced an autobiographical letter which Swedenborg had written
to Hartley, and which began, “I was born in the year 1689.” Swedenborg
told him that he was not born in that year, as mentioned, but in the
preceding. Tuxen asked him if this was an error of the press. He said
“No;” and added, “you may remember in reading my writings to have seen it
stated in many parts, that every cipher or number has in the spiritual
sense a certain correspondence or signification. Now,” said he, “when
I put the true year in that letter, an angel present told me to write
the year 1689, as much more suitable to myself than the other; ‘and you
observe,’ added the angel, ‘that with us time and space are nothing.’”

We give these anecdotes as Tuxen relates them. Every one, however, will
know from his private experience how little absolute dependence is to
be placed upon narrations of conversations, or actions, by even the most
truthful. Sir Walter Raleigh, while writing his History of the World,
was led to think of the errors into which he might be led, by observing
that an affray beneath his prison wall was variously described by
several eye-witnesses. If the occurrences of the present are so liable
to misstatement, what sort of faith can we place in the history of the
past? Wilkinson, commenting on this anecdote of the date of Swedenborg’s
birth, remarks, in his usual keen style: “We have here a reason for
that modification of events according to a context, of which the Gospel
histories, so often discrepant from each other, furnish numerous
instances. Manifestly it is the plan of the context which regards the
events from its own point of view, and paints the narrative in its own
colors. It is what all historians do in a lesser way, bending the history
to ideas, or shaping it with an artistic force. Taking a certain larger
block of time as a period of birth, it is hieroglyphically truthful to
play down upon any date contained in the block, according to the subject
and signification. There are many kinds of truth besides black and white;
and generally, figurative truths require latitude of phrase. At the same
time it must be confessed that one would like to know when the writing
is pure history, and when it is a base of history, made use of for
symbolical purposes, and touched, in part, by spirit. Literal people are
apt to be offended otherwise, and we sympathize with them.”

Swedenborg arrived in Amsterdam some time in September, 1770, and
straightway set about printing his manuscript of the “True Christian
Religion.” From two letters of a gentleman, named D. Paulus ab Indagine,
who seems to have been on familiar terms with Swedenborg, we select
the following passages, illustrative of this period of his life. He
writes:—“You asked me what this venerable old man, Swedenborg, is now
doing. This I can tell you; he eats and drinks very moderately, but
keeps his chamber rather long, and thirteen hours appear to be not too
much for him.[3] When I informed him that his work ‘On the Earths in
the Universe’ had been translated and published, he was much delighted,
and his eyes, which are always smiling, became still more brilliant. He
is now indefatigably at work; yea, I must say that he labors in a most
astonishing and superhuman manner at his new work. Only think! for every
printed sheet, 4to, he has to procure four sheets of manuscript; he now
prints two sheets every week, and corrects them himself, and consequently
he has to write eight sheets every week; and what appears to me utterly
inconceivable, he has not a single line beforehand in store.[4] His work
is to consist, as he himself states, of about eighty sheets in print. The
title of this work is the following:—‘True Christian Religion, Containing
the Universal Theology of the New Church, Predicted by the Lord in Daniel
viii. 13, 14, and in the Apocalypse, xxi. 1, 2; By Emanuel Swedenborg,
Servant of the Lord Jesus Christ.’ I could not, in my open manner,
conceal my astonishment that he should put himself upon the title page
as the servant of the Lord Jesus Christ. But he replied: ‘I have asked,
and have not only received permission, but have been ordered to do so.’
_It is astonishing with what confidence_ the old gentleman speaks of
the spiritual world, of the angels, and of God himself. If I were only
to give you the substance of our last conversation, it would fill many
pages. He spoke of naturalists, those who ascribe all things to nature,
whom he had seen shortly after death, and amongst them were even many
theologians, or such, at least, as had made theology their profession in
this life. He told me things which made me shudder, but which, however, I
pass by, in order not to be over-hasty in my judgment respecting him. I
will willingly admit that I know not what to make of him; he is a problem
that I can not solve. I sincerely wish that upright men, whom God has
placed as watchmen upon the walls of Zion, had some time since occupied
themselves with this man.

“I can not forbear to tell you something new about Swedenborg. Last
Thursday I paid him a visit, and found him, as usual, writing. He told
me that he had been in conversation that same morning, for three hours,
with the deceased king of Sweden. He had seen him already on Wednesday;
but as he observed that he was deeply engaged in conversation with the
queen, who is still living, he would not disturb him. I allowed him
to continue, but at length asked him how it was possible for a person
who is still in the land of the living, to be met with in the world of
spirits. He replied, that it was not the queen herself, but her _spiritus
familiaris_, or her familiar spirit. I asked him what that might be;
for I had neither heard from him anything respecting appearances of
that kind, nor had I read anything about them. He then informed me that
every man has either his good or bad spirit, who is not only constantly
with him, but sometimes a little removed from him, and appears in the
world of spirits. But of this, the man still living knows nothing; the
spirit, however, knows everything. This familiar spirit has everything in
accordance with his companion on earth; he has, in the world of spirits,
the same figure, the same countenance, and the same tone of voice, and
wears also similar garments; in a word, this familiar spirit of the
queen, said Swedenborg, appeared exactly as he had so often seen the
queen herself at Stockholm, and had heard her speak. In order to allay
my astonishment, he added that Dr. Ernesti, of Leipsic, had appeared to
him, in a similar manner, in the world of spirits, and that he had held
a long disputation with him. What will the learned professor say, when
he comes to hear of it? Probably he will say that the old man is in his
second childhood; he will only laugh at it, and who can be surprised? I
have often wondered at myself, how I could refrain from laughing, when I
was hearing such extraordinary things from him. And what is more, I have
often heard him relate the same things in a numerous company of ladies
and gentlemen, when I well knew there were mockers amongst them; but, to
my great astonishment, not a single person thought of laughing. Whilst
he is speaking, it is as though every person who hears him were charmed,
and compelled to believe him. He is by no means reserved and recluse, but
open-hearted and accessible to all. Whoever invites him as his guest, may
expect to see him. A certain young gentleman invited him last week to be
his guest, and, although he was not acquainted with him, he appeared at
his table, where he met Jewish and Portuguese gentlemen, with whom he
freely conversed, without distinction. Whoever is curious to see him, has
no difficulty; it is only necessary to go to his house, and he allows
anybody to approach him. It can easily be conceived, however, that the
numerous visits, to which he is liable, deprive him of much time.”

About this time, Dr. Ernesti attacked Swedenborg in his Bibliotheca
Theologica, and, in reply, Swedenborg published a single leaf, which, in
its decisive sharpness, is truly effective. It is as follows:—

“I have read what Dr. Ernesti has written about me. It consists of
mere personalities. I do not in it observe a grain of reason against
anything in my writings. As it is against the laws of honesty to assail
any one with such poisoned weapons, I think it beneath me to bandy words
with that illustrious man. I will not cast back calumnies by calumnies.
To do this, I should be even with the dogs, which bark and bite, or
with the lowest drabs, which throw street mud in each other’s faces in
their brawls. Read, if you will, what I have written in my books, and
afterwards conclude, but from reason, respecting my revelation.”

The Landgrave of Hesse Darmstadt now wrote to Swedenborg, requesting
information on several subjects. Swedenborg having doubt as to the
genuineness of the epistle, did not at first reply to it, until his
misgivings were set aside by M. Venator, the minister of that prince. In
his reply to the Landgrave, he says: “The Lord our Saviour had foretold
that He would come again into the world, and that he would establish
there a New Church. But as He cannot come again into the world in person,
it was necessary that He should do it by means of a man, who should not
only receive the doctrine of this New Church in his understanding, but
also publish it by printing; and as the Lord had prepared me for this
office from my infancy, He has manifested Himself in person before me,
His servant, and sent me to fill it.”

The Landgrave again wrote to Swedenborg, inquiring about the “miracle”
of his intercourse with the Queen of Sweden’s brother, and Swedenborg
answered that the story was true, but “not a miracle.” He also wrote
to M. Venator, “that such matters ought, by no means, to be considered
miracles: they are only testimonies that I have been introduced by the
Lord into the spiritual world, and that I have been in association
with angels and spirits, in order that the Church, which until now had
remained in ignorance concerning that world, may know that heaven and
hell exist in reality, and that man lives after death, a man, as before;
and that thus there may be no more doubt as to his immortality. Deign, I
pray you, to satisfy his Highness, that these are not miracles, but only
testimonies that I converse with angels and spirits. You may see in the
‘True Christian Religion’ that there are no more miracles at this time;
and the reason why. It is, that they who do not believe because they see
no miracles, might easily, by them, be led into fanaticism.”

Writing of miracles, Swedenborg remarks in another place, “Instead
of miracles, there has taken place, at the present day, an open
manifestation of the Lord himself, an intromission into the spiritual
world, and with it, illumination by immediate light from the Lord in
whatever relates to the interior things of the Church, but principally
an opening of the spiritual sense of the Word, in which the Lord is
present in his own Divine light. These revelations are not miracles,
because every man, as to his spirit, is in the spiritual world, without
separation from his body in the natural world. As to myself, indeed, my
presence in the spiritual world is attended with a certain separation,
but only as to the intellectual part of my mind, not as to the will part.
This manifestation of the Lord, and intromission into the spiritual
world, is more excellent than all miracles; but it has not been granted
to any one since the creation of the world, as it has been to me. The men
of the golden age, indeed, conversed with angels; but it was not granted
to them to be in any other light than what was natural. To me, however,
it has been granted to be in both spiritual and natural light at the same
time; and hereby I have been privileged to see the wonderful things of
heaven, to be in company with angels, just as I am with men, and at the
same time to pursue truths in the light of truth, and thus to perceive
and be gifted with them, consequently to be led by the Lord.”




