VII

CONCLUSION


There is force enough in ordinary sunshine to turn all the mills in the
world; and there is beneficent energy enough in any community to make
the people perfectly happy. But it is cramped and deflected, poisoned
by misuse, and turned to hateful ends. The question is how to liberate
energy.

People are fond of thinking the millennium is impossible; but so long
as happiness is dependent on a right use of the faculties, there is
no reason why the millennium should not be reached, and that soon or
unexpectedly. We all know individuals so harmoniously framed that we
say, “If theirs were the common temper of mankind, we should be happy.”
None of the externals of life, about which there is so much buffeting,
control the question. Happiness is in a nutshell. Anybody can have it.
You are happy if you get out of bed on the right side. I can never stop
wondering at the awful simplicity of the principle on which mankind
is constructed. Little Alice in the Looking-Glass could not reach the
porch till she turned her back on it and walked straight into the door.
Renounce the search for happiness and you find the substance. There is
nothing else in the law and the prophets.

We see most men like tee-totums spinning to the left and leading a
dismal life. How shall we get their motive power to spin them to the
right, and make them happy? The practical question is: how to use the
power of sunlight to turn our mills. How can we hold up a prism to
the times that shall disintegrate these rays of complex force, and
then adjust a lens that shall focus the powers of good and make them
turn the wheels of society? The elements are before us, ceaselessly in
motion. πάντα ῥεῖ. The most adamantine institutions are cloud palaces.
There is no stability anywhere; and if you have a steady eye you will
see that the whole fabric is in a flux. Nor are the changes arbitrary.
The formations and re-formations are governed by laws as certain as
those of astronomy. Study the changes and you will find the laws.
Subserve the laws and you can affect the formations. Julius Cæsar did
no more.

The strands of prejudice and passion that bind people together pulsate
with life. All these fellow-citizens are human beings, and there is no
one of them whom we cannot understand, reach, influence. The ordinary
modes of intercourse are at hand. Chief among them you find the great
machinery of government. It dwarfs every other agency, whether for good
or ill. In America this machinery was designed to be at the service of
anybody. It is an advertising agency for ideas, and it is very much
more than this; since the fact that a man is to vote forces him to
think. You may preach to a congregation by the year and not affect its
thought because it is not called upon for definite action. But throw
your subject into a campaign and it becomes a challenge. You can get
assent to almost any proposition so long as you are not going to do
anything about it. And on the other hand, no amount of verbal proof
will justify a new thought until it has been put in practice.

Alas for ink and paper! There is in all speech and writing a
conventional presumption that human beings shall be logical, or fixed
quantities, or at least coherent creatures. For the purposes of an
essay or a speech, you prove your case, and carry weight accordingly.
If you are very cogent and conclusive, why, you win. Hurrah! the world
is saved. But in real life there are no fixed quantities; all the terms
are variables.

For example, everybody understands what is meant by the “Moral Law.”
People differ only as to the application of that law. Not long ago I
heard a sermon on this law, in which great stress was laid on the fact
that it was a discovered law whereby the truth prevailed. Any truce
with evil meant defeat for the cause of righteousness. This was the law
of God, tested by experience, and in constant operation like the law
of gravity, a thing you could not escape. The preacher pictured the
solitary struggle of the great man seeking truth, his proclamation of
the truth, the refusal of the world to receive it, and the prophet’s
isolation and apparent failure. Nevertheless what the prophet said had
always the same content. It was an appeal to the instincts of man upon
the question of right and wrong, and in the end it was accepted.

Now the man who made this exposition, and it was admirable, is in
regard to politics a believer in compromise. I think I have never known
him support the idealist cause in a campaign; and upon most occasions
of crisis he is found heartily throwing stones at the crusaders.

What words in any language can make this man understand that his
law--which he really does profoundly understand as a law--applies
to reform movements? Why, no words will do it, only example. New
statements about morality, however eloquent, add nothing to our
knowledge. Everything is known about the moral law, except how you
yourself will act under given circumstances. You have nothing but
example to contribute.

People interrogate force. They are unconvinced, and are carried,
still protesting, through the air and deposited in a new place. And
then, thereafter, they agree with you about the whole matter. Mere
intellectual assent to your proposition is, even when you can get it,
worth nothing. Your object is not to confute, but to stimulate. What
you really want is that every man you meet shall drop his business
and devote his entire life and energy to your cause. You will accept
nothing less than this. Is it not clear that people are not moved by
logic? Your conduct must ultimately square with reason and be justified
by the laws of the universe and the constitution of other people’s
minds; but you must value only that approval which comes from the
deeper fibres in men. You need not be concerned about the bickerings of
contemporary misunderstanding. Leave these for the historical society.
Act first--explain afterwards. That is the way to get heard. Must you
show your passport and certificate of birth and legitimacy to every
editor and every lackey? They’ll find out who you are by and by. It
is easier to knock a man down than to say why you do it. The act is
sometimes needed, and wisdom then approves it after the event. People
who love soft methods and hate iniquity forget this,--that reform
consists in taking a bone from a dog. Philosophy will not do it.

Such are the practical dictates of agitation. Their justification lies
always with events. It may be that you must wait seven centuries for an
audience, or it may be that in two years your voice will be heeded. If
you are really a forerunner of better times, the times will appear and
explain you. It will then turn out that your movement was the keynote
of the national life. You really differed from your neighbors only in
this,--that your mind had gone faster than theirs along the road all
were travelling.

We are all slaves of the age; we can only see such principles as
society reveals. The philosophy of other ages does us little good.
We repeat the old formulas and cry up the prophets; but we see
no connection between the truth we know so well in print and its
counterpart in real life. The moral commonplaces, as, for instance,
“Honesty is the best policy,” “A single just man can influence an
entire community,” “Never compromise a principle,” are social truths.
They are always true, but they are only obviously true in very virtuous
communities. In a vile community the influence of a just man is potent
but not visible. In a perfectly virtuous era it is clear that a cheat
could not drive a fraudulent trade.

A seer is a man with such sharp eyes for cause and effect that he sees
social truth, even under unfavorable conditions. And yet even the
seers generally had auspicious weather,--that is to say, storms of
moral passion. The whole race of Jews lived in fervent exaltation for
generations, and revealed to their sharp-sighted prophets deep glimpses
of social truth. Hence the Bible. “A prophet is not without honor save
in his own country.” What happy precision! What sound generalization!
But every township in Israel had its prophet, and the truth was a
commonplace.

All the world’s moral wisdom would turn into literal truth upon the
regeneration of society. It tends to become obvious in regenerative
eras. In dark ages it becomes paradox. Standards are multiplied, and
makeshift theories come in,--one rule for social conduct, another for
business, another for politics. Expedient supplants principle. Indeed
you may gauge the degradation of an age by the multiplicity of its
standards. It is the same with the fine arts. To the men that made
the statues and the pictures, these things were the shortest symbols
of truth, and required no explanation. In the dark ages that followed
they became a mystery and a paradox. But the traditions and objects
survived and had to be accounted for. An age that cannot produce them
requires a philosophy of æsthetics. Thus a thousand reasons are given
to explain their existence, and finally it is agreed that they are
something superfluous and fictitious,--conventional lies, like poetry,
like loving your neighbor.

Nothing but a general increase of interest in the aspect of common
things would explain to us the great masters. A revival of interest in
the way the world looks is the precursor of painting: the perceptions
of every one are quickening. And so we may be sure that we are upon the
edge of a better era when the old moral commonplaces begin to glow like
jewels and the stones to testify.

You cannot expect any one but a scientist to be startled at the
movement of a glacier. But if you distribute a few micrometric
instruments upon that gloomy ice-field, the American civic
consciousness, and if you take observations not oftener than once
in three years, you will be startled. The direction of the general
movement is absolutely right. But it all moves together. Special signs
of progress imply general progress, and hence comes the extraordinary
and scientific interest in the awakening of this community. It is like
a man lapsed into the deepest coma who is beginning to stir. Watch
him, take his pulse, surround him with every apparatus of experimental
physiology, and you will find the laws of health, the norm of progress.

Art and literature, and that moral atmosphere which makes a society
worth moving in, lie on the other side of the great reaction, the
spiritual revival which we see now faintly beginning; and it is
because these things can be got at only by stimulating American
character that these reform movements are of value. Here at least the
circulation throbs. Political reform--that is to say, a political life
in which men who are personally honest predominate, a politics run
by ideas--will come in as fast as the public develops ideas, and not
before. But an idea is something very different from what you who read
this think it is. An idea is a thing that governs your conduct all
the time. For instance, you assent to the notion of independence in
politics; you understand the lost-cause theory, but you won’t vote the
ticket. Why? You don’t want to get out of your class. The relations
between thought and action in you are not normal. Half of your brain
has never functioned, and the paralysis shows in your politics. You
have no idea. It is not this sort of idea that expels rascals or makes
books or music. What passes for political thought in your vocabulary
is like the phantasma in the brain of the Indian priest who is buried
with the corn growing above him. The average educated man in America
has about as much knowledge of what a political idea is as he has of
the principles of counterpoint. Each is a thing used in politics or
music which those fellows who practise politics or music manipulate
somehow. Show him one and he will deny that it is politics at all. It
must be corrupt or he will not recognize it. He has only seen dried
figs. He has only thought dried thoughts. A live thought or a real idea
is against the rules of his mind.

Imagine a tea-party of pre-Raphaelites discussing Dante; they dote on
his style, his passion, his force, his quality. In walks Dante, grim,
remorseless, harsh, powerful. The man represents everything they hate.
He is a horror and an outrage. The whole region of literature that
these men live in is not more fictitious than the region of political
thought in which the effete American--I mean your banker, your college
president, your writer of editorial leaders--lives. Exclude for the
moment those who are financially corrupt and consider only the men of
intellect, and in all that concerns politics they are as removed from
real ideas as Rossetti was removed from the real Dante.

Imagine a company of people on a voyage. They play whist with one
another for dimes, and they spend all their money on the steward and
continue to play with counters, and the ship goes to wreck, and they
sit on the beach and continue to play with pebbles. That is American
politics. The whole thing is one gigantic sham, one transcendent fraud.

It makes no difference which man is made president; it makes no
difference which is governor. There is no choice between McKinley and
Bryan, between Republicanism and Democracy. There is no difference
between them. They are one thing. They both and all of them are part
of the machinery by which the government of a most dishonest nation
is carried on, for the financial benefit of certain parties,--certain
thousands of men who have bank accounts and eat and drink and bring up
their families on the proceeds of this complicated swindle.

There is no reality in a single phrase uttered in politics, no meaning
in one single word of any of it. There is no man in public life who
stands for anything. They are shadows; they are phantasmagoria. At
best they cater to the better elements; at worst they frankly subserve
the worst. There is no one who stands for his own ideas himself, by
himself, a man. If American politics does not look to you like a joke,
a tragic dance; if you have enough blindness left in you, on any plea,
on any excuse, to vote for the Democratic party or the Republican
party (for at present machine and party are one), or for any candidate
who does not stand for a new era,--then you yourself pass into the
slide of the magic-lantern; you are an exhibit, a quaint product, a
curiosity of the American soil. You are part of the problem, and you
must be educated and drawn forward towards real life. This process is
going on. As the community returns to life, it sees the natural world
for a moment and then forgets it. The blood flushes the brain and then
recedes. You yourself voted once against both parties, when you thought
you could win, and when you were excited. You quoted Isaiah and I know
not what poetry, and were out and out committed to principle; but
to-day you are cold and hopeless. At present, hope is a mystery to you.
Nevertheless the utility of those early reform movements survives. They
heated the imagination of the people till the people had a momentary
vision of truths which not all of them forgot; and so each year the
temperature has been higher, the mind of the community clearer.

We must not regard those broken reeds, the renegade leaders of reform
movements, as villains; though the mere record of their words and
conduct might prove them such. They have been men emerging from a mist.
They see clearly for a moment, and then clouds sweep before them.
Vanity, selfishness, ambition, tradition, habit, intervene like a fog.
They have been betrayed, too, by the fickle public, that would not
stand by them when in trouble. In the recapture of any institution by
the forces of honesty there are trenches that get filled by slaughtered
honor.

This whole revolution means the invasion of politics by new men. At
first they are tyros, unstable, untried, well-meaning fellows. Half of
them crack in the baking. But there are more coming, and the fibre is
growing tougher and the eyes clearer; soon we shall have men. A great
passion is soon to replace the feeble conscientious motive that has
hitherto brought the new men forward: ambition,--the ambition to stand
for ideas, for ideas only, and to get heard. We have almost forgotten
that public life is the natural ambition of every young man. Conditions
have made it contemptible. But these struggles signify that a change in
those conditions has already begun. Your work and mine may be summed up
in one word. Make it possible for a young man to go into public life
untarnished, and as an enemy to every extant evil. You must have men
who will not go except on these terms. The times herald such men. They
will appear. We must prepare for them.

       *       *       *       *       *

The reason for the slow progress of the world seems to lie in a
single fact. Every man is born under the yoke, and grows up beneath
the oppressions of his age. He can only get a vision of the unselfish
forces in the world by appealing to them, and every appeal is a call
to arms. If he fights he must fight, not one man, but a conspiracy.
He is always at war with a civilization. On his side is proverbial
philosophy, a galaxy of invisible saints and sages, and the
half-developed consciousness and professions of everybody. Against him
is the world, and every selfish passion in his own heart. The instant
he declares war, every inducement is offered to make him stop. “Toil,
envy, want, the patron, and the jail” intervene. The instant he stops
fighting he is allied with the enemy: he is bought up by prejudice or
by fatigue. He begins to realize the importance of particular visible
institutions, as if their sole value did not come from the fraction
of unselfishness they represent. He rushes headlong into trade, and
thenceforth can see his country only as a series of trade interests.
He gets into some church and begins to value its organization, or
into some party and begins to value its past, or into some club and
begins to value his friends’ feelings. The consequence is that you
may search Christendom and hardly find a man who is free. The advance
of the world, like the improvement of our local politics, has always
been the work of young men. It is done by men before their minds
have been worn into ruts by particular businesses, or their sight
shortened by the study of near things. What we love in the young is
not their youth, but their force. The energy that runs through them
makes them sensitive. They feel the importance of remote things, and
infer the relations of the present to the future more truly than their
elders. They are touched by hints. The direct language of humanity is
plain and native to them. The invisible waves of force which do as a
matter of fact rule the world, using its fictions and its phrases as
mere transmitting-plates, strike keenly upon the heart of the youth,
and the vibrations of instinctive passion that shake his frame are
the response of a strong creature to the laws of its universe. This
unlearned knowledge of good and evil is like the response of the
eyes to light or of the tongue to the taste of a fruit. It was not
indoctrinated; it is a reaction to a stimulus.

So long as the world shall last, men will be writing books in order to
explain and justify the instincts; inventing theologies and ethical
codes, and projecting political programs to advance and confirm them.

If you take up some particular matter and begin to trace out its
consequences upon mankind, you find yourself forced boldly to embrace
the sum of all human destiny. We cannot follow out this course in
detail. We see only tendency; we see only influence. Enlarge our
horizon as we will, we cannot live out the lives of all future
generations, and thus furnish an answer to the first caviller who
interrupts our argument with a “cui bono.” The generous impulses of
youth represent a vision of consequences. They take in more of the
future at one glance than a philosopher can state in a year.

Certainly, so far as we can follow out the threads of influence, the
lines seem to converge. They make a figure and point to a conclusion
exactly upon that spot in the firmament where instinct would place
it. If philosophy gives us a diagram, the rest of life fills it up,
and embellishes it with infinite illustration. The proofs multiply,
and are hurled in upon us from all quarters of life and all provinces
of endeavor. The anecdotes and fables of the world, its drama, its
poetry and fiction, its religion and piety, its domestic teaching and
its monuments support this instinct, and describe the same figure.
Further still, there is not a man who does not reveal it in his soul’s
anatomy: so much so that upon every occasion except where his interests
are touched, he is for virtue, and even where they are touched, it is
only a question of a few degrees more heat to dissolve the habits and
prejudices of a lifetime, and make him take off his coat and go into a
war or a political campaign.

A single man, as we see him in one of the great modern civilizations,
looks like a bit of machinery, a cog or a crank or an air-brake. The
business man is especially mechanical, his functions are so accurate,
so delimited and specialized. And yet any theory that dwells upon
these limitations is put to shame in five minutes, for the creature
eats and sheds tears before your eyes. All of the reasons for not
doing some particular act that you think wise to be done, turn out to
be founded on the idea that this man is a driving-wheel, and nothing
but a driving-wheel. You cannot change him, they say, you must take
him as he is. I have never heard any argument given against the wisdom
of righteousness, except the existence of evil. “It exists, therefore
subserve it.” Is it not clear that evil exists only because people
subserve it? It has no fixity. Withdraw your support and it begins
to perish. One man says, “Oh, let the world go. All the wickedness
and unhappiness in it are inevitable.” Another says, “Some little
concession to present conditions must be made.” Nothing can be said to
justify the second man that is not moral support to the first. Your
concession is always the acknowledgment of somebody’s weakness. Now
you may make allowances for a man who has not come up to the mark; but
if you make allowances for him beforehand, and assume that he is not
going to do right, you corrupt him. If these things are true, then we
are absolved from all complicity with vice. We need never take a course
that requires to be explained. We thus get rid of a great oppression
and can breathe freely. In the language of the old piety, Christian’s
pack falls from his back. That pack has, in all ages, been a perversion
of the conscience, a mistake as to the size of the universe.

We have seen all these ranks and armies of humanity pass in review
before us, each man with his eyes fixed in mesmeric intensity upon
some set of opinions, until he grew to be the thing he looked on.
These opinions of his are all we know of him. They are not our own
opinions. They often appear to us misguided and illusory; yet there
is always to be found in them the light of some benevolence. They are
like broken mirrors and give back fractions of a larger idea. The hope
and courage in each of these men bless and advance the world; but not
in the way that the men themselves expect. They seem all to be bent
over a game of chess, where every move has its real significance upon
another board which they do not see. Each man seems to be following
some will-o’-the-wisp across a landscape at night. No cannon can waken
these insensate sleepers. And yet they are tracing out patterns and
geometrical diagrams upon the sward; they are weaving a magical dance
that, for all its intricacy, has a planetary rhythm, and the sober
motion of a pendulum. Each individual in this unthinkable host gives
an instance of the same fatality; first, that he becomes the thing he
looks on, and second, that he accomplishes something that he does not
understand.

And both parts of this fatality must hold true of ourselves. Certainly,
our subjection to the thing we look on is almost pitiable. We cannot
even remember a righteous hatred without beginning to take color from
the thing we hate. Our goodness comes solely from thinking on goodness;
our wickedness from thinking on wickedness. We too are the victims of
our own contemplation.

As for the last half of that fatality, that keeps us forever ignorant
of the true meaning of our lives, it is not an absolute ignorance, like
our ignorance of how we came to exist. It is a qualified ignorance,
like our ignorance that we have hurt some one’s feelings. The elements
of understanding are within us: to-morrow the whole matter may become
clear. The borders of our understanding extend, as we push outward
our frontier of inquiry. This is both a frontier of scepticism, and
of faith. It is a bulwark of doubt as to the value of our last new
formula, and of faith as to the reality behind that formula. As we go
forward, bringing our lives down to date, holding our experience at
arm’s length and examining it with a merciless endeavor to wring the
truth out of it, we do, from day to day, get a clearer notion of the
actual world, a truer idea of our own place in it. This qualified and
modest understanding of life, that comes from putting things together
that seem to go together, is within the power of any one.

And we find this: the more unselfish men become, the more sensitive do
they become in understanding human relations. The gambler cannot see
that he is giving pain to his family; his self-indulgence has blunted
his sensibilities. The faith healer knows that he is curing a man in a
neighboring State; his love for mankind has refined his sensibilities.
Most of us stand somewhere between these two extremes in the scale of
understanding, and are moving towards one or the other. Education,
then, is the process by which we gradually discover both the real
nature of the human life about us, and our own relation to the whole of
it. The process is never complete. Even poets and great men are in the
dark about their own function; but they are less in the dark than the
rest of us. They speak from a knowledge that is greater than ours. They
have a wonderful power over us; for they help us in our struggle to see
the world as it is.




OTHER BOOKS BY JOHN JAY CHAPMAN

_EMERSON_ AND OTHER ESSAYS

12mo. $1.25.

  Emerson. Walt Whitman. A Study of Romeo.
  Michael Angelo’s Sonnets. Robert Browning.
  R. L. Stevenson. The Fourth Canto of the Inferno.

Mr. Chapman brings to bear on his task a rare store of critical
perception and literary knowledge, while in his own style there is
nothing to be found of the obscure or the inflated. The interesting
part of Mr. Chapman’s work is that he has something new to say about
everything he touches.--_The Spectator._

     ❦ ❦ ❦

This Essay (Emerson) is the most effective critical attempt made in the
United States, or I should suppose anywhere, to get near the sage of
Concord.--HENRY JAMES.

     ❦ ❦ ❦

We shall hope to come across Mr. Chapman again. Few living critics go
so straight to the heart of their problem, or waste so little time in
writing “about it and about.”--_The Academy._


_CAUSES AND CONSEQUENCES_

12mo. $1.25.

  Politics. Society. Education.
  Democracy. Government.

No one can read Mr. Chapman’s book without finding in it something
instructive and suggestive. The author is an enthusiast for humanity
converted by stress of circumstances into a preacher against
corruption. His book is a manly appeal to the rising generation,
for whom it has a message of courage and hope sadly wanting
nowadays.--_The Nation._

     ❦ ❦ ❦

This is a brilliant little book. Mr. Chapman wields a razor edge of
forcible statement, and he is inspired by a moral passion that makes
his utterance a breathing, vital thing.--_The Academy._

     ❦ ❦ ❦

The author is essentially a critic, clear and incisive, at times rather
sweeping in his generalities, yet always fresh and stimulating. His
attack on the corruption of American politics is as vigorous a piece of
writing as one could desire.--_The Outlook._


  CHARLES SCRIBNER’S SONS, Publishers
  153-157 Fifth Ave., New York




Transcriber’s Notes:

Variations in hyphenation have been retained as published in the
original book. Punctuation has been standardised.

The following change has been made:

  Page 17
    surge up and are scatttered _changed to_
    surge up and are scattered

