CHAPTER VI.

OF THE LOGIC OF INDUCTION.


APHORISM XVII.

_The_ Logic of Induction _consists in stating the Facts and the
Inference in such a manner, that the Evidence of the Inference is
manifest: just as the Logic of Deduction consists in stating the
Premises and the Conclusion in such a manner that the Evidence of
the Conclusion is manifest._

APHORISM XVIII.

_The Logic of Deduction is exhibited by means of a certain Formula;
namely, a Syllogism; and every train of deductive reasoning, to be
demonstrative, must be capable of resolution into a series of such
Formulæ legitimately constructed. In like manner, the Logic of
Induction may be exhibited by means of certain_ Formulæ; _and every
train of inductive inference to be sound, must be capable of
resolution into a scheme of such Formulæ, legitimately constructed._

APHORISM XIX.

_The_ inductive act of thought _by which several Facts are
colligated into one Proposition, may be expressed by saying:_ The
several Facts are exactly expressed as one Fact, if, and only if, we
adopt the Conceptions and the Assertion _of the Proposition._


APHORISM XX.

_The One Fact, thus inductively obtained from several Facts, may be
combined with other Facts, and colligated with them by a new act of
Induction. This process may be_ {98} _indefinitely repeated: and
these successive processes are the_ Steps _of Induction, or of_
Generalization, _from the lowest to the highest._

APHORISM XXI.

_The relation of the successive Steps of Induction may be exhibited
by means of an_ Inductive Table, _in which the several Facts are
indicated, and tied together by a Bracket, and the Inductive
Inference placed on the other side of the Bracket; and this
arrangement repeated, so as to form a genealogical Table of each
Induction, from the lowest to the highest._

APHORISM XXII.

_The Logic of Induction is the_ Criterion of Truth _inferred from
Facts, as the Logic of Deduction is the Criterion of Truth deduced
from necessary Principles. The Inductive Table enables us to apply
such a Criterion; for we can determine whether each Induction is
verified and justified by the Facts which its Bracket includes; and
if each induction in particular be sound, the highest, which merely
combines them all, must necessarily be sound also._

APHORISM XXIII.

_The distinction of_ Fact _and_ Theory _is only relative. Events and
phenomena, considered as Particulars which may be colligated by
Induction, are_ Facts; _considered as Generalities already obtained
by colligation of other Facts, they are_ Theories. _The same event
or phenomenon is a Fact or a Theory, according as it is considered
as standing on one side or the other of the Inductive Bracket._


1. THE subject to which the present chapter refers is described by
phrases which are at the present day familiarly used in speaking of
the progress of knowledge. We hear very frequent mention of
_ascending from particular to general_ propositions, and from these
to propositions still more general;--of {99} truths _included_ in
other truths of a higher degree of generality;--of different _stages
of generalization_;--and of the _highest step_ of the process of
discovery, to which all others are subordinate and preparatory. As
these expressions, so familiar to our ears, especially since the
time of Francis Bacon, denote, very significantly, processes and
relations which are of great importance in the formation of science,
it is necessary for us to give a clear account of them, illustrated
with general exemplifications; and this we shall endeavour to do.

We have, indeed, already explained that science consists of
Propositions which include the Facts from which they were collected;
and other wider Propositions, collected in like manner from the
former, and including them. Thus, that the stars, the moon, the sun,
rise, culminate, and set, are facts _included_ in the proposition
that the heavens, carrying with them all the celestial bodies, have
a diurnal revolution about the axis of the earth. Again, the
observed monthly motions of the moon, and the annual motions of the
sun, are _included_ in certain propositions concerning the movements
of those luminaries with respect to the stars. But all these
propositions are really _included_ in the doctrine that the earth,
revolving on its axis, moves round the sun, and the moon round the
earth. These movements, again, considered as facts, are explained
and _included_ in the statement of the forces which the earth exerts
upon the moon, and the sun upon the earth. Again, this doctrine of
the forces of these three bodies is _included_ in the assertion,
that all the bodies of the solar system, and all parts of matter,
exert forces, each upon each. And we might easily show that all the
leading facts in astronomy are comprehended in the same
generalization. In like manner with regard to any other science, so
far as its truths have been well established and fully developed, we
might show that it consists of a gradation of propositions,
proceeding from the most special facts to the most general
theoretical assertions. We shall exhibit this gradation in some of
the principal branches of science. {100}

2. This gradation of truths, successively included in other truths,
may be conveniently represented by Tables resembling the
genealogical tables by which the derivation of descendants from a
common ancestor is exhibited; except that it is proper in this case
to invert the form of the Table, and to make it converge to unity
downwards instead of upwards, since it has for its purpose to
express, not the derivation of many from one, but the collection of
one truth from many things. Two or more co-ordinate facts or
propositions may be ranged side by side, and joined by some mark of
connexion, (a bracket, as ⏟ or ⎵,) beneath which may be placed the
more general proposition which is collected by induction from the
former. Again, propositions co-ordinate with this more general one
may be placed on a level with it; and the combination of these, and
the result of the combination, may be indicated by brackets in the
same manner; and so on, through any number of gradations. By this
means the streams of knowledge from various classes of facts will
constantly run together into a smaller and smaller number of
channels; like the confluent rivulets of a great river, coming
together from many sources, uniting their ramifications so as to
form larger branches, these again uniting in a single trunk. The
_genealogical tree_ of each great portion of science, thus formed,
will contain all the leading truths of the science arranged in their
due co-ordination and subordination. Such Tables, constructed for
the sciences of Astronomy and of Optics, will be given at the end of
this chapter.

3. The union of co-ordinate propositions into a proposition of a
higher order, which occurs in this Tree of Science wherever two
twigs unite in one branch, is, in each case, an example of
_Induction_. The single proposition is collected by the process of
induction from its several members. But here we may observe, that
the image of a mere _union_ of the parts at each of these points,
which the figure of a tree or a river presents, is very inadequate
to convey the true state of the case; for in Induction, as we have
seen, besides mere collection of particulars, there is always a _new
conception_, a {101} principle of connexion and unity, supplied by
the mind, and superinduced upon the particulars. There is not merely
a juxta-position of materials, by which the new proposition contains
all that its component parts contained; but also a formative act
exerted by the understanding, so that these materials are contained
in a new shape. We must remember, therefore, that our Inductive
Tables, although they represent the elements and the order of these
inductive steps, do not fully represent the whole signification of
the process in each case.

4. The principal features of the progress of science spoken of in
the last chapter are clearly exhibited in these Tables; namely, the
_Consilience of Inductions_ and the constant Tendency to Simplicity
observable in true theories. Indeed in all cases in which, from
propositions of considerable generality, propositions of a still
higher degree are obtained, there is a convergence of inductions;
and if in one of the lines which thus converge, the steps be rapidly
and suddenly made in order to meet the other line, we may consider
that we have an example of Consilience. Thus when Newton had
collected, from Kepler's Laws, the Central Force of the sun, and
from these, combined with other facts, the Universal Force of all
the heavenly bodies, he suddenly turned round to include in his
generalization the Precession of the Equinoxes, which he declared to
arise from the attraction of the sun and moon upon the protuberant
part of the terrestrial spheroid. The apparent remoteness of this
fact, in its nature, from the other facts with which he thus
associated it, causes this part of his reasoning to strike us as a
remarkable example of _Consilience_. Accordingly, in the Table of
Astronomy we find that the columns which contain the facts and
theories relative to the _sun_ and _planets_, after exhibiting
several stages of induction within themselves, are at length
suddenly connected with a column till then quite distinct,
containing the _precession of the equinoxes_. In like manner, in the
Table of Optics, the columns which contain the facts and theories
relative to _double refraction_, and those which {102} include
_polarization by crystals_, each go separately through several
stages of induction; and then these two sets of columns are suddenly
connected by Fresnel's mathematical induction, that double
refraction and polarization arise from the same cause: thus
exhibiting a remarkable _Consilience_.

5. The constant _Tendency to Simplicity_ in the sciences of which the
progress is thus represented, appears from the form of the Table
itself; for the single trunk into which all the branches converge,
contains in itself the substance of all the propositions by means of
which this last generalization was arrived at. It is true, that this
ultimate result is sometimes not so simple as in the Table it
appears: for instance, the ultimate generalization of the Table
exhibiting the progress of Physical Optics,--namely, that Light
consists in Undulations,--must be understood as including some other
hypotheses; as, that the undulations are transverse, that the ether
through which they are propagated has its elasticity in crystals and
other transparent bodies regulated by certain laws; and the like.
Yet still, even acknowledging all the complication thus implied, the
Table in question evidences clearly enough the constant advance
towards unity, consistency, and simplicity, which have marked the
progress of this Theory. The same is the case in the Inductive Table
of Astronomy in a still greater degree.

6. These Tables naturally afford the opportunity of assigning to
each of the distinct steps of which the progress of science
consists, the name of the _Discoverer_ to whom it is due. Every one
of the inductive processes which the brackets of our Tables mark,
directs our attention to some person by whom the induction was first
distinctly made. These names I have endeavoured to put in their due
places in the Tables; and the Inductive Tree of our knowledge in
each science becomes, in this way, an exhibition of the claims of
each discoverer to distinction, and, as it were, a Genealogical Tree
of scientific nobility. It is by no means pretended that such a tree
includes the {103} names of all the meritorious labourers in each
department of science. Many persons are most usefully employed in
collecting and verifying truths, who do not advance to any new
truths. The labours of a number of such are included in each stage
of our ascent. But such Tables as we have now before us will present
to us the names of all the most eminent discoverers: for the main
steps of which the progress of science consists, are transitions
from more particular to more general truths, and must therefore be
rightly given by these Tables; and those must be the greatest names
in science to whom the principal events of its advance are thus due.

7. The Tables, as we have presented them, exhibit the course by
which we pass from Particular to General through various gradations,
and so to the most general. They display the order of _discovery_.
But by reading them in an inverted manner, beginning at the single
comprehensive truths with which the Tables end, and tracing these
back into the more partial truths, and these again into special
facts, they answer another purpose;--they exhibit the process of
_verification_ of discoveries once made. For each of our general
propositions is true in virtue of the truth of the narrower
propositions which it involves; and we cannot satisfy ourselves of
its truth in any other way than by ascertaining that these its
constituent elements are true. To assure ourselves that the sun
attracts the planets with forces varying inversely as the square of
the distance, we must analyse by geometry the motion of a body in an
ellipse about the focus, so as to see that such a motion does imply
such a force. We must also verify those calculations by which the
observed places of each planet are stated to be included in an
ellipse. These calculations involve assumptions respecting the path
which the earth describes about the sun, which assumptions must
again be verified by reference to observation. And thus, proceeding
from step to step, we resolve the most general truths into their
constituent parts; and these again into their parts; and by testing,
at each step, both the reality of the asserted ingredients and the
propriety {104} of the conjunction, we establish the whole system of
truths, however wide and various it may be.

8. It is a very great advantage, in such a mode of exhibiting
scientific truths, that it resolves the verification of the most
complex and comprehensive theories, into a number of small steps, of
which almost any one falls within the reach of common talents and
industry. That _if_ the particulars of any one step be true, the
generalization also is true, any person with a mind properly
disciplined may satisfy himself by a little study. That each of
these particular propositions _is_ true, may be ascertained, by the
same kind of attention, when this proposition is resolved into _its_
constituent and more special propositions. And thus we may proceed,
till the most general truth is broken up into small and manageable
portions. Of these portions, each may appear by itself narrow and
easy; and yet they are so woven together, by hypothesis and
conjunction, that the truth of the parts necessarily assures us of
the truth of the whole. The verification is of the same nature as
the verification of a large and complex statement of great sums
received by a mercantile office on various accounts from many
quarters. The statement is separated into certain comprehensive
heads, and these into others less extensive; and these again into
smaller collections of separate articles, each of which can be
inquired into and reported on by separate persons. And thus at last,
the mere addition of numbers performed by these various persons, and
the summation of the results which they obtain, executed by other
accountants, is a complete and entire security that there is no
errour in the whole of the process.

9. This comparison of the process by which we verify scientific
truth to the process of Book-keeping in a large commercial
establishment, may appear to some persons not sufficiently dignified
for the subject. But, in fact, the possibility of giving this formal
and business-like aspect to the evidence of science, as involved in
the process of successive generalization, is an inestimable
advantage. For if no one could pronounce concerning a wide and
profound theory except he who {105} could at once embrace in his
mind the whole range of inference, extending from the special facts
up to the most general principles, none but the greatest geniuses
would be entitled to judge concerning the truth or errour of
scientific discoveries. But, in reality, we seldom need to verify
more than one or two steps of such discoveries at one time; and this
may commonly be done (when the discoveries have been fully
established and developed,) by any one who brings to the task clear
conceptions and steady attention. The progress of science is
gradual: the discoveries which are successively made, are also
verified successively. We have never any very large collections of
them on our hands at once. The doubts and uncertainties of any one
who has studied science with care and perseverance are generally
confined to a few points. If he can satisfy himself upon these, he
has no misgivings respecting the rest of the structure; which has
indeed been repeatedly verified by other persons in like manner. The
fact that science is capable of being resolved into separate
processes of verification, is that which renders it possible to form
a great body of scientific truth, by adding together a vast number
of truths, of which many men, at various times and by multiplied
efforts, have satisfied themselves. The treasury of Science is
constantly rich and abundant, because it accumulates the wealth
which is thus gathered by so many, and reckoned over by so many
more: and the dignity of Knowledge is no more lowered by the
multiplicity of the tasks on which her servants are employed, and
the narrow field of labour to which some confine themselves, than
the rich merchant is degraded by the number of offices which it is
necessary for him to maintain, and the minute articles of which he
requires an exact statement from his accountants.

10. The analysis of doctrines inductively obtained, into their
constituent facts, and the arrangement of them in such a form that
the conclusiveness of the induction may be distinctly seen, may be
termed the _Logic of Induction_. By _Logic_ has generally been meant
a system which teaches us so to arrange our {106} reasonings that
their truth or falsehood shall be evident in their form. In
_deductive_ reasonings, in which the general principles are assumed,
and the question is concerning their application and combination in
particular cases, the device which thus enables us to judge whether
our reasonings are conclusive is the _Syllogism_; and this _form_,
along with the rules which belong to it, does in fact supply us with
a criterion of deductive or demonstrative reasoning. The _Inductive
Table_, such as it is presented in the present chapter, in like
manner supplies the means of ascertaining the truth of our inductive
inferences, so far as the form in which our reasoning may be stated
can afford such a criterion. Of course some care is requisite in
order to reduce a train of demonstration into the form of a series
of syllogisms; and certainly not less thought and attention are
required for resolving all the main doctrines of any great
department of science into a graduated table of co-ordinate and
subordinate inductions. But in each case, when this task is once
executed, the evidence or want of evidence of our conclusions
appears immediately in a most luminous manner. In each step of
induction, our Table enumerates the particular facts, and states the
general theoretical truth which includes these and which these
constitute. The special act of attention by which we satisfy
ourselves that the facts _are_ so included,--that the general truth
_is_ so constituted,--then affords little room for errour, with
moderate attention and clearness of thought.

11. We may find an example of this _act of attention_ thus required,
at any one of the steps of induction in our Tables; for instance, at
the step in the early progress of astronomy at which it was
inferred, that the earth is a globe, and that the sphere of the
heavens (relatively) performs a diurnal revolution round this globe
of the earth. How was this established in the belief of the Greeks,
and how is it fixed in our conviction? As to the globular form, we
find that as we travel to the north, the apparent pole of the
heavenly motions, and the constellations which are near it, seem to
mount higher, and as we proceed southwards they descend. {107}
Again, if we proceed from two different points considerably to the
east and west of each other, and travel directly northwards from
each, as from the south of Spain to the north of Scotland, and from
Greece to Scandinavia, these two north and south lines will be much
nearer to each other in their northern than in their southern parts.
These and similar facts, as soon as they are clearly estimated and
connected in the mind, are _seen to be consistent_ with a convex
surface of the earth, and with no other: and this notion is further
confirmed by observing that the boundary of the earth's shadow upon
the moon is always circular; it being supposed to be already
established that the moon receives her light from the sun, and that
lunar eclipses are caused by the interposition of the earth. As for
the assertion of the (relative) diurnal revolution of the starry
sphere, it is merely putting the visible phenomena in an exact
geometrical form: and thus we establish and verify the doctrine of
the revolution of the sphere of the heavens about the globe of the
earth, by contemplating it so as to see that it does really and
exactly include the particular facts from which it is collected.

We may, in like manner, illustrate this mode of verification by any
of the other steps of the same Table. Thus if we take the great
Induction of Copernicus, the heliocentric scheme of the solar
system, we find it in the Table exhibited as including and
explaining, _first_, the diurnal revolution just spoken of;
_second_, the motions of the moon among the fixed stars; _third_,
the motions of the planets with reference to the fixed stars and the
sun; _fourth_, the motion of the sun in the ecliptic. And the scheme
being clearly conceived, we _see_ that all the particular facts
_are_ faithfully represented by it; and this agreement, along with
the simplicity of the scheme, in which respect it is so far superior
to any other conception of the solar system, persuade us that it is
really the plan of nature.

In exactly the same way, if we attend to any of the several
remarkable discoveries of Newton, which form the principal steps in
the latter part of the Table, as for instance, the proposition that
the sun attracts all {108} the planets with a force which varies
inversely as the square of the distance, we find it proved by its
including three other propositions previously established;--_first_,
that the sun's mean force on different planets follows the specified
variation (which is proved from Kepler's third law); _second_, that
the force by which each planet is acted upon in different parts of
its orbit tends to the sun (which is proved by the equable
description of areas); _third_, that this force in different parts
of the same orbit is also inversely as the square of the distance
(which is proved from the elliptical form of the orbit). And the
Newtonian generalization, when its consequences are mathematically
traced, is _seen_ to agree with each of these particular
propositions, and thus is fully established.

12. But when we say that the more general proposition _includes_ the
several more particular ones, we must recollect what has before been
said, that these particulars form the general truth, not by being
merely enumerated and added together, but by being seen _in a new
light_. No mere verbal recitation of the particulars can decide
whether the general proposition is true; a special act of thought is
requisite in order to determine how truly each is included in the
supposed induction. In this respect the Inductive Table is not like
a mere schedule of accounts, where the rightness of each part of the
reckoning is tested by mere addition of the particulars. On the
contrary, the Inductive truth is never the mere _sum_ of the facts.
It is made into something more by the introduction of a new mental
element; and the mind, in order to be able to supply this element,
must have peculiar endowments and discipline. Thus looking back at
the instances noticed in the last article, how are we to see that a
convex surface of the earth is necessarily implied by the
convergence of meridians towards the north, or by the visible
descent of the north pole of the heavens as we travel south?
Manifestly the student, in order to see this, must have clear
conceptions of the relations of space, either naturally inherent in
his mind, or established there by geometrical cultivation,--by {109}
studying the properties of circles and spheres. When he is so
prepared, he will feel the force of the expressions we have used,
that the facts just mentioned are _seen to be consistent_ with a
globular form of the earth; but without such aptitude he will not
see this consistency: and if this be so, the mere assertion of it in
words will not avail him in satisfying himself of the truth of the
proposition.

In like manner, in order to perceive the force of the Copernican
induction, the student must have his mind so disciplined by
geometrical studies, or otherwise, that he sees clearly how absolute
motion and relative motion would alike produce apparent motion. He
must have learnt to cast away all prejudices arising from the
seeming fixity of the earth; and then he will see that there is
nothing which stands in the way of the induction, while there is
much which is on its side. And in the same manner the Newtonian
induction of the law of the sun's force from the elliptical form of
the orbit, will be evidently satisfactory to him only who has such
an insight into Mechanics as to see that a curvilinear path must
arise from a constantly deflecting force; and who is able to follow
the steps of geometrical reasoning by which, from the properties of
the ellipse, Newton proves this deflection to be in the proportion
in which he asserts the force to be. And thus in all cases the
inductive truth must indeed be verified by comparing it with the
particular facts; but then this comparison is possible for him only
whose mind is properly disciplined and prepared in the use of those
conceptions, which, in addition to the facts, the act of induction
requires.

13. In the Tables some indication is given, at several of the steps,
of the act which the mind must thus perform, besides the mere
conjunction of facts, in order to attain to the inductive truth.
Thus in the cases of the Newtonian inductions just spoken of, the
inferences are stated to be made 'By Mechanics;' and in the case of
the Copernican induction, it is said that, 'By the nature of motion,
the apparent motion is the same, whether the heavens or the earth
have a {110} diurnal motion; and the latter is more simple.' But
these verbal statements are to be understood as mere hints[22\2]:
they cannot supersede the necessity of the student's contemplating
for himself the mechanical principles and the nature of motion thus
referred to.

[Note 22\2: In the Inductive Tables they are marked by an
asterisk.]

14. In the common or Syllogistic Logic, a certain _Formula_ of
language is used in stating the reasoning, and is useful in enabling
us more readily to apply the Criterion of Form to alleged
demonstrations. This formula is the usual Syllogism; with its
members, Major Premiss, Minor Premiss, and Conclusion. It may
naturally be asked whether in Inductive Logic there is any such
Formula? whether there is any standard form of words in which we may
most properly express the inference of a general truth from
particular facts?

At first it might be supposed that the formula of Inductive Logic
need only be of this kind: 'These particulars, and all known
particulars of the same kind, are exactly included in the following
general proposition.' But a moment's reflection on what has just
been said will show us that this is not sufficient: for the
particulars are not merely _included_ in the general proposition. It
is not enough that they appertain to it by enumeration. It is, for
instance, no adequate example of Induction to say, 'Mercury
describes an elliptical path, so does Venus, so do the Earth, Mars,
Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus; therefore all the Planets describe
elliptical paths.' This is, as we have seen, the mode of stating the
_evidence_ when the proposition is once suggested; but the Inductive
step consists in the _suggestion_ of a conception not before
apparent. When Kepler, after trying to connect the observed places
of the planet Mars in many other ways, found at last that the
conception of an _ellipse_ would include them all, he obtained a
truth by induction: for this conclusion was not obviously included
in the phenomena, and had not been applied to these {111} facts
previously. Thus in our Formula, besides stating that the
particulars are included in the general proposition, we must also
imply that the generality is constituted by a new Conception,--new
at least in its application.

Hence our Inductive Formula might be something like the following:
'These particulars, and all known particulars of the same kind, are
exactly expressed by adopting the Conceptions and Statement of the
following Proposition.' It is of course requisite that the
Conceptions should be perfectly clear, and should precisely embrace
the facts, according to the explanation we have already given of
those conditions.

15. It may happen, as we have already stated, that the Explication
of a Conception, by which it acquires its due distinctness, leads to
a Definition, which Definition may be taken as the summary and total
result of the intellectual efforts to which this distinctness is
due. In such cases, the Formula of Induction may be modified
according to this condition; and we may state the inference by
saying, after an enumeration and analysis of the appropriate facts,
'These facts are completely and distinctly expressed by adopting the
following Definition and Proposition.'

This Formula has been adopted in stating the Inductive Propositions
which constitute the basis of the science of Mechanics, in a work
intitled _The Mechanical Euclid_. The fundamental truths of the
subject are expressed in _Inductive Pairs_ of Assertions, consisting
each of a Definition and a Proposition, such as the following:

DEF.--A _Uniform Force_ is that which acting in the direction of the
body's motion, adds or subtracts equal velocities in equal times.

PROP.--Gravity is a Uniform Force.

Again,

DEF.--Two _Motions_ are _compounded_ when each produces its separate
effect in a direction parallel to itself.

PROP.--When any Force acts upon a body in motion, the motion which
the Force would produce in the {112} body at rest is compounded with
the previous motion of the body.

And in like manner in other cases.

In these cases the proposition is, of course, established, and the
definition realized, by an enumeration of the facts. And in the case
of inferences made in such a form, the Definition of the Conception
and the Assertion of the Truth are both requisite and are
correlative to one another. Each of the two steps contains the
verification and justification of the other. The Proposition derives
its meaning from the Definition; the Definition derives its reality
from the Proposition. If they are separated, the Definition is
arbitrary or empty, the Proposition vague or ambiguous.

16. But it must be observed that neither of the preceding Formulæ
expresses the full cogency of the inductive proof. They declare only
that the results can be clearly explained and rigorously deduced by
the employment of a certain Definition and a certain Proposition.
But in order to make the conclusion demonstrative, which in perfect
examples of Induction it is, we ought to be able to declare that the
results can be clearly explained and rigorously declared _only_ by
the Definition and Proposition which we adopt. And in reality, the
conviction of the sound inductive reasoner does reach to this point.
The Mathematician asserts the Laws of Motion, seeing clearly that
they (or laws equivalent to them) afford the only means of clearly
expressing and deducing the actual facts. But this conviction, that
the inductive inference is not only consistent with the facts, but
necessary, finds its place in the mind gradually, as the
contemplation of the consequences of the proposition, and the
various relations of the facts, becomes steady and familiar. It is
scarcely possible for the student at once to satisfy himself that
the inference is thus inevitable. And when he arrives at this
conviction, he sees also, in many cases at least, that there may be
other ways of expressing the substance of the truth established,
besides that special Proposition which he has under his notice.
{113}

We may, therefore, without impropriety, renounce the undertaking of
conveying in our formula this final conviction of the necessary
truth of our inference. We may leave it to be thought, without
insisting upon saying it, that in such cases what _can_ be true,
_is_ true. But if we wish to express the ultimate significance of
the Inductive Act of thought, we may take as our Formula for the
Colligation of Facts by Induction, this:--'The several Facts are
exactly expressed as one Fact if, _and only if_, we adopt the
Conception and the Assertion' of the inductive inference.

17. I have said that the mind must be properly disciplined in order
that it may see the necessary connexion between the facts and the
general proposition in which they are included. And the perception
of this connexion, though treated as _one step_ in our inductive
inference, may imply _many steps_ of demonstrative proof. The
connexion is this, that the particular case is included in the
general one, that is, may be _deduced_ from it: but this deduction
may often require many links of reasoning. Thus in the case of the
inference of the law of the force from the elliptical form of the
orbit by Newton, the proof that in the ellipse the deflection from
the tangent is inversely as the square of the distance from the
focus of the ellipse, is a ratiocination consisting of several
steps, and involving several properties of Conic Sections; these
properties being supposed to be previously established by a
geometrical system of demonstration on the special subject of the
Conic Sections. In this and similar cases the Induction involves
many steps of Deduction. And in such cases, although the Inductive
Step, the Invention of the Conception, is really the most important,
yet since, when once made, it occupies a familiar place in men's
minds; and since the Deductive Demonstration is of considerable
length and requires intellectual effort to follow it at every step;
men often admire the deductive part of the proposition, the
geometrical or algebraical demonstration, far more than that part in
which the philosophical merit really resides. {114}

18. Deductive reasoning is virtually a collection of syllogisms, as
has already been stated: and in such reasoning, the general
principles, the Definitions and Axioms, necessarily stand at the
_beginning_ of the demonstration. In an inductive inference, the
Definitions and Principles are the _final result_ of the reasoning,
the ultimate effect of the proof. Hence when an Inductive
Proposition is to be established by a proof involving several steps
of demonstrative reasoning, the enunciation of the Proposition will
contain, explicitly or implicitly, principles which the
demonstration proceeds upon as axioms, but which are really
inductive inferences. Thus in order to prove that the force which
retains a planet in an ellipse varies inversely as the square of the
distance, it is taken for granted that the Laws of Motion are true,
and that they apply to the planets. Yet the doctrine that this is
so, as well as the law of the force, were established only by this
and the like demonstrations. The doctrine which is the _hypothesis_
of the deductive reasoning, is the _inference_ of the inductive
process. The special facts which are the basis of the inductive
inference, are the conclusion of the train of deduction. And in this
manner the deduction establishes the induction. The principle which
we gather from the facts is true, because the facts can be derived
from it by rigorous demonstration. Induction moves upwards, and
deduction downwards, on the same stair.

But still there is a great difference in the character of their
movements. Deduction descends steadily and methodically, step by
step: Induction mounts by a leap which is out of the reach of
method. She bounds to the top of the stair at once; and then it is
the business of Deduction, by trying each step in order, to
establish the solidity of her companion's footing. Yet these must be
processes of the same mind. The Inductive Intellect makes an
assertion which is subsequently justified by demonstration; and it
shows its sagacity, its peculiar character, by enunciating the
proposition when as yet the demonstration does not {115} exist: but
then it shows that it _is_ sagacity, by also producing the
demonstration.

It has been said that inductive and deductive reasoning are contrary
in their scheme; that in Deduction we infer particular from general
truths; while in Induction we infer general from particular: that
Deduction consists of many steps, in each of which we apply known
general propositions in particular cases; while in Induction we have
a single step, in which we pass from many particular truths to one
general proposition. And this is truly said; but though contrary in
their motions, the two are the operation of the same mind travelling
over the same ground. Deduction is a necessary part of Induction.
Deduction justifies by calculation what Induction had happily
guessed. Induction recognizes the ore of truth by its weight;
Deduction confirms the recognition by chemical analysis. Every step
of Induction must be confirmed by rigorous deductive reasoning,
followed into such detail as the nature and complexity of the
relations (whether of quantity or any other) render requisite. If
not so justified by the supposed discoverer, it is _not_ Induction.

19. Such Tabular arrangements of propositions as we have constructed
may be considered as the _Criterion of Truth_ for the doctrines
which they include. They are the Criterion of Inductive Truth, in
the same sense in which Syllogistic Demonstration is the Criterion
of Necessary Truth,--of the certainty of conclusions, depending upon
evident First Principles. And that such Tables are really a
Criterion of the truth of the propositions which they contain, will
be plain by examining their structure. For if the connexion which
the inductive process assumes be ascertained to be in each case real
and true, the assertion of the general proposition merely collects
together ascertained truths; and in like manner each of those more
particular propositions is true, because it merely expresses
collectively more special facts: so that the most general theory is
only the assertion of a great body of facts, duly classified and
subordinated. When we {116} assert the truth of the Copernican
theory of the motions of the solar system, or of the Newtonian
theory of the forces by which they are caused, we merely assert the
groups of propositions which, in the Table of Astronomical
Induction, are included in these doctrines; and ultimately, we may
consider ourselves as merely asserting at once so many Facts, and
therefore, of course, expressing an indisputable truth.

20. At any one of these steps of Induction in the Table, the
inductive proposition is a _Theory_ with regard to the Facts which
it includes, while it is to be looked upon as a _Fact_ with respect
to the higher generalizations in which it is included. In any other
sense, as was formerly shown, the opposition of _Fact_ and _Theory_
is untenable, and leads to endless perplexity and debate. Is it a
Fact or a Theory that the planet Mars revolves in an Ellipse about
the Sun? To Kepler, employed in endeavouring to combine the separate
observations by the Conception of an Ellipse, it is a Theory; to
Newton, engaged in inferring the law of force from a knowledge of
the elliptical motion, it is a Fact. There are, as we have already
seen, no special attributes of Theory and Fact which distinguish
them from one another. Facts are phenomena apprehended by the aid of
conceptions and mental acts, as Theories also are. We commonly call
our observations _Facts_, when we apply, without effort or
consciousness, conceptions perfectly familiar to us: while we speak
of Theories, when we have previously contemplated the Facts and the
connecting Conception separately, and have made the connexion by a
conscious mental act. The real difference is a difference of
relation; as the same proposition in a demonstration is the
_premiss_ of one syllogism and the _conclusion_ in another;--as the
same person is a father and a son. Propositions are Facts and
Theories, according as they stand above or below the Inductive
Brackets of our Tables.

21. To obviate mistakes I may remark that the terms _higher_ and
_lower_, when used of generalizations, are unavoidably represented
by their opposites in our Inductive Tables. The highest
generalization is that {117} which includes all others; and this
stands the lowest on our page, because, reading downwards, that is
the place which we last reach.

There is a distinction of the knowledge acquired by Scientific
Induction into two kinds, which is so important that we shall
consider it in the succeeding chapter.



{{118}}
