The Project Gutenberg eBook of Novum organon renovatum, by William
Whewell

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: Novum organon renovatum

Author: William Whewell

Release Date: January 10, 2023 [eBook #69764]

Language: English

Produced by: Ed Brandon from materials kindly provided by the Internet
             Archive, and with help gratefully received from various
             voluntary sources.



NOVUM ORGANON
RENOVATUM.

BY WILLIAM WHEWELL, D.D.,

MASTER OF TRINITY COLLEGE, CAMBRIDGE, AND
CORRESPONDING MEMBER OF THE INSTITUTE OF FRANCE.

BEING THE SECOND PART OF THE PHILOSOPHY
OF THE INDUCTIVE SCIENCES.

_THE THIRD EDITION, WITH LARGE ADDITIONS._

ΛΑΜΠΑΔIΑ ΕΧΟΝΤΕΣ ΔIΑΔΩΣΟΥΣIΝ ΑΛΛΗΛΟIΣ

LONDON:
JOHN W. PARKER AND SON, WEST STRAND.
1858.




IT is to our immortal countryman; Bacon, that we owe the broad
announcement of this grand and fertile principle; and the
developement of the idea, that the whole of natural philosophy
consists entirely of a series of inductive generalizations,
commencing with the most circumstantially stated particulars, and
carried up to universal laws, or axioms, which comprehend in their
statements every subordinate degree of generality; and of a
corresponding series of inverted reasoning from generals to
particulars, by which these axioms are traced back into their
remotest consequences, and all particular propositions deduced from
them; as well those by whose immediate considerations we rose to
their discovery, as those of which we had no previous knowledge.

HERSCHEL, _Discourse on Natural Philosophy_, Art. 96.



CAMBRIDGE: PRINTED BY C. J. CLAY, M.A. AT THE UNIVERSITY PRESS.



{{iii}}
PREFACE.


EVEN if Bacon's _Novum Organon_ had possessed the character to which
it aspired as completely as was possible in its own day, it would at
present need renovation: and even if no such book had ever been
written, it would be a worthy undertaking to determine the
machinery, intellectual, social and material, by which human
knowledge can best be augmented. Bacon could only divine how
sciences might be constructed; we can trace, in their history, how
their construction has taken place. However sagacious were his
conjectures, the facts which have really occurred must give
additional instruction: however large were his anticipations, the
actual progress of science since his time has illustrated them in
all their extent. And as to the structure and operation of the
_Organ_ by which truth is to be collected from nature,--that is, the
Methods by which science is to be promoted--we know that, though
Bacon's general maxims are sagacious and animating, his particular
precepts failed in his hands, and are now practically useless. This,
perhaps, was not wonderful, seeing that they were, as I have said,
mainly derived from conjectures respecting knowledge and the
progress of knowledge; but at {iv} the present day, when, in several
provinces of knowledge, we have a large actual progress of solid
truth to look back upon, we may make the like attempt with the
prospect of better success, at least on that ground. It may be a
task, not hopeless, to extract from the past progress of science the
elements of an effectual and substantial method of Scientific
Discovery. The advances which have, during the last three centuries,
been made in the physical sciences;--in Astronomy, in Physics, in
Chemistry, in Natural History, in Physiology;--these are allowed by
all to be real, to be great, to be striking; may it not be that the
steps of progress in these different cases have in them something
alike? May it not be that in each advancing movement of such
knowledge there is some common principle, some common process? May
it not be that discoveries are made by an _Organ_ which has
something uniform in its working? If we can shew that this is so, we
shall have the _New Organ_, which Bacon aspired to construct,
_renovated_ according to our advanced intellectual position and
office.

It was with the view of opening the way to such an attempt that I
undertook that survey of the past progress of physical knowledge, of
which I have given the results in the _History of the Sciences_, and
the _History of Scientific Ideas_[1\P]; the former containing the
history of the sciences, so far as it depends on {v} observed
_Facts_; the latter containing the history of those _Ideas_ by which
such Facts are bound into Theories.

[Note 1\P: Published in two former editions as part of the
_Philosophy of the Inductive Sciences_ (b. i--x.).]

It can hardly happen that a work which treats of Methods of
Scientific Discovery, shall not seem to fail in the positive results
which it offers. For an Art of Discovery is not possible. At each
step of the investigation are needed Invention, Sagacity,
Genius,--elements which no art can give. We may hope in vain, as
Bacon hoped, for an Organ which shall enable all men to construct
Scientific Truths, as a pair of compasses enables all men to
construct exact circles[2\P]. This cannot be. The practical results
of the Philosophy of Science must be rather classification and
analysis of what has been done, than precept and method for future
doing. Yet I think that the methods of discovery which I have to
recommend, though gathered from a wider survey of scientific
history, both as to subjects and as to time, than (so far as I am
aware) has been elsewhere attempted, are quite as definite and
practical as any others which have been proposed; with the great
additional advantage of being the methods by which all great
discoveries in science have really been made. This may be said, for
instance, of _the Method of Gradation_ and _the Method of Natural
Classification_, spoken of b. iii. c. viii; and in a narrower sense,
of _the Method of Curves_, _the Method of_ {vi} _Means_, _the Method
of Least Squares_ and _the Method of Residues_, spoken of in chap.
vii. of the same Book. Also the Remarks on the _Use of Hypotheses_
and on the _Tests of Hypotheses_ (b. ii. c. v.) point out features
which mark the usual course of discovery.

[Note 2\P: _Nov. Org._ lib. i. aph. 61.]

But one of the principal lessons resulting from our views is
undoubtedly this:--that different sciences may be expected to
advance by different modes of procedure, according to their present
condition; and that in many of these sciences, an Induction
performed by any of the methods which have just been referred to is
not the next step which we may expect to see made. Several of the
sciences may not be in a condition which fits them for such a
_Colligation of Facts_; (to use the phraseology to which the
succeeding analysis has led me). The Facts may, at the present time,
require to be more fully observed, or the Idea by which they are to
be colligated may require to be more fully unfolded.

But in this point also, our speculations are far from being barren
of practical results. The examination to which we have subjected
each science, gives us the means of discerning whether what is
needed for the further progress of the science, has its place in the
Observations, or in the Ideas, or in the union of the two. If
observations be wanted, the Methods of Observation, given in b. iii.
c. ii. may be referred to. If those who are to make the next
discoveries need, for that purpose, a developement of their Ideas,
the modes in which such a developement has usually taken {vii} place
are treated of in Chapters iii. and iv. of that Book.

No one who has well studied the history of science can fail to see
how important a part of that history is the explication, or as I
might call it, the _clarification_ of men's Ideas. This, the
metaphysical aspect of each of the physical sciences, is very far
from being, as some have tried to teach, an aspect which it passes
through at an early period of progress, and previously to the stage
of positive knowledge. On the contrary, the metaphysical movement is
a necessary part of the inductive movement. This, which is evidently
so by the nature of the case, was proved by a copious collection of
historical evidences, in the _History of Scientific Ideas_. The ten
Books of that History contain an account of the principal
philosophical controversies which have taken place in all the
physical sciences, from Mathematics to Physiology. These
controversies, which must be called _metaphysical_ if anything be so
called, have been conducted by the greatest discoverers in each
science, and have been an essential part of the discoveries made.
Physical discoverers have differed from barren speculators, not by
having _no_ metaphysics in their heads, but by having _good_
metaphysics in their heads while their adversaries had bad; and by
binding their metaphysics to their physics, instead of keeping the
two asunder. I trust that the _History of Scientific Ideas_ is of
some value, even as a record of a number of remarkable
controversies; but I conceive that it also contains an indisputable
proof that there {viii} is, in progressive science, a metaphysical
as well as a physical element;--ideas as well as facts;--thoughts as
well as things. Metaphysics is the process of ascertaining that
thought is consistent with itself: and if it be not so, our
supposed knowledge is not knowledge.

In Chapter vi. of the Second Book, I have spoken of _the Logic of
Induction_. Several writers[3\P] have quoted very emphatically my
assertion that the Logic of Induction does not exist in previous
writers: using it as an introduction to Logical Schemes of their
own. They seem to have overlooked the fact that at the same time
that I noted the deficiency, I offered a scheme which I think fitted
to supply this want. And I am obliged to say that I do not regard
the schemes proposed by any of those gentlemen as at all
satisfactory for the purpose. But I must defer to a future occasion
any criticism of authors who have written on the subjects here
treated. A critical notice of such authors formed the Twelfth Book
of the former edition of the _Philosophy of the Sciences_. I have
there examined the opinions concerning the Nature of Real Knowledge
and the mode of acquiring it, which have been promulgated in all
ages, from Plato and Aristotle, to Roger Bacon, to Francis Bacon, to
Newton, to Herschel. Such a survey, with the additions which I
should now have to make to it, may hereafter be put forth as a
separate book: but I {ix} have endeavoured to confine the present
volume to such positive teaching regarding Knowledge and Science as
results from the investigations pursued in the other works of this
series. But with regard to this matter, of the _Logic of Induction_,
I may venture to say, that we shall not find anything deserving the
name explained in the common writers on Logic, or exhibited under
the ordinary Logical Forms. _That_ in previous writers which comes
the nearest to the notice of such a Logic as the history of science
has suggested and verified, is the striking declaration of Bacon in
two of his Aphorisms (b. i. aph. civ. cv.).

[Note 3\P: Apelt _Die Theorie der Induction_: Gratry _Logique_.]

"There will be good hopes for the Sciences then, and not till then,
when by a true SCALE or Ladder, and by successive steps, following
continuously without gaps or breaks, men shall ascend from
particulars to the narrower Propositions, from those to intermediate
ones, rising in order one above another, and at last to the most
general.

"But in establishing such propositions, we must devise some other
FORM OF INDUCTION than has hitherto been in use; and this must be
one which serves not only to prove and discover _Principles_, (as very
general Propositions are called,) but also the narrower and the
intermediate, and in short, all true Propositions."

And he elsewhere speaks of successive FLOORS of Induction.

All the truths of an extensive science form a Series of such Floors,
connected by such Scales or Ladders; and a part of the Logic of
Induction consists, as I {x} conceive, in the construction of a
_Scheme_ of such Floors. Converging from a wide basis of various
classes of particulars, at last to one or a few general truths,
these schemes necessarily take the shape of a Pyramid. I have
constructed such Pyramids for Astronomy and for Optics[4\P]; and the
illustrious Von Humboldt in speaking of the former subject, does me
the honour to say that my attempt in that department is perfectly
successful[5\P]. The Logic of Induction contains other portions,
which may be seen in the following work, b. ii. c. vi.

[Note 4\P: See the Tables at the end of book ii.]

[Note 5\P: _Cosmos_, vol. ii. n. 35.]

I have made large additions to the present edition, especially in
what regards the Application of Science, (b. iii. c. ix.) and the
Language of Science. The former subject I am aware that I have
treated very imperfectly. It would indeed, of itself, furnish
material for a large work; and would require an acquaintance with
practical arts and manufactures of the most exact and extensive
kind. But even a general observer may see how much more close the
union of Art with Science is now than it ever was before; and what
large and animating hopes this union inspires, both for the progress
of Art and of Science. On another subject also I might have dilated
to a great extent,--what I may call (as I have just now called it)
the _social_ machinery for the advancement of science. There can be
no doubt that at certain stages of sciences, {xi} Societies and
Associations may do much to promote their further progress; by
combining their observations, comparing their views, contributing to
provide material means of observation and calculation, and dividing
the offices of observer and generalizer. We have had in Europe in
general, and especially in this country, very encouraging examples
of what may be done by such Associations. For the present I have
only ventured to propound one Aphorism on the subject, namely this;
(Aph. LV.) That it is worth considering whether a continued and
connected system of observation and calculation, like that of
Astronomy, might not be employed in improving our knowledge of other
subjects; as Tides, Currents, Winds, Clouds, Rain, Terrestrial
Magnetism, Aurora Borealis, composition of crystals, and the like.
In saying this, I have mentioned those subjects which are, as
appears to me, most likely to profit by continued and connected
observations.

I have thrown the substance of my results into Aphorisms, as Bacon
had done in his _Novum Organum_. This I have done, not in the way of
delivering dogmatic assertions or oracular sentences; for the
Aphorisms are all supported by reasoning, and were, in fact, written
after the reasoning, and extracted from it. I have adopted this mode
of gathering results into compact sentences, because it seems to
convey lessons with additional clearness and emphasis.

I have only to repeat what I have already said; that this task of
adapting the _Novum Organum_ to the {xii} present state of Physical
Science, and of constructing a _Newer Organ_ which may answer the
purposes at which Bacon aimed, seems to belong to the present
generation; and being here founded upon a survey of the past history
and present condition of the Physical Sciences, will I hope, not be
deemed presumptuous.

  TRINITY LODGE,

    1 _November_, 1858.



{{xiii}}
TABLE OF CONTENTS.


                                                                PAGE
PREFACE                                                        **iii



BOOK I.
APHORISMS CONCERNING IDEAS.

APHORISMS I.--XVIII.    Ideas in general                       5--7
        XIX.--XLIV.     Ideas in the Pure Sciences             8--12
        XLV.--LV.       Ideas in the Mechanical Sciences      13--15
        LVI.--LXXI.     Ideas in the Secondary Mechanical
                          Sciences.                           15--18
      LXXII.--**LXXIII. Ideas in the Mechanico-chemical
                          Sciences                                18
      LXXIV.--LXXIX.    Ideas in Chemistry                        18
       LXXX.--LXXXI.    Ideas in Morphology                       19
   **LXXXII.--C.        Ideas in Classificatory Science       20--23
         CI.--CVI.      Ideas in Biology                      23--24
       CVII.--CXVII.    Ideas in Palæontology                 24--26

