CHAPTER V

THE PRESIDENT SAYS "LOOK!"


Our American President, if one merely reads what the Constitution says
about him, is a rather weak-looking character.

The founders of the country did not intend him to be anybody in
particular--if it could be helped. They were discouraged about allowing
governments to be efficient. Not very much that was constructive to do
was handed over to him. And the most important power they thought it
would do for him to have was the veto or power to say "No."

Possibly if our fathers had believed in liberty more they would have
allowed more people to have some; or if they had believed in democracy
more, or trusted the people more, they would have thought it would do to
let them have leaders, but they had just got away. They felt timid about
human nature and decided that the less constructive the government was
and the less chance the government had to be concrete, to interpret a
people, to make opportunities and turn out events, the better.

Looked at at first sight no more elaborate, impenetrable, water-tight
arrangement for keeping a government from letting in an idea or ever
having one of its own or ever doing anything for anybody, could have
been conceived than the Constitution of the United States, as the
average President interprets it.

Each branch of the government is arranged carefully to keep any other
branch from doing anything, and then the people, every four years, look
the whole country over for some new man they think will probably leave
them alone more than anybody--and put him in for President.

Looking at it narrowly and by itself, all that a President selected like
this could ever expect in America to put in his time on, would seem to
be--being the country's most importantly helpless man--the man who has
been given the honour of being a somewhat more prominent failure in
America than any one else would be allowed to be.

He stops people for four years. Other people stop him for four years.
Then with a long happy sigh, at the end of his term, he slips back into
real life and begins to do things.

This has been the more or less sedately disguised career of the typical
American President. Merely reading the Constitution or the lives of the
Presidents, without looking at what has been happening to the habits of
the people in the last few years, we might all be asking to-day, "What
is there that is really constructive that President Wilson can do?" What
is there that is going to prevent him, with all that moral earnestness
dammed up in him, that sense of duty, that Presbyterian sense of other
people's duties--what is there that is going to prevent him, with his
school-book habits, his ideals, his volumes of American history, from
being a teachery or preachery person--a kind of Schoolmaster or Official
Clergyman to Business?

News.

The one really important and imperative thing to the people of this
country to-day is News. In spite of newspapers, authors, College
presidents, Bank presidents, Socialist agitators, Bill Heywoods, and
Trusts, the people are bound to get this news, and any man who is so
placed by his prominence that he can scoop up the news of a country,
hammer its news together into events the papers will report, express
news in the laws, build news into men who can make laws and unmake laws,
any man who is so placed that directly or indirectly he takes news,
forces it in by hydraulic pressure where people see it doing things, who
takes news and crowds it into courts, crowds news into lawyers and into
legislatures, pries some of it even into newspapers, can have, the
ordinary American says to-day, as much leeway in this government as he
likes.

The ordinary American has never been able to understand the objection
important people have--that nearly everybody has (except ordinary
people) to news--especially editors and publishers.

It is an old story. Every one must have noticed it. One set of people in
this world, always from the beginning, trying to climb up on the
housetops to tell news, and another set of people hurrying up always and
saying, "Hush, Hush!" Some days it seems, when I read the papers, that I
hear half the world saying under its breath, a vast, stentorian, "Shoo!
shoo! SHSH! SHSH!"

Then I realize I live in an editor's world. I am expected to be in the
world that editors have decided on the whole to let me be in.

Of course I did not know what to do at first when this came over me.

I naturally began to try to think of some way of cutting across lots, of
climbing up to News.

I looked at all the neat little park paths, with all those artistic
curves of truth on them the editors have laid out for me and for all of
us. Then I looked at the world and asked myself, "Who are the men in
this world, if any, who are able to walk on the Grass, who cut across
the little park paths when they like?"

And as fate would have it (it was during the Roosevelt administration),
the first two men I came on who seemed to be stamping about in the
newspapers quite a little as they liked were the Prime Minister of
England and the President of the United States.

Just how much governing can a President do?

How many columns a day is he good for, how many acres of attention every
morning in the papers of the country--all these white fields of
attention, these acres of other people's thoughts, can he cover?

How many sticks a day can he make compositors set up of what he thinks?

How many square miles of the people's thoughts can he spread out at
breakfast tables, lift up in a thousand thousand trolleys before their
faces?

I have seen the white fields of attention filled with the footprints of
his thoughts, of his will, of his desires!

I have seen that the President is the Editor of that vast, anonymous,
silent newspaper, written all the night, written all the day, and softly
published across a country--the newspaper of people's thoughts.

I have seen the vision of the forests he has cast down, ground into
headlines, into editorials, into news. Mountains and hills are laid bare
to say what he thinks. Thousands of presses throb softly and the white
reels of wood pulp fly into speech. Thousands of miles of paper wet with
the thoughts of a people roll dimly under ground in the night.

The President is saying Look! in the night!

The newsboys hasten out in the dawn. They cry in the streets!




