CHAPTER XII

NEWS-BOOKS II


A nation's religion is its shrewdness about its ideals, its genius for
stating its ideals or news about itself, in the terms of its everyday
life.

A nation's literature is its power of so stating its ideals that we will
not need to be shrewd for them--its power of expressing its ideals in
words, of tracing out ideals on white paper, so that ideals shall
enthrall the people, so that ideals shall be contagious, shall breathe
and be breathed into us, so that ideals shall be caught up in the voices
of men and sung in the streets.

Ideals, intangible, electric, implacable irresistible, all-enfolding
ideals, shall hold and grip a continent the way a climate grips a
continent, like sunshine around a helpless thing, in the hollow of its
hand, and possess the hearts of the people.

What our government needs now is a National band in Washington.

America is a Tune.

America is not a formula. America is not statistics, even graphic
statistics. A great nation cannot be made, cannot be discovered, and
then be laid coldly together like a census. America is a Tune. It must
be sung together.

The next thing statesmen are going to learn in this country is that from
a practical point of view in making a great nation only our Tune in
America and only our singing our Tune can save us. A great nation can be
made out of the truth about us. The truth may be--must be
probably,--plain. But the truth must sing.

It will not be the government that first gets the truth that will govern
us. The government that gets the truth big enough to sing first, and
sings it, will be the government that will govern us. The political
party in this country that will first be practical with the people, and
that will first get what it wants, will be the political party that
first takes Literature seriously. Our first great practical government
is going to see how a great book, searching the heart of a nation,
expressing and singing the men in it, governs a people. Being a
President in a day like this, if it does not consist in being a poet,
consists in being the kind of President who can be, at least, in
partnership with a poet.

It is not every President who can be his own David, who can rule with
one hand and write psalms and chants for his people with the other.

The call is out, the people have put in their order to the authors of
America, to the boys in the colleges, and to the young women in the
great schools--Our President wants a book.

Before much time has passed, he is going to have one.

Being a President in this country has never been expressed in a book.

The President is going to have a book that expresses him to the people
and that says what he is trying to do. He will live confidentially with
the book. It shall be in his times of trial and loneliness like a great
people coming to him softly. He shall feel with such a book, be it day
or night, the nation by him, by his desk, by his bedside, by his
silence, by his questioning, standing by, and lifting.

In the book the people shall sing to the President. He shall be kept
reminded that we are there. He shall feel daily what America is like.
America shall be focussed into melody. We shall have a literature once
more and the singers, as in Greece, as in all happy lands and in all
great ages, shall go singing through the streets.

There is no singing for a President now. All a President can do when he
is inaugurated, when he begins now, is to kiss helplessly some singing
four thousand years old in a Bible by another nation.

When David sang to his people, he sang the news, the latest news, the
news of what was happening to people about him from week to week.

Why is no one singing 1913, our own American 1913?

Why is no one stuttering out our Bible--one the President could have to
refer to, our own Bible in our own tongue from morning to morning in the
symbols that breathe to us out of the sounds in the street, out of the
air, out of the fresh, bright American sky, and out of the new ground
beneath our feet?

       *       *       *       *       *

It is easy for a President to pile up three columns a morning of news
about himself to us, show each man his face in the morning, but what is
there he can do with twenty thousand newspapers at his breakfast table,
to pick out the real news about us? Who shall paint the portrait of a
people?

One could go about in the White House and study the portraits of the
presidents, but where is the portrait of the people? The portrait of the
people comes in little bits to the president like a puzzle picture. Each
man brings in his little crooked piece, jig-sawed out from Iowa, South
Dakota, Oklahoma or Aroostook County, Maine. This picture or vision of a
nation, this wilderness of pieces, can be seen every day when one goes
in, lying in heaps on the floor of the White House.

A literature is the expression on the face of a nation. A literature is
the eyes of a great people looking at one.

It seems to be as we look, looking out of the past and faraway into the
future.

A newspaper can set a nation's focus for a morning, adjusting it one way
or the other. A President can set the focus for four years. But only a
book can set the focus for a nation's next hundred years so that it can
act intelligently and steadfastly on its main line from week to week and
morning to morning. Only a book can make a vast, inspiring, steadfast,
stage-setting for a nation. Only a book, strong, slow, reflective, alone
with each man, and before all men, can set in vast still array the
perspective, the vision of the people, can give that magnificent
self-consciousness which alone makes a great nation, or a mighty man. At
last humble, imperious, exalted, it shall see Itself, its vision of its
daily life lying out before it, threading its way to God!




