CHAPTER I

SPEAKING AS ONE OF THE CROWD


It is a little awkward to say what I am going to say now.

Probably it will be still more awkward afterward.

But I find as I go up and down the world and look in the faces of the
crowds in it, that it is true, and I can only tell as it is.

_I want to be good._

And I do not want to go up on a mountain to do it, or to slink off and
live all alone on an island in the sea.

I go a step further.

I believe that the crowds want to be good.

But I cannot prove that people want to be good in crowds, and so for the
sake of the argument, and to make the case as simple as possible, I am
going to give up speaking for crowds, and speak for myself as one member
of the crowd and for Lim. Lim and I (and Lim is a business man and not a
mere author) have had long talks in which we have confided to each other
what we think this world, in spite of appearances, is really like, and
we have come to a kind of provisional program and to a definite
agreement on our two main points.

1. We want to be good.

2. We want other people to be good, partly as a matter of convenience
for us, partly for morally aesthetic reasons, and partly because we want
to be in a kind of world where what is good in us works.

The next point in our confession follows from this. It is an awkward and
exposed thing to say out loud to people in general, but

3. Lim and I want to make over the earth.

4. Sitting down grimly by ourselves, all alone, and believing in a world
hard, with our eyes shut, does not interest us. It is this particular
planet just as it is that interests us, in its present hopeful,
squirming state.

It does not seem to us to the point just now to conceive some brand new,
clean, slick planet up in space, with crowds of perfect and convenient
people on it, and then expect to lay it down in the night like a great,
soft, beautiful dew or ideal on this one. We want to take this heavy,
inconvenient, cumbersome, real planet that we have, and see what can be
done with it, and by the people on it, what can be done by these same
people, whose signs one goes by down the street, with Smith & Smith,
Gowns, with Clapp & Clapp, Butchers, with W.H. Riley & Co., Plumbers and
Gas Fitters, and with things that real people are really doing.

The things that real people are really doing, when one thinks of it, are
Soap, Tooth-brushes, Subsoil Pipes, Wall Papers, Razors, Mattresses,
Suspenders, Tiles, Shoes, Pots, and Kettles. Of course the first thing
that happened to us, to Lim and to me (as any one might guess, in a
little quiet job like making over the earth), was that we found we had
to begin with ourselves.

We did.

We are obliged to admit that, as a matter of fact, we began, owing to
circumstances, in a kind of rudimentary way with the idea of getting
people to take up goodness by talking about it.

But we are reformed preachers now. We seldom backslide into talking to
people about goodness.

We have made up our minds to lie low and keep still and show them some.

Of course one ought to have some of one's own to show. But the trouble
always is, if it is really good, one is sure not to know it, or at least
one does not know which it is. The best we can do with goodness, some of
us, if we want it to show more quickly or to hurry people along in
goodness more, is to show them other people's.

I sometimes think that if everybody in the world could know my plumber
or pay a bill to him, the world would soon begin slowly but surely to be
a very different place.

My plumber is a genius.




CHAPTER II

IS IT WRONG FOR GOOD PEOPLE TO BE EFFICIENT?


Perhaps it will seem a pity to spoil a book--one that might have been
really rather interesting--by putting the word "goodness" down flatly in
this way in the middle of it.

And in a book which deals with crowds, too, and with business.

I would not yield first place to any one in being tired of the word. I
think, for one, that unless there is something we can do to it, and
something we can do to it now, it had better be dropped.

But I have sometimes discovered when I had thought I was tired of a
word, that what I was really tired of was somebody who was using it.

I do not mind it when my plumber uses it. I have heard him use it (and
swearing softly, I regret to say) when it affected me like a Hymn Tune.

And there is Non, too.

I first made Non's acquaintance as our train pulled out of New York, and
we found ourselves going down together on Friday afternoon to spend
Sunday with M---- in North Carolina. The first thing he said was, when
we were seated in the Pullman comfortably watching that big, still world
under glass roll by outside, that he had broken an engagement with his
wife to come. She was giving a Tea, he said, that afternoon, and he had
faithfully promised to be there. But a weekend in North Carolina
appealed to him, and afternoon tea--well, he explained to me, crossing
his legs and beaming at me all over as if he were a whole genial,
successful afternoon tea all by himself--afternoon tea did not appeal to
him.

He thought probably he was a Non-Gregarious Person.

As he was the gusto of our little party and fairly reeked with
sociability, and was in a kind of orgy of gregariousness every minute
all the way to Wilmington (even when he was asleep we heard from him),
we called him the Non-Gregarious Person, and every time he piled on one
more story, we reminded him how non-gregarious he was. We called him
Non-Gregarious all the way after that--Non for short.

This is the way I became acquainted with Non. It has been Non ever
since.

       *       *       *       *       *

I found in the course of the next three days that when Non was not being
the life of the party or the party did not need any more life for a
while, and we had gone off by ourselves, he became, like most people who
let themselves go, a very serious person. When he talked about his
business, he was even religious. Not that he had any particular
vocabulary for being religious, but there was something about him when
he spoke of business--his own business--that almost startled me at first.
He always seemed to be regarding his business when he spoke of it as
being, for all practical purposes, a kind of little religion by itself.

Now Non is a builder or contractor.

       *       *       *       *       *

For many years now the best way to make a pessimist or a confirmed
infidel out of anybody has been to get him to build a house. No better
arrangement for not believing in more people, and for not believing in
more kinds of people at once and for life, has ever been invented
probably than building a house. No man has been educated, or has been
really tested in this world, until he has built a house. I submit this
proposition to anybody who has tried it, or to any one who is going to
try it. There is not a single kind or type of man who sooner or later
will not build himself, and nearly everything that is the matter with
him, into your house. The house becomes a kind of miniature model (such
as they have in expositions) of what is the matter with people. You
enter the door, you walk inside and brood over them. Everything you come
upon, from the white cellar floor to the timbers you bump your head on
in the roof, reminds you of something or of rows of people and of what
is the matter with them. It is the new houses that are haunted now. Any
man who is sensitive to houses and to people and who would sit down in
his house when it is finished and look about in it seriously, and think
of all the people that have been built, in solid wood and stone, into
it, would get up softly and steal out of it, out of the front door of
it, and never enter that house again.

This is what Non saw. He saw how people felt about their houses, and how
they lived in them helplessly and angrily year after year, and felt
hateful about the world.

I gradually drew out of him the way he felt about it. I found he was not
as good as some people are at talking about himself, but the subject was
interesting. He began his career building houses for people, as nearly
every one does. The general idea is that everybody is expected to exact
commissions from everybody else, and the owner is expected to pay each
man his own commission and then pay all the commissions that each man
has charged the other man. Every house that got built in this way seemed
to be a kind of network or conspiracy of not doing as you would be done
by. Non did not see any way out at first, just for one man. He merely
noticed how things were going, and he noticed that nearly every person
that he had dealings with, from the bottom to the top of the house,
seemed to make him feel that he either was, or would be, or ought to be,
a grafter. He could not so much as look at a house he had built, through
the trees when he was going by, without wishing he could be a better
man, and studying on how it could be managed. His own first houses made
him see things. They proved to be the making of him, and if similar
houses have not made similar men, it is their fault. It might not be
reassuring to the men who are now living in these first houses to dwell
too much on this (and I might say he did not build them alone), but it
seems to be necessary to bring out the most striking thing about Non in
his first stage as a business man, _viz._: He hated his business. He
made up his mind he either would make the business the kind of business
he liked or get out of it. I did not gather from the way he talked about
it that he had any idea of being an uplifter. He merely had, apparently,
an obstinate, doggedly comfortable idea about himself, and about what a
thing would have to be, in this world, if he was connected with it. He
proposed to enjoy his business. He was spending most of his time at it.

Other people have had this same happy thought, but they seem to manage
to keep on being patient. Non could not fall back on being patient, and
it made him think harder.

The first thing he thought of was that doing his business as he thought
he ought to, if he once worked his idea out, and worked it down through
and organized it, might pay. He almost had the belief that people might
pay a man a little extra, perhaps, for enjoying his business. It cannot
be said that he believed this immediately. He merely wanted to, and
worked toward it, and merely contrived new shrewd ways at first of being
able to afford it. Gradually he began to notice that the more he enjoyed
his business, the more he enjoyed it with his whole soul and body,
enjoyed it down to the very toes of his conscience, the more people
there were who stepped into his office and wanted him to enjoy his
business on their houses. It was what they had been looking for for
years--for some builder who was really enjoying his business. And the
more he enjoyed his business in his own particular way--that of building
a house for a man in less time than he said he would, and for less
money, not infrequently sending him a check at the end of it--the more
his business grew.

I do not know that there would be any special harm in speaking of Non's
idea--of just doing as you would be done by--in more moral or religious
language, but it is not necessary. And I find I take an almost religious
joy in looking at the Golden Rule at last as a plain business
proposition. All that happened was that Non was original, saw something
that everybody thought they knew, and acted as if it were so.
Theoretically one would not have said that it would be original to take
an old platitudinous law like the law of supply and demand, and act as
if it were so; but it was. At the time Non was beginning his career
there was nothing in the building-market people found harder to hire
than honesty. Here was something, he saw at last, that thousands of busy
and important men who did not have time to be detectives, wanted. There
did not seem to be any one very actively supplying the demand. A big
market, a small supply, and almost no competition. Non stepped in and
proposed to represent a man's interest who is building a house as
literally as the man would represent his interests himself, if he knew
all about houses. Everything has followed from this. What Non's business
is now, when a man is building a house, is to step quietly into the
man's shoes, let him put on another pair, and go about his business. It
is not necessary to go into the details. Any reader who has ever built a
house knows the details. Just take them and turn them around.

What those of us who know Non best like about him is that he is a plain
business man, and that he has acted in this particular matter without
any fine moral frills or remarks. He has done the thing because he liked
it and believed in it.

But the most efficient thing to me about Non is not the way he is making
money out of saving money for other people, but the way the fact that he
can do it makes people feel about the world. Whenever I have a little
space of discouragement or of impatience about the world because it does
not hurry more, I fall to thinking of Non. "Perhaps next week"--I say
to myself cheerfully--"I can go down to New York and slip into Non's
office and get the latest news as to how religion is getting on. Or he
will take me out with him to lunch, and I will stop scolding or
idealizing, and we will get down to business, and I will take a good
long look into that steady-lighted, unsentimental face of his while he
tells me across the little corner table at Delmonico's for three hours
how shrewd the Golden Rule is, and how it works." Sometimes when I have
just been in New York, and have come home and am sitting in my still
study, with the big idle mountain just outside, and the great meadow and
all the world, like some great, calm gentle spirit or picture of itself,
lying out there about me, and I fall to thinking of Non, and of how he
is working in wood and stone inside of people's houses, and inside of
their lives day after day, and of how he is touching people at a
thousand points all the weeks, being a writer, making lights and shadows
and little visions of words fall together just so, seems, suddenly a
very trivial occupation--like amusing one's self with a pretty little
safe kaleidoscope, holding it up, aiming it and shaking softly one's
coloured bits of phrases at a world! Of course, it need not be so. But
there are moments when I think of Non when it seems so.

In our regular Sunday religion we do not seem to be quite at our best
just now.

At least (perhaps I should speak for one) I know I am not.

Being a saint of late is getting to be a kind of homely, modest,
informal, almost menial everyday thing. It makes one more hopeful about
religion. Perhaps people who once get the habit, and who are being good
all the week, can even be good on Sunday.

There are many ways of resting or leaning back upon one's instincts and
getting over to one's religion or perspective about the world. Mount Tom
(which is in my front yard, in Massachusetts) helps sometimes--with a
single look.

When I go down to New York, I look at the Metropolitan Tower, the
Pennsylvania Station, the McAdoo Tunnels, and at Non.

If I wanted to make anybody religious, I would try to get him to work in
Non's office, or work with anybody who ever worked with him, or who ever
saw him; or I would have him live in a house built by him, or pay a bill
made out by him.

It has seemed to me that his succeeding and making himself succeed in
this way is a great spiritual adventure, a pure religion, a difficult,
fresh, and stupendous religion.

Now these many days have I watched him going up and down through all the
empty reputations, the unmeaning noises of the world, living his life
like some low, old-fashioned, modest Hymn Tune he keeps whistling--and I
have seen him in fear, and in danger, and in gladness being shrewder and
shrewder for God, now grimly, now radiantly, hour by hour, day by day
getting rich with the Holy Ghost!




