CHAPTER IV

DEAD AS A DOOR NAIL!


There are people who say that machines cannot be beautiful, and cannot
make for beauty, because machines are dead.

I would agree with them if I thought that machines were dead.

I have watched in spirit, hundreds of years, the machines grow out of
Man like nails, like vast antennae--a kind of enormous, more unconscious
sub-body. They are apparently of less lively and less sensitive tissue
than tongues or eyes or flesh; and like all bones they do not renew, of
course, as often or as rapidly as flesh. But the difference between live
and dead machines is quite as grave and quite as important as the
difference between live and dead men. The generally accepted idea a live
thing is, that it is a thing that keeps dying and being born again every
minute; it is seen to be alive by its responsiveness to the spirit, to
the intelligence that created it and that keeps re-creating it. I have
known thousands of factories; and every factory I have known that is
really strong or efficient has scales like a snake, and casts off its
old self. All the people in it, and all the iron and wood in it, month
by month are being renewed and shedding themselves. Any live factory can
always be seen moulting year after year. A live spirit goes all through
the machinery, a kind of nervous tissue of invention, of thought.

We already speak of live and dead iron, of live and dead engines or
half-dead and half-sick engines, and we have learned that there is such
a thing as tired steel. What people do to steel makes a difference to
it. Steel is sensitive to people. My human spirit grows my arm and moves
it and guides it and expresses itself in it, keeps re-creating it and
destroying it; and daily my soul keeps rubbing out and writing in new
lines upon my face; and in the same way my typewriter, in a slow, more
stolid fashion, responds to my spirit too. Two men changing typewriters
or motor-cars are, though more subtly, like two men changing boots.
Sewing machines, pianos, and fiddles grow intimate with the people who
use them, and they come to express those particular people and the ways
in which they are different from others. A Titian-haired typewriter girl
makes her machine move differently every day from a blue-eyed one.
Typewriters never like to have their people take the liberty of lending
them. Steel bars and wooden levers all have little mannerisms, little
expressions, small souls of their own, habits of people that they have
lived with, which have grasped the little wood and iron levers of their
wills and made them what they are.

It is somewhere in the region of this fact that we are going to discover
the great determining secret of modern life, of the mastery of man over
his machines. Man, at the present moment, with all his new machines
about him, is engaged in becoming as self-controlled, as
self-expressive, with his new machines, with his wireless telegraph arms
and his railway legs, as he is with his flesh and blood ones. The force
in man that is doing this is the spiritual genius in him that created
the machine, the genius of imperious and implacable self-expression, of
glorious self-assertion in matter, the genius for being human, for being
spiritual, and for overflowing everything we touch and everything we use
with our own wills and with the ideals and desires of our souls. The
Dutchman has expressed himself in Dutch architecture and in Dutch art;
the American has expressed himself in the motor-car; the Englishman has
expressed himself, has carved his will and his poetry upon the hills,
and made his landscape a masterpiece by a great nation. He has made his
walls and winding roads, his rivers, his very treetops express his deep,
silent joy in the earth. So the great, fresh young nations to-day, with
a kind of new, stern gladness, implacableness, and hope, have appointed
to their souls expression through machinery. Our Engines and our radium
shall cry to God! Our wheels sing in the sun!

Machinery is our new art-form. A man expresses himself first in his
hands and feet, then in his clothes, and then in his rooms or in his
house, and then on the ground about him; the very hills grow like him,
and the ground in the fields becomes his countenance; and now, last and
furthest of all, requiring the liveliest and noblest grasp of his soul,
the finest circulation of will of all, he begins expressing himself in
his vast machines, in his three-thousand-mile railways, in his vast,
cold-looking looms and dull steel hammers. With telescopes for Mars-eyes
for his spirit, he walks up the skies; he expresses his soul in deep and
dark mines, and in mighty foundries melting and re-moulding the world.
He is making these things intimate, sensitive, and colossal expressions
of his soul. They have become the subconscious body, the abysmal,
semi-infinite body of the man, sacred as the body of the man is sacred,
and as full of light or of darkness.

So I have seen the machines go swinging through the world. Like
archangels, like demons, they mount up our desires on the mountains. We
do as we will with them. We build Winchester Cathedral all over again,
on water. We dive down with our steel wheels and nose for
knowledge--like a great Fish--along the bottom of the sea. We beat up
our wills through the air. We fling up, with our religion, with our
faith, our bodies on the clouds. We fly reverently and strangely, our
hearts all still and happy, in the face of God!




CHAPTER V

AN OXFORD MAN AND AN INCH OF IRON


The whole process of machine-invention is itself the most colossal,
spiritual achievement of history. The bare idea we have had of
unravelling all creation, and of doing it up again to express our own
souls--the idea of subduing matter, of making our ideals get their way
with matter, with radium, ether, antiseptics, is itself a religion, a
poetry, a ritual, a cry to heaven. The supreme, spiritual adventure of
the world has become this task that man has set himself, of breaking
down and casting away forever the idea that there is such a thing as
matter belonging to matter--matter that keeps on in a dead, stupid way,
just being matter. The idea that matter is not all alive with our souls,
with our desires and prayers, with hope, terror, worship, with the
little terrible wills of men and the spirit of God, is already
irreligious to us. Is not every cubic inch of iron (the coldest-blooded
scientist admits it) like a kind of little temple, its million million
little atoms in it going round and round and round dancing before the
Lord?

And why should an Oxford man be afraid of a cubic inch of iron, or
afraid of becoming like it?

I daily thank God that I have been allowed to belong to this generation.
I have looked at last a little cubic inch of iron out of countenance. I
can sit and watch it, the little cubic inch of iron, in its still
coldness, in all its little funny play-deadness, and laugh! I know that
to a telescope or a god, or to me, to us, the little cubic inch of iron
is all alive inside, that it is whirling with will, that it is sensitive
in a rather dead-looking but lively cosmic way, sensitive like another
kind of more slowly quivering flesh, sensitive to moons and to stars
and to heat and cold, to time and space and to human souls. It is
singing every minute low and strange, night and day, in its little grim
blackness, of the glory of Things. I am filled with the same feeling,
the same sense of kindred, of triumphant companionship, when I go out
among them and watch the majestic family of the machines, of the
engines, those mighty Innocents, those new awful sons of God, going
abroad through all the world, looking back at us when we have made them,
unblinking and without sin!

Like rain and sunshine, like chemicals, and like all the other innocent,
godlike things, and like waves of water and waves of air, rainbows,
starlight, they say what we make them say. They are alive with the life
that is in us.

The first element of power in a man, in getting control of his life in
our modern era, is to have spirit enough to know what matter is like.

The Machine-Trainer is the man who sees what the machines are like. He
is the man who conceives of iron-and-wood machines, in his daily habit
of thought, as alive. He has discovered ways in which he can produce an
impression upon iron and wood with his desires, and with his will. He
goes about making iron-and-wood machines do live things.

It is never the machines that are dead.

It is only mechanical-minded men that are dead.




