CHAPTER VI

THE MACHINES' MACHINES


The fate of civilization is not going to be determined by people who are
morbidly like machines on the one hand, or by people who are morbidly
unmechanical, on the other.

People in a machine civilization who try to live without being automatic
and mechanical-minded part of the time and in some things, people who
try to make everything they do artistic and self-expressive and
hand-made, who attend to all their own thoughts and finish off all their
actions by hand themselves, soon wish they were dead.

People who do everything they do mechanically, or by machinery, are dead
already.

It is bad enough for those of us who are trying to live our lives
ourselves--real, true, hand-made individual lives--to have to fight all
these machines about us trying daily to roar and roll us down into
humdrum and nothingness, without having to fight besides all these dear
people we have about us too, who have turned machines, even one's own
flesh and blood. Does not one see them--see them everywhere--one's own
flesh and blood, going about like stone-crushers, road-rollers, lifts,
lawn-mowers?

Between the morbidly mechanical people and the morbidly unmechanical
people, modern civilization hangs in the balance.

There must be some way of being just mechanical enough, and at the right
time and right place, and of being just unmechanical enough at the right
time and right place. And there must be some way in which men can be
mechanical and unmechanical at will.

The fate of civilization turns on men who recognize the nature of
machinery, who make machines serve them, who add the machines to their
souls, like telephones and wireless telegraph, or to their bodies, like
radium and railroads, and who know when and when not and how and how not
to use them who are so used to using machines quietly and powerfully,
that they do not let the machines outwit them and unman them.

Who are these men?

How do they do it?

They are the Machine-Trainers. The men who understand people-machines,
who understand iron machines, and who understand how to make
people-machines and iron machines run softly together.




CHAPTER VII

THE MEN'S MACHINES


There was a time once in the old simple individual days when drygoods
stores could be human. They expressed, in a quiet, easy way, the souls
of the people who owned them.

When machinery was invented and when organization was invented--machines
of people--drygoods stores became vast selling machines.

We then faced the problem of making a drygoods store with twenty-five
hundred clerks in it as human as a drygoods store with fifteen.

This problem has been essentially and in principle solved. At least we
know it is about to be solved. We are ready to admit--most of us--that
it is practicable for a department store to be human. Everything the man
at the top does expresses his human nature and his personality to his
clerks. His clerks become twenty-five hundred more of him in miniature.
What is more, the very stuff in which the clerks in department stores
work--the thing that passes through their hands, is human, and
everything about it is human, or can be made human; and all the while
vast currents of human beings, huge Mississippis of human feeling, flow
past the clerks--thousands and thousands of souls a day, and pour over
their souls, making them and keeping them human. The stream clears
itself.

But what can we say about human beings in a mine, about the
practicability of keeping human twenty-five hundred men in a hole in the
ground? And how can a mine-owner reach down to the men in the hole, make
himself felt as a human being on the bottom floor of the hole in the
ground?

In a department store the employer expresses himself to his clerks
through every one of the other twenty-five hundred; they mingle and stir
their souls and hopes and fears together, and he expresses himself to
all of them through them all.

But in a mine, two men work all alone down in the dark hole in the
ground. Thousands of other men, all in dark holes, are near by, with
nothing but the dull sound of picks to come between. In thousands of
other holes men work, each with his helper, all alone. The utmost the
helper can do is to grow like the man he works with, or like his own
pick, or like the coal he chips out, or like the black hole. The utmost
the man who mines coal can do, in the way of being human, is with his
helper.

In a factory, for the most part, the only way, during working hours, an
employer can express himself and his humanness to his workman is through
the steel machine he works with--through its being a new, good, fair
machine or a poor one. He can only smile and frown at him with steel, be
good to him in wheels and levers, or now and then perhaps through a
foreman pacing down the aisles.

The question the modern business man in a factory has to face is very
largely this: "I have acres of machines all roaring my will at my men. I
have leather belts, printed rules, white steam, pistons, roar, air,
water and fire and silence to express myself to my workmen in. I have
long monotonous swings and sweeps of cold steel, buckets of melted iron,
strips of wood, bells, whistles, clocks--to express myself, to express
my human spirit to my men. Is there, or is there not, any possible way
in which my factory with its machines can be made as human and as
expressive of the human as a department store?"

This is the question that our machine civilization has set itself to
answer.

All the men with good honest working imaginations, the geniuses and the
freemen of the world, are setting themselves the task of answering it.

Some say, "Machines are on the necks of the men. We will take the
machines away."

Others say, "We will make our men as good as our machines. We will make
our inventions in men catch up with our inventions in machines."

We naturally turn to the employer first as having the first chance. What
is there an employer can do to draw out the latent force in the men,
evoke the divine, incalculable passion sleeping beneath in the
machine-walled minds, the padlocked wills, the dull unmined desires of
men? How can he touch and wake the solar plexus of labour?

If any employer desires to get into the inner substance of the most
common type of workman, be an artist with him, express himself with him
and change the nature of that substance, give it a different colour or
light or movement so that he will work three times as fast, ten times as
cheerfully and healthfully, and with his whole body and soul, spirit,
and how is he going to do it?

Most employers wish they could do this. If they could persuade their men
to believe in them, to begin to be willing to work with them instead of
against them, they would do it.

What form of language is there, whether of words or of actions, that an
employer can use to make the men who work nine hours a day for him and
to whom he has to express himself across acres of machines, believe in
him and understand him?

The modern employer finds himself set sternly face to face, every day of
his life, with this question. All civilization seems crowding up day by
day, seems standing outside his office door as he goes in and as he goes
out, and asking him--now with despair, now with a kind of grim,
implacable hope, "Do you believe, or do you not believe, a factory can
be made as human as a department store?"

This question is going to be answered first by men who know what iron
machines really are, and what they are really for, and how they
work--who know what people-machines really are, and what they are really
for, and how they work. They will base all that they do upon certain
resemblances and certain differences between people and machines.

They will work the machines of iron according to the laws of iron.

They will work the machines of men according to the laws of human
nature.

There are certain facts in human nature, feelings, enthusiasms and
general principles concerning the natural working relation between men
and machines, that it may be well to consider in the next chapter as a
basis for a possible solution.

What are our machines after all? How are the machines like us? And on
what theory of their relation to us can machines and men expect in a
world like this to run softly together? These are the questions men are
going to answer next. In the meantime, I venture to believe that no man
who is morose to-day about the machines, or who is afraid of machines in
our civilization--because they are machines--is likely to be able to do
much to save the men in it.




