CHAPTER XII

THE NECKS OF THE WICKED


A letter lies before me, one out of many others asking me how the author
of "The Shadow Christ," which is a study of the religious values in
suffering and self-sacrifice in this world, takes the low ground that
honesty is the best policy.

I know two kinds of men who believe that honesty is the best policy.

These two men use exactly the same words "Honesty is the best policy."

One man says it.

The other man sings it.

One man is honest because it pays.

The other man is honest because he likes it.

"Honesty is the best policy" as a motive cannot be called religious, but
"Honesty is the best policy" as a Te Deum, as something a man sings in
his heart every day about God, something he sings about human nature is
religious, and believing it the way some men believe it, is an act of
worship.

It is like a great gentle mass.

It is like taking softly up one's own planet and offering it to God.

Here it is--the planet. Honesty is organized in the rocks on it and in
the oak trees on it and in the people. The rivers flow to the sea and
the heart of Man flows to God. On this one planet, at least, God is a
success.

Possibly it is because many other people beside myself have been slow in
clearly making this distinction between "Honesty is the best policy" as
a motive or a Te Deum, that I have come upon so many religious men and
women in the last two or three years, who, in the finest spirit, have
seemed to me to be doing all that they could to discourage everybody
especially to discourage me, about the Golden Rule.

The first objection which they put forward to the Golden Rule is that it
is a failure.

When I try to deal with this or try to tell them about Non-Gregarious,
the second objection that they put forward is, that it is a success.

If they cannot discourage me with one of these objections they try to
discourage me with the other.

They point to the Cross.

Some days I cannot help wondering what Christ would think if He were to
come back and find people, all these good Christian people everywhere
using the Cross--the Cross of all things in the world as an objection to
the Golden Rule and to its working properly, or as a general argument
against expecting anything of anybody.

I do not know that I have any philosophy about it that would be of any
value to others.

I only know that I am angry all through when I hear a certain sort of
man saying, and apparently proving, that the Golden Rule does not work.

And I am angry at other people who are listening with me because they
are not angry too.

Why are people so complacent about crosses? And why are they willing to
keep on having and expecting to have in this world all the good people
on crosses? Why do they keep on treating these crosses year after year,
century after century, in a dull tired way as if they had become a kind
of conventionality of God's, a kind of good old church custom, something
that He and the Church by this time, after two thousand years, could not
really expect to try to get over or improve upon?

I do not know that I ought to feel as I do.

I only know that the moment I see evil triumphing in this world, there
is one thing that that evil comes up against.

It comes up against my will.

My will, so far as it goes, is a spiritual fact.

I do not argue about it, nor do I know that I wish to justify it. I
merely accept my will as it is, as one spiritual fact.

I propose to know what to do with it next.

The first thing that I have done, of course, has been to find out that
there are millions of other so-called Christian people who have
encountered this same fact that I have encountered.

There are at least some of us who stand together. Our wills are set
against having any more people die on crosses in this world than can be
helped. If there is any kind of skill, craftmanship, technique,
psychology, knowledge of human nature which can be brought to bear,
which will keep the best people in this world not only from being, but
from belonging on crosses in it, we propose to bring these things to
bear. We are not willing to believe that crowds are not inclined to
Goodness. We are not willing to slump down on any general slovenly
assumption about the world that goodness cannot be made to work in it.

If goodness is not efficient in this world we will make it efficient.

Our reason for saying this is that we honestly glory in this world. We
believe that at this moment while we are still on it, it is in the act
of being a great world, that it is God's world, and in God's Name we
will defend its reputation.

We do not deny that it may be better spiritual etiquette, more heroic
looking and may have a certain moral grace, so far as a man himself is
concerned, if the world makes him suffer for being honest. But after all
he is only one man, and whether he dislikes his suffering or likes it
and feels fine and spiritual over it, it is only one man's suffering.

But why is it that when the world makes a man suffer, everybody should
seem always to be thinking of the man? Why does not anybody think of the
world?

Is not the fact that a whole world, eternal and innumerable, is supposed
to be such a mean, dishonest sort of a world that it will make a man
suffer for being good a more important fact than the man's suffering is?
It seems to me to be taking not lower but higher ground when one insists
on believing in the race one belongs to and in believing that it is a
human race that can be believed in. After two thousand years of Christ,
it is a lazy, tired, anaemic slander on the world to believe that it does
not pay to be good in it. The man who believes it, and acts as if he
believed it, is to-day and has been from the beginning of time the
supreme enemy of us all. He is guilty before heaven and before us all
and in all nations of high treason to the human race. One of the next
most important things to do in modern religion is going to be to get all
these morally dressed-up, noble-looking people who enjoy feeling how
good they are because they have failed, to examine their hearts, stop
enjoying themselves and think.

For hundreds of years we have religiously run after martyrs and we have
learned in a way, most of us, to have a kind of cooped-up patriotism for
our own nation, but why are there not more people who are patriotic
toward the whole human race? One has been used to seeing it now for
centuries, good people all over the world hanging their harps on willow
trees, or snuggling down together by the cold sluggish stream of their
lives, and gossiping about how the world has abused them, when they
would be far better occupied, nine out of ten of them--in doing
something that would make it stop. There was a poet and soldier some
thousands of years ago who put more real religion (and put it too, into
his imprecatory psalms), than has been put, I believe, into all the
sweet whinings and the spiritual droopings of the world in three
thousand years. I do not deny that I would quarrel, as a matter of form,
with the lack of urbanity, with a certain ill-nature in the imprecatory
Psalms; but with the spirit in them, with the motive and mighty desire,
with the necessity in the man's heart that was poured into them, I have
the profoundest sympathy.

David had a manly, downright belief. His belief was that if sin is
allowed to get to the top in this world of ours, it is our fault. David
felt that it was partly his--and being a king--very much his, and as he
was trying to do something about it, he naturally wanted the world to
help.

What he really meant--what lay in the background of his petition--the
real spirit that made him speak out in that naive bold way before the
Lord, and before everybody--that made him ask the great God in heaven
all looking so white and so indifferent, to come right down please and
jump on the necks of the wicked, was a vivid, live vision of his own for
his own use that he was going to make the world more decent. He was
spirited about it. If God did not, He would, and naturally when he came
to expressing how he felt in prayer, he wanted God to stand by him. To
put it in good plain soldier-like Hebrew, He wanted God to jump on the
necks of his enemies.

Speaking strictly for ourselves, in our more modern spirit of course, we
would want to modulate this, we admit that we would not ask God to do a
little thing like jumping on the necks of the wicked--just for us--nor
would we care to break away from the other things we are doing and
attend to it ourselves, nor would we even favour their necks being
jumped on by others, but while we do not agree with David's particular
request, we do profoundly agree with the way he felt when he made it. We
would not make our flank movement on the wicked in quite the same way
and according to our more modern and more scientific manner of thought,
we would want to do something more practical with the wicked, but we
would want to do something with them and we would want to do it now.

As we look at it, it ought not to be necessary to jump on the necks of
the wicked to make them good, that is, to make them understand what they
would wish they had done in twenty years. We live in a more reasoning
and precise age and what more particularly concerns us in the wicked is
not their necks, but their heads and their hearts. It seems to us that
they are not using them very much and that the moment they do and we can
get them to, they will be good. Possibly it was a mere matter of
language, a concession to the then state of the language--David's
wanting their necks to be jumped on so that he could get their attention
at first and make them stop and think and understand. More subtle ways
of expressing things to the wicked have been thought of to-day than of
jumping on their necks, but the principle David had in mind has not
changed, the principle of being loyal to the human race, the principle
of standing up for people and insisting that they were really meant to
be better than they were or than they thought they could be--a kind of
holy patriotism David had for this world. The main fact about David
seems to be that he believed he belonged to a great human race.
Incidentally he believed he belonged to a human race that was really
quite bright, bright enough at least to make people sorry for doing
wrong in it--a human race that was getting so shrewd and so just and so
honest that it took stupider and stupider people every year to be
wicked, and when he found, judging from recent events in Judea, that
this for the time being was not so, he had a hateful feeling about it,
which it seems to some of us, vastly improved him and would improve many
of us. We do not claim that the imprecatory Psalms were David's best,
but they must have helped him immensely in writing the other ones.

       *       *       *       *       *

We may be wrong. But it has come to be an important religious duty to
some of us, or rather religious joy, to hate the prosperity of the
wicked. We hate the prosperity of the wicked, not because it is their
prosperity and not ours, but because their prosperity constitutes a
sneer or slander on the world. We have no idea of wanting to go about
faithfully jumping upon the necks of the wicked. What we want is to feel
that we are in a world where the good people are happy and are making
goodness reasonable, successful, profitable and practical in it. We want
an earth with crowds on it who see things as they are, and who guess so
well on what they want (_i.e._, who are good) that other people who do
not know what they want and are not good, will be lonesome.

We have made up our minds to live in a world not where the wicked will
feel that their necks are going to be jumped on (which is really a
rather interesting and prominent feeling on the whole), but a world
where the wicked will be made to feel that nobody notices their necks,
that they are not worth being jumped on, a world where nobody will have
time to go out back and jump on them, a world where the wicked will not
be able to think of anything important to do, and where the wicked
things that are left to do will be so small and so stupid that nobody
will notice. They will be ignored like boys with catcalls in the street.
When we can make people who do wrong feel unimportant enough, there is
going to be some chance for the good.

If we could find some sweet, proper, gentle, Christian-looking way of
conveying to these people for a few swift, keen minutes how little
difference it makes when they and people like them do wrong, they would
steal over in a body and do right.

This is our program. We are making preliminary arrangements for a world
in which after this, very soon now, righteousness is going to attend
strictly to its own business and unrighteousness is going to be crowded
out. No one will feel that he has time in two or three hundred years
from now to go out of his way into some obscure corner of the world and
jump on the necks of the wicked.

But this is a matter of form. The main fundamental manful instinct David
had--the idea that there should not be any more people dying on crosses
than could be helped--that collective society should take hold of Evil
and set it down hard in its chair and make it cry seems to many of us
absolutely sound. Of course, we feel that it is not for us, those who
love righteousness, to jump on the necks of the wicked. We prefer to
have it attended to in a more dignified, impersonal way by Society as a
whole. So we believe that Society should proceed to making goodness and
honesty pay. If Society will not do it _we_ will do it. The world may be
against us at first but we will at least clear off a small place on
it--in our own business for instance--where our goodness can command the
most shrewdness and the most technique--and we will do what we can
slowly--one industry at a time, to remove the slander on goodness that
goodness is not inefficient, and the slander on the world that goodness
cannot be self-supporting, self-respecting (and without disgrace), even
comfortable in it.

The old hymn with which many of us are familiar is well and true enough.
But it does not seem that standing up for Jesus is the most important
point in the world just now. A great many people are doing it. What we
need more is people who will stand up for the world. When people who are
standing up for the world stand and sing "Stand up for Jesus" it will
begin to count. Let four hundred Nons sing it; and we will all go to
church.

If nine of the people out of ten who are singing "Stand up for Jesus"
would stand up for the world, that is, if they would stop trading with
their grocer when they find he slides in regularly one bad orange out of
twelve and promptly look up a grocer who does not do such things, and
trade with him, it would not be necessary for people to do as they so
often do nowadays, fall back on a little wistful half discouraged last
resort like "standing up for Jesus."

Standing up for the world means standing by men who believe in it,
standing by men who make everything they do in business a declaration of
their faith in God and their faith in the credit of human nature, men
who put up money daily in their advertising, their buying and selling,
on the loyalty, common sense, brains, courage, goodness, and righteous
indignation of the people.

The idea that goodness is sweet and helpless and that Jesus was meek and
lowly and has to be stood up for is now and always has been a slander.
It does not seem to some of us that He would want to be stood up for and
we do not like the way some people call Him meek and lowly. It would be
more true to say that He merely looks meek and lowly; that is, if most
men had done or not done or had said or not said things in the way he
did, they would have been considered meek and lowly for it. He had a way
of using a soft answer to turn away wrath. But there was not anything
really meek and lowly about his giving the soft answer. No meek and
lowly man would ever have thought of such a thing as turning away wrath
with a soft answer. He would have been afraid of looking weak. He would
not have had the energy or the honesty or the spiritual address to know
or to think of a soft answer that would do it.

The spirit of fighting evil with good--a kind of glorious self-will for
goodness, for doing a thing the higher and nobler way and making it
work, the spirit of successful implacably efficient righteousness is the
last and most modern interpretation of the New Testament, the crowd's
latest cry to its God. Crowds will always crucify and crosses will never
go by. But we are going to have a higher ideal for crosses. We are not
going (out of sheer shame for the world), to think seriously any longer
of dying on a cross, or letting any one else die on one for a little
rudimentary platitude, a quiet, sensible, everyday business motto for
any competent business man like "Do unto others as you would have them
do unto you."




