CHAPTER I

NOW!


This outlook or glimmer of vision I have tried to trace, for the art of
crowds is something we want, and want daily, in the future. We want
daily a future. But, after all, it is a future.

I speak in this present chapter as one of the crowd who wants something
now.

I find myself in a world in which apparently some vast anonymous
arrangement was made about me and about my life, before I was born. This
arrangement seems to be, as I understand it, that if I want to live
while I am on this planet a certain sort of life or be a certain sort of
person, I am expected practically to take out a permit for it from the
proper authorities.

In the previous chapter I made a request of the authorities, as perhaps
the reader will remember. I said, "I want to be good now."

In this one I have a further request to make of the authorities: "I want
to be beautiful."

I want to be beautiful now.

I find thousands of other people about me on every hand making these
same two requests. I find that the authorities do not seem to notice
their requests any more than they have noticed mine.

Some of us have begun to suspect that we must have made the request in
the wrong way. Perhaps we should not ask a world--a great, vague thing
like the world in general--to make any slight arrangement we may need
for being beautiful. We have come to feel that we must ask somebody in
particular, and do something in particular, and find some one in
particular with whom we can do it. There is getting to be but one course
open to a man if he wants to be beautiful. He must bone down and work
hard with his soul, make himself see precisely what it is and who it is
standing between him and a beautiful world. He must ask particular
persons in particular positions if they do not think he ought to be
allowed to be beautiful. He must ask some millionaire probably
first--his employer, for instance--to stop getting in his way, and at
least to step one side and let him reason with him. And when he cannot
ask his millionaire--his own particular humdrum millionaire--to step one
side and reason with him, he must ask iron-machines to step one side and
reason with him. After this he must ask crowds to please to step one
side and reason with him.

Whatever happens, he is sure to find always these same three great,
imponderable obstructions in the way of his being beautiful--the humdrum
millionaires, the iron-machines, and crowds.

In the old days when any one wanted to be beautiful he found it more
convenient. There was very likely some one who was more beautiful than
he was nearby, some one who found him craving the same thing that he had
craved, and who recognized it and delighted in it, and who could make
room and help.

Nowadays, if one wants to be beautiful one must ask everybody. Every man
finds it the same. He must ask millions of people to let him be
something, one after the other in rows, that they do not want him to be
or do not care whether he is or not. He has to ask more people than he
could count, before he dies, to let him be beautiful. Many of them that
he has to ask, sometimes most of them, are his inferiors.

I have tried to deal with how it is going to be possible for a man to
break through to being beautiful, past millionaires and past
iron-machines. I would like now to deal with the people-machines or
crowds, and how perhaps to break past them and be beautiful in behalf of
them, in spite of them.




CHAPTER II

COMMITTEES AND COMMITTEES


The problem seems to be something like this. One finds one has been born
and put here whether or no, and that one is inextricably alive in a
state of society in which men are coming to live in a kind of vast
disease of being obliged to do everything together.

We are still old-fashioned enough to be born one at a time, but we are
educated in litters and we do our work in the world in herds and gangs.
Even the upper classes do their work in gangs, and with overseers and
little crowds called committees. Our latest idea consists in putting
parts of a great many different men together to make one great
one--forming a committee to make a man of genius.

There is no denying that, in a way, a committee does things; but what
becomes of the committee?

And the lower in the scale of life we go the more committees it takes to
do the work of one man and the more impossible it becomes to find
anything but parts of men to do things. I put it frankly to the reader.
The chances are nine out of ten that when you meet a man nowadays and
look at him hard or try to do something with him you find he is not a
man at all but is some subsection of a committee. You cannot even talk
with such a man without selecting some subsection of some subject which
interests him; and if you select any other subsection than his
subsection he will think you a bore; and if you select his subsection he
will think that you do not know anything.

And if you want to get anything done that is different, or that is the
least bit interesting, and want to get some one to do it, how will you
go about it? You will find yourself being sent from one person to
another; and before you know it you find yourself mixed up with nine or
ten subdivisions of nine or ten committees; and after you have got your
nine or ten subsections of nine or ten committees to get together to
consider what it is you want done, they will tell you, after due
deliberation, that it is not worth doing, or that you had better do it
yourself. Then every subsection of every committee will go home
muttering under its breath to every other subsection that a man who
wants slightly different and interesting things done in society is a
public nuisance; and that the man who does not know what subsection he
is in and what subsection of a man he was intended to be, and who tries
to do things, carries dismay and anger on every side around him. Drop
into your pigeonhole and be filed away, O Gentle Reader! Do you think
you are a soul? No; you are Series B. No. 2574, top row on the left.

In my morning paper the other day I read that in a factory whose long
windows I often pass in the train, they have their machinery so
perfected that it takes sixty-four machines to make one shoe.

Query--If it takes sixty-four machines run by sixty-four men who do
nothing else to make one shoe, how many machines would it take, and how
many shoes, to make one man?

Query--And when an employer in a shoe factory deals with his employee,
can it really be said, after all, that he is dealing with _him_? He is
dealing with _It_--with Nine Hours a Day, of one sixty-fourth of a man.

The natural effect of crowds and of machines is to make a man feel that
he is, and always was, and always will be, immemorially, unanimously,
innumerably nobody.

Sometimes we are allowed a little faint numeral to dangle up over our
oblivion. Not long ago I saw a notice or letter in the _West
Bulletin_--probably from a member of something--ending like this: "...
I hope the readers of the _Bulletin_ will ponder over this suggestion of
_Number_ 29,619.--Sincerely yours, _No._ 11, 175."




