CHAPTER VI

THE IMAGINATION OF CROWDS


The modern imagination takes, speaking roughly, three characteristic
forms:

1. Imagination about the unseen or intangible--the spiritual--as
especially typified in electricity, in the wireless telegraph, the
aeroplane: a new and extraordinary sense of the invisible and the
unproved as an energy to be used and reckoned with.

2. Imagination about the future--a new and extraordinary sense of what
is going to happen next in the world.

3. Imagination about people. We are not only inventing new machines, but
our new machines have turned upon us and are creating new men. The
telephone changes the structure of the brain. Men live in wider
distances, and think in larger figures, and become eligible to nobler
and wider motives.

Imagination about the unseen is going to give us in an incredible degree
the mastery of the spirit over matter.

Imagination about the future is going to make the next few hundred years
an organic part of every man's life to-day.

The imagination of men about themselves and other people is going to
give us a race of men with new motives; or, to put it differently, it is
going to give us not only new sizes but new kinds of men. People are
going to achieve impossibilities in goodness, and our inventions in
human nature are going to keep up with our other inventions.




CHAPTER VII

IMAGINATION ABOUT THE UNSEEN


The most distinctively modern thing that ever happened was when Benjamin
Franklin went out one day and called down lightning from heaven. Before
that, power had always been dug up, or scraped off the ground. The more
power you wanted the more you had to get hold of the ground and dig for
it; and the more solid you were, the more heavy, solid things you could
get, the more you could pull solid, heavy things round in this world
where you wanted them. Franklin turned to the sky, and turned power on
from above, and decided that the real and the solid and the substantial
in this world was to be pulled about by the Invisible.

Copernicus had the same idea, of course, when he fared forth into space,
and discovered the centre of all power to be in the sun. It grieved
people a good deal to find how much more important the sky was than they
were, and their whole little planet with all of them on it. The idea
that that big blue field up there, empty by day and with such crowds of
little faint dots in it all night, was the real thing--the big, final,
and important thing--and that they and their churches and popes and
pyramids and nations should just dance about it for millions of years
like a mote in a sunbeam, hurt their feelings at first. But it did them
good. It started them looking Up, and looking the other way for power.

Very soon afterward Columbus enlarged upon the same idea by starting the
world toward very far things, on the ground; and he bored through the
skylines, a thousand skylines, and spread the nations upon the sea.
Columbus was the typical modern man led by the invisible, the
intangible; and on the great waters somewhere between Spain and New
York, between the old and the new, Columbus discovered the Future Tense,
the centrifugal tense, the tense that sweeps in the unknown, and gathers
in, out of space, out of hope, out of faith, the lives of men. The mere
fastened-down stable things, the mere actual facts, stopped being the
world with Columbus, and the air and the sky began to be swung in, and
to be swept through the thoughts and acts of men and of women.... Then
miners, mariners, explorers, inventors--the impossible steamship, the
railway, the impossible cotton-gin and sewing-machine and reaper, Hoosac
tunnels and Atlantic cables. The impossible became one of the habits of
modern life.

Of course the sky and the air and the unknown and the future had been
recognized before, but only a little and in a rather patronizing way.
But when a world has made a great, solid continent by following a
horizon line, it begins to take things just beyond very seriously. And
so our Time has been fulfilled. We have had the stone age; we have had
the iron age; and now we have the sky age, and the sky telegraph, and
sky men, and sky cities. Mountains of stone are built out of men's
visions, towers and skyscrapers swing up out of their wills and up out
of their hearts.

       *       *       *       *       *

Not long ago, as I was coming away from New York in the Springfield
Express, which was running at fifty-five miles an hour, I saw suddenly
some smoke coming up apparently out of a satchel on the floor, belonging
to the man in the chair in front of me. I moved the satchel away, and
the smoke came up through the carpet. I spoke to the Pullman conductor
who was passing through, and in a second the train had stopped, and the
great wild roaring Thing had ceased, and we stood in a long, wide, white
silence in the fields. We got off the car--some of us--to see what had
happened, and to see if there was a hot box on the wheels. We found
that the entire underside of the floor of the car was on fire, and what
had happened? Nothing except a new impossibility; nothing except that a
human being had invented an electrical locomotive so powerful that it
was pulling that train fifty-five miles an hour while the brakes on the
car were set--twelve brakes all grinding twenty miles on those twelve
wheels; and the locomotive paid no more attention to the brakes of that
heavy Pullman than it would to a feather or to a small boy, all the way
from New York to Stamford, hanging on behind. As I came in I looked
again at the train--the long dull train that had been pulled along by
the Invisible, by the kingdom of the air and the sky--the long, dull,
heavy Train! And the spirit of the far-off sun was in it!

In Count Zeppelin's new airship the new social spirit has a symbol, and
in the gyroscopic train the inspired millionaire is on a firm
foundation. The power of the new kind and new size of capitalist is his
power of keeping an equilibrium with the people, and the men of real
genius in modern affairs are men who have motor genius and light genius
over other men's wills. They are allied to the X-ray and the airship,
and gain their pre-eminence by their power of forecast and
invention--their power of riding upon the unseen, upon the thoughts of
men and the spirit of the time. Even the painters have caught this
spirit. The plein air painters are painting the light, and the sculptors
are carving shadows and haloes, and we have not an art left which does
not lean out into the Invisible. And religion is full of this spirit and
theosophy and Christian Science. The playwrights are touched by it; and
the action, instead of being all on the stage, is thrown out into the
spirit of the audience. The play in a modern theatre is not on the stage
but in the stalls. Maeterlinck, Ibsen, Shaw, merely use the stage as a
kind of magic-lantern or suggestion-centre for the real things that, out
behind us in the dark, are happening in the audience.




