CHAPTER III

MR. NOBEL TRIES TO MAKE PEOPLE WRITE


Not unnaturally, of course, I turned to see what had already been done
by the more powerful men the planet had produced, in the way of
arranging for the necessary seers and geniuses to run the world with,
and I soon found that by far the most intelligent and far-seeing attempt
that had been made yet in this direction had been made by an inspired,
or semi-inspired, millionaire in Sweden, named Alfred Nobel, an
idealist, who had made a large but unhappy fortune out of an explosive
to stop war with. His general idea had been that dynamite would make war
so terrible that it would shock people into not fighting any more, and
that gradually people, not having to spend their time in thinking of
ways of killing one another, would have more time than they had ever had
before to think of other and more important things. It was the
disappointment of his life that his invention, instead of being used
creatively, used to free men from fighting and make men think of things,
had been used largely as an arrangement for making people so afraid of
war that they could not think of anything else. Whichever way he turned
he saw the world in a kind of panic, all the old and gentle-minded
nations with their fair fields, their factories and art galleries, all
hard at work piling up explosives around themselves until they could
hardly see over them. As this was the precise contrary of what he had
intended, and he had not managed to do what he had meant to do with
making his money, he thought he would try to see if he could not yet do
what he had meant to do in spending it. He sat down to write his Will,
and in this Will, writing as an inventor and a man of genius, he tried
to express, in the terms of money, his five great desires for the world.
He wished to spend forty thousand dollars a year, every year forever,
after he was dead, on each of these five great desires. There were five
great Inventors that he wanted, and he wanted the whole world searched
through for them, for each of them, once more every year, to see if they
could be found. Mr. Nobel expressed his desire for these five Inventors
as people often manage to express things in wills, in such a way that
not everybody had been sure what he meant. There seems to have been
comparatively little trouble, from year to year, in awarding the prizes
to some adequate inventor in the domain of Peace, of Physics, of
Chemistry, and of Medicine; but the Nobel Prize Trustees, in trying to
pick out an award each year to some man who could be regarded as a true
inventor in Literature, have met with considerable difficulty in
deciding just what sort of a man Alfred Nobel had in mind, and had set
aside his forty thousand dollars for when he directed that it should
go--to quote from the Will--"To the person who shall have produced in
the field of Literature the most distinguished work of an idealistic
tendency."

Allen Upward, for instance, an Englishman unknown in Stockholm, invented
and published a book four years ago, called the "New Word," which was so
idealistic and distinguished a book, and so full of new ideas and of new
combinations of old ideas, that there was scarcely a publisher in
England who did not instinctively recognize it, who did not see that it
would not pay at once, and that therefore it was too strange and
original and too important a book for him to publish, and after a long
delay the book was finally printed in Geneva.

A copy was sent to the Nobel Prize Trustees.

One would have thought, looking at it theoretically, that here was
precisely the sort of situation that Alfred Nobel, who had been the
struggling inventor of a great invention that would not pay at once
himself, would have been looking for. A book so inventive, so far ahead,
that publishers praised it and would not invest in it, one would have
imagined to be the one book of all others for which Alfred Nobel stood
ready and waiting to put down his forty thousand dollars.

But Mr. Nobel's forty thousand dollars did not go to a comparatively
obscure and uncapitalized inventor who had written a book to build a
world with, or at least a great preliminary design, or sketch, toward a
world. The Nobel Prize Trustees, instead of giving the forty thousand
dollars to Allen Upward, looked carefully about through all the nations
until their eyes fell on a certain Mr. Rudyard Kipling. And when they
saw Mr. Rudyard Kipling, piled high with fame and five dollars a word,
they came over quietly to where he was and put softly down on him forty
thousand dollars more.

I do not know, but it is not inconceivable, that Kipling himself would
rather have had Allen Upward have it.

I am not quarrelling with the Trustees, and am merely trying to think
things out and understand. But it certainly is a question that cannot
but keep recurring to one's mind--the unfortunate, and perhaps rather
unlooked-for, way in which Mr. Nobel's Will works. And I have been
wondering what there is that might be done, the world being the kind of
world it is, which would enable the Nobel Prize Trustees to so
administer the Will that its practical weight on the side of Idealism,
and especially upon the crisis of idealism in young authors, would be
where Mr. Nobel meant to have it.

One must hasten to admit that Mr. Upward's book is open to question;
that, in fact, it is the main trait of Mr. Upward's book that it raises
a thousand questions; and that it would be a particularly hard book for
most men to give a prize to, quietly go home, and sleep that night. I
must hasten to admit also that, judging from their own point of view,
the Nobel Prize Trustees have so far done quite well. They have
attained a kind of triumph of doing safe things--things that they could
not be criticised for; and they could well reply to this present
criticism that there was no other course that they could take. Unless
they had a large fund for butting through all nations for obscure
geniuses, and for turning up stones everywhere to look for embryo
authors--unless they had a fund for going about among the great
newspapers, the big magazines, and peeping under them through all the
world for geniuses--and unless they had still another large fund for
guaranteeing their decision when they had found one, a fund for
convincing the world that they were right, and that they were not
wasting their forty thousand dollars--the Trustees have taken a fairly
plausible position. Their position being that, in default of perfectly
fresh, brand-new, great men, and in view of the fact, in a world like
this that geniuses in it are almost invariably, and, as a matter of
course, lost or mislaid until they are dead, much the best and safest
thing that Trustees of Idealism could do was to watch the drift of
public opinion in the different nations, to adopt the course of noting
carefully what the world thought were really its great men, and then (at
a discreet and dignified distance, of course) tagging the public, and
wherever they saw a crowd, a rather nice crowd, round a man, standing up
softly at the last moment and handing him over his forty thousand
dollars. This has been the history of the Nobel Trustees of Idealism,
thus far.

But in a way, we are all the trustees of idealism, and the problem of
the Nobel Prize Trustees is more or less the problem of all of us. We
are interested as well as they in trying to find out how to recognize
and reward men of genius. What would we do ourselves if we were Nobel
Prize Trustees? Precisely what was it that Alfred Nobel intended to
achieve for Literature when he made this bequest of forty thousand
dollars a year in his Will, for a work of Literature of an idealistic
tendency?

To take a concrete case, I can only record that it has seemed to me
that if Alfred Nobel himself could have been on hand that particular
year, and could have read Mr. Upward's book, he would have given the
prize of forty thousand dollars to Allen Upward. He would not have given
the prize to Mr. Kipling--he would have given it twenty years before;
but in this particular year of which I am writing, when he saw these two
men together, I believe he would have given the prize to Allen Upward,
and he would have hurried.

I would like to put forward at this point two inquiries. First, why did
the Trustees not award the prize to Allen Upward? And second, what would
have happened if they had?

First, the Trustees could not be sure that Mr. Upward in his work of
genius was telling the truth.

Second, they could not be sure that the world would approve of his
having forty thousand dollars for telling the truth. Perhaps the world
would have rather had him paid forty thousand dollars for not telling
it.

Third, Mr. Kipling was safe. No creative work had to be done on Kipling;
all they had to do was to send him the cheque. Great crowds had swept in
from all over the world, and nominated Mr. Kipling; the Committee merely
had to confirm the nomination.

Fourth, Mr. Upward, like all idealists, like all men who have the power
of throwing this world into the melting-pot and bringing it out new
again partly unrecognizable (which, of course, is the regular
historical, almost conventional, thing for an idealist to do with a
world), bewildered the Nobel Prize Committee. They could not be sure but
that Mr. Upward's next book would be thought in the wrong, and make
their having given him forty thousand dollars to write it ridiculous.

       *       *       *       *       *

What would have happened if the Trustees had given the prize to Mr.
Upward?

First, practically no one would have known who he was, and twenty-five
nations would have been reading his book in a week, to see why the prize
was given to him. The book would have been given the most widespread,
highly stimulated, forty-thousand-dollar-power attention that any book
in any age has had.

Only now and then would a man go over and take down his old Kiplings
from the shelf and read them, because he had heard that Mr. Kipling had
forty thousand dollars more than he had had before.

Secondly, Mr. Upward's new book would have the stimulus of his knowing
while he was writing it that every word would be read by everybody. All
the draught on the fire of his genius of the whole listening world would
result in a work that even Mr. Upward himself perhaps would hardly
believe he had written. As events turned out, and Mr. Upward did not get
the prize there might be many reasons to believe that his next book
might be out of focus, might be a mere petulant, scolding book, his
exultation spent or dwindled, because his last tremendous wager--that
the world wanted the truth--was lost.

Scolding in a book means, as a rule, either juvenility or it means
relapse into conscious degeneration of the soul--the focussing and
fusing power in a man. I have sometimes wondered if even Christ, if He
had not died in His thirty-third year, made His great dare for the world
on the cross early, would not have stopped believing so magnificently in
other people at about forty or forty-five or so, and would not have
spent the rest of His days in railing at them, and in being very bitter
and helpless and eloquent about Rome and Jerusalem. I have caught myself
once or twice being glad Abraham Lincoln died suddenly just when he did,
his great faith and love all warm in him, and his great oath for the
world--that it was good--still fresh upon his lips!

Writing a book like Allen Upward's for a planet with a vision of a
thousand years singing splendidly through it, and then just reading it
all alone afterward when he has written it, and going over the score all
alone by himself, would seem to be a good deal of a strain. To be
contradicted out loud and gloriously by a world might be inspiring, but
to be contradicted by a solid phalanx of silent nations, trooping up
behind one another, unanimous, impervious, is enough to make any
radiant, long-accumulated genius pause in full career, question himself,
question his vision as a chimera, as some faintly lighted Northern
Lights upon the world, that would never mean anything, that was an
illusion, that would just flicker in the great dark once more and go
out.

I do not say that this is true, or that it would be true of Allen
Upward.

But I have read his book. I should think it might be true.

What Alfred Nobel had in mind, his whole idea in his Will, it seems to
some of us, was to put in his forty thousand dollars at the working end
of some man's mind, at the end of the man's mind where the forty
thousand dollars would itself be creative, where the forty thousand
dollars would get into the man, and work out through the man and through
his genius into the world. It does not seem to me that he wanted to put
his forty thousand dollars at the idle, old remembering end of a man's
mind; that he meant it should be used as a mere reward for idealism. I
doubt if it even so much as occurred to Alfred Nobel, who was an
idealist himself, that idealism, after a man had managed to have some in
this world, would be rewarded, or could possibly be paid for, by any
one. He knew, if ever a man knew, that idealism was its own reward, and
that it was priceless, and that any attempt to reward it with money, to
pay a man for it after he had had it, and after it was all over, would
make forty thousand dollars look shabby, or at least pathetic and
ridiculous. What he wanted to do was to build his forty thousand dollars
over into a Man. He wanted to feel that this money that he had made out
of dynamite, out of destruction, would be wrought, through this man,
into exultation, into life. He had proposed that this forty thousand
dollars should become poetry in this man's book, that it should become
light and heat, a power-house of thought, of great events. What Alfred
Nobel had in mind, I think, with his little forty thousand dollars, was
that it should be given a chance to become an intimate part of some
man's genius; that it should become perhaps at last a Great Book--that
great foundry of men's souls, where the moulds of History are patterned
out, and where the hopes of nations and the prayers of women and
children and of great men are, and where the ideals of men--those huge
drive-wheels of the world--are cast in a strange light and silence.

I wondered if they could have thought of this when they voted on Allen
Upward's book that day three years ago--those twenty grave, quiet
gentlemen in frockcoats in Stockholm!

       *       *       *       *       *

I have picked out Mr. Upward's book because it is the most difficult,
the most hazardous, and the least fortunate one I know, to make my point
with; and because a great many people will get the reaction of
disagreeing with me, and feeling about it probably, the way the Nobel
Prizes Trustees did. I have wanted to take a book which has the traits
in it for which men of genius are persecuted or crucified or
ignored--our more modern timid or anonymous form of the cross. If Mr.
Upward had been given the Prize by the Nobel Prize Trustees, it will
have to be admitted a howl would have gone up round the world that would
not have quieted down yet; and it is this howl that Mr. Nobel intended
his Prize for, and that he thought a man would need about forty thousand
dollars to meet.

I might have taken any one of several other books, and they would have
illustrated my point snugly and more conveniently; but just that right
touch of craziness that Nobel had in mind, and that goes with great
experiment of spirit--the chill, Nietzsche-like wildness, that bravado
before God and man and before Time, that swinging one's self out on
Eternity, which make Upward a typical man of genius, would have been
lacking. K---- (whose criticisms of books are the most creative ones I
know) said of Upward's book that he felt very happy and strangely
emancipated when he read it, but that it was an uncanny experience, as
if he had been made of thin air, had become a kind of aerated being, a
psychic effect that genius often has; and K---- admitted to me
confidentially that he felt that possibly he and Upward were being a
little crazy and happy together by themselves, breaking out into
infinite space so, and he took the book over to W----, and left it on
his desk slinkingly and half-ashamed and without saying anything about
it. He said he was enormously relieved next time he saw W----, felt as
if he had just been pulled out of Bedlam to find that there was at least
one other man in the world apparently in his right mind, who valued the
book as he did.

This is the precise feeling, it seems to me, that the Nobel Prize was
intended to champion and to stand by and temporarily defend in a new
author--the feeling he gives us of being in the presence of unseen
forces, of incalculableness. It was this way Allen Upward has of taking
his reader apart or up into a high place (like the Devil), and dizzying
him, taking away his breath with Truth, that Nobel had in mind. He
wanted to spend eight thousand pounds a year on providing for the world
one more book which would give the ordinary man the personal feeling of
being with a genius, cold, lonely, cosmic genius, the sense of a chill
wind of All Space Outside blowing through--a book which is a sort of
God's Wilderness, in which ordinary men with their ordinary plain senses
round them move about dazed a little and as trees walking--a great,
gaunt, naked book.

Alfred Nobel was the inventor of an explosive, a rearranger of things
assumed and things unbedded, and it was this same expansive,
half-terrible, half-sublime power in other men and other men's books he
wanted to endow--the power to free and mobilize the elements in a world,
make it budge over a little toward a new one. He wanted to spend forty
thousand dollars a year on the man in literature who had the pent-up
power in him to crash the world's mind open once more every year like a
Seed, and send groping up out of it once more its hidden thought.

I may not be right in anticipating the eventual opinion of Allen
Upward's book; but even if I am wrong, it will have helped perhaps to
call attention to the essential failure of the Nobel Prize Trustees to
side with the darers and experimenters in literature, to take a serious
part in those great creative, centrifugal movements in the souls of men
in which new worlds and the sense of new worlds are swept in upon us.
For the Sciences, which are more matter of fact and tangible, the Nobel
Prize is functioning more or less as Mr. Nobel intended, but certainly
in Literature it will have to be classed as one more of our humdrum
regular millionaire arrangements for patting successful people
expensively on the back. It acts twenty years too late, falls into line
with our usual worldly ornamental D.D., LL.D. habit, and has become, so
far as Literature is concerned, a mere colossal, kindly, doddering Old
Age Pension from a few gentlemen in Stockholm. It adds itself as one
more futile effort of men of wealth--or world owners to be creative and
lively with money, very much on the premises with money, after they are
dead.




