CHAPTER XI

DOING AS ONE WOULD WISH ONE HAD DONE IN TWENTY YEARS


If two great shops could stand side by side on the Main Street of the
World, and all the vices could be put in the show window of one of them
and all the virtues in the show windows the other, and all the people
could go by all day, all night, and see the windowful of virtues as they
were, and the windowful of vices as they were, all the world would be
good in the morning.

It would stay good as long as people remembered how the windows looked.
Or if they could not remember, all they would need to do, most people,
when a vice tempted them would be to step out, look at it in its window
a minute--possibly take a look too at the other window--and they would
be good.

If a man were to take a fancy to any particular vice, and would take a
step up to The Window, and take one firm look at it in The Window--see
it lying there, its twenty years' evil, its twenty days', its twenty
minutes' evil, all branching up out of it--he would be good.

When we see the wrong on one side and the right on the other and really
see the right as vividly as we do the wrong, we do right automatically.
Wild horses cannot drag a man away from doing right if he sees what the
right is.

A little while ago in a New England city where the grade crossings had
just been abolished, and where the railroad wound its way on a huge
yellow sandbank through the most beautiful part of the town, a
prominent, public-spirited citizen wrote a letter to the President of
the Company suggesting that the railroad (for a comparatively small
sum, which he mentioned) plant its sandbanks with trees and shrubs. A
letter came the next day saying that the railroad was unwilling to do
it. He might quite justifiably have been indignant and flung himself
into print and made a little scene in the papers, which would have been
the regular and conventional thing to do under the circumstances. But it
occurred to him instead, being a man of a curious and practical mind,
that possibly he did not know how to express himself to railroad
presidents, and that his letter had not said what he meant. He thought
he would try again, and see what would happen if he expressed himself
more fully and adequately. He took for it this second time a box seven
feet long. The box contained two long rolls of paper, one a picture by a
landscape gardener of the embankment as it would look when planted with
trees and with shrubs, and the other a photograph--a long panorama of
the same embankment as it then stood with its two great broadsides of
yellowness trailing through the city. The box containing the rolls was
sent without comment and with photographs and estimates of cost on the
bottom of the pictures.

A letter from the railroad came next day thanking him for his
suggestion, and promising to have the embankment made into a park at
once.

If God had arranged from the beginning, slides of the virtues, and had
furnished every man with a stereopticon inside, and if all a man had to
do at any particular time of temptation was to take out just the right
slide or possibly try three or four up there on his canvas a second, no
one would ever have any trouble in doing right.

       *       *       *       *       *

It is not too much to say that this way of looking at evil and good--at
the latent capacities of evil and good in men, if a man once believes
it, and if a man once practises it as a part of his daily practical
interpretation and mastery of men, will soon put a new face for him on
nearly every great human problem with which he finds his time
confronted. We shall watch the men in the world about us--each for their
little day--trying their funny, pathetic, curious little moral
experiments, and we shall see the men--all of the men and all of the
good and the evil in the men this moment--daily before our eyes working
out with an implacable hopefulness the fate of the world. We know that,
in spite of self-deceived syndicalism and self-deceived trusts, in spite
of coal strikes and all the vain, comic little troops of warships around
the earth, peace and righteousness in a vast overtone are singing toward
us.

We are not only going to have new and better motives in our modern men,
but the new and better motives are going to be thrust upon us. Every man
who reads these pages is having, at the present moment, motives in his
life which he would not have been capable of at first. Why should not a
human race have motives which it was not capable of at first? If one
takes up two or three motives of one's own--the small motives and the
large ones--and holds them up in one's hand and looks at them quietly
from the point of view of what one would wish one had done in twenty
years, there is scarcely one of us who would choose the small ones.
People who are really modern, that is, who look beyond themselves in
what they do to others, who live their lives as one might say six people
away, or sixty people farther out from themselves, or sixty million
people farther, are becoming more common everywhere; and people who look
beyond the moment in what they do to another day, who are getting more
and more to live their lives twenty years ahead, and to have motives
that will last twenty years, are driven to better and more permanent
motives.

Thinking of more people when we act for ourselves means ethical
consciousness or goodness, and better and more permanent motives.

In the last analysis, the men who permanently succeed in business will
have to see farther than the other people do.

Men like John D. Rockefeller, who have made failures of their lives, and
have not been able to conduct a business so as to keep it out of the
courts, have failed because they have had imagination about Things but
not imagination about people.

The man who is just at hand will not do over again what Mr. Rockefeller
has done. He will at least have made some advance in imagination over
Rockefeller.

Mr. Rockefeller became rich by cooeperating with other rich men to
exploit the public. The man of the immediate future is going to get
rich, as rich as he cares to be, by cooeperating not merely with his
competitors--which is as far as Rockefeller got--but by cooeperating with
the people.

It is a mere matter of social imagination, of seeing what succeeds most
permanently, and honourably, of putting what has been called "goodness"
and what is going to be called "Business" together. In other words,
social imagination is going to make a man gravitate toward mutual
interest or cooeperation, which is the new and inevitable level of
efficiency and success in business. Success is being transferred from
men of millionaire genius to men of social and human genius. The men who
are going to compete most successfully in modern competitive business
are competing by knowing how to cooeperate better than their competitors
do. Employers, employees, consumers, partners, become irresistible by
cooeperation; only employers, employees, consumers, and partners who
cooeperate better than they do can hope to compete with them. The Trusts
have already crowded out many small rivals because, while their
cooeperation has been one-sided, they have cooeperated with more people
than their rivals could; and the good Trusts, in the same way are going
to crowd out the bad Trusts, because the good ones will know how to
cooeperate with more people than the bad ones do. They will have the
human genius to see how they can cooeperate with the people instead of
against them.

They are going to invent ways of winning and keeping the confidence of
the people, of taking to this end a smaller and more just share of
profits. And they are going to gain their leadership through the wisdom
and power that goes with their money, and not through the money itself.
It is the spiritual power of their money that is going to count; and
wealth, instead of being a millionaire disease, is going to become a
great social energy in democracy. We are going to let men be rich
because they represent us, not because they hold us up, and because the
hold-up has gone by, that is: getting all one can, and service--getting
what we have earned--has come in.

The new kind and new size of politician will win his power by his faith,
like U. Ren of Oregon; the new kind and new size of editor is going to
hire with brains a millionaire to help him run his paper; and the new
kind and new size of author, instead of tagging a publisher, will be
paid royalties for supplying him with new ideas and creating for him new
publics. Power in modern life is to be light and heat and motion, and
not a gift of being heavy and solid. Even Money shall lose its inertia.

We are in this way being driven into having new kinds and new sizes of
men; and some of them will be rich ones, and some of them will be poor,
and no one will care. We will simply look at the man and at what size he
is.

If our preachers are not saving us, our business men will. Sometimes one
suspects that the reason goodness is not more popular in modern life is
that it has been taken hold of the wrong way. Perhaps when we stop
teasing people, and take goodness seriously and calmly, and see that
goodness is essentially imagination, that it is brains, that it is
thinking down through to what one really wants, goodness will begin to
be more coveted. Except among people with almost no brains or
imagination at all, it will be popular.

Perhaps it is unnecessary to say that these things that I have been
saying, or trying to say, about the flexibility and the potentiality of
the human race in its present crisis, in its present struggle to
maintain and add to its glory on the earth, are all beyond the range of
possibility, and the present strength of manhood. But I can only hope
that these objections that people make will turn out like mine. I have
been making objections all my life, as all idealists must--only to watch
with dismay and joy the old-time, happy obdurate way objections have of
going by.

People began by saying they would never use automobiles because they
were so noisy and ill-odoured and ugly. Presto! The automobile becomes
silent and shapes itself in lines of beauty.

Some of us had decided against balloons. "Even if the balloon succeeds,"
we said, "there will be no way of going just where and when you want
to." And then, presto! regular channels of wind are discovered, and the
balloon goes on.

"Aeroplanes," we said, "may be successful, but the more successful they
are, the more dangerous, and the more danger there will be of
collisions--collisions in the dark and up in the great sky at night." And,
presto! man invents the wireless telegraph, and the entire sky can be
full of whispers telling every airship where all the other airships are.

Some of us have decided that we will never have anything to do with
monopoly. Presto! there is suddenly evolved an entirely new type of
monopolist--the man who can be rich and good; the millionaire who has
invented a monopoly that serves the owners, the producers and employees,
the distributors and the consumers alike. An American railway President
has been saying lately that America would not have enough to eat in
2050, but it would not do to try to prove this just yet. Some one,
almost any day, will invent a food that is as highly concentrated as
dynamite, and the whole food supply of New York--who knows?--shall be
carried around in one railway President's vest pocket.




