CHAPTER X

AMERICAN TEMPERAMENT AND GOVERNMENT


I would like to say more specifically what I mean by an American or
singing government.

The thing that counts the most in a government is its temperament. A
German government succeeds by having the German temperament. An American
government must have the American temperament.

If we are fortunate enough to have in America a government with an
American temperament what would it be like? And how would it differ from
the traditional or conventional temperament, governments are usually
allowed to have?

If I were confined to one or two words I would put it like this:

If a government has the conventional temperament, it says "NO."

If it has the American Temperament it says, "YES, BUT ..."

The whole policy and temper of a true American government is summed up
in its saying as it looks about it--now to this business man and now to
that, just in time, "YES BUT."

Louis Brandeis, of Boston, when he was made attorney for the Gas Company
of Boston to defend the company from the criticisms of the people, sent
suddenly scores of men all about canvassing the city and looking up
people to find fault with the gas.

He spent thousands of dollars a month of the Gas Company's money for a
while in helping people to be disagreeable, until they had it attended
to and got over it.

The Gas Company had the canvassers show the people how they could burn
less gas for what they got for it, and tried to help them cut their
bills in two. Incidentally, of course, they got to thinking about gas
and about what they got for it, and about other ways they could afford
to use it, and began to have the gas habit--used it for cooking and
heating.

The people found they wanted to use four times as much gas.

The Boston Gas Company smiled sweetly.

Boston smiled sweetly.

Not many months had passed and two things had happened in Boston.

The Boston Gas Company, with precisely the same directors in it, had
made over the directors into new men, and all the people in Boston (all
who used gas) apparently had been made over into new people.

What had happened was Brandeis--a man with an American temperament.

Mr. Brandeis had defended his company from the people by going the
people's way and helping them until they helped him.

Mr. Brandeis gave gas a soul in Boston.

Before a gas corporation has a soul, it would be American for a
government to treat it in one way. After it has one it would be American
to treat it in another. There are two complete sets of conduct,
principles, and visions in dealing with a corporation before and after
its having a soul.

Preserving the females of the species and killing males as a method of
discrimination has been applied to all animals except human beings. This
is suggestive of a method of discrimination in dealing with
corporations. A corporation that has a soul and that is the most likely
to keep reproducing souls in others should be treated in one way, and a
corporation that has not should be treated in another.

There are two assumptions underneath everybody's thought, underneath
every action of our government: Which is the American assumption?

People are going to be bad if they can.

People are going to be good if they can.

Men who want to arrange laws and adjust life on the assumption that
business men will be bad if they can, it seems to some of us, are
inefficient and unscientific. It seems to us that they are off on the
main and controlling facts in American human nature. It is not true that
American business men will be bad if they can. They will be good if they
can.

This is my assertion. I cannot prove it.

What we seem to need next in this country in order to be clear-headed
and to go ahead, is to prove it. We want a competent census of human
nature.

Lacking a census of human nature, the next best thing we can do is to
watch the men who seem to know the most about human nature.

We put ourselves in their hands.

These men seem to believe, judging from their actions, that there is
really nothing that suits our temperament better in America than being
good. If we can manage to have some way of being good that we have
thought of ourselves, we like it still better. We dote on goodness when
it is ours and when we are allowed to put some punch into it. We want to
be good, to express our practical, our doing-idealism, but we will not
be driven to being good and people who think they can drive us to being
good in a government or out of it are incompetent people. They do not
know who we are.

We say they shall not have their way with us.

Let them get us right first. Then they can do other things.

What is our American temperament?

Here are a few American reflections.

The government of the next boys' school of importance in this country is
going to determine the cuts and free hours, and privileges not by marks,
but by its genius for seeing through boys.

And instead of making rules for two hundred pupils because just twenty
pupils need them, they will make the rules for just twenty pupils.

Pupils who can use their souls and can do better by telling themselves
what to do, will be allowed to do better. Why should two hundred boys
who want to be men be bullied into being babies by twenty infants who
can scare a school government into rules, _i.e._, scare their teachers
into being small and mean and second-rate?

A government that goes on this principle with business men, and that
does it in a spirit of mutual understanding for those who are not yet
free from rules, and in a spirit of confidence and expectation and of
talking it over, will be a government with an American temperament.

The first trait of a great government is going to be that it will
recognize that the basis of a true government in a democracy is
privilege and not treating all people alike. It is going to see that is
it a cowardly, lazy, brutal, and mechanical-minded thing for a
government which is trying to serve a great people--to treat all the
people alike. The basis of a great government like the basis of a great
man (or even the basis of a good digestion) is discrimination, and the
habit of acting according to facts. We will have rules or laws for
people who need them, and men in the same business who amount to enough
and are American enough to be safe as laws to themselves, will continue
to have their initiative and to make their business a profession, a
mould, an art form into which they pour their lives. The pouring of the
lives of men like this into their business is the one thing that the
business and the government want.

Several things are going to happen when what a good government seeks
each for a man's business, is to let him express himself in it.

When a man has proved conclusively that he has a higher level of
motives, and a higher level of abilities to make his motives work, the
government is going to give him a higher level of rights, liberties, and
immunities. The government will give special liberties on a sliding
scale and with shrewd provision for the future. The government will not
give special liberties to the man with higher motives than other men
have, who has not higher abilities to make his motives work, nor will it
give special liberties to the man who has higher abilities which could
make higher motives work, but who has not the higher motives.

Men who are new kinds and new sizes of men and who have proved that they
can make new kinds and new sizes of bargains, that they can make (for
the same money) new kinds and new sizes of goods, and who incidentally
make new kinds and new sizes of people out of the people who buy the
goods, men who have achieved all these supposed visionary feats by their
own initiative, will be allowed by the government to have all the
initiative they want, and immunities from fretful rules as long as they
resemble themselves and keep on doing what they have shown they can do.
The government will deal with each man according to the facts, the
scientific facts, that he has proved about himself.

The government acts according to scientific facts in everything except
men, in pure food, in cholera, and the next thing the government is
going to do is to be equally efficient in dealing with scientific facts
in men.

It is going to give some men inspected liberty. If these men say they
can be more efficient, as a railroad sometimes is, by being a monopoly,
by being a vast, self-visioned, self-controlled body the government will
have enough character, expert courage and shrewdness about human nature
to provide a way for them to try it.

When the other people come up and ask why they cannot have these
special immunities and why they cannot be a monopoly, or nearly a
monopoly, too, the government will tell them why.

Telling them why will be governing them.

When we once reckon with new kinds and new sizes of men, everything
follows. The first man who organizes a true monopoly for public service
and who does it better than any state could do it, because he thinks of
it himself, glories in it and has a genius for it, will be given a
peerage in England perhaps. But he would not really care. The thing
itself would be a peerage enough and either in America or England he
would rather be rewarded by being singled out by the government for
special rights and distinctions in conducting his business. The best way
a democracy can honour a man who has served it is not to give him a
title or to make a frivolous, idle monument of bronze for him, but to
let him have his own way.

The way to honour any artist or any creative man, any man a country is
in need of especially, is to let him have his own way.

       *       *       *       *       *

We are told that the way to govern trusts is to untrammel competition.

But the way to untrammel competition is not to try to untrammel it in
its details with lists of things men shall not do.

This is cumbersome.

We would probably find it very much more convenient in specifying 979
detailed things trusts cannot do, if we could think of certain
sum-totals of details.

Then we could deal with the details in a lump.

The best sum totals of details in this world that have ever been
invented yet, are men.

We will pick out a man who has a definite, marked character, who is a
fine, convenient sum-total that any one can see, of things not to do.

We will pick out another man in the same line of business who is a fine,
convenient sum-total of things that people ought to do.

The government will find ways, as the Coach of Business as the Referee
of the Game for the people, to stand by this man until he whips the
other, drives him out of business or makes him play as good a game as he
does.

       *       *       *       *       *

When a child finds suddenly that his father is not merely keeping him
from doing things, that his father has a soul, the father begins to get
results out of the child.

As a rule a child discovers first that his father has a soul by noticing
that he insists on treating him as if he had one.

Of course a corporation that has not a soul yet does not propose to be
dictated to by a government that has not a soul yet. When corporations
without souls see overwhelmingly that a government has a soul, they will
be filled with a wholesome fear. They will always try at first to
prevent it from having a soul if they can.

But the moment it gets one and shows it, they will be glad. They will
feel on firm ground. They will know what they know. They will act.

In the hospital on the hill not far from my house, one often sees one
attendant going out to walk with twelve insane men. One would think it
would not be safe for twelve insane men to go out to walk with one sane
man, with one man who has his soul on.

The reason it is safe, is, that the moment one insane man or man who has
not his soul on, attacks the man who has a soul, all of the other eleven
men throw themselves upon him and fling him to the ground. Men whose
souls are not on, protect, every time, the man who has his soul on
because the man who has a soul is the only defence they have from the
men who have not.

It is going to be the same with governments. We believe in a
government's having as much courage in America as a ten-dollar-a-week
attendant in an insane asylum. We want a government that sees how
courage works.

We are told in the New Testament that we are all members one of another.

If society has a soul and if every member of it has a soul, what is the
relation of the social soul to the individual soul?

A man's soul is the faculty in him for seeing the Whole in relation to
the part--his vision for others in relation to his vision for himself.

My forefinger's soul in writing with this fountain pen is the sense my
forefinger has of its relation to my arm, my spinal column, and my
brain. The ability and efficiency of my forefinger depends upon its
soul, that is, its sense of relation to the other members of the body.
If my forefinger tries to act like a brain all by itself, as it
sometimes does, nobody reads my writing.

The government in a society is the soul of all the members and it treats
them according to their souls.

The one compulsion a government will use if it has a soul, will be
granting charters in business in such a way as to fix definite
responsibility and definite publicity upon a few men.

If a corporation has a soul, it must show. It must have a face. Anybody
can tell a face off-hand or while going by. Anybody can keep track of a
corporation if it has a face.

The trouble with the average corporation is that all that anybody can
see is its stomach. Even this is anonymous.

Whose Stomach is it? Who is responsible for it? If we hit it, whom will
we hit? Let the government find out. If the time the government is now
spending in making impossibly minute laws for impossibly minute men,
were spent in finding out what size men were, and who they were and then
giving them just as many rights from the people, as they are the right
kind and the right size to handle for the people, it would be an
American government.

If there is one thing rather than another that an American or an
Englishman loves, it is asserting himself or expressing his character in
what he does. The typical dominating Englishman or American is not as
successful as a Frenchman or as an Italian in expressing other things,
as he is in expressing his character.

He cares more about expressing his character and asserting it. If he is
dealing with things, he makes them take the stamp of who he is. If he is
dealing with people, he makes them see and acknowledge who he is. They
must take in the facts about what he is like when they are with him.
They must deal with him as he is.

This trait may have its disadvantages, but if an Englishman or an
American is on this earth for anything, this is what he is for--to
express his character in what he does--in strong, vigorous, manly lines
draw a portrait of himself and show what he is like in what he does.
This may be called on both sides of the sea to-day as we stand front to
front with the more graceful nations, Anglo-Saxon Art.

It is because this particular art in the present crisis of human nature
on this planet is the desperate, the almost reckless need of a world
that the other nations of the world with all their dislike of us and
their superiorities to us, with all our ugliness and heaviness and our
galumphing in the arts, have been compelled in this huge, modern thicket
of machines and crowds to give us the lead.

And now we are threading a way for nations through the moral wilderness
of the earth.

This position has been accorded us because it goes with our temperament,
because we can be depended upon to insist on asserting ourselves and on
expressing ourselves in what we do. If the present impromptu industrial
machinery which has been handed over to us thoughtlessly and in a hurry,
does not express us, everybody knows that we can be depended on to
assert ourselves and that we will insist on one that will. The nations
that are more polite and that can dance and bow more nicely than we can
in a crisis like this would be dangerous. It is known about us
throughout a world that we are not going to be cowed by wood or by iron
or by steel and that we are not going to be cowed by men who are all
wood and iron and steel inside. If wood, iron, or steel does not express
us, we are Englishmen and we are Americans. We will butt our character
into it until it does.

       *       *       *       *       *

If the American workman were to insist upon butting his American
temperament into his labour union machinery, what would his labour
machinery in America soon begin to show that an American labourer was
like?

I imagine it might work out something like this:

The thoughtful workman looks about him. He discovers that the workman
pays at least two times as much for coal as he needs to because miners
down in Pennsylvania work one third as hard as they might for the money.

When he comes to think of it, all the labouring men of America are
paying high prices because they have to pay all the other workmen in
America for working as little as they can. He is working one third less
than he can and making his own class pay for it. He sees every workman
about him paying high prices because every other workman in making
things for him to eat and for him to wear, is cheating him--doing a
third less a day for him than he ought.

At this point the capitalists pile in and help. They shove the prices up
still higher because capital is not interested in an industry in which
the workmen do six hours' work in nine. It demands extra profits. So
while the workmen put up the prices by not working, the capitalists put
up the prices because they are afraid the workmen will not work. Half
work, high prices.

Then the American workman thinks. He begins to suppose.

Suppose that the millers' workmen and the workmen in the woollen mills
in America see how prices of supplies for labouring men are going up and
suppose they agree to work as hard as they can? Suppose the wool workers
of the world want cheap bread. The flour mill workers want cheap
clothes. We will say to the bread people, "We will bring down the price
of wool for you if you will bring down the price of bread for us."

Then let Meat and Potatoes do the same for one another. Then two
industries at a time, industries getting brains in pairs, until like the
animals going into the ark, little by little (or rather very fast,
almost piling in, in fact, after the first pair have tried it), at last
our true, spirited, practical minded American workmen will have made
their labour machines as natural and as human and as American as they
are. They will stop trying to lower prices by not working, each workman
joining (in a factory) the leisure classes and making the other workmen
pay for it.

       *       *       *       *       *

The American workman, as things are organized now, finds himself
confronted with two main problems. One is himself. How can he get
himself to work hard enough to make his food and clothes cheap? The
other is his employer.

What will the American workman do to express his American temperament
through his labour union to his employer? The American workmen will go
to their employers and say: "Instead of doing six hours' work in nine
hours, we will do nine hours' work in nine hours." The millers, for
instance, will say to the flour mill owners: "We will do a third more
work for you, make you a third more profit on our labour if you will
divide your third more profit like this:

"First, by bringing down the price of flour to everybody;

"Second, by bringing up our wages. Third, by taking more money
yourselves."

American labouring men who did this would be acting like Americans. It
is the American temperament.

They will insist on it: The labour men will continue to say to their
employers, "We will divide the proceeds of our extra work into three
sums of money--ours, yours, and everybody's." In return we will soon
find the employers saying the same thing to the labour men. Employers
would like to arrange to be good. If they can get men who earn more,
they want to pay them more.

The labourers would like to be good, _i.e._, work more for employers who
want to pay them more.

But being good has to be arranged for.

Being good is a matter of mutual understanding, a matter of
organization, a matter of butting our American temperament into our
industrial machines.

All that is the matter with these industrial machines is that they are
not like us.

Our machines are acting just now for all the world as if they were the
Americans and as if we were the machines.

Are we for the machines, or are the machines for us?

All that the American labourers and that the American capitalists have
to do is to show what they are really like, organize their news about
themselves so that they get it through to one another, and our present
great daily occupation in America (which each man calls his "business")
all the workmen going down to the mills and all the employers going down
to their offices, and then for six, eight, nine hours a day being chewed
on by machines, will cease.

We make our industrial machines. We are Americans. Our machines must
have our American temperament.

       *       *       *       *       *

If an American employer were to insist on butting his American
temperament into his industrial machine, what would his industrial
machine, when it is well at work at last, show an American employer's
temperament to be like?

The first thing that would show in his machine, I think, would be its
courage, its acting with boldness and initiative, originality and
freedom, without being cluttered up by precedents or running and asking
Mama, its clear-headedness in what it wants, its short-cut in getting to
it, and above all a kind of ruthless faith in human nature, in the
American people, in its goods and in itself.

The typical American business man of the highest class--the man who is
expressing his American temperament best in his business--is the one who
is expressing in it the most courage for himself and for others and for
his government. He has big beliefs every few minutes a day, and he acts
on them with nonchalance.

If he is running a trust--our most characteristic, recklessly difficult
American invention for a man to show through, and if he tries to get his
American temperament to show through in it, tries to make his trust like
a vast portrait, like a kind of countenance on a country, of what a big
American business is like, what will he do?

He will take a little axiom like this and act as if it were so.

_If in any given case the producers by collusion and combination can be
efficient in lowering wages to employees and raising prices and cheating
the public, this same combination or collusion would be efficient in
raising the wages of employees, lowering prices and serving the public._

He will then, being an American, turn to his government and say "I am a
certain sort of man. If I am allowed to be an exception and to combine
in this matter, I can prove that I can raise wages, lower prices for a
whole nation in these things that I make. I am a certain sort of man. Do
you think I am, or do you think that I am not? I want to know."

The government looks noncommittally at him. It says it cannot
discriminate.

He says nothing for a time, but he thinks in his heart that it is
incompetent and cowardly to run a great government of a great nation as
a vast national sweep or flourish of getting out of brains and of
evading vision. It seems to him lazy and effeminate in a government to
treat all combinations and all monopolies alike. He says: "Look me in
the eyes! I demand of you as a citizen of this country the right to be
looked by my government in the eyes. What sort of man am I? Here are all
my doors open. My safes are your safes and my books are your books. Am I
or am I not a man who can conduct his business as a great profession,
one of the dignities and energies and joys of a great people?

"What am I like inside? Is what I am like inside--my having a small size
or a big size of motive, my having a right kind or a wrong kind of
ability of no consequence to this government? Does the government of
this country really mean that the most important things a country like
this can produce, the daily, ruling motives of the men who are living in
it, have no weight with the government? Am I to understand that the
government does not propose to avail itself of new sizes and new kinds
of men and new sizes and new kinds of abilities in men? What I am trying
to do in my product is to lower the prices and raise the wages for a
nation. Will you let me do it? Will you watch me while I do it?"

This will be the American trust of to-morrow. The average trust of this
country has not yet found itself, but the moral and spiritual history,
the religious message to a government of The Trust That Has Found Itself
will be something like this.

Perhaps when we have a trust that has found itself, we will have a
government that has dared to find itself, that has the courage to use
its insight, its sense of difference between men, as it means of getting
what it wants for the people.

As it is now, the government has not found itself and it falls back on
complex rules or machines for getting out of seeing through people.

Where courage is required, it proceeds as it proceeds with automobile
speeding laws. Everybody knows that one man driving his car three miles
an hour may be more dangerous than another kind of man who is driving
his car thirty.

When our government begins to be a government, begins to express the
American temperament, it will be a government that will devote its
energy, its men, and its money to being expert in divining, and using
differences between men. It will govern as any father, teacher, or
competent business man does by treating some people in one way and
others in another, by giving graded speed licenses in business, to
labour unions, trusts, and business men.

The government will be able to do this by demanding, acquiring, and
employing as the servants of the people, men who are experts in human
nature, masters in not treating men alike--Crowbars, lemonade-straws,
chisels, and marshmallows, powerhouses and AEolian harps by the people,
for the people, and of the people, will be rated for what they are and
will be used for what they are for.

This will be democracy. It will be the American temperament in
government.

       *       *       *       *       *

Is President Wilson or is he not going to fall back into a mere lawyer
Moseslike way of getting people to be good, or is he going to be a man
like David, half poet, half soldier, who got his way with the nation
half by appreciating the men in it and being a fellow human being with
them, and half by fighting them when they would not let him be a fellow
human being with them, and would not let him appreciate them?

Almost any nation or government can get some kind of Moses to-day but
the men that America is producing would not particularly notice a Moses
probably now. A Moses might do for a Rockefeller, but he could not
really do anything with a man like Theodore N. Vail who has the
telephones and telegraphs of a country talking and ticking to us all,
all night, all day, what kind of a man he is.

A big affirmative, inspirational man like David or even Napoleon who
inspires people with one breath and fights hard with the next, a man who
swings his hat for the world, a man who goes on ahead and says "Come!"
is the only man who can be practical in America to-day in helping real
live American men like McAdoo, like Edison and Acheson,--men who can
express a people in a business--to express them.

The people have spoken. A man in the White House who cannot say "Come"
goes.

We want a poet in the White House. If we can not have a poet for the
White House soon, we want a poet who will make us a poet for the White
House.

I do not believe it is too much to expect a President to be a poet. We
have had a poet for President once in one supreme crisis of this nation
and the crisis that is coming now is so much deeper, so much more human
and world-wide than Lincoln's was that it would almost seem as if a
place like the White House (where one's poetry could really work) would
make a poet out of anybody.

A President who has not a kind of plain, still, homely poetry in him, a
belief about people that sings, in the present appalling crisis of the
world is impracticable or visionary.

So we do not say, "Have we a President that can get our Bells, Edisons,
McAdoos, Achesons to be good by toeing a line?"

We say, "Have we a President who can swing into step, who can join in
the singing, who can catch up?"

Tunnel McAdoo, when he lifted up his will against the sea and against
the seers of Wall Street, was singing. When he conceived those steel
cars, those roaring yellow streaks of light ringing through rocks
beneath the river, streets of people flashing through under the slime
and under the fish and under the ships and under the wide sunshine on
the water, he was singing! He raised millions of dollars singing.

Of course he sang the way Americans usually sing, and had to do as well
as he could in talking to bankers and investors not to look as if he
were singing, but there it all was singing inside him, the seven years
of digging, the seven years of dull thundering on rocks under the city,
and at last the happy steel cars all green and gold, the streams of
people all yellow light hissing and pouring through--those vast pipes
for people beneath the sea!

If we have a President, let him sing like McAdoo, or like Luther
Burbank, or like Theodore N. Vail, or like Colonel Goethals, picking up
a little isthmus like Panama, a string between two continents, playing
on it as if it were a harp; or like Edward Ripley playing with the Santa
Fe Railroad for all the world like Homer with a lute, all his seven
thousand men, all his workmen, all their wives and their children, all
the cities along the line striking up and joining in the chorus or like
Carborundum Acheson, backed up by his little Niagara Falls oiling the
wheels of a world, weaving diamonds into steel, hardening the bones of
the earth into skyscrapers, into railroads, into the mighty thighs of
flying locomotives....

Any man who is seen acting in this world with a thing, as if he believed
in the thing, as if he believed in himself and believed in other people,
is singing.

Moses striking out with a rod, as we are told, a path along the sea for
his people may have done a more showy thing from a religious point of
view, hitting the water on top so, making a great splash with an empty
place in it for people to march through, but he was not essentially more
religious than McAdoo, with all those modest but mighty columns of
figures piling up behind him, with all those splendid, dumb, still
glowing engineers behind him, lifting up his will against cities,
lifting up his will against herds of politicians, haughty newspapers,
against the flocks of silly complacent old ferry-boats waddling in the
bay, against the wind and the rain and the cold on the water, and all
the banks of Wall Street....

When we want to tell News to our President about ourselves in America,
we point to William G. McAdoo.

The first news that we, the American people, must contrive to get into
the White House about ourselves is that we do not want to be improved,
and that we do not like an improving tone in our government. We want to
be expressed the way McAdoos express us. We want a government that
expresses our faith in one another, in what we are doing, and in
ourselves, and in the world.

We are singing over here on this continent. We would not all of us put
it in just this way. But our singing is the main thing we can do, and a
government that is trying to improve us feebly, that is looking askance
at us and looking askance at our money, and at our labour, and that does
not believe in us and join in with us in our singing does not know what
we are like.

Our next national business in America is to get the real news over to
the President of what we are like.

It is news that we want in the White House. A missionary in the White
House, be he ever so humble, will not do.

Mr. Roosevelt, himself, with the word Duty on every milepost as he
whirled past, with suggestions of things for other people to do buzzing
like bees about his head, acquired his tremendous and incredible power
with us as a people because, in spite of his violent way of breaking out
into a missionary every morning and every evening when he talked, it was
not his talking but his singing that made him powerful--his singing, or
doing things as if he believed in people, his I wills and I won'ts, his
assuming every day, his acting every day, as if American men were men.
He sang his way roughly, hoarsely, even a little comically at times into
the hearts of people, stirred up in the nation a mighty heat, put a
great crackling fire under it, put two great parties into the pot,
boiled them, drew off all that was good in them, and at last, to-day, as
I write (February 1913), the prospect of a good square meal in the White
House (with some one else to say grace) is before the people.

The people are waiting to sit down once more in the White House and
refresh themselves.

At least, the soup course is on the table.

Who did it, please? Who bullied the cook and got everybody ready?

Theodore Roosevelt, singing a little roughly, possibly hurrahing "_I
will, I will, I won't, I won't_," and acting as if he believed in the
world.

Bryan in the village of Chicago sitting by at a reporter's table saw him
doing it.

Bryan saw how it worked.

Bryan had it in him too.

Bryan heard the shouts of the people across the land as they gloried in
the fight. He saw the signals from the nations over the sea.

Then Armageddon moved to Baltimore.

       *       *       *       *       *

And now table is about to be spread.

It is to be Mr. Wilson's soup.

But the soup will have a Roosevelt flavour or tang to it. And we will
wait to see what Mr. Wilson will do with the other courses.

       *       *       *       *       *

A poet in words, with two or three exceptions, America has not produced.

The only touch of poetry or art as yet that we have in America
is--acting as if we believed in people. This particular art is ours.
Other people may have it, but it is all we have.

This is what makes or may make any moment the common American a poet or
artist.

Speaking in this sense, Mr. Roosevelt is the first poet America has
produced that European peoples and European governments have noticed for
forty years, or had any reason to notice. We respectfully place Mr.
Roosevelt with Mr. McAdoo (and if Mr. Brandeis will pardon us, with Mr.
Brandeis) as a typical American before the eyes of the new President.
We ask him to take Mr. Roosevelt as a very important part of the latest
news about us.

The true imaginative men of our modern life, the poets of crowds and
cities are not to-day our authors, preachers, professors or lawyers or
philosophers. The poets of crowds are our men like this, our
vision-doers, the men who have seen visions and dreamed dreams in the
real and daily things, the daring Governors like Wilson and like Hughes,
the daring inventors of great business houses, the men who have invented
the foundations on which nations can stand, on which railroads can run,
the men whose imaginations, in the name of heaven, have played with the
earth mightily, watered deserts, sailed cities on the seas, the men who
have whistled and who have said "Come!" to empires, who have thought
hundred-year thoughts, taken out nine hundred and ninety-nine year
leases, who have thought of mighty ways for cities to live, for cities
to be cool, to be light, to be dark, who have conceived ways for nations
to talk, who have grasped the earth and the sky like music, like words,
and put them in the hands of the people, and made the people say, "O
earth," and "O sky, thou art great, but we also are great! Come earth
and sky, thou shalt praise God with us!"

Who are these men?

Let the President catch up!

Who are these men? Here is Edward A. Filene, who takes up the pride,
joy, beauty, self-respect, and righteousness of a city, swings it into a
Store, and makes that Store sing about the city up and down the world!
Here is Alexander Cassatt, imperturbable, irrepressible, and like a
great Boy playing leapfrog with a Railroad--Cassatt who makes
quick-hearted, dreamy Philadelphia duck under the Sea, bob up serenely
in the middle of New York and leap across Hell Gate to get to Boston!
Let the parliaments droning on their benches, the Congresses pile out of
their doors and catch up.

Let the lawyers--the little swarms of dark-minded lawyers, wondering and
running to and fro, creeping in offices, who have tried to run our
world, blurred our governments, and buzzed, who have filled the world
with piles of old paper, Congressional Records, with technicalities,
words, droning, weariness, despair, and fear ... let them come out and
look! Let them catch up!

Let a man in this day in the presence of men like these sing. If a man
cannot sing, let him be silent. Only men who are singing things shall do
them.

I go out into the street, I go out and look almost anywhere, listen
anywhere, and the singing rises round me!

It was singing that spread the wireless telegraph like a great web
across the sky.

It was singing that dug the subways under the streets in New York.

It was singing, a kind of iron gladness, hope and faith in men, that has
flung up our skyscrapers into the lower stories of the clouds, and made
them say, "_I will! I will! I will!_" to God.

Ah, how often have I seen them from the harbour, those flocking, crowded
skyscrapers under that little heaven in New York, lifting themselves in
the sunlight and in the starlight, lifting themselves before me,
sometimes, it seems, like crowds of great states, like a great country
piled up, like a nation reaching, like the plains and the hills and the
cities of my people standing up against heaven day by day--all those
flocks of the skyscrapers saying, "_I will! I will! I will!_" to God.

The skyscrapers are news about us to our President. He shall reckon with
skyscraper men. He shall interpret men that belong with skyscrapers.

And as he does so, I shall watch the people answer him, now with a glad
and mighty silence and now with a great solemn shout.

The skyscrapers are their skyscrapers.

The courage, the reaching-up, the steadfastness that is in them is in
the hearts of the people.

If the President does not know us yet in America, does not know McAdoo
as a representative American, we will thunder on the doors of the White
House until he does.

My impression is he would be out in the yard by the gate asking us to
come in.

We are America. We are expressing our joy in the world, our faith in
God, and our love of the sun and the wind in the hearts of our people.

In America the free air breathes about us, and daily the great sun
climbs our hillsides, swings daily past our work. There are ninety
million men with this sun and this wind woven into their bodies, into
their souls. They stand with us.

The skyscrapers stand with us.

All singing stands with us.

Ah, I have waked in the dawn and in the sun and the wind have I seen
them!

That sun and that wind, I say before God, are America! They are the
American temperament.

I will have laws for free men, laws with the sun and the wind in them!

I have waked in the dawn and my heart has been glad with the iron and
poetry in the skyscrapers.

I will have laws for men and for American men, laws with iron and poetry
in them!

The way for a government to get the poetry in is to say "Yes" to
somebody.

The way for a government to get the iron in is not by saying "No." It is
not American in a government to keep saying "No." The best way for our
government in America to say "No" to a man, is to let him stand by and
watch us saying "Yes" to some one else.

Then he will ask why.

Then he will stand face to face with America.




