CHAPTER XII

NEW KINDS AND NEW SIZES OF MEN


It would be hard to overestimate the weariness and cynicism and despair
that have been caused in the world by its more recklessly hopeful
men--the men who plump down happily anywhere and hope, the optimists who
are merely slovenly in their minds about evil. But the optimism that
consists in putting evil facts up into a kind of outdoors in our minds
and in giving them room to exercise in our thoughts and feelings, the
optimism that consists in having one's brain move vigorously through
disagreeable facts--organize them into the other facts with which they
belong and with which they work--is worthy of consideration. Many of us,
who have tried optimism and pessimism both, have noticed certain things.

When one is being pessimistic, one almost always has the feeling of
being rather clever. It is forced upon one a little, of course, having
all those other people about one stodgily standing up for people and not
really seeing through them!

So, though one ought not to, one does feel a little superior--even with
the best intentions--when one is being discouraged.

But the trouble with pessimism is that it is only at the moment when one
is having it that one really enjoys it, or feels in this way about it.

Perhaps I should not undertake to speak for others, and should only
speak for myself; but I can only bear witness, for one, that every time
in my life that I have broken through the surface a little, and seen
through to the evil, and found myself suddenly and astutely discouraged,
I have found afterward that all I had to do was to see the same thing a
little farther over, set it in the light beyond it, and look at it in
larger or more full relations, and I was no longer astutely discouraged.

So I have come to believe slowly and grimly that feeling discouraged
about the world is not quite clever. I have noticed it, too, in watching
other people--men I know. If I could take all the men I know who are
living and acting as if they believed big things about people to-day,
men who are daily taking for granted great things in human nature, and
put them in one group by themselves all together, and if I could then
take all the men I know who are taking little things for granted in one
another and in human nature, I do not believe very many people would
find it hard to tell which group would be more clever. Possibly the
reason more of us do not spend more time in being hopeful about the
world is that it takes more brains usually than we happen to have at the
moment. Hope may be said to be an act of the brain in which it sees
facts in relations large enough to see what they are for, an act in
which it insists in a given case upon giving the facts room enough to
turn around and to relate themselves to one another, and settle down
where they belong in one's mind, the way they would in real time.

So now, at last, Gentle Reader, having looked back and having looked
forward, I know the way I am going.

I am going to hope.

It is the only way to see through things. The only way to dare to see
through ones' self; the only way to see through other people and to see
past them, and to see with them and for them--is to hope.

So I am putting the challenge to the reader, in this book, as I have put
it to myself.

There are four questions with which day by day we stand face to face:

1. Does human nature change?

2. Does it change toward a larger and longer vision?

3. Will not a larger and longer vision mean new kinds and
new sizes of men?

4. Will not new sizes of men make new-sized ethics practical
and make a new world?

Everything depends for every man upon this planet, at this moment, on
how he decides these questions. If he says Yes, he will live one kind of
life, he will live up to his world. If he says No, he will have a mean
world, smaller-minded than he is himself, and he will live down to it.

This is what the common run of men about us--the men of less creative
type in literature, in business, and in politics--are doing. They do not
believe human nature is changing. They are living down to a world that
is going by. They are living down to a world that is smaller than they
are themselves. They are trying to make others do it. They answer the
question "Does human nature change?" by "No!" Wilbur Wright, when he
flew around over the heads of the people in New York a few years ago, a
black speck above a whole city with its heads up, answered "Yes!"

But the real importance of the flying machine has not stopped short with
a little delicate, graceful thing like walking on the air instead of the
ground.

The big and really revolutionary thing about Wilbur Wright's flying was
that he changed the minds of the whole human race in a few minutes about
one thing. There was one particular thing that for forty thousand years
they knew they could not do. And now they knew they could.

It naturally follows--and it lies in the mind of every man who
lives--that there must be other particular things. And as nine men out
of ten are in business, most of these particular things are going to be
done in business.

The Wilbur Wright spirit is catching.

It is as if a Lid had been lifted off the world.

One sees everywhere business men going about the street expecting new
things of themselves. They expect things of the very ground, and of the
air, and of one another they had not dared expect before.

The other day in a New England city I saw a man, who had been the
president of an Electric Light Company for twenty years, who had
invented a public service corporation that worked. Since he took office
and dictated the policy of the Company, every single overture for more
expensive equipment in the electric lighting of the city has come from
the Company, and every single overture for reducing the rate to
consumers has come from the company.

The consumption of electricity in the city is the largest _per capita_
in the world, and the rate is the cheapest in the country; and,
incidentally, the Company so trusts the people that they let them have
electricity without metres, and the people so trust the Company that
they save its electricity as they would their own.

Even the man without a conscience, who would be mean if he could, is
brought to terms, and knows that if he refrains from leaving his lights
burning all night when he goes to bed he is not merely saving the
Company's electricity but his own. He knows that he is reducing his own
and everybody's price for electricity, and not merely increasing the
profits of the Company.

It makes another kind of man slowly out of thousands of men every day,
every night, turning on and turning off their lights.

The Electric Light Company has come to have a daily, an almost hourly,
influence on the way men do business and go about their work in that
city--the motives and assumptions with which they bargain with one
another--that might be envied by twenty churches.

All that had happened was that a man with a powerful, quietly wilful
personality--the kind that went on crusades and took cities in other
ages--had appeared at last, and proposed to do the same sort of thing in
business. He proposed to express his soul, just as it was, in business
the way other people had expressed theirs for a few hundred years in
poetry or more easy and conventional ways.

If he could not have made the electric light business say the things
about people and about himself that he liked and that he believed, he
would have had to make some other business say them.

One of the things he had most wanted to say and prove in business was
the economic value of being human, the enormous business saving that
could be effected by being believed in.

He preferred being believed in himself, in business, and he knew other
people would prefer it; and he was sure that if, as people said, "being
believed in did not pay," it must be because ways of inventing faith in
people, the technique of trust, had not been invented.

He found himself invited to take charge of the Electric Light Company at
a time when it was insolvent and in disgrace with the people, and he
took the Corporation in hand on the specific understanding that he
should be allowed to put his soul into it, that he should be allowed his
own way for three years--in believing in people, and in inventing ways
of getting believed in as much as he liked.

The last time I saw him, though he is old and nearly blind, and while as
he talked there lay a darkness on his eyes, there was a great light in
his face.

He had besieged a city with the shrewdness of his faith, and conquered a
hundred thousand men by believing in them more than they could.

By believing in them shrewdly, and by thinking out ways of expressing
that belief, he had invented a Corporation--a Public Service
Corporation--that had a soul, and consequently worked.




BOOK TWO

LETTING THE CROWDS BE GOOD

TO ABRAHAM LINCOLN

    They stay not in their hold
    These stokers,
    Stooping to hell
    To feed a ship.
    Below the ocean floors.
    Before their awful doors
    Bathed in flame,
    I hear their human lives
    Drip--drip.

    Through the lolling aisles of comrades
    In and out of sleep,
    Troops of faces
    To and fro of happy feet,
    They haunt my eyes.
    Their murky faces beckon me
    From the spaces of the coolness of the sea
    Their fitful bodies away against the skies.





