CHAPTER IV

THE STRIKE--AN INVENTION FOR MAKING CROWDS THINK


When I was arranging to slip over from New York and get something I very
much wanted in England last spring, I found myself held up suddenly in
all my plans because some men on the docks had decided that there was
something that they wanted too. They decided that I and thousands of
other people in New York would have to wait over on the shores of
America until they got it.

After postponing my plans until things had settled down, I took passage,
and in due time found myself standing on English soil, only to be
informed that, while I might be allowed perhaps at least to stand on
English soil, that was really as much as I could expect. I could not go
anywhere because a number of men on the railways had decided that there
was something they wanted and that I would have to wait till they got
it.

I could go down and look at the silent, cold locomotives on the rails,
and I could be as wistful and hopeful as I liked about getting up to
London, but these men had decided that there was something that they
wanted and I must wait.

I could not think of anything I had ever done to these men, and what had
Liverpool and London done to them?

After I was duly settled in London, and had begun to get into its little
ways, and was busily driving about and attending to my business as I had
planned, 6,000 more men suddenly wanted something, brought me up to a
full stop one rainy day, and said that they had decided that if I wanted
to ride I would have to walk, or that I would have to poke dismally
about in a 'bus, or worm my way through under the ground. As I
understood it, there was something that they wanted and something that
they were going to get; and while of course in a way, they recognized
that there might be something that I wanted too, I would have to wait
till they got theirs.

I could not think of anything I had ever done to them, nor could I see
what the thousands of other good people in London that I saw walking and
puddling about, or watched waiting twenty minutes or so with long,
hopeful, dogged whistles for cabs, had done to them.

A few days more, and my morning paper tells me suddenly of some more men
who wanted something--this time up in Lancashire. They had decided that
they wouldn't let some two or three hundred thousand other men go to
their work until they got it. They hushed cities to have their own way.
Day by day I watched them throwing the silence of the cities in their
employers' faces, closing shops, closing up railroads, telling the world
it must pay more for the clothes on its back, and all because--a certain
Mr. and Mrs. Riley of Accrington, North Lancashire did not like or did
not think that they liked, the North Lancashire Trades Union. (The
general idea seemed to be to have all the others join in,
everywhere--fifty-four million spindles, and four hundred and forty
thousand looms--and wait and keep perfectly still until Mr. and Mrs.
Riley could make up their minds.)

And now this present week, morning after morning I take up my paper and
read that 500,000 miners want something. I look in my fire dubiously day
by day. I may have to go home to America in a few weeks to get warm.

Of course it is only fair to say at the outset that this little series
of impressions, or sketches, as one may say, of Civilization as I have
seen it since arriving in England are of such a nature that I need not
have come over to England to observe them. I would be the last to deny
that the same conveniences for being disagreeable and for getting in the
way and for making a general muss of Life can be offered almost any
time in my own hopeful and blundering country.

What more immediately concerns me in these things is that, having
happened, there can be no doubt that they have some valuable and worthy
meaning for me and for other people that I ought to get out of them.

One cannot stand by and see a great civilization like our
English-speaking civilization, with its ocean liners, cathedrals, and
aeroplanes, being undignified and inefficient before one's eyes and even
a little ridiculous, without trying to see if it does not serve some
purpose. There must be something beyond, something further and deeper,
something newborn about it, which shall be worth our while. Strikes seem
to be common people's way of thinking things out. If they had more
imagination, they would know what they were going to think beforehand,
without so much trouble perhaps; but so long as they have not, and so
long as it is really true perhaps that all these millions of levers and
wheels and engines will have to be stopped, so that the rich
mechanical-minded people who own them and the poor mechanical-minded
people who work with them can think better, we will have to be glad at
least that they are thinking, and we will have to hope that they are
thinking fast, and will soon have it over with. In the meantime, while
they are thinking, we can think too.

It is never fair to lump people together, and there are always
exceptions and special reasons to consider; but, speaking roughly, it is
fair to lay it down as a general principle that it is apt to be the more
common kind of employers and employees who find it difficult to think,
and who need strikes to think with. When we see 175,000 weavers striking
in Lancashire, and the Trades Unions insisting on the discharge of
Non-Union men, and employers being willing to recognize the Unions but
being unwilling to be controlled by them, most of us find ourselves
taking sides very quickly. We are often amazed to see how quickly we
take sides, and what amazes some of us most is our apparent
inconsistency. We find ourselves now on the Union side and now on the
employer side in the dispute between Capital and Labour. We never know
when we take up the morning paper, some of us, which side will be our
next; and very often, if we were suddenly asked why, on reading quietly
about a new dispute in the morning paper, we had taken promptly one side
rather than the other, almost unconsciously, before we knew it we would
not perhaps be able to say at once. The other day I became a little
alarmed at myself at what looked at first like a kind of moral weakness,
and inability to stand still on one side or the other in the contest
between Labour and Capital; and I tried to think my way sternly through,
and decide why it was my mind seemed to waver from one side to the
other, and seemed so inconsistent and inefficient.

It seems to me I have just discovered a certain thread of consistency,
as I look back over many disputes.

As near as I can remember, I find the side that uses force, or that uses
the most force, invariably turns me against it. If, as I read, I find
that both sides are using force, I find myself against both sides. I
find myself wishing, in spite of my dislike of Socialism, that the
nation had the power, when a quarrelsome industry turns to the people in
the street and stops them in what they are doing, and tells the people
in the street that they cannot ride, or that they shall not sleep, or
that they cannot eat--when a quarrelsome industry insists on keeping the
whole world up all night because it has a Stomach Ache, I feel suddenly
that the people ought to be able to take the industry away and put it
into such hands that the people in the streets will be protected; into
hands that will make the industry behave so that it won't have a stomach
ache. An industry with a stomach ache always has it because somebody in
it has been over-eating and getting more than their share, and is
incompetent and unfit; and obviously it should have its freedom, its
privilege of selecting its food, taken away from it until it behaves.

Always allowing for exceptions, we may put it down as a general truth
that, when we find a cause using force or mere advantage of position, it
is because there is incompetence or lack of brains in those who conduct
it, and the cure lies, not in more force, but in more brains. One cannot
help being angered by force, because one knows that it is not only not a
remedy, but is itself the cause of all incompetence and blindness in
business. Force merely heaps the incompetence and blindness up,
postpones cooeperation, defeats the mutual interest which is the very
substance of business efficiency in a nation. Force is itself the injury
mounting up more and more, which it seeks to cure.

The most likely way to prevent industrial trouble would seem to be to
have employers and managers and foremen who have a genius for getting
men to trust and believe in them. We are getting smoke-consumers,
computing machines, and the next contrivance is going to be the employer
who has the understanding spirit, and who sees the cash value of human
genius, the value in the market of genius for being fair and getting on
with people. Arbitration boards are at best (as they themselves would
say) stupid and negative things, and though better than nothing, as a
rule merely postpone evil or change symptoms. No one can ever really
arbitrate for any one else either in industry or marriage except for a
moment. The trouble lies deep down inside the people who keep needing
arbitration. As long as these people are still there, and as long as
incompetent employers or employees are there, there is bound to be
trouble.

Turning out incompetent employers and incompetent labourers is the only
way. We are getting rid of them as rapidly as possible. All business in
the last resort turns on brains for being human and understanding
people. Business, as people say, is partly business and business is
partly economics, but more than anything else, in modern times, business
is psychology.

Success is the science of being believed in. Incompetent employers and
incompetent labourers are already being turned out, and are bound to be
turned out implacably more and more, by the competitive nature of modern
business. Under present conditions, if we have in each industry one
single competent employing firm, with brains for being fair and brains
for being far-sighted, and for being thoughtful of others--in short,
with brains for being believed in--the control of that industry soon
falls into their hands. People who use force instead of brains are
second-rate, are out of the spirit of the times, and are going by. And
this seems to be the spirit, too, which is to govern the more efficient
Labour Unions as well as the more efficient Trusts.

If it were possible to collect the names in England and America of the
men in each industry where brains were being personally believed in, we
would have a list of the leaders of England and America for the next
fifty years. Having a soul in business pays, not because it affords a
fine motive power, but because it affords a practical and conclusive
method of driving the devil out of business. He is being driven out of
industry, one industry at a time, by men who get on better without him;
and this is going to go on until the ability to do this--to crowd out
the devil, to get the devil out of machines and factories, out of the
machinery of organization--the power to keep the devil out of things and
out of people, is recognized by everybody as the greatest, most subtle,
most victorious and universal market-value in the world. The men who can
be believed in most will get the most business, and, what is still more
important, the men who can make men believe in them most will be able to
hire the employees who can be believed in most, and will get a monopoly
of the efficiency of the world; and though the men who can be believed
in less may be able to continue for a time to do their work and go
through all their old motions as well as they can, with all their old
lumbering, pathetic machinery of watching each other and suspecting each
other and fighting each other humped up on their backs, they can never
hope to compete with free-moving, honest men, who deal directly and
openly and in a few words for their employees, jobbers, consumers, and
the public, without any vast machinery of suspicion to bother with. It
is a most curious, local, temporary, back-county idea, the idea that,
for sheer industrial economy, for simple cheap conclusive finance, there
is anything on earth in business that will take the place of
old-fashioned human personal prestige--the prestige of the man who has a
genius for being believed in.

In a way, perhaps the recent strike among the London cabmen is an
instance of what is really the essential issue in every strike. The
bottom fact about the taxi chauffeurs, stated simply, was that they did
not believe in their employers. They believed that, if the precise
figures were known, their employers were getting more than their share.
On the other hand, the bottom fact about the employers was that they did
not and could not believe that, if the precise figures were known, the
cabmen were not getting more than their share. They insisted that the
cabmen should publish, or make known, the precise figures of their
extras. The cabmen declined to do it, and it made them look for the
moment perhaps as if they were wrong. But were they necessarily wrong?
Was it really true that they had any more reason to trust their
employers than their employers had to trust them? The cabmen might quite
honestly and justly have said to the owners: "What we want is an honest,
impeccable little dividend-recorder fastened on the back of every owner,
as well as on our machines and on us. Then we will publish our extras."

The determining and important fact of economics in the last analysis
always turns out to be some human fact, some fact about people. It is
really true that just now, in the present half-stage of
machine-industry, employers should nearly all be compelled to go about
in this world with fare-recorders on their backs. Employees too. This
would be the logical thing to do; and as it is impracticable, and as
every business must have certain elements of secrecy in it in order to
be competent, the only alternative is to have in charge men with enough
genius for being believed in and for taking measures to be believed
in--to keep employees believing in them, in spite of secrecy. Under
these conditions, it cannot be long before we will see in every business
the men being put forward on both sides who have a genius for being
believed in. Managers and superintendents will be put in office
everywhere who see the cash value, the economy, of the simple,
old-fashioned power in a man of a genius for being believed in;
employers with the power of inspiring more and better work from their
workmen; Labour men with the power of inspiring employers to believe in
them, of inspiring their employers to put up money, stock, or profits on
their belief--on the belief that workmen are capable of the highest
qualities of manhood: hard work, loyalty, persistence, and faith toward
a common end. I have preferred to have this inspired employer a
millionaire, because the more capital he has the more men he can employ,
and the more rapidly the other kind of millionaire, the blind,
old-fashioned butter of Labour, will be driven out of business.

Little can be done with one book, but at this special juncture, this
psychological moment for copartnership and the spirit of copartnership,
when all the world is touched to the quick by great strikes--at a time
when one can sit still and almost hear the nations think--there are some
of us who hope that the case we are trying to make out for copartnership
between Capital and Labour will be of use to those who are trying to do
things, and who for the moment find themselves foiled at every point by
men who have given up believing in human nature. We wish to put
ourselves on record, and to say that we do believe in human nature, and
that we believe not only that the inspired employer is going to be
evolved by the Crowd, but that the Crowd is going to recognize him and
is going to take sides with him, and that the Crowd is going to justify
him, make him succeed, is going to make his success its own success. In
other words, we believe in heroes, crowds, and goodness; in men of
heroic gifts--who are fit and meet to interpret the wills and desires
of crowds--who are great men or Crowd-Men, crowds in spirit themselves.

I would like to try to express the type of modern man who, as it seems
to me, is about to prove himself the real ruler of our modern world, the
silent master of what the crowds shall think. It has seemed to me that
it is going to be a man of a marked type, and of a particular
temperament, to whom we will have to look in our new and crowded world
for the crowd-interpreter, or man who touches the imagination of crowds.

As our whole labour problem to-day turns on our being able to touch the
imagination of Crowds, it may not be uninteresting in the next chapter
to consider what a man who can do this will probably be like and the
spirit in which he will do it.




