CHAPTER X

THE MACHINE-TRAINERS


The fundamental failure of humanity so far is in self-assertion.

The essential distinctive trait of modern civilization is machinery.

Machinery logically and irrevocably involves the cooeperative action of
individuals.

If we make levers and iron wheels work by putting them together
according to their nature, we can only make vast masses of men work by
putting them together according to their nature.

So far we have been trying to make vast masses of men work together in
precisely the same way we make levers and iron wheels work together. We
have thought we could make diabolically, foolishly, insanely inflexible
men-machines which violate at every point the natural qualities and
instincts of the materials of which they are made.

We have failed to assert ourselves against our iron machines. We have
let our iron machines assert themselves against us. We have let our iron
machines be models for us. We have overlooked the difference in the
nature of the materials in machines of iron and machines of men.

A man is a self-reproducing machine, and an iron machine is one that has
to be reproduced by somebody else.

In a man-machine arrangements must be made so that each man can be
allowed to be the father of his own children and the author of his own
acts.

In society or the man-machine, if it is to work, men are individuals.
Society is organically, irrevocably dependent upon each man, and upon
what each man chooses according to his own nature to do himself.

The result is, the first principle of success in constructing and
running a social machine is to ask and to get an answer out of each man
who is, as we look him over and take him up, and propose to put him into
it, "What are you like?" "What are you especially for?" "What do you
want?" "How can you get it?"

Our success in getting him properly into our machine turns upon a loyal,
patient, imperious attention on our part to what there is inside him,
inside the particular individual man, and how we can get him to let us
know what is inside, get him to decide voluntarily to let us have it,
and let us work it into the common end.

In this amazing, impromptu, new, and hurried machine civilization which
we have been piling up around us for a hundred years we have made
machines out of everything, and our one consummate and glaring failure
in the machines we have made is the machine we have made out of
ourselves.

Mineral machines are made by putting comparatively dead, or at least
dead-looking, matter together; vegetable machines or gardens, are made
by studying little unconscious seeds that we can persuade to come up and
to reproduce themselves. Man-machines are produced by putting up
possible lives before particular individual men, and letting them find
out (and finding out for ourselves, too), day by day, into which life
they will grow up.

Everything in a social machine, if it is a machine that really works, is
based on the profound and special study of individuals: upon drawing out
the aptitudes and motives, choices and genius in each man; the passion,
if he has any; the creative desire, the self-expressing,
self-reproducing, inner manhood; the happy strength there is in him.

Trades unions overlook this, and treat all men alike and all employers
alike. Employers have very largely overlooked it.

It is the industrial, social, and religious secret of our modern machine
civilization. We need not be discouraged about machines, because the
secret of the machine civilization has as yet barely been noticed.

The elephants are running around in the garden. But they have merely
taken us by surprise. It is their first and their last chance. The men
about us are seeing what to do. We are to get control of the elephants,
first, by getting control of ourselves. We are beginning to organize our
people-machines as if they were made of people; so that the people in
them can keep on being people, and being better ones. And as our
people-machines begin to become machines that really work, our iron
machines will no longer be feared. They will reach over and help. As we
look about us we shall see our iron machines at last, about all the
world, all joining in, all hard at work for us, a million, million
machines a day making the crowd beautiful.




CHAPTER XI

MACHINES, CROWDS, AND ARTISTS


A crowd civilization produces, as a matter of course, crowd art and art
for crowded conditions. This fact is at once the glory and the weakness
of the kind of art a democracy is bound to have.

The most natural evidence to turn to first, of the crowd in a crowd age,
is such as can be found in its literature, especially in its
masterpieces.

The significance of shaking hands with a Senator of the United States is
that it is a convenient and labour-saving way of shaking hands with two
or three million people. The impressiveness of the Senator's Washington
voice, the voice on the floor of the Senate, consists in the mystical
undertone--the chorus in it--multitudes in smoking cities, men and
women, rich and poor, who are speaking when this man speaks, and who are
silent when he is silent, in the government of the United States.

The typical fact that the Senator stands for in modern life has a
corresponding typical fact in modern literature. The typical fact in
modern literature is the epigram, the senatorial sentence, the sentence
that immeasurably represents what it does not say. The difference
between democracy in Washington and democracy in Athens may be said to
be that in Washington we have an epigram government, a government in
which ninety million people are crowded into two rooms to consider what
to do, and in which ninety million people are made to sit in one chair
to see that it is done. In Athens every man represented himself.

It may be said to be a good working distinction between modern and
classic art that in modern art words and colours and sounds stand for
things, and in classic art they said them. In the art of the Greek,
things were what they seemed, and they were all there. Hence simplicity.
It is a quality of the art of to-day that things are not what they seem
in it. If they were, we should not call it art at all. Everything stands
not only for itself and for what it says, but for an immeasurable
something that cannot be said. Every sound in music is the senator of a
thousand sounds, thoughts, and associations, and in literature every
word that is allowed to appear is the representative in three syllables
of three pages of a dictionary. The whistle of the locomotive, and the
ring of the telephone, and the still, swift rush of the elevator are
making themselves felt in the ideal world. They are proclaiming to the
ideal world that the real world is outstripping it. The twelve thousand
horsepower steamer does not find itself accurately expressed in iambics
on the leisurely fleet of Ulysses. It is seeking new expression. The
command has gone forth over all the beauty and over all the art of the
present world, crowded for time and crowded for space. "Telegraph!" To
the nine Muses the order flies. One can hear it on every side.
"Telegraph!" The result is symbolism, the Morse alphabet of art and
"types," the epigrams of human nature, crowding us all into ten or
twelve people. The epic is telescoped into the sonnet, and the sonnet is
compressed into quatrains or Tabbs of poetry, and couplets are signed as
masterpieces. The novel has come into being--several hundred pages of
crowded people in crowded sentences, jostling each other to oblivion;
and now the novel, jostled into oblivion by the next novel, is becoming
the short story. Kipling's short stories sum the situation up. So far as
skeleton or plot is concerned, they are built up out of a bit of nothing
put with an infinity of Kipling; so far as meat is concerned, they are
the Liebig Beef Extract of fiction. A single jar of Kipling contains a
whole herd of old-time novels lowing on a hundred hills.

The classic of any given world is a work of art that has passed through
the same process in being a work of art that that world has passed
through in being a world. Mr. Kipling represents a crowd age, because he
is crowded with it; because, above all others, he is the man who
produces art in the way the age he lives in is producing everything
else.

This is no mere circumstance of democracy. It is its manifest destiny
that it shall produce art for crowded conditions, that it shall have
crowd art. The kind of beauty that can be indefinitely multiplied is the
kind of beauty in which, in the nature of things, we have made our most
characteristic and most important progress. Our most considerable
success in pictures could not be otherwise than in black and white.
Black-and-white art is printing-press art; and art that can be produced
in endless copies, that can be subscribed for by crowds, finds an
extraordinary demand, and artists have applied themselves to supplying
it. All the improvements, moving on through the use of wood and steel
and copper, and the process of etching, to the photogravure, the
lithograph, the moving picture, and the latest photograph in colour,
whatever else may be said of them from the point of view of Titian or
Michael Angelo, constitute a most amazing and triumphant advance from
the point of view of making art a democracy, of making the rare and the
beautiful minister day and night to crowds. The fact that the mechanical
arts are so prominent in their relation to the fine arts may not seem to
argue a high ideal amongst us; but as the mechanical arts are the body
of beauty, and the fine arts are the soul of it, it is a necessary part
of the ideal to keep body and soul together until we can do better.
Mourning with Ruskin is not so much to the point as going to work with
William Morris. If we have deeper feelings about wall-papers than we
have about other things, it is going to the root of the matter to begin
with wall-papers, to make machinery say something as beautiful as
possible, inasmuch as it is bound to have, for a long time at least,
about all the say there is. The photograph does not go about the world
doing Murillos everywhere by pressing a button, but the camera habit is
doing more in the way of steady daily hydraulic lifting of great masses
of men to where they enjoy beauty in the world than Leonardo da Vinci
would have dared to dream in his far-off day; and Leonardo's pictures,
thanks to the same photograph, and everybody's pictures, films of paper,
countless spirits of themselves, pass around the world to every home in
Christendom. The printing press made literature a democracy, and
machinery is making all the arts democracies. The symphony piano, an
invention for making vast numbers of people who can play only a few very
poor things play very poorly a great many good ones, is a consummate
instance both of the limitation and the value of our contemporary
tendency in the arts. The pipe organ, though on a much higher plane, is
an equally characteristic contrivance making it possible for a man to be
a complete orchestra and a conductor all by himself, playing on a crowd
of instruments, to a crowd of people, with two hands and one pair of
feet. It is a crowd invention. The orchestra--a most distinctively
modern institution, a kind of republic of sound, the unseen spirit of
the many in one--is the sublimest expression yet attained of the crowd
music, which is, and must be, the supreme music of this modern day, the
symphony. Richard Wagner comes to his triumph because his music is the
voice of multitudes. The opera, a crowd of sounds accompanied by a crowd
of sights, presented by one crowd of people on the stage to another
crowd of people in the galleries, stands for the same tendency in art
that the syndicate stands for in commerce. It is syndicate music; and in
proportion as a musical composition in this present day is an
aggregation of multitudinous moods, in proportion as it is suggestive,
complex, paradoxical, the way a crowd is complex, suggestive, and
paradoxical--provided it be wrought at the same time into some vast and
splendid unity--just in this proportion is it modern music. It gives
itself to the counterpoints of the spirit, the passion of variety in
modern life. The legacy of all the ages, is it not descended upon
us?--the spirit of a thousand nations? All our arts are thousand-nation
arts, shadows and echoes of dead worlds playing upon our own. Italian
music, out of its feudal kingdoms, comes to us as essentially solo
music--melody; and the civilization of Greece, being a civilization of
heroes, individuals, comes to us in its noble array with its solo arts,
its striding heroes everywhere in front of all, and with nothing nearer
to the people in it than the Greek Chorus, which, out of limbo, pale and
featureless across all ages, sounds to us as the first far faint coming
of the crowd to the arts of this groping world. Modern art, inheriting
each of these and each of all things, is revealed to us as the struggle
to express all things at once. Democracy is democracy for this very
reason, and for no other: that all things may be expressed at once in
it, and that all things may be given a chance to be expressed at once in
it. Being a race of hero-worshippers, the Greeks said the best, perhaps,
what could be said in sculpture; but the marbles and bronzes of a
democracy, having average men for subjects, and being done by average
men, are average marbles and bronzes. We express what we have. We are in
a transition stage. It is not without its significance, however, that we
have perfected the plaster cast--the establishment of democracy among
statues, and mobs of Greek gods mingling with the people can be seen
almost any day in every considerable city of the world. The same
principle is working itself out in our architecture. It is idle to
contend against the principle. The way out is the way through. However
eagerly we gaze at Parthenons on their ruined hills, if thirty-one-story
blocks are in our souls thirty-one-story blocks will be our
masterpieces, whether we like it or not. They will be our masterpieces
because they tell the truth about us; and while truth may not be
beautiful, it is the thing that must be told first before beauty can
begin. The beauty we are to have shall only be worked out from the truth
we have. Living as we do in a new era, not to see that the
thirty-one-story block is the expression of a new truth is to turn
ourselves away from the one way that beauty can ever be found by men, in
this era or in any other.

What is it that the thirty-one-story block is trying to say about us?
The thirty-one-story block is the masterpiece of mass, of immensity, of
numbers; with its 2427 windows and its 779 offices, and its crowds of
lives piled upon lives, it is expressing the one supreme and
characteristic thing that is taking place in the era in which we live.
The city is the main fact that modern civilization stands for, and
crowding is the logical architectural form of the city idea. The
thirty-one-story block is the statue of a crowd. It stands for a
spiritual fact, and it will never be beautiful until that fact is
beautiful. The only way to make the thirty-one-story block beautiful
(the crowd expressed by the crowd) is to make the crowd beautiful. The
most artistic, the only artistic, thing the world can do next is to make
the crowd beautiful.

The typical city blocks, with their garrets in the lower stories of the
sky, were not possible in the ancient world, because steel had not been
invented; and the invention of steel, which is not the least of our
triumphs in the mechanical arts, is in many ways the most
characteristic. Steel is republican for stone. Putting whole quarries
into a single girder, it makes room for crowds; and what is more
significant than this, inasmuch as the steel pillar is an invention that
makes it possible to put floors up first, and build the walls around the
floors, instead of putting the walls up first and supporting the floors
upon the walls, as in the ancient world, it has come to pass that the
modern world being the ancient world turned upside down, modern
architecture is ancient architecture turned inside out, a symbol of many
things. The ancient world was a wall of individuals, supporting floor
after floor and stage after stage of society, from the lowest to the
highest; and it is a typical fact in this modern democratic world that
it grows from the inside, and that it supports itself from the inside.
When the mass in the centre has been finished, an ornamental stone
facing of great individuals will be built around it and supported by it,
and the work will be considered done.

The modern spirit has much to boast of in its mechanical arts, and in
its fine arts almost nothing, because the mechanical arts are studying
what men are needing to-day, and the fine arts are studying what the
Greeks needed three thousand years ago. To be a real classic is, first,
to be a contemporary of one's own time; second, to be a contemporary of
one's own time so deeply and widely as to be a contemporary of all time.
The true Greek is a man who is doing with his own age what the Greeks
did with theirs, bringing all ages to bear upon it, and interpreting it.
As long as the fine arts miss the fundamental principle of this present
age--the crowd principle, and the mechanical arts do not, the mechanical
arts are bound to have their way with us. And it were vastly better that
they should. Sincere and straightforward mechanical arts are not only
more beautiful than affected fine ones, but they are more to the point:
they are the one sure sign we have of where we are going to be beautiful
next. It is impossible to love the fine arts in the year 1913 without
studying the mechanical ones; without finding one's self looking for
artistic material in the things that people are using, and that they are
obliged to use. The determining law of a thing of beauty being, in the
nature of things, what it is for, the very essence of the classic
attitude in a utilitarian age is to make the beautiful follow the useful
and inspire the useful with its spirit. The fine art of the next
thousand years shall be the transfiguring of the mechanical arts. The
modern hotel, having been made necessary by great natural forces in
modern life, and having been made possible by new mechanical arts, now
puts itself forward as the next great opportunity of the fine arts. One
of the characteristic achievements of the immediate future shall be the
twentieth-century Parthenon--a Parthenon not of the great and of the few
and of the gods, but of the great many, where, through mighty corridors,
day and night, democracy wanders and sleeps and chatters and is sad and
lives and dies, streets rumbling below. The hotel--the crowd
fireside--being more than any other one thing, perhaps, the thing that
this civilization is about, the token of what it loves and of how it
lives, is bound to be a masterpiece sooner or later that shall express
democracy. The hotel rotunda, the parlour for multitudes, is bound to be
made beautiful in ways we do not guess. Why should we guess? Multitudes
have never wanted parlours before. The idea of a parlour has been to get
out of a multitude. All the inevitable problems that come of having a
whole city of families live in one house have yet to be solved by the
fine arts as well as by the mechanical ones. We have barely begun. The
time is bound to come when the radiator, the crowd's fireplace-in-a-pipe,
shall be made beautiful; and when the electric light shall be taught
the secret of the candle; and when the especial problem of modern
life--of how to make two rooms as good as twelve--shall be mastered
aesthetically as well as mathematically; and when even the piano-folding,
bed-bookcase-toilet-stand-writing-desk--a crowd invention for living
in a crowd--shall either take beauty to itself or lead to beauty that
serves the same end.

While for the time being it seems to be true that the fine arts are
looking to the past, the mechanical arts are producing conditions in the
future that will bring the fine arts to terms, whether they want to be
brought to terms or not. The mechanical arts hold the situation in their
hands. It is decreed that people who cannot begin by making the things
they use beautiful shall be allowed no beauty in other things. We may
wish that Parthenons and cathedrals were within our souls; but what the
cathedral said of an age that had the cathedral mood, that had a
cathedral civilization and thrones and popes in it, we are bound to say
in some stupendous fashion of our own--something which, when it is built
at last, will be left worshipping upon the ground beneath the sky when
we are dead, as a memorial that we too have lived. The great cathedrals,
with the feet of the huddled and dreary poor upon their floors, and
saints and heroes shining on their pillars, and priests behind the
chancel with God to themselves, and the vast and vacant nave, symbol of
the heaven glimmering above that few could reach--it is not to these
that we shall look to get ourselves said to the nations that are now
unborn; rather, though it be strange to say it, we shall look to
something like the ocean steamship--cathedral of this huge unresting
modern world--under the wide heaven, on the infinite seas, with spars
for towers and the empty nave reversed filled with human beings'
souls--the cathedral of crowds hurrying to crowds. There are hundreds of
them throbbing and gleaming in the night--this very moment--lonely
cities in the hollow of the stars, bringing together the nations of the
earth.

When the spirit of our modern way of living, the idea in it, the bare
facts about our modern human nature have been noticed at last by our
modern artists, masterpieces shall come to us out of every great and
living activity in our lives. Art shall tell the things these lives are
about. When this is once realized in America as it was in Greece, the
fine arts shall cover the other arts as the waters cover the sea. The
Brooklyn Bridge, swinging its web for immortal souls across sky and sea,
comes nearer to being a work of art than almost anything we possess
to-day, because it tells the truth, because it is the material form of a
spiritual idea, because it is a sublime and beautiful expression of New
York in the way that the Acropolis was a sublime and beautiful
expression of Athens. The Acropolis was beautiful because it was the
abode of heroes, of great individuals; and the Brooklyn Bridge, because
it expresses the bringing together of millions of men. It is the
architecture of crowds--this Brooklyn Bridge--with winds and sunsets and
the dark and the tides of souls upon it; it is the type and symbol of
the kind of thing that our modern genius is bound to make beautiful and
immortal before it dies. The very word "bridge" is the symbol of the
future of art and of everything else, the bringing together of things
that are apart--democracy. The bridge, which makes land across the
water, and the boat, which makes land on the water, and the cable, which
makes land and water alike--these are the physical forms of the spirit
of modern life, the democracy of matter. But the spirit has countless
forms. They are all new and they are all waiting to be made beautiful.
The dumb crowd waits in them. We have electricity--the life current of
the republican idea--characteristically our foremost invention, because
it takes all power that belongs to individual places and puts it on a
wire and carries it to all places. We have the telephone, an invention
which makes it possible for a man to live on a back street and be a
next-door neighbour to boulevards; and we have the trolley, the modern
reduction of the private carriage to its lowest terms, so that any man
for five cents can have as much carriage power as Napoleon with all his
chariots. We have the phonograph, an invention which gives a man a
thousand voices; which sets him to singing a thousand songs at the same
time to a thousand crowds; which makes it possible for the commonest man
to hear the whisper of Bismarck or Gladstone, to unwind crowds of great
men by the firelight of his own house. We have the elevator, an
invention for making the many as well off as the few, an approximate
arrangement for giving first floors to everybody, and putting all men on
a level at the same price--one more of a thousand instances of the
extraordinary manner in which the mechanical arts have devoted
themselves from first to last to the Constitution of the United States.
While it cannot be said of many of these tools of existence that they
are beautiful now, it is enough to affirm that when they are perfected
they will be beautiful; and that if we cannot make beautiful the things
that we need, we cannot expect to make beautiful the things that we
merely want. When the beauty of these things is at last brought out, we
shall have attained the most characteristic and original and expressive
and beautiful art that is in our power. It will be unprecedented
because it will tell unprecedented truths. It was the mission of
ancient art to express states of being and individuals, and it may be
said to be in a general way the mission of our modern art to express the
beautiful in endless change, the movement of masses, coming to its
sublimity and immortality at last by revealing the beauty of the things
that move and that have to do with motion, the bringing of all things
and of all souls together on the earth.

The fulfillment of the word that has been written, "Your valleys shall
be exalted, and your mountains shall be made low," is by no means a
beautiful process. Democracy is the grading principle of the beautiful.
The natural tendency the arts have had from the first to rise from the
level of the world, to make themselves into Switzerlands in it, is
finding itself confronted with the Constitution of the United States--a
Constitution which, whatever it may be said to mean in the years to
come, has placed itself on record up to the present time, at least, as
standing for the tableland.

The very least that can be granted to this Constitution is that it is so
consummate a political document that it has made itself the creed of our
theology, philosophy, and sociology; the principle of our commerce and
industry; the law of production, education, and journalism; the method
of our life; the controlling characteristic and the significant force in
our literature; and the thing our religion and our arts are about.




PART THREE

PEOPLE-MACHINES

