CHAPTER XVII

THE CROWDS PUSH


The men who are ahead make goodness start, but it is the crowds that
make it irresistible.

The final, slow, long, imperious lift on goodness is the one the crowd
gives. Of course, for the most part, modern business is largely done
with crowds. Crowds are doing it and crowds are nearly always watching
it.

The factory is slower than the department store in being good because
the men in it deal with crowds of things and crowds of wheels and not
with crowds of people.

All responsible people are forced to be good, with crowds around them,
expecting it of them.

Crowds at the very least are a kind of vast, insinuating, penetrating,
omnipresent, permeating police force of righteousness.

In a department store, the crowds, twelve thousand a day, are like some
huge coil of hose or vacuum cleaner, lying about the place, sucking up,
drawing out, and demanding goodness from the clerks. Clerks develop
human insight and powers faster in department stores than machinists do
in factories because they are exposed to more people and to larger
crowds. The stream clears itself.

The last forms of business to yield to the new spirit are to be the
lonely ones, the ones where light, air, human emotions, and crowds are
shut out.

The lonely forms of business will at last be vitalized and socialized by
men of organizing genius, who will invent the equivalent of crowds going
by, who will contrive ways of putting a few responsible persons in
sight or in a position where they will feel crowds going by their souls,
looking into them as if they were shop windows. Crowds can keep track of
a few. The crowds will see that these few are the kind of men who will
keep track of all.

Crowds in the end will not accept less than the best. With crowds of
people and crowds of places and crowds of times we are good. In all
things crowds can see or be made to see we are safe. Progress lies in
making crowds see through people, making crowds go past them. While they
are going past them, they lure their goodness on.




CHAPTER XVIII

THE MAN WHO SAYS HOW, SAYS HOW


The people who are worried and discouraged about goodness in this world,
one finds when one studies them a little, are almost always worried in a
kind of general way. They do not worry about anything in particular.
Their religion seems to be a kind of good-hearted, pained vagueness.

The religion of the people who never worry at all, the thoughtless
optimists, is quite the same too, except that they have a kind of happy,
rosy-lighted vagueness instead.

For about two thousand years now, goodness has been in the hands of
vague people. Some of them have used their vagueness to cry with softly,
and some of them have used it to praise God with and to have many fine,
brave, general feelings about God.

I have tried faithfully, speaking for one, to be religious with both of
these sets of people.

They make one feel rather lonesome.

If one goes about and takes a grim happiness, a kind of iron joy in
seeing how successful a locomotive is, or if one watches a great,
worshipful ocean liner with delight, or if, down in New York, one looks
up and sees a new skyscraper going slowly up, unfolding into the sky
before one, lifting up its gigantic, restless, resistless face to God;
there comes to seem to be something about churches and about good people
and about the way they have of acting and thinking about goodness and
doing things with goodness, that makes one unhappy.

Perhaps one has just come from it and one's soul is filled with the
stern, glad singing of a great foundry, of the religious, victorious
praising spirit of man, dipping up steel in mighty spoonfuls--the stuff
the inside of the earth is made of, and flinging it together into a
great network or crust for the planet--into mighty floors or sidewalks
all round the earth for cities to tread on and there comes to seem
something so successful, so manlike, so godlike about it, about the way
these men who do these things do them and do what they set out to do,
that when I find myself suddenly, all in a few minutes on a Sunday
morning, thrown out of this atmosphere into a Christian church, find
myself sitting all still and waiting, with all these good people about
me, and when I find them offering me their religion so gravely, so
hopefully, it all comes to me with a great rush sometimes--comes to me
as out of great deeps of resentment, that religion could possibly be
made in a church to seem something so faint, so beautifully weary, so
dreamy, and as if it were humming softly, absently to itself.

I wonder in the presence of a Christianity like this whether I am a
Christian or not--the quartet choirs, confections, the little, dainty,
faintly sweet sermons--it is as if--no I will not say it....

I have this moment crossed the words out before my eyes. It is as if,
after all, religion, instead of being as I supposed down at the foundry,
the stern and splendid music of man conquering all things for God, were,
after all, some huge, sublime and holy vagueness, as if the service and
the things I saw about me were not hard true realities--as if going to
Church were like sitting in a cloud--some soft musical cloud or floating
island of goodness and drifting and drifting....

       *       *       *       *       *

Not all churches are alike, but I am speaking of something that must
have happened to many men. I but record this blank space on this page,
as a spiritual fact, as a part of the religious experience of a man
trying to be good.

When this little experience of which the words have to be crossed out
after going to Church--finally settles down, there is still a grim truth
left in it.

The vagueness of the man who is good, who locks himself up in a Church
and says, "Oh God! Oh God! Oh God!" and the vigour and incisiveness of
the man who says nothing about it and who goes out of doors and acts
like a god all the week--these remain with me as a daily and abiding
sense.

And when I find myself myself, I, who have gloried in cathedrals since I
was a little child, looking ahead for a God upon the earth, and when I
see the foundries, the airships, the ocean liners beckoning the soul of
man upon the skies, and the victory of the soul over the dust and over
the water and over the air and when I see the Cathedrals beside them,
those vast, faint, grave, happy, floating islands of the Saved, drifting
backward down the years, it does not seem as if I could bear the
foundries saying one thing about my God and the cathedrals saying
another.

I have tried to see a way out. Why should it be so?

I have seen that the foundries, the ocean liners, and the airships are
in the hands of men who say How.

Perhaps we will take goodness and cathedrals, very soon now, and put
them for a while in the hands of the men who say how. If St. Francis,
for instance, to-day, were to be suddenly more like Bessemer, or if Dr.
Henry Van Dyke were more like Edison or if the Reverend R.J. Campbell
were more like Sir Joseph Lister or if the Bishop of London were to go
at London the way Marconi goes at the sky, what would begin to happen to
goodness? One likes to imagine what would happen if that same spirit,
the spirit of "how" were brought to bear upon a great engineering
enterprise like goodness in this world.

Perhaps the spirit of "how" is the spirit of God.

Perhaps religion in the twentieth century is Technique.

Technique in the twentieth century is the Holy Ghost.

Technique is the very last thing that has been thought of in religion.
Religion is being converted before our eyes. It is becoming touched with
the temper of science, with the thoroughness, the doggedness, the
inconsolableness of science until it is seeing how and until it is
saying how.

When the inventors, in our machine age, get to work on goodness in the
way that they are getting to work on other things, things will begin to
happen to goodness that the vague, sweet saints of two thousand years
have never dreamed of yet.

In London and New York, in this first quarter of the twentieth century
Christianity will not be put off as a spirit. The right of Christianity
to be a spirit has lapsed.

Christianity is a Method.

What Christ meant when He said He was the Truth and the Life, has been
understood, on the whole, very well. What He meant by saying He was the
Way, we are now beginning, to work out.

       *       *       *       *       *

A thousand or two years ago, when two men stood by the roadside and made
a bargain, it was their affair.

When two men stand on the sidewalk now and make a bargain, say in New
York, they have to deal and to deal very thoughtfully and accurately
with ninety million people who are not there. They do this as well as
they can by imagining what the ninety million people would do and say,
and how they would like to be done by, if they were there.

The facilities for finding out what the ninety million people would do
and say, and what they would want, the general conveniences for assuring
the two men on the sidewalk that they will be able to conduct their
bargain, and to get the other ninety million in, accurately, that they
will be able to do by them as they would be done by--these have scarcely
been arranged for yet.

In our machine age, with our railroads, and our telephones suddenly
heaping our lives up on one another's lives, almost before we have
noticed it, our religious machinery to go with our other machinery, our
machinery that we are going to be Christians with, has not been
invented yet.

Religion two-men size, or man and woman size, or one family or two
family size or village size has been worked out. Religion as long as it
has been concerned with a few people and was a matter of love between
neighbours, or of skill in being neighbourly, has had no special or
imperative need for science or the scientific man.

Now that religion is obliged to be an intimate, a confiding relation
between ninety million people, the spiritual genius, devotion, and
holiness of the scientific man, of the man who says "how" has come to be
the modern man's almost only access to his God.

A ninety million man-power religion is an enterprise of spiritual
engineering, a feat in national and international statesmanship, a
gigantic structural constructive achievement in human nature. Doing as
one would be done by, with a few people, is a thing that any man can sit
down and read his Bible a few minutes and arrange for himself. He can
manage to do as he would be done by, fairly well in the next yard. But
how about doing as one would be done by with ninety million people--all
sizes, all climates, all religions, Buffalo, New Orleans, Seattle? How
about doing as one would be done by three thousand miles?

It is an understatement to say, as we look about our modern world, that
Christianity has not been tried yet.

Christianity has not been invented yet.

What was invented two thousand years ago was the spirit of Christianity.

Christianity has been for two thousand years a spirit.

It is almost like a new religion to me just of itself to think of it. It
is like being presented suddenly with a new world to think of it, to
think that all we have really done with Christianity as yet is to use it
as a breath or spirit.

I look at the vision of the earth to-day, of the great cities rushing
together at last and running around the world like children running
around a house--great cities shouting on the seas, suddenly sliding up
and down the globe, playing hopscotch on the equator, scrambling up the
poles--all these colossal children!... Here we all are!--a whiff of
steam from the Watts's steam kettle and a wave of Marconi across the air
and we have crept up from our little separate sunsets, all our little
private national bedrooms of light and darkness into the one single same
cunning dooryard of a world! Our religion, our politics, our Bibles,
kings, millionaires, crowds, bombs, prophets and railroads all hurling,
sweeping, crashing our lives together in a kind of vast international
collision of intimacy.

All the Christianity we can bring to bear or that we can use to run this
crash of intimacy with is a spirit, a breath.

We do not well to berate one another or to berate one another's motives
or to assail human nature or to grow satirical about God with all our
little battered helpless Christians about us and our unadjusted
religions.

We are a new human race grappling with a new world. Our Christianity has
not been invented yet and if we want a God, we will work like chemists,
like airmen, turn the inside of the earth out, dump the sky, move
mountains, face cities, love one another, and find Him!

In the meantime until we have done this, until we have worked as
chemists and airmen work, Christianity is a spirit.

It explains all this eager jumble of the world, brushes away our
objections, frees our hearts, gives us our program, makes us know what
we are for, to stop and think a moment of this--that Christianity is a
spirit.

Everything that is passing wonderful is a spirit at first. God begins
building a world as a world-spirit, out of a spirit brooding upon the
waters. Then for a long while the vague waters, then for a long while a
little vague land or spirit-of-planet before a real world.

And every real belief that man has had, has begun as a spirit.

For two thousand years Man has had the spirit of immortality. Homer had
it. Homer had moments when improvising his mighty song all alone, of
hearing or seeming to hear, faintly, choruses of men's voices singing
his songs after him, a thousand years away.

As he groped his way up in his singing, he felt them in spirit, perhaps,
the lonely wandering minstrels in little closed-in valleys, or on the
vast quiet hills, filling the world with his voice when he was dead,
going about with his singing, breaking it in upon the souls of children,
of the new boys and girls, and building new worlds and rebuilding old
worlds in the hearts of men. Homer had the spirit of hearing his own
voice forever, but the technique of it, the important point of seeing
how the thing could really be done, of seeing how people, instead of
listening to imitations or copies or awkward echoes of Homer, should
listen to Homer's voice itself--the timbre, the intimacy, the subtlety,
the strength of it--the depth of his heart singing out of it. All this
has had to wait to be thought out by Thomas A. Edison.

Man has not only for thousands of years had the spirit of immortality,
of keeping his voice filed away if any one wanted it on the earth,
forever, but he has had all the other spirits or ghosts of his mightier
self. He has had the spirit of being imperious and wilful with the sea,
of faring forth on a planet and playing with oceans, and now he has
worked out the details in ocean liners, in boats that fly up from the
water, and in boats which dive and swim beneath the sea. For thousands
of years he has had the spirit of the locomotive working through, troops
of runners or of dim men groping defiantly with camels through deserts,
or sweeping on on horses through the plains, and now with his banners of
steam at last he has great public trains of cars carrying cities.

For hundreds of years man has had the spirit of the motor-car--of having
his own private locomotive or his own special train drive up to his
door--the spirit of making every road his railway. For a great many
years he has had the spirit of the wireless telegraph and of using the
sky. Franklin tried using the sky years ago but all he got was
electricity. Marconi knew how better. Marconi has got ghosts of men's
voices out of the clouds, has made heaven a sounding board for great
congregations of cities, and faraway nations wrapped in darkness and
silence whisper round the rolling earth. Man has long had the spirit of
defying the seas. Now he has the technique and the motor-boat. He has
had the spirit of removing oceans and of building huge, underground
cities, the spirit of caves in the ground and mansions in the sky, and
now he has subways and skyscrapers. For a thousand years he has had the
spirit of Christ and now there is Frederick Taylor, Louis Brandeis,
Westfield Pure Food, Doctor Carrel, Jane Addams, and Filene's Store.
Vast networks--huge spiritual machines of goodness are crowding and
penetrating to-day, fifteen pounds to the square inch, the atmosphere of
the gospel into the very core of the matter of the world, into the
everyday things, into the solids of the lives of men.

It takes two great spirits of humanity to bring a great truth or a new
goodness into this world; one spirit creates it, the other conceives it,
gathers the earth about it and gives it birth. These two spirits seem to
be the spirits of the poet and the scientist.

We are taking to-day, many of us, an almost religious delight in them
both. We make no comparisons.

We note that the poet's inspiration comes first and consists in saying
something that is true, that cannot be proved.

A few people with imagination, here and there, believe it.

The scientist's inspiration comes second and consists in seeing ways of
proving it, of making it matter of fact.

He proves it by seeing how to do it.

Crowds believe it.




