CHAPTER XIII

NEWS-PAPERS


I went one day six months ago to the Mansion House and heard Lord Grey,
and Lord Robert Cecil, and Mr. T.C. Taylor and others address the annual
meeting of the Labour Copartnership Association.

I found myself in the presence of a body of men who believe that
Englishmen are capable of bigger and better things than many men believe
they are capable of. They refuse to evade the issue of the coal strike
and to agree with the socialists who have given up believing that
English employers can be competent and who merely believe that we will
have to rely on our governments now to be employers, and they refuse to
agree with the syndicalists, who believe in human nature still less and
have given up on employers and on governments both.

I have retained three impressions as a result of the meeting.

The first was that it was the most significant and impressive event
since the coal strike, that it brought the whole industrial issue to a
point and summed the coal strike up.

The second impression was one of surprise that the hall was not full.

The third impression came the next day when I looked through the papers
for accounts of what had been said and of what it stood for.

It was noted pleasantly and hurriedly as one of the day's events. It was
just one more of those shadowy things that flicker on the big foolish,
drifting, rolling attention of a world a second and are gone.

People were given a few inches.

I read in the papers that same day a quite long account of a discussion
of nine bishops for five hours (meeting at the same time) on a matter of
proper clothes for clergymen.

I would have said of that meeting of the Labour Copartnership
Association--that it was a meeting of a Society for Defence and
Protection of Longer Possible Religion on the Earth--but the clergy out
of all the invitations, did not seem very largely to have had time to be
there.

I wondered too a little about the papers, as I hunted through them.

It set one to thinking if anything serious to the nation would have
happened, if possibly during the coal strike the London papers had
devoted as much attention to T.C. Taylor--a mutual interest
employer--and to how he runs his business--as to Horatio Bottomley?

Possibly too what Mr. Sandow prefers to have people drink is not so
important--perhaps whole pages of it at a time--as Amos Mann and how he
runs his shoe business without strikes, or as Joseph Bibby and how he
makes oil cakes and loyal workmen together.

I read the other day of a clergyman in New Jersey--who was organizing a
league of all the left-handed men in the world. Everything is being
organized, whether or no. Some one has financed him. There will be some
one very soon now who will pay the bill for organizing the attention of
a world and for deciding the fate of human nature. It would be worth
while spending possibly one fortune on getting human nature to settle
decisively and once for all whether it has any reason to believe in
itself or not. Why have a world at all--one like this? Do we want it?
Who wants it? What do we want instead? We will advertise and find out.
We will spend millions of pounds and Dreadnoughts, even national
beer-bills on it, if necessary, on making everybody know that mentally
competent business men--mutual-interest employers, and mentally
competent workmen--mutual-interest workmen, can be produced by the
human race. When everybody knows that this is true, nine out of ten
Parliamentary questions would be settled, the Churches would again have
a chance to be noticed, and education and even religion could be taken
seriously. There would be some object in being a teacher perhaps once
more and in making teaching again a great profession. There would be
some object perhaps in even being an artist. The world would start off
on a decent, self-respecting theory or vision about itself. Things could
begin to be done in society once more, soundly, permanently, humanly and
from the bottom up.

We would go out on the streets again--rich and poor--and look in each
other's faces. We would take up our morning papers without a sinking at
the heart.

And the men who have stopped believing in men and who merely believe in
machines would be indicted before the bar of mankind. We would see them
slowly filing back, one by one, to where they belong--on the back seats
of the world.

The newspapers in England and America seem to think that in their
business of rolling the world along, what they find themselves
confronted with just now is an economic problem.

The problem that the newspapers are really confronted with, as a matter
of fact, is one with which newspaper men big and little are more
competent to deal than they would be with an expert problem in
economics. The real problem that newspapers are confronted with every
night, every morning, to-day, is a problem in human nature.

Some people believe that human nature can be believed in, and others do
not. The socialists, the syndicalists, the trades unionists, as a class,
and the capitalists as a class, are acting as if they did not. A great
many inventors, and a great many workmen, all the more bold and
inventive workmen, and many capitalists and great organizers of facts
and of men, are acting as if they believed in human nature.

Which are right? Can a mutual-interest employer, can a mutual-interest
worker, be produced by the human race? There are some of us who answer
that this is a matter of fact, that this type of man can be produced, is
already produced, and is about to be reproduced indefinitely.

The moment we can convince trades unions and convince employers that
this is true we will change the face of the earth.

Why not change the face of the earth now?

In this connection I respectfully submit three considerations:

1st. If all employers of the world to-morrow morning knew what Lord Grey
(as President of the Labour Copartnership Association) knows to-day
about copartnership--the hard facts about the way copartnership works in
calling out human nature--in nerving and organizing labour, every
employer in the world to-morrow would begin to take an attitude toward
labour which would result in making strikes and lockouts as
impracticable, as incredible, as moony, as visionary forever as ideals
of a world without strikes look now.

2nd. If all the workmen of the world to-morrow morning knew what
Frederick Taylor (the American engineer) knows about planning workmen's
work so that they receive, for the same expenditure of strength, a third
more wages every day, the whole attitude of labour in every nation and
of the trades unions of the world--the attitude of doing as little work
as possible, of labouring and studying and slaving away to discover ways
of not being of any use to employers--would face about in a day.

3rd. What Lord Grey knows about copartnership and the way it works is in
the form of ascertainable, communicable, and demonstrable facts. What
Frederick Taylor knows and what he has been doing with human beings and
with steel and pig iron and with bricks and other real things is in the
form of history that has been making for thirty years--and that can be
looked up and proved.

Why should not everybody who employs labour know what Lord Grey knows?

And why should not all workmen know what a few thousand workmen who have
been trained under Frederick Taylor to work under better conditions and
with more wages, know?

If I were an inspired millionaire the first thing I would do to-morrow
would be to supply the funds and find the men who should take up what
Lord Grey knows about employers, and what Frederick Taylor knows about
workmen, and put it where all who live shall see it and know it. I would
spend my fortune in proving to the world, in making everybody know and
believe that the mutual-interest business man and the mutual-interest
workman have been produced and can be produced and shall be produced by
the human race.

The problem of the fate of the world in its essential nature and in its
spiritual elements and gifts--has come to be in this age of the press a
huge advertising problem--a great adventure in human attention.

The most characteristic and human and natural way, and the only profound
and permanent way to handle the quarrel between Capital and Labour is by
placing certain facts--certain rights-of-all-men-to-know, into the hands
of some disinterested and powerful statesman of publicity--some great
organizer of the attention of a world. He would have to be a practical
passionate psychologist, a man gifted with a bird's-eye view of
publics--a discoverer of geniuses and crowds, a natural diviner or
reader of the hearts of men. He shall search out and employ twenty men
to write as many books addressed to as many classes and types of
employers and workers. He shall arrange pamphlets for every dooryard
that cannot help being read.

He shall reach trades unions by using the cinema, by having some master
of human appeal take the fate of labour, study it out in pictures--and
the truth shall be thrown night after night and day after day on a
hundred thousand screens around a world. He shall organize and employ
wide publicity or rely on secret and careful means on different aspects
of the issue according to the nature of the issue, human nature and
common sense, and organize his campaign to reach every type of person,
every temperament, and order of circumstance, each in its own way.

What Lord Grey knows and what Frederick Taylor's workmen know shall be
put where all who live shall see it where every employer, every workman,
every workman's wife and every growing boy and girl that is passing by,
as on some vast billboard above the world, shall see it--shall see and
know and believe that employers that are worth believing in--and that
workmen who can work and who are skilled and clever enough to love to
work--can still be produced by the human race.

If I were a newspaper man I would start what might be called Pull
Together Clubs in every community, men in all walks of life, little
groups of crowdmen or men in the community who could not bear not to see
a town do team work.

I would use these Pull Together Clubs in every community as means of
gathering and distributing news--as local committees on the national
campaign of touching the imagination of labour and touching the
imagination of capital.

"_Without Vision the People perish_."

I would begin with spending five million dollars on a vision for the
people.

What would I do with a five-million-dollar fund for touching the
imagination of labour and touching the imagination of capital?

First: preliminary announcement in all papers and in all public ways,
asking names and addresses of workmen who have already proved and
established their belief in copartnership.

Names and addresses of employers in the same way.

Second: names and addresses of workmen who would believe in it if they
could; who believe in the principle theoretically and would be
interested in seeing how it could be practically and technically
proved.

Names and addresses of employers in the same way.

Third: selection of one firm in each industry, the best and most
strategically placed to carry it out in that industry, and placing the
facts before them.

Selection of the leading workmen out of all the workmen in the nation
employed in that industry, who would be willing to work with such a
firm.

Fourth: a selection of travelling secretaries to visit trades unions and
get provisional permission and toleration for these workmen so that they
can take copartnership places under such a firm with the consent of
their fellows and he set one side for experimental purposes, under the
protection of the trades union rules.

Fifth: I would find the most promising trades-union branch in each
industry and I would try to get this branch to take it up with the other
branches until all trades unions were brought to admit copartnership
members on special terms.

Sixth: after getting copartnership tolerated for certain workmen
employed in certain firms I would try to make copartnership a
trades-union movement.

I would then let the trades unions educate the employers.

Seventh: I would prepare a list of apparent exceptions to copartnership
as a working principle. I would investigate and try to see why they were
exceptions and why copartnership would not work, and I would find and
set inventors at work, and find in what way the spirit that is back of
copartnership could be applied.




