CHAPTER VIII

MAKING GOODNESS HURRY


Perhaps it has leaked out to those who have been following these pages
thus far, that I am merely at best, if the truth were known, a kind of
reformed preacher.

I admit it. Many other people are. We began, owing to circumstances,
with the idea of getting people to take up goodness by talking about it.

But we have grown discouraged in talking to people about goodness. More
and more, year by year, we have made up our minds, as I have hinted, to
lie low and to keep still and show them some.

And I can only say it again, as I have said it before, if everybody in
the world could know my plumber or pay a bill to him, the world would
soon begin, slowly but surely, to be a very different place.

The first time I saw B---- I had asked him to come over to arrange with
regard to putting in new waterpipes from the street to my house. The old
ones had been put in no one could remember how many years before, and
the pressure of water in the house, apparently from rust in the pipes,
had become very weak. After a minute's conversation I at once engaged
B---- to put in the new and larger pipes, and he agreed to dig open the
trench (about two hundred feet long, and three feet deep) and put the
pipes in the next day for thirty-five dollars. The next morning he
appeared as promised, but, instead of going to work, he came into my
study, stood there a moment before my eyes, and quietly but firmly threw
himself out of his job!

There was no use in spending thirty-five dollars, he said. He had gone
to the City Water Works Office and told them to look into the matter and
see if the connection they had put in at the junction of my pipe with
the main in the street did not need attention. They had found that a new
connection was necessary. They would see that a new one was put in at
once. They were obliged to do it for nothing, he said; and then,
slipping (figuratively speaking) thirty-five dollars into my pocket, he
bowed gravely and was gone.

B---- knew absolutely and conclusively (as any one would with a look)
that I was not the sort of person who would ever have heard of that
blessed little joint out in the street, or who ever would hear of it or
who would know what to do with it if he did.

       *       *       *       *       *

Sometimes I sit and think of B---- in church, or at least I used to,
especially when his bill had just come in. It was always a pleasure to
think of paying one of B----'s bills--even if it was sometimes a
postponed one. You always knew, with B----, that he had made that bill
out to you as if he had been making out a bill to himself.

Not such a bad thing to think about during a sermon.

I do not deny that I do lose a sentence now and then in sermons; and
while, as every one knows, the sermons I have been provided with in the
old stone church have been of a rare and high order, there have, I do
acknowledge, been bad moments--little sudden bare spots or streaks of
abstraction--and I do not deny that there have been times when I could
not help feeling, as I sat listening, like sending around Monday morning
to the parsonage--my plumber. One could not help thinking what Dr. ----
if he once got started on a plumber like B---- (had had him around
working all the week during a sermon) could do with him.

I have a shoemaker, too, who would help most ministers. I imagine he
would point up their sermons a good deal--if they had his shoes on.

Perhaps shoes and pipes and things like these will be looked upon soon
to-day as constituting the great, slow, modest, implacable spiritual
forces of our time.

At all events, this is the most economical, sensible, thorough way (when
one thinks of it) that goodness can be advertised.




CHAPTER IX

TOUCHING THE IMAGINATION OF CROWDS


A man's success in business to-day turns upon his power of getting
people to believe he has something that they want.

Success in business, in the last analysis, turns upon touching the
imagination of crowds. The reason that preachers in this present
generation are less successful in getting people to want goodness than
business men are in getting them to want motor-cars, hats, and pianolas,
is that business men as a class are more close and desperate students of
human nature, and have boned down harder to the art of touching the
imaginations of crowds.

When one considers what it is that touches a crowd's imagination and how
it does it, one is bound is admit that there is not a city anywhere
which has not hundreds of men in it who could do more to touch the
imagination of crowds with goodness than any clergyman could. A man of
very great gifts in the pulpit, a man of genius, even an immortal
clergyman, could be outwitted in the art of touching the imagination of
crowds with goodness by a comparatively ordinary man in any one of
several hundred of our modern business occupations.

There is a certain nation I have in mind as I write, which I do not like
to call by name, because it is struggling with its faults as the rest of
us are with ours. But I do not think it would be too much to say that
this particular nation I have in mind--and I leave the reader to fill in
one for himself, has been determined in its national character for
hundreds of years, and is being determined to-day--every day, nearly
every minute of every day, except when all the people are asleep--by a
certain personal habit that the people have. I am persuaded that this
habit of itself alone would have been enough to determine the fate of
the nation as a third-rate power, that it would have made it always do
things with small pullings and haulings, in short breaths, and
hand-to-mouth insights--a little jerk of idealism one day, and a little
jerk of materialism the next--a kind of national palavering, and
see-sawing and gesturing, and talking excitedly and with little
flourishes. It is a nation that is always shrugging its shoulders, that
almost never seems to be capable of doing a thing with fine directness,
with long rhythms of purpose or sustained feeling; and all because every
man, woman, and child in the country--scores of generations of them for
hundreds of years--has been taught that the great spiritual truth or
principle at the bottom of correctly and beautifully buying a turnip is
to begin by saying that you do not want a turnip at all, that you never
eat turnips, and none of your family, and that they never would. The
other man begins by pointing out that he is never going to sell another
turnip as long as he lives, if he can help it. Gradually the facts are
allowed to edge in until at last, and when each man has taken off God
knows how much from the value of his soul, and spent two shillings'
worth of time on keeping a halfpenny in his pocket, both parties
separate courteously, only to carry out the same spiritual truth on a
radish perhaps or a spool of thread, or it may be even a house and lot,
or a battleship, or a war, or a rumour of a war, with somebody.

The United States, speaking broadly, is not like this. But it might have
been.

In the United States some forty years ago, being a new country, and
being a country where everything a man did was in the nature of things,
felt to be a first experiment, everybody felt democratic and
independent, and as if he were making the laws of the universe just for
himself as he went along.

There was a period of ten years or so in which every spool of thread and
bit of dress goods--everything that people wore on their bodies or put
in their months, and everything that they read, came up and had to be
considered as an original first proposition, as if there never had been
a spool of thread before, as if each bit of dress goods was, or was
capable of being, a new fresh experiment, with an adventurous price on
it; and before we knew it a moral nagging and edging and hitching had
set in, and was fast becoming in America an American trait, and fixing
itself by daily repetition upon the imagination of the people.

The shopping of a country is, on the whole, from a psychologist's point
of view, the most spiritual energy, the most irrevocable, most
implacable meter there can ever be of the religion a country really has.

There was no clergyman in America who could have made the slightest
impression on this great national list or trend of always getting things
for less than they were worth--this rut of never doing as one would be
done by. What was there that could be done with an obstinate, pervasive,
unceasing habit of the people like this?

What was there that could be done to touch the imagination of the crowd?

Six thousand women a day were going in and out of A.T. Stewart's great
store on Broadway at that time. A.T. Stewart announced to New York
suddenly in huge letters one day, that from that day forward there
should be one price for everything sold in his store, and that that
price would be paid for it by everybody.

A.T. Stewart's store was the largest, most successful, original, and
most closely watched store in America.

The six thousand women became one thousand.

Then two thousand. Some of them had found that they finished their
shopping sooner; the better class of women, those whose time was worth
the most, and whose custom was the largest, gradually found they did not
want to shop anywhere else. The two thousand became three thousand, four
thousand, six thousand, ten thousand, twelve thousand.

Other department stores wanted the twelve thousand to come to them. They
announced the one price.

Hardware stores did it. Groceries announced one price. Then everybody.

Not all the clergymen in America, preaching every Sunday for months,
could have done very much in the way of seriously touching the
imagination of the crowd on the moral unworthiness, the intellectual
degradation, the national danger of picking out the one thing that
nearly all the people all do, and had to do, all day, every day, and
making that thing mean, incompetent, and small. No one had thought out
what it would lead to, and how monstrous and absurd it was and would
always be to have a nation have all its people taking every little thing
all day, every day, that they were buying, or that they were
selling--taking a spool of thread, for instance--and packing it, or
packing their action with it, as full of adulterated motives and of
fresh and original ways of not doing as they would be done by as they
could think up--a little innocent spool of thread--wreaking all their
sins and kinds of sins on it, breaking every one of the ten commandments
on it as an offering....

It was A.T. Stewart, a very ordinary-looking, practical man in a plain,
everyday business, who arrested the attention of a nation and changed
the habit of thought and trend of mind of a great people, and made them
a candid, direct people, a people that went with great sunny prairies
and high mountains, a yea and nay people, straightforward, and free from
palavering forever. A.T. Stewart was accustomed, in his own personal
dealings from day to day, to cut people short when they tried to heckle
with him. He liked to take things for granted, drive through to the
point, and go on to the next one. This might have ended, of course, in a
kind of _cul de sac_ of being a merely personal trait in a clean-cut,
manful, straightforward American gentleman; and if Stewart had been a
snob or a Puritan, or had felt superior, or if he had thought other
people--the great crowds of them who flocked through his store--could
never expect to be as good as he was, nothing would ever have come of
it.

It is not likely that he was conscious of the long train of spiritual
results he had set in motion; of the way he had taken the habit of mind,
the daily, hourly psychology of a great people, and had wrought it
through with his own spirit; or of the way he had saved up, and set
where it could be used, everyday religion in America, and had freed the
business genius of a nation for its most characteristic and most
effective self-expression.

He merely was conscious that he could not endure palavering in doing
business himself, and that he would not submit to being obliged to
endure it, and he believed millions of people in America were as
clean-cut and straightforward as he was.

And the millions of people stood by him.

Perhaps A.T. Stewart touched the imagination of the crowd because he had
let the crowd touch his and had seen what crowds, in spite of
appearances, were really like.

The enterprise of touching the imagination of the crowd with goodness,
which is being conducted every day on an enormous scale around us, has
to be carried on, like all huge enterprises, by men who are in a large
degree unconscious of it. There are few department stores in England or
America that would expect to be called pious, but if one is deeply and
obstinately interested in the Golden Rule, and in getting crowds of
people to believe in it at a time, it is impossible not to think what
sweeps of opportunity department stores would have with it--with the
Golden Rule. With thousands of people flowing in and out all the week,
and with hundreds of clerks to attend to it, eight hours a day, there
would hardly seem to be any limit to what such a store could do in
making the Golden Rule a direct, a pointed and personal thing, a thing
that could not be evaded and could not be forgotten by thousands of
people. The same people all going in and out of department stores, vast
congregations of them, eight hours a day, which ministers can only get
at in small lots, three hundred or so, twenty minutes a week, and can
only get at with words even then--all of them being convinced in terms
they understand, and in terms they keenly feel, convinced in hats that
they will see over and over again, convinced in velvets that they are
going to put on and off for years, in laces, in waistcoats, shoes, in
dining-room chairs, convinced in the very underclothes next to their
skins, the clothes they sleep in all night, in the very plates on which
they eat, while all the time they keep remembering, or being reminded,
just how the things were bought, and just what was claimed for them and
what was not claimed for them, and thinking how the claims came true or
how they did not.

       *       *       *       *       *

I just saw lying on the table as I came through the hall a moment ago a
hat which (out of all the long rows of hats I can see faintly reaching
across the years) will always be to me a memorable hat. I am free to say
that, after all the ladies it has been taken off to, my great memory of
that hat is now and always will be, as long as I live, the department
store at which I bought it, and the things the department store, before
I got through with it, managed to make the hat say.

I had been in the store the day before and selected, in broad daylight,
with a big mirror staring me out of countenance, a hat which was a
quarter of a size too large. To clinch the matter, I had ordered four
ventilating holes to be punched in it, and had it sent to my rooms to be
my hat--implacably my hat as I supposed, for better for worse, for
richer for poorer--always. The next morning, after standing before a
mirror and trying hopefully for a few minutes to see if I could not look
more intelligent in the hat, I returned to the store firmly. I had made
up my mind that I would keep from looking the way that that hat made me
look, at any cost. The store was not responsible according to the letter
either for the hat or for the way I looked in it. I had deliberately
chosen it, looked at myself in cold blood in it, had those dreadful,
irremovable, eternal air-holes dug into it. I would buy a new one. I
jumped into a cab, and a moment after I arrived I found myself before
the clerk from whom I had bought it, with a new one on my head, and was
just reaching into my pocket for my purse when, to my astonishment, I
heard, or seemed to hear, the great Department Store Itself, in the
gentle accents of a young man with a yellow moustache, saying: "I'm
sorry"--all seven storys of it gathering itself up softly, apparently,
and saying "I'm sorry!" The young man explained that he was afraid the
hat was wrong the day before, and thought he ought to have told me so,
that the store would not want me to pay for the mistake.

I came home a changed man. I had been hit by the Golden Rule before in
department stores, but always rather subtly--never with such a broad,
beautiful flourish! I made some faint acknowledgment, I have forgotten
what, and rushed out of the store.

But I have never gone past the store since, on a 'bus, or in a taxi, or
sliding through the walkers on the street, but I have looked up to
it--to its big, quiet windows, its broad, honest pillars fronting a
world.

I take off my hat to it.

But it gave me more than a hat.

I think what a thousand department stores, stationed in a thousand
places on this old planet, could do in touching the imagination of the
world--every day, day by day, cityfuls at a time.

I had found a department store that had absolutely identified itself
with my interests, that could act about a hat the way a wife would--a
department store that looked forward to a permanent relation with me--a
great live machine that could be glad and sorry--that really took me in,
knew how I felt about things, cared how I looked as I walked down the
street. Sometimes I think of the poor, wounded, useless thing I took
back to them, those pitiless holes punched in it--just where no one
else would ever have had them. I am human. I always feel about the
store, that great marble and glass Face, when I go by it now as if, in
spite of all the difficulties, it wanted me--to be beautiful! I at least
feel and know that the people who were the brain, the daily moving
consciousness behind the face--wanted me to be a becoming customer to
them. They did not want to see me coming in, if it could possibly be
helped, in that hat any more!

       *       *       *       *       *

I have told this little history of a gray hat, not because it is in any
way extraordinary, but because it is not. The same thing, or something
quite like it, expressing the same spirit, might have happened in any
one of the best hundred department stores in the world.

Most people can remember a time, only a very little while ago, when
clerks in our huge department stores or selling machines were not
expected to be people who would think of things like this to do, or who
would know how, or who would think to consider them good business if
they did.

The department store that based its success on selecting clerks of a
high order of human insight, that paid higher wages to its clerks for
their power of being believed in, for their personal qualities and their
shrewdness in helping people and a gift for discovering mutual interests
with everybody and for founding permanent human relations with the
public, had not been thought of a little while ago.

All that had been thought of was the appearance of these things. It was
an employer's business, speaking generally, to get all he could out of
his clerks and have them get as little as possible out of him. It was
their business in their turn to get as much money out of the public as
they could get, and to give the public as little in return as they
dared.

The type of employer who liked to do business in this way, and who
believed in it, crowed over the world nearly everywhere as the Practical
Man. And for the time being certainly it has to be admitted that he
seemed the most successful. Naturally there came to be a general
impression among the people that only certain lower orders of life and
character could be employed, or could stand being employed, in the great
department stores.

I used often to go into ----'s. Everybody remembers it. I went in, as a
rule, in a helpless, waiting, married way, and as a mere attache of the
truly wise and good. All I ever did or was expected to do was to stand
by and look wise and discriminating a minute about dress goods, when
spoken to. I used to put in my time looking behind the counters--all
those busy, pale, yellow-lighted people in little holes or stalls trying
to be human and natural in that long, low, indoor street of theirs,
crowds of women staring by them and picking at things. Always that
moving sidewalk of questions--that dull, eager stream of consciousness
sweeping by. No sunlight--just the crowds of covetousness and
shrewdness. I used to wonder about the clerks, many of them, and what
they would be like at home or under an apple tree or each with a bit of
blue sky to go with them. They used to seem in those days, as I looked,
mostly poor, underground creatures living in a sort of Subway of Things
in a hateful, hard, little world of clothes, each with his little study
or trick or knack of appearances, standing there and selling people
their good looks day after day at so much a yard.

To-day, in a hundred cities one can go into department shops where one
would get, standing and looking on idly, totally different impressions.
There are hundreds of thousands of young men and women who have made
being a clerk a new thing in the world. The public has already had its
imagination touched by them, and is beginning to deal with clerks, as a
class, on a different level.

This has been brought to pass because the employer has been thought of,
or has thought of himself, who engages and pays for in clerks the
highest qualities in human nature that he can get. He picks out and puts
in power, and persuades to be clerks, people who would have felt
superior to it in days gone by--men and women who habitually depend for
their efficiency in showing and selling goods upon their more generous
emotions and insights, their imaginations about other people. They
gather in their new customers, and keep up their long lists of old and
regular customers, through shrewd visions of service to people, and
through a technical gift for making the Golden Rule work.

When one looks at it practically, and from the point of view of all the
consequences, a bargain is the most spiritual, conclusive, most
self-revealing experience that people can have together. Every bargain
is a cross-section in three tenses of a man. A bargain tells everything
about people--who they are, and what they are like. It also tells what
they are going to be like unless they take pains; and it tells what they
are not going to be like too sometimes, and why.

The man who comes nearest in modern life to being a Pope, is the man who
determines in what spirit and by what method the people under him shall
conduct his bargains and deal with his customers. ----, at the head of
his department store, has a parish behind his counters of twenty-five
hundred men and women. He is in the business of determining their
religion, the way they make their religion work, eight hours a day, six
days a week. He seems to me to be engaged in the most ceaseless, most
penetrating, most powerful, and most spiritual activity of the world. He
is really getting at the imaginations of people with his idea of
goodness. If he does not work his way through to a man's imagination one
minute or one day, he does the next. If he cannot open up a man's
imagination with one line of goods, he does it with another. If he
cannot make him see things, and do as he would be done by, with one kind
of customer, another is moved in front of him presently, and another,
and another--the man's inner substance is being attacked and changed
nearly every minute every day. There is nothing he can do, or keep from
doing, in which his employer's idea of goodness does not surround,
besiege, or pursue him. Every officer of the staff, every customer who
slips softly up to the counter in front of him makes him think of the
Golden Rule in a new way or in some shading of a new way--confronts him
with the will, with the expectation, with the religion of his employer.

In ----'s store (where I looked in a moment yesterday) one thousand of
the two thousand five hundred clerks are men. If I were a minister
wondering nearly every day how to work in for my religion a fair chance
at men, I should often look wistfully from over the edge of my pulpit, I
imagine, to the head of ----'s department store, sitting at that quiet,
calm, empty looking desk of his in his little office at the top of his
big building in ---- Street, with nothing but those little six or seven
buttons he softly puts his thumbs on connecting him with a thousand
men.

And he does not even need the buttons. Every man knows and feels,
personally and intimately, what the man at the desk is asking him to do
with a particular customer who stands before him at the moment. As soon
as the customer is there, the man at the desk practically is there too.
His religion works by wireless, and goes automatically, and as from a
huge stored-up reservoir, to all that happens in the place. He makes
regularly with his idea of goodness anywhere from twenty to sixty
pastoral calls (with every sale they make) on a thousand men a day. He
is not dependent, as the ordinary minister often is, on their dying, or
on their babies, or on their wives, for a chance to get at men with his
religion.

If I wanted to take a spiritual census of modern civilization and get at
the actual scientific facts, what we would have to call, probably the
foot-tons of religion in the world to-day, I would not look for them in
the year-books of the churches, I would get them by going about in the
great department stores, by moving among the men and women in them day
after day, and standing by and looking on invisibly. Like a shadow or a
light I would watch them registering their goodness daily, hourly, on
their counters, over their counters, measuring out their souls before
God in dress goods, shoes, boas, hats, silk, and bread and butter!

This may not be true of the Orient, but it is true, and getting to be
more true every day, of Europe and America.

It is especially true of America. In the things which we borrow in
America, we are far behind the rest of the world. It is to the things
that we create, that we must look alone, for our larger destiny, and our
world-service.

Naturally, in so far as civilization is a race of borrowing, nations
like England and France and Germany a few hundred miles apart from one
another, set the pace for a nation that is three thousand miles away
from where it can borrow, like the United States. It is a far cry from
the land of the Greeks with their still sunny temples and dreams, and
from England with its quiet-singing churches, to New York with its
practical sky-scraping hewing prayer!

New York--scooping its will out of the very heavens!

New York--the World's last, most stern, perhaps most manful prayer of
all--half-asking and half-grasping out of the hand of God!

Here is America's religion! Half afraid at first, half glad, slowly,
solemnly triumphant, as on the edge of an abyss, I have seen America's
religion! I have seen my brother Americans hewing it out--day by day,
night by night, have I seen them--in these huge steel sub-cellars of the
sky!

I have accepted the challenge.

If it is not a religion, then it shall be to us a religion to make it a
religion.

The Metropolitan Tower with its big clock dial, with its three stories
of telling what time it is, and its great bell singing hymns above the
dizzy flocks of the skyscrapers, is the soul of New York, to me.

If one could see a soul--if one could see the soul of New York, it would
look more like the Metropolitan Tower than anything else.

It seems to be trying to speak away up there in the whiteness and the
light, the very soul of the young resistless iron-hearted city.

I write as an American. To me there is something about it as I come up
the harbour that fills my heart with a big ringing, as if all the world
were ringing, ringing once more--ringing all over again--up in this
white tower of ours in its new bit of blue sky! I glory in England with
it, in Greece, in Bethlehem. It is as an outpost on Space and Time, for
all of us gathering up all history in it softly--once more and pointing
it to God!

It is the last, the youngest-minded, the most buoyant tower--the mighty
Child among the steeples of the world. The lonely towers of Cologne
stretching with that grave and empty nave against the sky, out of that
old and faded region of religion, far away, tremulously send greetings
to it--to this white tower in the west--to where it goes up with its
crowds of people in it, with business and with daily living and hoping
and dying in it, and strikes heaven!

It may be perhaps only the American blood in me. Perhaps it is raw and
new to be so happy. I do not know. I only know that to me the
Metropolitan Tower is saying something that has been never quite said
before--something that has been given in some special sense to us as a
trust from the world. It is to me the steeple of democracy--of our
democracy, England's democracy--the world's democracy. The hollow domes
of Sts. Peter and Paul, and all the rest with their vague, airy
other-worldliness, all soaring and tugging like so many balloons of
religion and goodness, trying to get away from this world--are not to me
so splendid, so magnificently wilful as the Metropolitan Tower--as the
souls of these modern, heaven-striking men, taking the world itself, at
last, its streets of stone, of steel, its very tunnels and lifting them
up as blind offerings, as unbounded instincts, as prayers, as songs to
heaven!

I worship my country, my people, my city when I hear the big bell in it
and when I look up to where the tower is in that still place like a
sea--look up to where that little white country belfry sits in the
light, in the dark above the vast and roaring city!

To me, the Metropolitan Tower, sweeping up its prayer out of the streets
the way it does, and doing it, too, right beside that little safe,
tucked-in, trim, Sunday religion of the Madison Square Presbyterian
Church, lifts itself up as one of the mighty signs and portents of our
time. Have I not heard the bell tolling to the people in the midst of
business and singing great hymns? A great city lifts itself and prays in
it--prays while it sings and clangs so absent-looking below.

I like to go out before going to sleep and take a look at it--one more
look before I sleep, upon the tower, strong, unyielding, alive, sinewy,
imperturbable, lifting up within itself the steel and soul of the world.
I am content to go to sleep.

It is a kind of steeple of the business of this world. I would rather
have said that business needed a steeple before until I saw the
Metropolitan Tower and heard it singing above the streets. But I had
always wanted (without knowing it), in a modern office building, a great
solemn bell to remind us what the common day was. I like to hear it
striking a common hour and what can be done in it. I stop in the street
to listen--to listen while that great hive of people tolls--tolls not the
reveries of monks above the roofs of the skyscrapers, but the religion
of business--of the real and daily things, the seriousness of the mighty
street and the faces of the men and the women.




