CHAPTER XX

THE STRIKE OF THE SAVIOURS


A factory in ---- some ten years ago employed one hundred men. Three of
these men were in the office and ninety-seven were hands in the works.
To-day this same factory which is doing a very much larger business is
still employing one hundred men, but thirty of the men are employed in
the office and seventy in the works.

Ten years, ago to put it in other words, the factory provided places for
one artist or manager and two inventors and places for ninety-seven
Hewers.

To-day the factory has made room for thirty inventors, one manager and
twenty-nine men who spend their entire time in thinking of things that
will help the Hewers hew.

It has seventy Hewers who are helping the Inventors invent by hewing
three times as hard and three times as skilfully or three times as much
as without the Inventors to help them, they had dreamed they could hew
before.

The Artist or Organizer who made this change in the factory found that
among the ninety-seven Hewers that were employed a number of Hewers were
hewing very poorly, because though hewing was the best they could do,
they could not even hew. He found certain others who were hewing poorly
because they were not Hewers, but Inventors. These he set to work--some
of them inventing in the office.

On closer examination the two Inventors in the office were found to be
not Inventors at all. One of them was a fine Hewer who liked to hew and
who hated inventing and the other was merely a rich Hewer who was an
owner in the business who saw suddenly that he would have to stop
inventing and stop very soon if he wanted the business to make any more
money.

There are four things that the Artist has to do with a factory like this
before he can make it efficient.

Each of these things is an art. One art is the art of compelling the
mere owner, the man with the merely hewing mind, to confine himself to
the one thing he knows how to do, namely to shovelling, to shovelling
his money in when and where he was told it was needed, and to shovelling
his money out when it has been made for him.

The art of compelling a mere owner to know his place, of keeping him
shovelling money in and shovelling money out silently and modestly,
consists as a rule in having the Artist or Organizer tell him that
unless the business is placed completely in his hands he will not
undertake to run it.

This is the first art. The second art consists in having an
understanding with the inventors that they will invent ways of helping
the Hewers hew.

The third art consists in having an understanding with the Hewers that
they will accept the help of the Inventors and hew with it. The fourth
art is the art of representing the consumer with the Hewer and with the
Inventor and with the Owner and seeing that he shares in the benefits of
all economies and improvements.

These are all human arts and turn on the power in a man of being a true
artist, of being a man-inventor, a man-developer and a man-mixer, daily
taking part of himself and using these parts in putting other men
together.

These organizers or artists, being the men who see how--are the men who
are not afraid.




CHAPTER XXI

THE LEAGUE OF THE MEN WHO ARE NOT AFRAID


If all the unbrained money in the world to-day and the men that go with
it could be isolated, could be taken by men of imagination and put in a
few ships and sent off to an island in the sea--if New York and London
and all the other important places could be left in the hands of the men
who have imagination, poor and rich, they would soon have the world in
shape to make the men with merely owning minds, the mere owners off on
their island, beg to come back to it, to be allowed to have a share in
it on any terms.

In order to be fair, of course, their island would have to be a
furnished island--mines, woods, and everything they could want. It would
become a kind of brute wilderness or desert in twenty-five years. We
could, now and then, some of us, take happy little trips, go out and
look them over on their little furnished island. It would do us good to
watch them--these men with merely owning or holding-on minds, really
noticing at last how unimportant they are.

But it is not necessary to resort to a furnished island as a device, as
a mirror for making mere millionaires see themselves.

This is a thing that could be done for millionaires now, most of them,
here just where they are.

All that is necessary is to have the brains of the world so organized
that the millionaires who expect merely because they are millionaires to
be run after by brains, cannot get any brains to run after them.

I am in favour of organizing the brains of the world into a trades
union.

One of the next things that is going to happen is that the managing and
creating minds of the world to-day are going to organize, are going to
see suddenly their real power and use it. The brains are about to have,
as labour and capital already have, a class consciousness.

I would not claim that there is going to be an international strike of
the brains of the world, but it will not be long before the managing
class as a class will be organized so that they can strike if they want
to.

The Artists or Organizers and Managers of business will not need
probably, in order to accomplish their purpose, to strike against the
uncreative millionaires. They will make a stand (which the best of them
have already made now) for the balance of power in any business that
they furnish their brains to. The brains that create the profits for the
owners and that create the labour for the labourers, will make terms for
their brains and will withhold their brains if necessary to this end.
But it is far more likely that they will accomplish their purpose sooner
by using their brains for the millionaires and for the labourers--by
cooeperating with the millionaires and labourers than they will by
striking against them or keeping their brains back.

They are in a position to make the millionaires see how little money
they can make without them even in a few days. They will let them try. A
very little trying will prove it.

Where hand labour would have to strike for weeks and months to prove its
value, brain labour would have to strike hours and days.

This is what is going to be done in modern business in one business at a
time, the brains insisting in each firm upon full control.

Then, of course, the firms that have the brains in most full control
will drive the firms in which brains are in less control out of
competition.

Then brains will spread from one business to another. The Managers,
Artists, and Organizers of the world will have formed at last a Brain
Syndicate, and they will put themselves in a position to determine in
their own interests and in the interests of society at large the terms
on which all men--all men who have no brains to put with their
money--shall be allowed to have the use of theirs. They will monopolize
the brain supply of the world.

Then they will act. Under our present regime money hires men; under the
regime of the Brain Syndicate men will hire money. Money--_i.e._, saved
up or canned labour, is going to be hired by Managers, Organizers, and
Engineers with as much discrimination and with as deep a study of its
efficiency, as new labour is hired. The millionaires are going to be
seen standing with their money bags and their little hats in their hands
like office boys asking for positions for their money before the doors
of the really serious and important men, the men who toil out the ideas
and the ways and the means of carrying out ideas--the men who do the
real work of the world, who see things that they want and see how to get
them--the men of imagination, the inventors of ideas, organizers of
facts, generals and engineers in human nature.

It is these men who are going to allow people who merely have
thoughtless labour and people who merely have thoughtless money to be
let in with them. The world's quarrel with the rich man is not his being
a rich man, but his being rich without brains, and its quarrel with the
poor labourer is not his being a poor labourer, but his being a poor
labourer without brains. The only way that either of these men can have
a chance to be of any value is in letting themselves be used by the man
who will supply them with what they lack. They will try to get this man
to see if he cannot think of some way of getting some good out of them
for themselves, and for others.

We have a Frederick Taylor for furnishing brains to labour.

We are going to have a Frederick Taylor to attend to the brain-supply of
millionaires, to idea-outfits for directors.

Every big firm is going to have a large group of specialists working on
the problem of how to make millionaires--its own particular millionaires
think, devising ways of keeping idle and thoughtless capitalists out of
the way. If the experts fail in making millionaires think, they may be
succeeded by experts in getting rid of them and in finding thoughtful
money, possibly made up of many small sums, to take their place.

The real question the Artist or Organizer is going to ask about any man
with capital will be, "Is it the man who is making the money valuable
and important or is it the money that is making this man important for
the time being and a little noticeable or important-looking?"

The only really serious question we have to face about money to-day is
the unimportance of the men who have it. The Hewers or Scoopers, or
Grabbers, who have assumed the places of the Artist and the Inventor
because they have the money, are about to be crowded over to the silent,
modest back seats in directors' meetings. If they want their profits,
they must give up their votes. They are going to be snubbed. They are
going to beg to be noticed. The preferred stock or voting stock will be
kept entirely in the hands of the men of working imagination, of
clear-headedness about things that are not quite seen, the things that
constitute the true values in any business situation, the men who have
the sense of the way things work and of the way they will have to go.

Mere millionaires who do not know their place in a great business will
be crowded into small ones. They will be confronted by the organized
refusal of men with brains to work for their inferiors, to be under
control of men of second-rate order. Men with mere owning and grabbing
minds will only be able to find men as stupid as they are to invest and
manage their money for them. In a really big creative business their
only chance will be cash and silence. They will be very glad at last to
get in on any terms, if the men of brains will let their money edge into
their business without votes and be carried along with it as a favour.

It is because things are not like this now, that we have an industrial
problem.

Managers who have already hired labour as a matter of course are going
to hire the kind of capital they like, the kind of capital that thinks
and that can work with thinking men.

There will gradually evolve a general recognition in business on the
part of men who run it and on the part of managers, of the moral or
human value of money. The successful manager is no longer going to grab
thoughtlessly at any old, idle, foolish pot of money that may be offered
to him. He is going to study the man who goes with it, see how he will
vote and see whether he knows his place, whether he is a Hewer, for
instance, who thinks he is an Inventor. Does he or does he not know
which he is, an Inventor, an Artist, or a Hewer?

Capitalists will expect as a matter of course to be looked over and to
be hired in a great business enterprise as carefully as labourers are
being hired now.

The moment it is generally realized that the managers of every big
modern business have become as particular about letting in the right
kind of directors as they have been before about letting in the right
kind of labour, we will stop having an upside-down business world.

An upside-down business world is one in which any man who has money
thinks he can be a director almost anywhere, a world in which on every
hand we find managers who are not touching the imagination of the public
and getting it to buy, and not touching the imagination of labour and
getting it to work, because they are not free to carry out their ideas
without submitting them to incompetent and scared owners.

The incompetent and scared owners--the men who cannot think--are about
to be shut out. Then they will be compelled to hire incompetent and
scared managers. Then they will lose their money. Then the world will
slip out of their hands.

The problem of modern industry is to be not the distribution of the
money supply, but the distribution of the man-supply.

Money follows men.

Free men. Free money.




BOOK FIVE

GOOD NEWS AND HARD WORK


TO ANYBODY

       "_I know that all men ever born are also my brothers....
    Limitless leaves too, stiff or drooping in the fields,
       And brown ants in the little wells beneath them
       And mossy scabs of the worm fence, heaped stones, elders,
    mulleins and poke weed._"

_A Child said, "What is grass?" fetching it to me with full hands.

How could I answer the Child?_

       *       *       *       *       *

    _"I want to trust the sky and the grass!
    I want to believe the songs I hear from the fenceposts!
    Why should a maple-bud mislead me?"_




PART ONE

NEWS AND LABOUR


A big New England factory, not long ago, wanted to get nearer its raw
material and moved to Georgia.

All the machine considerations, better water-power, cheaper labour,
smaller freight bills, and new markets had argued for moving to Georgia.

Long rows of new mills were built and thousands of negroes were moved in
and thousands of shanties were put up, and the men and the women stood
between the wheels. And the wheels turned.

There was not a thing that had not been thought of except the men and
women that stood between the wheels.

The men and women that stood between the wheels were, for the most part,
strong and hearty persons and they never looked anxious or abused and
did as they were told.

And when Saturday night came, crowds of them with their black faces, of
the men and of the women, of the boys and girls, might have been seen
filing out of the works with their week's wages.

Monday morning a few of them dribbled back. There were enough who would
come to run three mills. All the others in the long row of mills were
silent. Tuesday morning, Number Four started up, Wednesday, Number Five.
By Thursday noon they were all going.

The same thing happened the week after, and the week after, and the week
after that.

The management tried everything they could think of with their people,
scolding, discharging, making their work harder, making their work
easier, paying them less, paying them more, two Baptist ministers and
even a little Roman Catholic Church.

As long as the negroes saw enough to eat for three days, they would not
work.

It began to look as if the mills would have to move back to
Massachusetts, where people looked anxious and where people felt poor,
got up at 5 A.M. Mondays and worked.

Suddenly one day, the son of one of the owners, a very new-looking young
man who had never seen a business college, and who had run through
Harvard almost without looking at a book, and who really did not seem to
know or to care anything about anything--except folks--appeared on the
scene with orders from his father that he be set to work.

The manager could not imagine what to do with him at first, but finally,
being a boy who made people like him more than they ought to, he found
himself placed in charge of the Company Store. The company owned the
village, and the Company Store, which had been treated as a mere
necessity in the lonely village, had been located, or rather dumped, at
the time, into a building with rows of little house-windows in it, a
kind of extra storehouse on the premises.

The first thing the young man did was to stove four holes in the
building, all along the front and around the corners on the two sides,
and put in four big plate-glass windows. The store was mysteriously
closed up in front for a few days to do this, and no one could see what
was happening, and the negroes slunk around into a back room to buy
their meal and molasses. And finally one morning, one Sunday morning,
the store opened up bravely and flew open in front.

The windows on the right contained three big purple hats with blue
feathers, and some pink parasols.

The windows on the left were full of white waistcoats, silver-headed
canes, patent-leather shoes and other things to live up to.

Monday morning more of the mills were running than usual.

Later in the week there appeared in the windows melodions, phonographs,
big gilt family Bibles, bread machines, sewing machines, and Morris
chairs. Only a few hands took their Mondays off after this.

All the mills began running all the week.

       *       *       *       *       *

Of course there are better things to live for than purple hats and blue
feathers, and silver-headed canes, and patent leather shoes. But if
people can be got to live six days ahead, or thirty days, or sixty days
ahead, instead of three days ahead, by purple hats and blue feathers and
white waistcoats, and if it is necessary to use purple hats and blue
feathers to start people thinking in months instead of minutes, or to
budge them over to where they can have a touch of idealism or of
religion or of living beyond the moment, I say for one, with all my
heart, "God bless purple hats and blue feathers!"

       *       *       *       *       *

The great problem of modern charity, the one society is largely occupied
with to-day, is: "What is there that we can possibly do for our
millionaires?"

The next thing Society is going to do, perhaps, is to design and set up
purple hats with blue feathers for millionaires.

The moment our millionaires have placed before them something to live
for, a few real, live, satisfying ideals, or splendid lasting things
they can do, things that everybody else would want to do, and that
everybody else would envy them for doing, it will bore them to run a
great business merely to make money. They will find it more interesting,
harder, and calling for greater genius, to be great and capable
employers. When our millionaires once begin to enter into competition
with one another in being the greatest and most successful employers of
labour on earth, our industrial wars will cease.

Millionaires who get as much work out of their employees as they dare,
and pay them as little as they can, and who give the public as small
values as they dare, and take as much money as they can, only do such
stupid, humdrum, conventional things because they are bored, because
they cannot really think of anything to live for.

Labourers whose daily, hourly occupation consists in seeing how much
less work a day than they ought to do, they can do, and how much more
money they can get out of their employers than they earn, only do such
things because they are tired or bored and discouraged, and because they
cannot think of anything that is truly big and fine and worth working
for.

The industrial question is not an economic question. It is a question of
supplying a nation with ideals. It is a problem which only an American
National Ideal Supply Company could hope to handle. The very first
moment three or four purple hats with blue feathers for millionaires and
for labourers have been found and set up in the great show window of the
world, the industrial unrest of this century begins to end.

       *       *       *       *       *

As I went by, one day not long ago, I saw two small boys playing
house--marking off rooms--sitting-rooms and bedrooms, with rows of
stones on the ground. When I came up they had just taken hold of a big
stone they wanted to lift over into line a little. They were tugging on
it hopefully and with very red faces, and it did not budge. I picked up
a small beam about five feet long on my side of the road, that I thought
would do for a crowbar, stepped over to the boys, fixed a fulcrum for
them, and went on with my walk. When I came back after my walk that
night to the place where the boys had been playing, I found the boys had
given up working on their house. And as I looked about, every big stone
for yards around--every one that was the right size--seemed subtly out
of place. The top of the stone wall, too, was very crooked.

They had given up playing house and had played crowbar all day instead.

I should think it would have been a rather wonderful day, those boys'
first day, seven or eight hours of it spent, with just a little time off
for luncheon, in seeing how a crowbar worked!

I have forgotten just how much larger part of a ton one inch more on a
crowbar lifts. I never know figures very well. But I know people and I
know that a man with only three day's worth of things ahead to live for
does not get one hundredth part of the purchase power on what he is
doing that the man gets who works with thirty days ahead of things to
live for, all of them nerving him up, keeping him in training, and
inspiring him. And I know that the man who does his work with a longer
lever still, with thirty or forty years worth' of things he wants, all
crowding in upon him and backing him up, can lift things so easily, so
even jauntily, sometimes, that he seems to many of us sometimes to be a
new size and a new kind of man.

       *       *       *       *       *

The general conventional idea of business is, that if you give a man
more wages to work for, he will work more, but of course if a business
man has the brains, knows how to fire up an employee, knows how to give
him something or suggest something in his life that will make him want
to live twenty times as much, it would not only be cheaper, but it would
work better than paying him twice as much wages.

Efficiency is based on news. Put before a man's life twenty times as
much to live for and to work for, and he will do at least, well--twice
as much work.

If a man has a big man's thing or object in view, he can do three times
as much work. If the little thing he has to do, and keep doing, is seen
daily by him as a part of a big thing, the power and drive of the big
thing is in it, the little thing becomes the big thing, seems big while
he is doing it every minute. It makes it easier to do it because it
seems big.

The little man becomes a big man.

From the plain, practical point of view, it is the idealist in
business, the shrewd, accurate, patient idealist in modern business who
is the man of economic sense. The employer who can put out ideals in
front of his people, who can make his people efficient with the least
expense, is the employer who has the most economic sense.

The employer who is a master at supplying motives to people, who manages
to cut down through to the quick in his employees, to the daily motives,
to the hourly ideals, the hourly expectations with which they work, is
the employer who already takes the lead, who is already setting the pace
in the twentieth-century business world.

Possibly you have noticed this trait in the great employers or, at
least, in the great managers of employers?

You are going, for instance, through a confectionery shop. As you move
down the long aisles of candy machines you hear the clock strike eleven.
Suddenly music starts up all around you and before your eyes four
hundred girls swing off into each other's arms. They dance between their
machines five minutes, and then, demurely, they drop back to their work.
You see them sitting quietly in long white rows, folding up sweet-meats
with flushed and glowing cheeks.

Is this sentiment or is it cold businesslike efficiency?

The more sentiment there is in it, I think, the more efficient it is and
the better it works.

"Business is not business."

One need not quarrel about words, but certainly, whatever else business
is, it is not business. It would be closer to the facts to call business
an art or a religion, a kind of homely, inspired, applied piety, based
upon gifts in men which are essentially religious gifts; the power of
communion in the human heart, the genius for cultivating companionship,
of getting people to understand you and understand one another and do
team work. The bed-rock, the hard pan of business success lies in the
fundamental, daily conviction--the personal habit in a man of looking
upon business as a hard, accurate, closely studied, shrewd human art, a
science of mutual expectation.

I am not saying that I would favour all employers of young women having
them, to-morrow morning at eleven o'clock, swing off into each other's
arms and dance for five minutes. The value of the dance in this
particular case was that the Firm thought of the dancing itself and was
always doing things like it, that everybody knew that the Firm, up in
its glass office, felt glad, joined in the dance in spirit, enjoyed
seeing the girls caught up for five minutes in the joy and swing of a
big happy world full of sunshine and music outside, full of buoyant and
gentle things, of ideals around them which belonged to them and of which
they and their lives were a part.

When we admit that business success to-day turns or is beginning to turn
on a man's power of getting work out of people, we admit that a man's
power of getting work out of people, his business efficiency, turns on
his power of supplying his people with ideals.

Ideals are news.

You come on a man who thinks he is out of breath and that he cannot
possibly run. You happen to be able to tell him that some dynamite in
the quarry across the road is going to blow the side of the hill out in
forty-five seconds and he will run like a gazelle.

You tell a man the news, the true news that his employees are literally
and honestly finding increased pay or promotion, either in their own
establishment or elsewhere for every man they employ, as fast as he
makes himself fit, and you have created a man three times his own size
before your own eyes, all in a minute. And he begins working for you
like a man three times his own size, and not because he is getting more
for it, but because he suddenly believes in you, suddenly believes in
the world and in the human race he belongs to.

To make a man work, say something to him or do something to him which
will make him swing his hat for humanity, and give three cheers (like a
meeting of workmen the other day): "Three cheers for God!"

There is a well-known firm in England which has the best labour of its
kind in the world, because the moment the Firm finds that a man's skill
has reached the uttermost point in his work, where it would be to the
Firm's immediate interests to keep him and where the Firm could keep on
making money out of him and where the man could not keep on growing,
they have a way of stepping up to such a man (and such things happen
every few days), and telling him that he ought to go elsewhere, finding
him a better place and sending him to it. This is a regular system and
highly organized. The factory is known or looked upon as a big family or
school. There are hundreds of young men and young women who, in order to
get in and get started, and merely be on the premises of such a factory,
would offer to work for the firm for nothing. The Factory, to them, is
like a great Gate on the World.

It is its ideals that have made the factory a great gate on the World.

And ideals are news. Ideals are news to a man about himself. News to a
man about himself and about what he can be, is gospel.

And a factory with men at the top who have the brains about human nature
to do things like this, men who can tell people news about themselves,
all day, every day, all the week, like a church--let such a factory, I
say, for one, have a steeple with chimes in it, if it wants to, and be
counted with the other churches!

People have a fashion of speaking of a man's ideals in a kind of weak,
pale way, as if ideals were clouds, done in water-colour by schoolgirls,
as if they were pretty, innocent things, instead of being fierce,
splendid, terrific energies, victorious, irrevocable in human history,
trampling the earth like unicorns, breathing wonder, deaths, births upon
the world, carrying everything before them, everywhere they go. These
are ideals! This may not be the way ideals work in a moment or in a
year, but it is the way they work in history, and it is the way they
make a man feel when he is working on them. It is what they are for, to
make him feel like this, when he is working on them. With the men who
are most alive and who live the longest, the men who live farther ahead
and think in longer periods of time, the energies in ideals function as
an everyday matter of course.

I wish people would speak oftener of a man's motives, what he lives for,
as his motive powers. They generally speak of motives in a man as if
they were a mere kind of dead chart or spiritual geography in him, or
clock-hand on him or map of his soul. The motives and desires in a man
are the motors or engines in him, the central power house in a man, the
thing in him that makes him go.

All a man has to do to live suddenly and unexpectedly a big life is to
have suddenly a big motive.

Anybody who has ever tried, for five minutes, a big motive, ever tried
working a little happiness for other people into what he is doing for
himself, for instance, if he stopped to think about it and how it worked
and how happy it made him himself, would never do anything in any other
way all his life. It is the big motives that are efficient.




PART TWO

NEWS AND MONEY


I think it was Sir William Lever who remarked (but I have heard in the
last two years so many pearls dropped from the lips of millionaires that
I am not quite sure) that the way to tell a millionaire, when one saw
one, was by his lack of ready money. He added that perhaps a surer way
of knowing a millionaire, when one saw one, was by his lack of ideas.

My own experience is that neither of these ways works as well as it used
to. I very often meet a man now--a real live millionaire, no one would
think it of.

One of them--one of the last ones--telegraphed me from down in the
country one morning, swung up to London on a quick train, cooped me up
with him at a little corner table in his hotel, and gave me more ideas
in two hours than I had had in a week.

I came away very curious about him--whoever he was.

Not many days afterward I found myself motoring up a long, slow hill,
full of wind and heather, and there in a stately park with all his
treetops around him, and his own blue sky, in a big, beautiful, serene
room, I saw him again.

He began at once, "Do you think Christ would have approved of my house?"

His five grown sons were sitting around him but he spoke vividly and
directly and like a child, and as if he had just brushed sixty years
away, and could, any time.

I said I did not think it fair to Christ, two thousand years off, to ask
what he would have thought of a house like his, now. The only fair
thing to do would be to ask what Christ would think if He were living
here to-day.

"Well, suppose He had motored over here with you this afternoon from
---- Manor, and spent last night with you there, and talked with you and
with ---- and had seen the pictures, and the great music room and
wandered through the gardens, and suppose that then He had come through
on his way up, all those two miles of slums down in ---- seen all those
poor, driven, crowded people, and had finally come up here with you to
this big, still, restful place two thousand people could live in, and
which I keep all to myself. You don't really mean to say, do you, that
He would approve of my living in a house like this?"

I said that I did not think that Christ would be tipped over by a house
or lose his bearings with a human soul because he lived in a park. I
thought He would look him straight in the eyes.

"But Christ said, 'He that loseth his life shall save it!'"

"Yes, but He did not intend it as a mere remark about people's houses."

It did not seem to me that Christ meant simply giving up to other people
easy and ordinary things like houses or like money, but that He meant
giving up to others our motives, giving up the deepest, hardest things
in us, our very selves to other people.

"And so you really think that if Christ came and looked at this house
and looked at me in it, He would not mind?"

"I do not know. I think that after He had looked at your house He would
go down and look at your factory, possibly. How many men do you employ?"

"Sixteen hundred."

"I think He would look at them, the sixteen hundred men, and then He
would move about a little. Very likely He would look at their wives and
the little children."

He thought a moment. I could see that he was not as afraid of having
Christ see the factory as he was of having Him see the house.

I was not quite sure but I thought there was a little faint gleam in his
eye when I mentioned the factory.

"What do you make?" I asked.

He named something that everybody knows.

Then I remembered suddenly who he was. He was one of the men I had first
been told about in England, and the name had slipped from me. He had
managed to do and do together the three things one goes about looking
for everywhere in business--what might be called the Three R's of great
business (though not necessarily R's). (1) He had raised the wages of
his employees. (2) He had reduced prices to consumers. (3) He had
reduced his proportion of profit and raised the income of the works, by
inventing new classes of customers, and increasing the volume of the
business.

He had found himself, one day, as most men do, sooner or later, with a
demand for wages that he could not pay.

At first he told the men he could not pay them more, said that he would
have to close the works if he did.

He was a very busy man to be confronted with a crisis like this. The
market was trouble enough.

One morning, when he was up early, and the house was all still and he
was sitting alone with himself, the thought slipped into his mind that
there had been several times before in his life when he had sat thinking
about certain things that could not be done. And then he had got up from
thinking they could not be done and gone out and done them.

He wondered if he could not get up and go out and do this one.

As he sat in the stillness with a clear road before his mind and not a
soul in the world up, the thought occurred to him, with not a thing in
sight to stop it, that he had not really trained himself to be quite
such an expert in raising wages as he had in some other things.

Perhaps he did not know about raising wages.

Perhaps if he concentrated his imagination as much on getting higher
wages for his workmen as he had in those early days years before on
making over all his obstinate raw material into the best cases of ----
on earth, he might find it possible to get more wages for his men by
persuading them to earn more and by getting their cooeperation in finding
ways to earn more.

As he sat in the stillness, gradually (perhaps it was the stillness that
did it) the idea grew on him.

He made up his mind to see what would happen if he worked as hard at
paying higher wages for three months as he had for three years at making
raw material into cases of the best----on earth.

Then things began happening every day. One of the most important
happened to him.

He found that higher wages were as interesting a thing to work on as any
other raw material had ever been.

He found that a cheap workman as raw material to make a high-priced
workman out of was as interesting as a case of----.

A year or so after this, there was a strike (in his particular industry)
of all the workmen in England. They struck to be paid the wages his men
were paid.

He had been able to do three things he thought he thought he could not
do. He had succeeded in doing the first, in raising the wages of his
employees, by thinking up original ways of expressing himself to them,
and of getting them to believe in him and of making them want to work a
third harder. At the same time he succeeded in doing the second, in
reducing the prices to consumers, by inventing new by-products out of
waste.

He had succeeded in doing the third, in reducing his per cent. of
profits and increasing his income from the works at the same time, by
thinking up ways of creating new habits and new needs in his customers.

He had fulfilled, as it seems, the three requisites of a great business
career. He had created new workmen, invented new things for men and
women to want, and had then created some new men and women who could
want them.

Incidentally all the while, day by day, while he was doing these things,
he had distributed a large and more or less unexpected sum of money
among all these three classes of people.

Some of this extra money went to his workmen, and some to himself, and
some to his customers, but it was largely spent, of course, in getting
business for other manufacturers and in getting people to buy all over
England, from other manufacturers, things that such people as they had
never been able before to afford to buy.

       *       *       *       *       *

All these things that I have been saying and which I have duly confided
to the reader flashed through my mind as I stood with my back to the
fire, realizing suddenly that the man who had done them was the man with
whom I was talking.

Possibly some little thing was said. I do not remember what. The next
thing I knew was that, with his five grown sons around him, he returned
to his attack on his house.

He said some days he was glad it was so far away. He did not want his
workmen to see it. He did not go to the mill often in his motor-car, not
when he could help it.

I said that I thought that a man who was doing extraordinary things for
other people, things that other men could not get time or strength or
freedom or boldness of mind or initiative to do, that any particular
thing he could have that gave him any advantage or immunity for doing
the extraordinary things better, that would give him more of a chance to
give other people a chance, that the other people, if they were in their
senses, would insist upon his having these things.

"I think there are hundreds of men in my mill who think that they ought
to have my motor-car and three or four rooms in this house."

"Are they the most efficient ones?"

"No."

If a man gives over to other people his deepest motives, and if he
really identifies himself--the very inside of himself with them and
treats their interests as his interests, the more money he has, the more
people like it.

"Take me, for instance," I said.

"I have hoped every minute since I knew you, that you were a prosperous
man. I saw the house and looked around in the park as I motored up with
joy. And when I came to the big gate I wanted to give three cheers! I
wish you had stock in the Meat Trust in America, that you could pierce
your way like a microbe into the vitals, into the inside of the Meat
Trust in my own country, make a stand in a Directors' Meeting for ninety
million people over there, say your say for them, vote your stock for
them, say how you want a Meat Trust you belong to, to behave, how you
want it to be a big, serious, business institution and not a humdrum,
mechanical-minded hold-up anybody could think of--in charge of a few
uninteresting, inglorious men--men nobody really cares to know and that
nobody wants to be like ... when I think of what a man like you with
money can do ...!

"Am I not tired every day, are you not tired, yourself, of going about
everywhere and seeing money in the hands of all these second-class,
socially feeble-minded men, of seeing columns in the papers of what such
men think, of having college presidents, great universities, domes,
churches and thousands of steeples all deferring to them and bowing to
them, and all the superior, live, interested people ringing their door
bells for their money waiting outside on benches for what they think?"

I do not believe that Christ came into the world, two thousand years
ago, to say that only the men who have minds of the second class, men
who are not far-sighted enough in business to be decently unselfish in
this world, should be allowed to have control of the money and of the
peoples' means of living in it.

We are living in an age of big machines and big, inevitable
aggregations, and to say in an age like this, and above all, to get it
out of a Bible, or put it into a hymn book or make a religion of it,
that all the first class minds of the world--the men who see far enough
to be unselfish, should give over their money to second-class men, is
the most monstrous, most unbelieving, unfaithful, unbiblical,
irreligious thing a world can be guilty of. The one thing that is now
the matter with money, is that the second-class people have most of it.

"What would happen if we applied asceticism or a tired, discouraged
unbelief to having children that we do to having pounds and pence and
dollars and cents? You would not stand for that would you?"

I looked at his five sons.

"Suppose all the good families of to-day were to take the ground that
having children is a self-indulgence unworthy of good people; suppose
the good people leave having children in this world almost entirely to
bad ones?

"This is what has been happening to money.

"Unbelief in money is unbelief in the spirit. It is paying too much
attention to wealth to say that one must or that one must not have it."

I cannot recall precisely what was said after this in that long evening
talk of ours but what I tried to say perhaps might have been something
like this:

The essence of the New Testament seems to be the emphasis of a man's
spirit with or without money. Whether a man should be rich or get out of
being rich and earn the right to be poor (which some very true and big
men, artists and inventors in this world will always prefer) turns on a
man's temperament. If a man has a money genius and can so handle money
that he can make money, and if he can, at the same time, and all in one
bargain, express his own spirit, if he can free the spirits of other men
with money and express his religion in it, he should be ostracized by
all thoughtful, Christian people, if in the desperate crisis of an age
like this, he tries to get out of being rich.

The one thing a man can be said to be for in this world, is to express
the goodness--the religion in him, in something, and if he is not the
kind of man who can express his religion in money and in employing
labour, then let him find something--say music or radium or painting in
which he can. It is this bounding off in a world, this making a bare
spot in life and saying "This is not God, this cannot be God!"--it is
this alone that is sacriligious.

       *       *       *       *       *

It may be that I am merely speaking for myself, but I did discover a man
on Fleet Street the other day who quite agreed with me apparently, that
if the thing a man has in him is religion he can put it up or express it
in almost anything.

This man had tried to express his idea in a window.

He had done a Leonardo da Vinci's "Last Supper," in sugar--a kind of
bas-relief in sugar.

I do not claim that this kind of foolish, helpless caricature of a great
spiritual truth filled me with a great reverence or that it does now.

But it did make me think how things were.

If sugar with this man, like money with a banker, was the one logical
thing the man had to express his religion in, or if what he had had to
express had been really true and fine, or if there had been a true or
fine or great man to express, I do not doubt sugar could have been made
to do it.

One single man with enough money and enough religions skill in human
nature, who would get into the Sugar Trust with some good, fighting,
voting stock, who could make the Sugar Trust do as it would be done by,
would make over American industry in twenty years.

He would have thrown up as on a high mountain, before all American men,
one great specimen, enviable business. He would have revealed as in a
kind of deep, sober apocalypse, American business to itself. He would
have revealed American business as a new national art form, as an
expression of the practical religion, the genius for real things, that
is our real modern temperament in America and the real modern
temperament in all the nations.

Of course it may not need to be done precisely with the Sugar Trust.

The Meat Trust might do it first, or the Steel Trust.

But it will be done.

Then the Golden Rule, one great Golden Rule-machine having been
installed in our trust that knew the most, and was most known, it could
be installed in the others.

Religion can be expressed much better to-day in a stock-holder's meeting
than it can in a prayer-meeting.

Charles Cabot, of Boston, walked in quietly to the Stock-holder's
Meeting of the Steel Trust one day and with a little touch of
money--$2,900 in one hand, and a copy of the _American Magazine_ in the
other, made (with $2,900) $1,468,000,000 do right.




PART THREE

NEWS AND GOVERNMENT




