CHAPTER I

STEEPLES AND CHIMNEYS


I went to the Durbar the other night in cinema colour and saw the King
and Queen through India. I had found my way, with hundreds of others,
into the gallery of the Scala Theatre, and out of that big, still rim of
watchful darkness where I sat I saw--there must have been thousands of
them--crowds of camels running.

And crowds of elephants went swinging past.

I watched them like a boy, like a boy standing on the edge of a thousand
years and looking off at a world.

It was stately and strange, and like far music to sit quite still and
watch civilizations swinging past.

Then suddenly it became near and human--the spirit of playgrounds and of
shouting and boyish laughter ran through it. And we watched the
elephants, naked and untrimmed, lolling down to the lake and lying down
to be scrubbed in it with comfortable low snorting and slow rolling in
the water, and the men standing by all the while like little play-nurses
and tending them, their big bungling babies, at the bath. A few minutes
later we watched the same elephants, hundreds of them, their mighty
toilets made, pacing slowly past, swinging their gorgeous trappings in
our eyes, rolling their huge hoodahs at us, and all the time still those
little funny dots of men beside them, moving them silently, moving them
invisibly as by a spirit, as by a kind of awful wireless--those great
engines of the flesh! I shall never forget it or live without it, that
slow pantomime of those mighty, silent Eastern nations, their religions,
their philosophies, their wills, their souls, moving their elephants
past--the long panorama of it, of their little awful human wills, all
those little black, helpless-looking slits of Human Will astride those
mighty necks!

I have the same feeling when I see Count Zeppelin with his airship, or
Grahame-White at Hendon, riding his vast cosmic pigeon up the sky; and
it is the same feeling I have with the locomotives--those unconscious,
forbidding, coldly obedient terrible fellows! Have I not lain awake and
listened to them storming through the night, heard them out there ahead
working our wills on the blackness, on the thick night, on the stars, on
Space, and on Time while we slept?

My main feeling at the Durbar while I watched those splendid beasts--the
crowds of camels, the crowds of elephants--all being driven along by the
little, faint, dreamy, sleepy-looking people was, "Why don't their
elephants turn around on them and chase them?"

I kept thinking at first that they would, almost any minute.

Our elephants chase us--most of us. Who has not seen locomotives coming
quietly out of their roundhouses in New York and begin chasing people,
chasing whole towns, tearing along with them, making everybody hurry
whether or no, speeding up and ordering around by the clock great
cities, everybody alike, the rich and the poor, the just and the unjust,
for hundreds of miles around? In the same way I have seen, hundreds of
times, motor cars turning around on their owners and chasing
them--chasing them fairly out of their lives. And hundreds of thousands
of little wood-and-rubber Things with nickel bells whirring, may be seen
ordering around people--who pay them for it--in any city of our modern
world.

Now and then one comes on a man who keeps a telephone, who is a
gentleman with it, and who keeps it in its place, but not often.

There are certain questions to be asked and to be settled in any
civilization that would be called great.

First: Do the elephants chase the men in it? Second: And if--as in our
Western civilization--the men have made their own elephants, why should
they be chased by them?

There are some of us who have wondered a little at the comparative
inferiority of organ music. We have come to the conclusion that perhaps
organ music is inferior because it has been largely composed by
organists, by men who sit at organ machines many hours a day, and who
have let their organ machines with all their stops and pedals, and with
all their stop-and-pedal-mindedness, select out of their minds the tones
that organs can do best--the music that machines like.

Wagner has come to be recognized as a great and original composer for a
machine age because he would not let his imagination be cowed by the
mere technical limitations, the narrow-mindedness of brass horns, wooden
flutes, and catgut; he made up his mind that he would not sing violins.
He made violins sing him.

Perhaps this is the whole secret of art in a machine civilization.

Perhaps a machine civilization is capable of a greater art than has ever
been dreamed in the world before, the moment it stops being chased by
its elephants. The question of letting the crowd be beautiful in our
world of machines and crowds to-day turns on our producing
Machine-Trainers.

Men possessed by watches in their vest pockets cannot be inspired, men
possessed by churches or religion-machines cannot be prophets, men
possessed by school-machines cannot be educators.

The reason that we find the poet, or at least the minor poet,
discouraged in a machine age probably is, that there is nothing a minor
poet can do in it. Why should nightingales, poppies, and dells expect,
in a main trial of strength, to compete with machines? And why should
human beings running for their souls in a race with locomotives expect
to keep very long from losing their souls?

The reason that most people are discouraged about machinery to-day is
that this is what they think a machine civilization is. They whine at
the machines. They blame the locomotive.

A better way for a man to do would be to stop blaming the locomotive,
and stop running along out of breath beside it, and climb up into the
cab.

This is the whole issue of art in our modern civilization--climbing up
into the cab.

First come the Machine-Trainers, or poets who can tame engines. Then the
other poets.

In the meantime, the less we hear about nightingales and poppies and
dells and love and above, the better.

Poetry must make a few iron-handed, gentle-hearted, mighty men next. It
is because we demand and expect the beautiful that we say that poetry
must make men next.

The elephants have been running around in the garden long enough.




