CHAPTER II

BELLS AND WHEELS


We are living in a day of the great rebellion of the machines. Out of a
thousand thousand roundhouses and factories, vast cities and nations of
machines on the land and on the sea have risen before the soul of man
and said, "We have served you; now, you serve us."

A million million vulgar, swaggering Goliaths, one sees them everywhere;
they wave their arms at us around the world, they puff their white
breath at us, they spit smoke in our eyes, line up in a row before the
great cities, before the mighty-hearted nations, and say it again and
again, all in chorus, _"We have served you, now, you serve us!"_

It has come to sound to some of us as a kind of chant around our lives.

But why should we serve them?

I have seen crowds of minor poets running, their little boxes of perfume
and poetry, their cologne water, their smelling-salts, in their hands.

And, of course, if the world were all minor poets the situation would be
serious.

And I have seen flocks of faint-hearted temples, of big, sulky,
beautiful, absent-minded colleges, looking afraid. Every now and then
perhaps one sees a professor run out, throw a book at the machines, and
run back again. Oxford still looks at science, at matter itself,
tremulously, with that same old, still, dreamy air of dignity, of
gentlemanly disappointment.

And if the world were all Oxford the situation would be serious.

When Oxford with its hundred spires, its little beautiful boy choirs of
professors, draws me one side from the Great Western Railway Station,
and intones in those still, solemn, lonely spaces the great truth in my
ears, that machines and ideals cannot go together, that the only way to
deal with ideals is to keep them away from machines, my only reply is
that ideals that are so tired that they are merely devoted to defending
themselves, ideals that will not and cannot go forth and be the breath
of the machines, ideals that cannot and will not master the machines,
that will not ride the machines as the wind, overrun matter, and conquer
the earth, are not ideals for gentlemen.

At least they are not ideals that can keep up the standard of the Oxford
gentleman.

A gentleman is a man who is engaged in expressing his best and noblest
self in every fibre of his mind and every fibre of his body. He makes
the very force of gravity pulling on his clothes express him, and the
movements of his feet and his hands. He gathers up his rooms into his
will and all the appointments of his life and crowds into them the full
meaning of his soul. He makes all these things say him.

The main attribute of a man who is not a gentleman is that he does not
do these things, that he cannot inform his body with his spirit.

I go back to the Great Western Railway, ugly as it still is. I go alone,
and sadly if I must, and for a little time--without the deep bells and
without the stained-glass windows, without all that dear, familiar
beauty I have loved in the old and quiet quadrangles--I take my stand
beside the Great Western Railway! I claim the Great Western Railway for
the spirit of man and for the will of God!

With its vast shuttle of steam and shining engines, its little,
whispering telegraph office, the Great Western Railway is a part of my
body. I lay my will on the heart of London with it, or I sleep in the
old house in Lynmouth with it. I am the Great Western Railway, and the
Great Western Railway is ME. And from the heart of the roar of London
to the slow, sleepy surge of the sea in my window at Lynmouth it is
mine! Though it be iron and wood, switches, whistles, and white steam,
it is my body, and I inform it with my spirit, or I die. With the will
of God I endow it, with the glory of the world, with the desires of my
heart, and with the prayers of the hurrying men and women.

I declare that that same glory I have known before, and that I will
always know, and will never give up, in the old quiet quadrangles of
Oxford and in the deep bells and in the still waters, as in some
strange, new, and mighty Child, is in the Great Western Railway too.

When I am in the train it sings. Strangely and hoarsely It sings! I lie
down to rest. It whistles on ahead my ideals down the slope of the
world. It roars softly, while I sleep, my religion in my ears.




CHAPTER III

DEW AND ENGINES


When I was small, and wanted suddenly to play tag or duck-on-the-rock I
had a little square half-mile of boys near by to play with.

My daughter plays tag or plays dolls, any minute she likes, with a whole
city. She is not surprised at the telephone; she takes it for granted
like sunshine and milk. It is a part of the gray matter in her brain--a
whole city, six or seven square miles of it. A little mouthpiece on a
desk, a number, and two hundred little girls are hers in a minute, to
play dolls with. She thinks in miles when she plays, where I thought in
door-yards. The whole city is a part of the daily, hourly furniture of
her mind. The little gray molecules in the structure of her brain are
different from those in mine.

I have seen that Man moves over with each new generation into a bigger
body, more awful, more reverent and free than he has had before.

A few minutes ago, here where I am writing, an engine all in bright,
soft, lit-up green with little lines of yellow on it and flashing silver
feet, like a vision, swept past--through my still glass window, through
the quiet green fields--like a great, swift, gleaming whisper of London.
And now, all in six seconds, this great quiet air about me is waked to
vast vibrations of the mighty city. Out over the red pines, the lonely
gorse fields, I have seen passing the spirit of the Strand. I have seen
the great flocking bridges and the roar about St. Paul's in communion
with the treetops and with the hedgerows and with the little brooks, all
in six seconds, when an engine, with its vision like a cloud of glory
swept past.

And yet there are people in Oxford who tell me that an engine when it is
in the very act of expressing such stupendous and boundless thoughts, of
making such mighty and beautiful things happen, is not beautiful, that
it has nothing to do with art. They can but watch the machines, the
earth black with them, going about everywhere mowing down great nations
and rolling under the souls of men.

I cannot see it so. I see a thousand thousand engines carrying dew and
green fields to the stones of London. I see the desires of the earth
hastening. The ships and the wireless telegraph beckon the wills of
cities on the seas and on the sky. With the machines I have taken a
whole planet to me for my feet and for my hands. I gesture with the
earth. I hand up oceans to my God.




