CHAPTER X

THE STUPENDOUS, THE UNUSUAL, THE MONOTONOUS, AND THE SUCCESSFUL


The imagination of crowds may be said to be touched most successfully
when it is appealed to in one of four ways:

    THE STUPENDOUS. THE UNUSUAL. THE MONOTONOUS. THE SUCCESSFUL.

Of these four ways, the stupendous, or the unusual, or the successful
are the most in evidence, and have something showy about them, so that
we can look at them afterward, and point out at a glance what they have
done. But probably the underhold on the crowd, the real grip on its
imagination, the one which does the plain, hard, everyday work on a
crowd's ideals, which determines what crowds expect and what crowds are
like inside--is the Monotonous.

The man who tells the most people what they shall be like in this world
is not the great man or the unusual man. He is the monotonous man.

He is the man, to each of us, who determines the unconscious beat and
rhythm with which we live our daily lives.

If we wanted to touch the imaginations of crowds, or of any particular
crowd, with goodness, the best way to do it would probably be, not to go
to the crowd itself, but to the man who is so placed that he determines
the crowd's monotony, the daily rhythm with which it lives--the man, if
we can find him, who arranges the crowd's heart-beat.

It need not take one very long to decide who the man is who determines
the crowd's heart-beat. The man who has the most dominion over the
imaginations of most of us, who stands up high before us out in front of
our lives, the man who, as with a great baton, day after day, night
after night, conducts, as some great symphony, the fate of the world
above our heads, who determines the deep, unconscious thoughts and
motives, the inner music or sing-song, in which we live our lives, is
the man to whom we look for our daily bread.

It is the men with whom we earn our money who are telling us all
relentlessly, silently, what we will have to be like. The men with whom
we spend it, who sell things to us, like the department stores, those
huge machines of attention, may succeed in getting great sweeps of
attention out of crowds at special times, by appealing to men through
the unusual and through the stupendous or the successful. But what
really counts, and what finally decides what men and what women shall
be, what really gets their attention unfathomably, unconsciously, is the
way they earn their money. The feeling men come to have about a fact, of
its being what it is, helplessly or whether or no--the feeling that they
come to have about something, of its being immemorially and innumerably
the same everywhere and forever, comes from what they are thinking and
the way they think while they are earning their money. It is out of the
subconscious and the monotonous that all our little heavens and hells
are made. It is our daily work that becomes to us the real floor and
roof of living, hugs up under us like the ground, fits itself down over
us, and is our earth and sky. The man with whom we earn our money, the
man who employs us, his thinking or not thinking, his "I will" and "I
won't," are the iron boundaries of the world to us. He is the skylight
and the manhole of life.

The monotonous, the innumerable and over and over again, one's desk,
one's typewriter, one's machine, one's own particular factory window,
the tall chimney, the little forever motion with one's hand--it is
these, godlike, inscrutable, speechless, out of the depths of our
unconsciousness and down through our dreams, that become the very breath
and rumble of living to us, domineer over our imaginations and rule our
lives. It is decreed that what our Employers think and let us know
enough to think shall be a part of the inner substance of our being. It
shall be a part of growing of the grass to us, and shall be as water and
food and sleep. It shall be to us as the shouts of boys at play in the
field and as the crying of our children in the night. To most men
Employers are the great doors that creak at the end of the world.

It is not the houses that people live in, or the theatres that they go
to, or the churches to which they belong, or the street and number--the
East End look or the West End look the great city carves on the faces of
these men I see in the street--that determines what the men are like.

Their daily work lies deeper in them than their faces. One finds one's
self as one flashes by being told things in their walk, in the way they
hold their hands and swing their feet.

And what is it their hands and feet, umbrellas, bundles, and the
wrinkles in their clothes tell us about them?

They tell us how they earn their money. Their hopes, their sorrow, their
fears and curses, their convictions, their very religions are the
silent, irrevocable, heavenly minded, diabolical by-products of what
their Employers think they can afford to let them know enough to think.

    "Fight for yourselves. Your masters hate you. They would shoot
    you down like rabbits, but they need your labour for their
    huge profits. Don't go in till you get your minimum. No Royal
    Commission, no promise in the future. Leaders only want your
    votes; they will sell you. They lie. Parliament lies, and will
    not help you, but is trying to sell you. Don't touch a tool
    till you get your minimum. Win, win, win! It is up to all
    workers to support the miners."

If a man happens to be an employer, and happens to know that he is not
this sort of man, and finds that he cannot successfully carry on his
business unless he can make five hundred men in his factory believe it,
what can he do? How can he touch their imaginations? What language is
there, either of words or of action, that will lead them to see that he
is a really a fair-minded, competent employer, a representative of the
interests of all, a fellow-citizen, a Crowdman, and that his men can
afford to believe in him and cooeperate with them?

If they think he would shoot them down like rabbits, it is because they
have not the remotest idea what he is really like. They have not noticed
him. They have no imagination about him, have not put themselves in his
place. How can he get their attention?




