CHAPTER IX

NEWS-MEN


It seems very difficult to get news through as to who we really are to a
President. When I look about me and see what the President's ways are of
telling news about himself to us, I see that he is not without his
advantages. But when I look about to see what conveniences we have as a
people for telling our President news about us, I note some curious
things. The fears of the American people, the fears and threats of
labour and capital are organized and expressed, but their faiths, their
wills, the things in them that make them go and that make them American,
are not organized and are not expressed.

The labour unions are afraid and say, "We will not work," to their
employers, "You cannot make us work." The President hears this. It is
about all they say.

The capitalists and employers are afraid and they say, "We will not
pay," "You cannot make us pay."

Shall the President act as if these men represent Labor and Capital?

We say, "No."

Neither of these groups of men express real live American labour or real
live characteristic American money.

American money is free, bold, manful, generous and courageous to a
fault. American money swings out in mighty enterprises, shrewdly
believing things, imperiously singing things out of its way.

A singing people want a singing government. How is our President going
to hear our labour and our money sing?

Pinchot expressed us, not Ballinger.

Mr. Pinchot is no mere uplifter or missionary. He is an artist in
expressing America to a President. If we have a President who will not
listen to a man like Pinchot, let us try a President that will.

Pinchot--an American millionaire with a fortune made out of forests, who
is spending the fortune in protecting the forests for the nation, is the
kind of American Americans like to set up before a President to say what
Americans are like. Millions of men stand by Pinchot. We like the way he
makes money sing.

Tom L. Johnson--an American millionaire who made his money in the
ordinary humdrum way, by getting valuable street railway franchises out
of a city for nothing--has the courage to turn around, spend his fortune
and spend it all, in keeping other people from doing it.

America presents Tom L. Johnson to a President with its compliments and
says, "This is what America is like."

It may not look always as if Tom L. Johnson were America--America in
miniature. But millions of us say he is. He makes money sing.

We want a President--millions of us want him--and this is the most
important news about us, who expects money in this country to sing.

We want our money and expect our money in this country to stop saying
mean things about us, things that make us ashamed to look a true
newspaper in the face, or one another in the face, and that humiliate us
before the world.

       *       *       *       *       *

And now I have come to an awkward place in this book where I hope the
reader will help me all he can.

There is nothing to do but to let out the real truth and face the music.
The fact is, Gentle Reader--perhaps you have suspected it all
along--that if it had not been for fear of mixing my book all up with
him and making it a kind of arena or tournament instead of a book, I
would have mentioned ex-President Roosevelt before this. He has been
getting in or nearly getting in to nearly every chapter so far, but of
course I knew, as any one would, that he would spoil all the calm
equipoise, the quiet onward flowing of the Stream of Thought, and with
one chapter after the other, with each as the crisis came up, though I
scarcely know how, I have managed to keep him out. And now, oh, Gentle
Reader, here he is! I know very well that he is in everything, and right
in the middle of everything, and that in a kind of splendid mixed happy
uproarious way, there somehow has to be a great to-do the moment he
appears. The beautiful clear water, the lucid depth of Thought--will all
become (ah, I know it too well, Gentle Reader) all thunder and spray and
underneath the mighty grinding of the wheels--the wheels of the Nation
and the Mowing Machine of Time, and in the background--in the red
background of the Dawn, there will be the face of Theodore--just the
face of Theodore in this book shining at us--readers and writer and
all--out of a huge rosy mist!

But I have been driven to it. The fact seems to be that I must find at
just this point in the book, if I can, a word. And the word will have to
be a word, too, that everybody knows, and that conveys a lively sense to
everybody the moment it is used--of a certain tone or quality, or hum or
murmur of being. No one regrets this more than I, because it is so
unwieldy and inconvenient and always bulges out in a sentence or a book
or a nation more than it was meant to, but the word ROOSEVELT, R O O S E
V E L T, happens to be the word that people in this country, and very
largely in other nations, and in all languages have chosen and are using
every day to express to one another a certain American quality or tone
now abroad in our world--a certain hum, as one might say, or whirr of
goodness.

This particular hum, or whirr of goodness, which is instantly associated
with the word Roosevelt, expresses, except that of course it
over-expresses, a part of the news to-day about America which we want
our President to read.

One cannot help wondering why it is that if one wanted to express to the
largest number of people in the world a certain quality of goodness, the
word Roosevelt would do it best.

I am not dealing for the purpose of this book in what Mr. Roosevelt's
goodness is or whether it is what he thinks it is. We might all disagree
about that. I am dealing quite strictly in this connection with what
even his enemies would say is his almost egregious success in
advertising goodness. While we might all disagree as to his goodness
being the kind that he or any one ought to love, we would not fail to
agree that it is his love of his own goodness, such as it is, and his
holding on to it, and his love of other people's and his love of getting
his goodness and their goodness together, that has made him the most
unconcealed person in modern life. These qualities have established him,
with his ability raised to the n-th power of attracting attention to
anything he likes, as the world's greatest News Man--the world's
greatest living energy to-day in advertising what is good and what is
had in our American temperament.

Even the people who disagree with him or dislike him--many of them would
have to fall back on using the word roosevelt, or rather the verb to
roosevelt.

It does not seem to be because his goodness in itself is extraordinary.
It is even, for that matter, in the sense that anybody could have it, or
some more just like it, a little common.

What seems to be uncommon and really distinguished about Mr. Roosevelt
is the way he feels about his goodness, and the way he grips hold of it,
and the way he makes it grip hold of other people--practically anybody
almost, who is standing by. Even if they are merely going by in
automobiles, sometimes they catch some. I do not imagine that his worst
enemies, however seriously they may question the general desirability or
safety of having so much goodness roosevelting around, would fail to
admit his own real enthusiasm about goodness anywhere he finds it
indiscriminately, whether it is his own or other people's. He grips hold
of it, and grips like a cable car--instantly.

His enthusiasm is so great that many people are nonplussed by it. The
enthusiasm must really be in spite of appearances about something else,
something wicked in behind, they think, and not really about goodness.
An entire stranger would not quite believe it. It would be too original
in him, they would say, or in anybody, to care so about goodness.

If one could watch the expression in Mr. Roosevelt's face or his manner
while he is in the act of having a virtue and if one could not see
plainly from where one was, just what it was he was doing, one would at
once conclude that it must be some vice he is having. He looks happy and
as if it were some stolen secret. There is always that manner of his
when he is caught doing right, as if one were to say "Now, at last, I
have got it!" He does right like a boy with his mouth full of jam, and
this seems to be true not only when, with a whole public following and
two or three nations besides, and all the newspapers, he goes off on an
orgy of righteousness, makes the grand tour of Europe, and has the time
of his life. It is the steady-burning under enthusiasm with him all the
while. The spectacle of a good man doing a tremendous good thing affects
Theodore Roosevelt like one of the great forces of nature, like Niagara
Falls, like the screws of the _Mauritania_, or any other huge, happy
thing that is having its way against fear; against weakness, or against
small terrified goodness.

Mr. Roosevelt in doing right conveys the sense of enjoying it so himself
that he has made almost an art form of public righteousness. He has
found his most complete, his most naive, instinctive self-expression in
it, and while we have had goodness in public men before, we have had no
man who has been such an international chromo for goodness, who has made
such a big, comfortable "He-who-runs-may-read" bill-poster for doing
right as Roosevelt. Other men have done things that were good to do, but
the very inmost muscle and marrow of goodness itself, goodness with
teeth, with a fist, goodness that smiled, that ha-ha'd, and that leaped
and danced--perpetual motion of goodness, goodness that reeked--has been
reserved for Theodore Roosevelt. We have had goodness that was bland or
proper, and goodness that was pious or sentimental and sang, "Nearer My
God to Thee," or goodness that was kind and mushy, but this goodness
with a glad look and bounding heart, goodness with an iron hand, we have
not had before. It is Mr. Roosevelt's goodness that has made him
interesting in Cairo, Paris, Rome, and Berlin. He has been conducting a
grand tour of goodness. He has been a colossal drummer of goodness,
conducting an advertising campaign. He has proved himself a master
salesman for moral values. And he has put the American character, its
hope, its energy, on the markets and on the credits of the world.

With all his faults, those big, daring, yawning fissures in him, he is
news about us, faults and all. Though I may be, as I certainly am much
of the time, standing and looking across at him, across an abyss of
temperament that God cut down between us thousands of years ago, and
while he may have a score of traits I would not like and others that no
one would like in any one else, there he is storming out at me with his
goodness! It is his way--God help him!--God be praised for him! There he
is!

I know an American when I see one. He is a man who is singing.

A man who is singing is a man who is so shrewd about people that he sees
more in them than they see in themselves and who does things so shrewdly
in behalf of God, that when God looks upon him he delights in him. Then
God falls to of course and helps him do them.

When American men saw that there was a man among them who was taking a
thing like the Presidency of the United States (that most people never
run risks with) and putting it up before everybody, and using it grimly
as a magnificent bet on the people, they looked up. Millions of men
leaped in their hearts and as they saw him they knew that they were like
him!

So did Theodore Roosevelt become news about Us.




