CHAPTER I

OXFORD STREET AND THE HOUSE OF COMMONS


Every now and then when I am in London (at the instigation of some
business man who takes the time off to belong to it), I drop into a
pleasant but other-worldly and absent-minded place called the House of
Commons.

I sit in the windows in the smoking-room and watch the faces of the
members all about me and watch the steamships, strangely, softly,
suddenly--Shakespeare and Pepys, outside on the river, slip gravely by
under glass.

Or I go in and sit down under the gallery, face to face with the
Speaker, looking across those profiles of world-makers in their seats;
and I watch and listen in the House itself. There is a kind of pleasant,
convenient, appropriate hush upon the world there.

Wisdom.

The decorous, orderly machinery of knowledge rolls over one--one listens
to It, to the soft clatter of the endless belt of words.

Every now and then one sees a member in the middle of a speech, or
possibly in the middle of a sentence, slip up quietly and take a look
(under glass) at The People, or he uses a microscope, perhaps, or a
reading glass on The People, Mr. Bonar Law's, Mr. Lloyd George's, Ramsay
MacDonald's, Will Crook's, or somebody's. Then he comes back gravely as
if he had got the people attended to now, and finishes what he was
saying.

It is a very queer feeling one has about the People in the House of
Commons.

I mean the feeling of their being under glass; they all seem so
manageable, so quiet and so remote, a kind of glazed-over picture in
still life, of themselves. Every now and then, of course one takes a
member seriously when he steps up to the huge showcase of specimen
crowds, which members are always referring to in their speeches. But
nothing comes of it.

The crowds seem very remote there under the glass. One feels like
smashing something--getting down to closer terms with them--one longs
for a Department Store or a bridge or a 'bus--something that rattles and
bangs and is.

All the while outside the mighty street--that huge megaphone of the
crowd, goes shouting past. One wishes the House would notice it. But no
one does. There is always just the House Itself and that hush or ring of
silence around it, all England listening, all the little country papers
far away with their hands up to their ears and the great serious-minded
Dailies, and the witty Weeklies, the stately Monthlies, and Quarterlies
all acting as if it mattered....

Even during the coal strike nothing really happened in the House of
Commons. There was a sense of the great serious people, of the crowds on
Westminster Bridge surging softly through glass outside, but nothing got
in. Big Ben boomed down the river, across the pavements, over the
hurrying crowds and over all the men and the women, the real business
men and women. The only thing about the House that seemed to have
anything to do with anybody was Big Ben.

Finally one goes up to Harrod's to get relief, or one takes a 'bus, or
one tries Trafalgar Square, or one sees if one can really get across the
Strand or one does something--almost anything to recall one's self to
real life.

And then, of course, there is Oxford Street.

Almost always after watching the English people express themselves or
straining to express themselves in the House of Commons, I try Oxford
Street.

I know, of course, that as an art-form for expressing a great people,
Oxford Street is not all that it should be, but there is certainly
something, after all the mooniness and the dim droniness, and
lawyer-mindedness in the way the English people express themselves or
think that they ought to express themselves in their house of
Commons--there is certainly something that makes Oxford Street seem
suddenly a fine, free, candid way for a great people to talk! And there
is all the gusto, too, the 'busses, the taxies, the hundreds of
thousands of men and women saying things and buying things they believe.

Taking in the shops on both sides or the street, and taking in the
things the people are doing behind the counters, and in the aisles, and
up in the office windows three blocks of Oxford Street really express
what the English people really want and what they really think and what
they believe and put up money on, more than three years of the house of
Commons.

If I were an Englishman I would rather be elected to walk up and down
Oxford Street and read what I saw there than to be elected to a seat in
the House of Commons, and I could accomplish more and learn more for a
nation, with three blocks of Oxford Street, with what I could gather up
and read there, and with what I could resent and believe there, than I
could with three years of the House of Commons.

I know that anybody, of course, could be elected to walk up and down
Oxford Street. But it is enough for me.

So I almost always try it after the house of Commons.

And when I have taken a little swing down Oxford Street and got the
House of Commons out of my system a little, perhaps I go down to the
Embankment, and drop into my club.

Then I sit in the window and mull.

If the English people express themselves and express what they want and
what they are bound to have, on Oxford Street and put their money down
for it, so much better than they do in the House of Commons, why should
they not do it there?

Why should elaborate, roundabout, mysterious things like governments,
that have to be spoken of in whispers (and that express themselves
usually in a kind of lawyer-minded way, in picked and dried words like
wills), be looked upon so seriously, and be taken on the whole, as the
main reliance the people have, in a great nation, for expressing
themselves?

Why should not a great people be allowed to say what they are like and
to say what they want and what they are bound to get, in the way Oxford
Street says things, in a few straight, clean-cut, ordinary words, in
long quiet rows of deeds, of buying and selling and acting?

Pounds, shillings, and silence.

Then on to the next thing.

If the House of Commons were more like Oxford Street or even if it had
suddenly something of the tone of Oxford Street, if suddenly it were to
begin some fine morning to express England the way Oxford Street does,
would not one see, in less than three months, new kinds and new sizes of
men all over England, wanting to belong to it?

Big, powerful, uncompromising, creative men who have no time for
twiddling, who never would have dreamed of being tucked away in the
house of Commons before, would want to belong to it.

In the meantime, of course, the men of England who have empires to
express, are not unnaturally expressing them in more simple language
like foundries, soap factories around a world, tungsten mines,
department stores, banks, subways, railroads for seventy nations, and
ships on seven seas, Winnipeg trolleys and little New York skyscrapers.

Business men of the more usual or humdrum kind could not do it, but
certainly, the first day that business men like these, of the first or
world-size class, once find the House of Commons a place they like to be
in, once begin expressing the genius of the English people in government
as they are already expressing the genius of the English people in
owning the earth, in buying and selling, in inventing things and in
inventing corporations, the House of Commons will cease to be a bog of
words, an abyss of committees, and legislation will begin to be run like
a railroad--on a block signal system, rows of things taken up, gone
over, and finished. The click of the signal. Then the next thing.

I sit in my club and look out of the window and think. Just outside
thousands of taxies shooting all these little mighty wills of men across
my window, across London, across England, across the world ... the huge,
imperious street ... all these men hurling themselves about in it,
joining their wills on to telephone wires, to mighty trains and little
quiet country roads, hitching up cables to their wills, and
ships--hitching up the very clouds over the sea to their wills and
running a world--why are not men like these--men who have the
street-spirit in them, this motor genius of driving through to what they
want, taking seats in the House of Commons?

Perhaps Oxford Street is more efficient and more characteristic in
expressing the genius and the will of the English people than the House
of Commons is because of the way in which the people select the men they
want to express them in Oxford Street.

It may be that the men the people have selected to be at the top of the
nation's law-making are not selected by as skillful, painstaking, or
thorough a process as the men who have been selected to be placed at the
top of the nation's buying and selling.

Possibly the reason the House of Commons does not express the will of
the people is, that its members are merely selected in a loose, vague
way and by merely counting noses.

Possibly, too, the men who are selected by a true, honest, direct,
natural selection to be the leaders and to free the energies and steer
the work of the people, the men who are selected to lead by being seen
and lived with and worked with all day, every day, are better selected
men than men who having been voted on on slips of paper, and having been
seen in newspaper paragraphs, travel up to London and begin
thoughtlessly running a world.

The business man drops into the House of Commons after the meeting of
his firm in Bond Street, Lombard Street, or Oxford Street and takes a
look at it. He sees before him a huge tool or piece of machinery--a body
of men intended to work together and to get certain grave, particular,
and important things done, that the people want done, and he does not
see how a great good-hearted chaos or welter, a kind of chance national
Weather of Human Nature like the House of Commons, can get the things
done.

So he confines himself more and more to business where he loses less
time in wondering what other people think or if they think at all, cuts
out the work he sees, and does it.

He thinks how it would be if things were turned around and if people
tried to get expressed in business in the loose way, the thoughtless
reverie of voting that they use in trying to get themselves expressed in
politics.

He thinks the stockholders of the Sunlight Soap Company, Limited, would
be considerably alarmed to have the president and superintendent and
treasurer and the buyers and salesmen of the company elected at the
polls by the people in the county or by popular suffrage. He thinks that
thousands of the hands as well as the stockholders would be alarmed too.
It does not seem to him that anybody, poor or rich, employer or
employee, in matters of grave personal concern, would be willing to
trust his interest or would really expect the people, all the people as
a whole, to be represented or to get what they wanted, to act definitely
and efficiently through the vague generalizations of the polls. Perhaps
a natural selection, a dead-earnest rigorous, selection that men work
on nine hours a day, an implacable, unremitting process during working
hours, of sorting men out (which we call business), is the crowd's most
reliable way of registering what it definitely thinks about the men it
wants to represent it. Business is the crowd's, big, serious, daily
voting in pounds, shillings, and pence--its hour to hour, unceasing,
intimate, detailed labour in picking men out, in putting at the top the
men it can work with best, the men who most express it, who have the
most genius to serve crowds, to reveal to crowds their own minds, and
supply to them what they want.

As full as it is--like all broad, honest expressions, of human
shortcomings and of things that are soon to be stopped, it does remain
to be said that business, in a huge, rough way, daily expressing the
crowds as far as they have got--the best in them and the worst in them,
is, after all, their most faithful and true record, their handwriting.
Business is the crowds' autograph--its huge, slow, clumsy signature upon
our world.

Buying and selling is the life blood of the crowds' thought, its big,
brutal daily confiding to us of its view of human life. What do the
crowds, poor and rich, really believe about life? Property is the last
will and testament of Crowds.

The man-sorting that goes on in distributing and producing property is
the Crowd's most unremitting, most normal, temperamental way of
determining and selecting its most efficient and valuable leaders--its
men who can express it, and who can act for it.

This is the first reason I would give against letting the people rely on
having a House of Commons compel business men to be good.

Men who meet now and again during the year, afternoons or evenings, who
have been picked out to be at the top of the nation's talking, by a
loose absent-minded and illogical paper-process, cannot expect to
control men who have been picked out to be at the top of a nation's
buying and selling, by a hard-working, closely fitting, logical
process--the men that all the people by everything they do, every day,
all day, have picked out to represent them.

Any chance three blocks of Oxford Street could be relied on to do
better.

Keeping the polls open once in so often, a few hours, and using hearsay
and little slips of paper--anybody dropping in--seems a rather fluttery
and uncertain way to pick out the representatives of the people, after
one has considered three blocks of Oxford Street.

The next thing the crowd is going to do in getting what it wants from
business men is to deal directly with the business men themselves and
stop feeling, what many people feel partly from habit, perhaps, that the
only way the crowd can get to what it wants is to go way over or way
back or way around by Robin Hood's barn or the House of Commons.

But there is a second reason:

The trouble is not merely in the way men who sit in the House of Commons
are selected. The real deep-seated trouble with the men who sit in the
House of Commons is that they like it. The difficulty (as in the
American Congress too) seems to be something in the men themselves. It
lies in what might be called, for lack of a better name, perhaps, the
Hem and Haw or Parliament Temperament.

The dominating type of man in all the world's legislative bodies, for
the time being, seems to be the considerer or reconsiderer, the man who
dotes on the little and tiddly sides of great problems. The greatness of
the problem furnishes, of course, the pleasant, pale glow, the happy
sense of importance to a man, and then there is all the jolly littleness
of the little things besides--the little things that a little man can
make look big by getting them in the way of big ones--a great nation
looking on and waiting.... For such a man there always seems to be a
certain coziness and hominess in a Legislative Body....

As a seat in the House of Commons not unnaturally--every year it is
hemmed or hawed in, gets farther and farther away from the people, it is
becoming more and more apparent to the people every year that the
Members of their House of Commons as a class are unlikely to do anything
of a very striking or important or lasting value in the way of getting
business men to be good.

The more efficient and practical business men are coming to suspect that
the members of the House of Commons, speaking broadly, do not know the
will of the people, and that they could not express it in creative,
straightforward and affirmative laws if they did.




