CHAPTER II

OXFORD STREET HUMS. THE HOUSE HEMS


But it is not only because the members of the House of Commons are
selected in a vague way or because they are a vague kind of men, that
they fail to represent the people.

The third reason against having a House of Commons try to compel
business men to be good, by law, is its out-of-the-way position.

The out-of-the-way position that a Parliament occupies in getting
business men to be good, can be best considered, perhaps, by admitting
at the outset that a government really is one very real and genuine way
a great people may have of expressing themselves, of expressing what
they are like and what they want, and that business is another way.

Then the question narrows down. Which way of expressing the people is
the one that expresses them the most to the point, and which expresses
them where their being expressed counts the most?

The people have a Government. And the people have Business.

What is a Government for?

What is Business for?

Business is the occupation of finding out and anticipating what the
wants of the English people really are and of finding out ways of
supplying them.

The business men on Oxford Street hire twenty or thirty thousand men and
women, keep them at work eight or nine hours a day, five or six days in
a week, finding out what the things are that the English people want
and reporting on them and supplying them.

They are naturally in a strategic position to find out, not only what
kinds of things the people want, but to find out, too, just how they
want the things placed before them, what kind of storekeepers and
manufacturers, salesmen and saleswomen they tolerate, like to deal with
and prefer to have prosper.

And the business men are not only in the most strategic and competent
position to find out what the people who buy want, but to find out too,
what the people who sell want. They are in the best position to know,
and to know intimately, what the salesmen and saleswomen want and what
they want to be and what they want to do or not do.

They are in a close and watchful position, too, with regard to the
conditions in the factories from which their goods come and with regard
to what the employers, stockholders, foremen and workmen in those
factories want.

What is more to the point, these same business men, when they have once
found out just what it is the people want, are the only men who are in a
position, all in the same breath, without asking anybody and without
arguing with anybody, without meddling or convincing anybody--to get it
for them.

Finding out what people want and getting it for them is what may be
called, controlling business.

The question not unnaturally arises with all these business men and
their twenty or thirty thousand people working with them, eight or nine
hours a day, five or six days a week, in controlling business, why
should the members of the House of Commons expect, by taking a few
afternoons or evenings off for it, to control business for them?

If I were an employee and if what I wanted to do was to improve the
conditions of labour in my own calling, I do not think I would want to
take the time to wait several months, probably, to convince my member of
Parliament, and then wait a few months more for him to convince the
other members of Parliament, and then vote his one vote. I would rather
deal directly with my employer.

If my employer is on my back and if I can once get the attention of my
employer himself, as to where he is and as to how he is interrupting
what I am doing for him--if I once get his attention and once get him to
notice my back, he can get down. No one else can get down for him and no
one else, except by turning a whole nation all around, can make him get
down. Why should a man bother with T.P.'s _Weekly_ or with Horatio
Bottomley or with the _Daily Mail_ or the _Times_, with a score of other
people's by-elections all over England to lift his own employer off his
back?

There is a very simple rule for it.

The way to lift one's employer off one's back is to make one's back so
efficient that he cannot afford to be on it.

The first thing I would do would be to see if I could not persuade my
employer to take steps to train me and to make me efficient, himself.
And perhaps the second thing I would try to do would be to wake my
trades union up, to get my trades union to consent to let me want to try
to be efficient and work as hard as I can, or to consent to my
employer's hiring engineers to make me efficient. I would try to get my
trades union to be interested in hiring itself some special expert like
Frederick Taylor, some specialist in making a man do three times as much
work with the same strength, making him three times as valuable for his
employer and three times as fit and strong for himself.

This is what I would do if I wanted to make my employer good. I would be
so good that he could not afford not being good too.

If I were an employer, on the other hand, and understood human nature,
and knew enough about psychology to found a great business house and
wanted to make my employee good, or make him work three times as hard
for me, with three times the normal strength, day by day, and have a
normal old age to look forward to, I do not think I would wait for the
House of Commons to butt in and pension him. It seems to me that I would
be in a position to do it more adequately, more rapidly, and do it with
more intimate knowledge of economy than the House of Commons could. And
I would not have to convince several hundred men, men from rural
counties, how I could improve my factory and get them to let me improve
it. I could do it quietly by myself.

In any given industrial difficulty, there is and must be a vision for
every man, a vision either borrowed for him or made for him by some one
else, or a vision he has made for himself, that fits in just where he
is. In the last analysis our industrial success is going to lie in the
sense of Here, and Me, and Now, raised to the n-th power, in what might
be called a kind of larger syndicalism.

The typical syndicalist, instead of saying, as he does to-day, "We will
take the factories out of our employers hands and run them ourselves,"
is going to say, "We will make ourselves fit to run the factories
ourselves."

What would please the employers more, give them a general, or national
confidence in trying to run business and improve the conditions of work
to-day, than to have their employees, suddenly, all over the nation,
begin doing their work so well that they would be fit to run the
factories?

What is true of employers and employees in factories is still more true
of the employers and employees in the great retail stores. If there is
one thing rather than another the business men and women on Oxford
Street, the managers, floor walkers and clerks all up and down the
street are really engaged in all day all their lives, it is what might
be called a daily nine-hour drill in understanding people. Why should
employers and employees like these--experts in human nature--men who
make their profession a success by studying human nature, and by working
in it daily, call in a few drifting gentlemen from the House of Commons
and expect them to work out their human problems better than they can do
it?

Employers and clerks in retail stores are the two sets of people in all
the world most competent to study together the working details of human
nature, to act for themselves in self-respecting man-fashion and without
whining at a nation.

Who that they could hope to deal with and get what they want from, could
know more about human nature than they do? Are they not the men of all
others, all up and down that little strip of Oxford Street, who devote
their entire time to human nature? They are in the daily profession of
knowing the soonest and knowing the most about what people are like, and
about what people will probably think. They are intimate with their
peccadillos in what they want to wear and in what they want to eat; they
have learned their likes and dislikes in human nature; they know what
they will support and what they will defy in human nature, in clerks,
and in stores, and in storekeepers.

And these things that they have learned about human nature (in
themselves and other people) they have learned not by talking about
human nature but by a grim daily doing things with it.

These things being so, it would almost seem that these people and people
like them were qualified to act, and as they happen to be in the one
strategic position, both employers and employees alike, to act and to
act for themselves and act directly and act together, it will not be
very long, probably, before the nation will be very glad to have them do
it.

It is likely to be seen very soon (at least by all skilled Labour and
all skilled Capital) that running out into the street and crying "Help!"
and calling in some third person to settle family difficulties that can
be better settled by being faced and thought out in private, is an
inefficient and incompetent thing to do.

And for the most part it is going to be only in the more superficial,
inefficient, thoughtless industry that men, either employers or
employed, will be inclined to leave their daily work, run out wildly and
drag in a House of Commons to help them to do right.

I am only speaking for myself but certainly if I were an employer or an
employee, I would not want to wait for an election a year away or to
wait for the great engineering problem of compelling my member of
Parliament by my one vote to act for me.

Perhaps workingmen in England and America are deceived about the value
of voting as a means of improving conditions of workingmen. Possibly
women are deceived about the value of voting as a means of improving the
conditions of working women.

Possibly a woman could do more behind a counter or by buying a store
than by voting to have some man she has read about in a paper, improve
business by talking about it in the House of Commons.

       *       *       *       *       *

There is also a kind of program or vision of action one can use as a
customer as well as an employer or employee.


I might speak for myself.

I have about so much money I spend every year in buying things. I have
proposed to study with my money every firm on which I spend it. I
propose to take away my trade from the firm that does the least as it
should and give it to the firm that does the most as it should. I will
vote with my entire income and with every penny I save for the kind of
employers I believe in and that I want, for the kind of employers who
can earn and deserve and enjoy and keep the kind of salesmen and
saleswomen I choose to do business with.

All the year round, every firm with which I deal, I am going to study
not only with my mind but with my money. I will proceed to take my
trade away from the big employers who think that I want shoddy goods or
who think that I want or am willing to trade with saleswomen who would
let an employer impose on them, saleswomen that he thinks he can afford
to impose upon. I will proceed to vote with my money, with every penny I
have in the world, and I will earn more that I may vote more, for the
kind of employer with whom I like to trade. And there shall not be a
man, woman, or child of my acquaintance, if I can help it, or of my
family's acquaintance who shall not know who these employers are by name
and by address, the employers that I will trade with and the employers
that I will not.

This is my idea as a customer, as a member of the public, of the way for
a people to express itself and to get what it wants.

What I want may be said to be a kind of news, news about me so far as I
go, as one member of the public. As I am only one person every item of
the news about me must be put where it works. I will deal directly with
the news of what I want and I will convey that news, not to the House of
Commons but to the men who have what I want and who can give it to me
when they know it.

News is the real government now and always of this world.

When one has made up one's mind to tell this news, obviously the best
art-form for telling news to employers and business men--the news of
what we want and what we do not want and of what we want in them as well
as in the things they sell, is to tell them the news in the language
they have studied most, tell it to them in pounds, shillings, dollars,
and cents, and by trading somewhere else.

The gospel-bearing value, the news that one can get into a man's mind
with one dollar, the news that he can be made to see and act on for one
dollar--well, thinking of this some days, makes for me, at least, going
up and down the Main Street of the World feeling my purse snuggling in
my pocket, and all the people I can step up to with my purse and tell
so many dollars' worth of news to, tell that dollar's worth of gospel to
about the world--makes going up and down with a dollar on a big business
street, and spending it or not spending it, feel like a kind of chronic,
easy, happy, going to Church. One always has a little money in one's
pocket that one spends or that one won't spend, and sometimes even not
spending a dollar, practised by some people, at just the right moment
and in just the right way, can be made to mean as much and do as much
with a world as spending a thousand dollars would without any meaning
put into it.

Sometimes I even go into a store on purpose, a certain kind of store I
know will try to cheat me in a certain way, let them look a minute at
the dollar they cannot have. Then I walk out with it quietly.

I have said that the life-blood of my convictions shall circulate in my
money and if I cannot express my soul, my religion, my gospel or news
for this world, news about what I want and about what I will have in a
world, if I cannot make every dollar, every shilling I earn, go through
the world and sing my own little world-song in it, may I never have
another shilling or earn another dollar as long as I live!

The very sight of a dollar now whenever I see one once more, fills me
with deep, hopeful working joy, thinking of what a bargain it is and how
I can use it twice over, thinking of the dollar's worth of news, to say
nothing of the dollar's worth of things that belong with a dollar!

       *       *       *       *       *

For some generations, now, we have tried to make people good in a vague,
general way, by using priests, sacraments and confessional boxes. For
some centuries we have been trying to make people good with lawyers and
juries and ballot boxes. We are now to try, at last, religion or gospel
or news or ideals--practical, shrewd aimed ideals, that is, news to a
man about himself or news about the man from the man himself to us. In
everything a man does he is expressing to us this news about himself,
and about his world, and about his God. We are all telling news about
the world and about ourselves all the time and we are all in a position
for news all the time.

What is it from hour to hour and day to day that we will do and we will
not do?

This news about us is the religion in us.

The average man is coming to have very accurate ideas of late as to just
where his religion is located. He has come to see that real religion in
a man, very conveniently located (immediately at hand in him and
personally directed), is his own action, his own divine "I will" or "I
won't."

He has come to be deeply attracted by this idea of a religion for every
man just where he is, fitted on patiently, cheerfully, to just where he
is, every day all day, his glorious, still, practical, good-natured,
godlike "I will" and "I won't "--or News about himself.




