CHAPTER V

PROSPECTS OF THE BULLY


The stage properties that go with a bully change as we grow older. When
one thinks of a bully, one usually sees a picture at once in one's mind.
It is a big boy lording it over a little one, or getting him down and
sitting on him.

Everybody recognizes what is going on immediately, pitches in nobly and
beautifully, and licks the big boy.

The trouble with the bully in business has been that he is not so simple
and easy to recognize. He is apt to be more or less anonymous and
impersonal, and it is harder to hit him in the right place.

But when one thinks of it perhaps this pleasant and inspiring duty is
not so impracticable as it looks, and is presently to be attended to.

Any man who relies, in getting what he wants, on being big instead of
being right, is a bully.

Modern business is done over a wide area, with thousands of persons
looking on, and for a long time and with thousands of people coming
back. The man who relies on being big instead of being right, and who
takes advantage of his position instead of his inherent superiority, is
soon seen through. His customers go over to the enemy. A show of force
or a hold-up works very well at the moment. Being bigger may be more
showy than being right, and it may down the Little Boy, but the Little
Boy wins the crowd.

Business to-day consists in persuading crowds.

The Little Boy can prove he is right. All the bully can prove is that he
is bigger.

The Liar in Business is already going by.

Now it is the turn of the bully.

Not long ago a few advertisers in a big American city wanted unfairly
low rates for advertisements and tried to use force with the newspapers.
Three or four of the biggest shops combined and gave notice that they
would take their advertising away unless the rates came down. After a
little, they drew in a few other lines of business with them, and
suddenly one morning five or six full pages of advertisements were
withdrawn from every newspaper in the city. The newspapers went on
publishing all the news of the city except news as to what people could
buy in department stores, and waited. They made no counter-move of any
kind, and said nothing and seven days slipped past. They held to the
claim that the service they performed in connecting the great stores
with the people of the city was a real service, that it represented
market value which could be proved and paid for. They kept on for
another week publishing for the people all the news of the city except
the news as to how they could spend their money. They wondered how long
it would take the great shops with acres of things to sell to see how it
would work not to let anybody know what the things were.

The great shops tried other ways of letting people know. They tried
handbills, a huge helpless patter of them over all the city. They used
billboards, and posted huge lists of items for people to stop and read
in the streets, if they wanted to, while they rushed by. For three whole
weeks they held on tight to the idea that the newspapers were striking
employees of department stores. One would have thought that they would
have seen that the newspapers were the representatives of the
people--almost the homes of the people--and that it would pay to treat
them respectfully. One would have thought they would have seen that if
they wanted space in the homes of the people--places at their very
breakfast tables--space that the newspapers had earned and acquired
there, they would have to pay their share of what it had cost the
newspapers to get it.

One would have thought that the department shops would have seen that
the more they could make the newspapers prosper, the more influence the
newspapers would have in the homes of the people, and the more business
they could get through them. But it was not until the shopowners had
come down and gazed day after day on the big, white, lonely floors of
their shops that they saw the truth. Crowds stayed away, and proved it
to them. Namely: a store, if it uses a great newspaper, instead of
having a few feet of show windows on a street for people to walk by,
gets practically miles of show windows for people--in their own
houses--sells its goods almost any morning to the people--to a whole
city--before anybody gets up from breakfast--has its duties as well as
its rights.

Of course, when the shopkeepers really saw that this was what the
newspapers had been doing for them, they wanted to do what was right,
and wanted to pay for it. One would have thought, looking at it
theoretically, that the department stores in any city would have
imagination enough to see, without practically having to shut their
stores up for three weeks, what advertising was worth. But if great
department stores do not have imagination to see what they would wish
they had done in twenty years, in one year, or three weeks, and have to
spell out the experience morning by morning and see what works, word by
word, they do learn in the end that being right works, and that bullying
does not. Gradually the level or standard of right in business is bound
to rise, until people have generally come to take the Golden Rule with
the literalness and seriousness that the best and biggest men are
already taking it. Department stores that have the moral originality and
imagination to guess what people would wish they had bought of them and
what they would wish they had sold to them afterward are going to win.
Department stores that deal with their customers three or four years
ahead are the ones that win first.




