CHAPTER I

MR. CARNEGIE SPEAKS UP


As I was wandering through space the other day--just aeroplaning past on
my way over from Mars--I came suddenly upon a neat, snug little
property, with a huge sign stuck in the middle of it:

    THE EARTH: THIS DESIRABLE PROPERTY TO LET. Rockefeller,
    Carnegie, Morgan & Co.

I was just about to pass it by, inferring naturally that it must be a
mere bank, or wholesale house, or something, when it occurred to me it
might do no harm to stop over on it, and see. I thought I might at least
drop in and inquire what kind of a firm it was that was handling it, and
what was their idea, and what, if anything, they thought their little
planet was for, and what they proposed to do with it.

I found, on meeting Mr. Rockefeller and Mr. Carnegie and Mr. Morgan, to
my astonishment, that they did not propose to do anything with it at
all. They had merely got it; that was as far as they had thought the
thing out apparently--to get it. They seemed to be depending, so far as
I could judge, in a vague, pained way, on somebody's happening along who
would think perhaps of something that could be done with it.

Of course, as Mr. Carnegie (who was the talking member of the firm)
pointed out, if they only owned a part of it, and could sell one part of
it to the other part there would still be something left that they could
do, at least it would be their line; but merely owning all of it, so, as
they did, was embarrassing. He had tried, Mr. Carnegie told me, to think
of a few things himself, but was discouraged; and he intimated he was
devoting his life just now to pulling himself together at the end, and
dying a poor man. But that was not much, he admitted, and it was really
not a very great service on his part to a world, he thought--his merely
dying poor in it.

When I asked him if there was anything else he had been able to think of
to do for the world--

"No," he said, "nothing really; nothing except chucking down libraries
on it--safes for old books."

"And Mr. Morgan?" I said.

"Oh! He is chucking down old china on it, old pictures, and things."

"And Mr. Rockefeller?"

"Mussing with colleges, some," he said, "just now. But he doesn't, as a
matter of fact, see anything--not of his own--that can really be done
with them, except to make them more systematized and businesslike, make
them over into sort of Standard Oil Spiritual Refineries, fill them with
millions more of little Rockefellers--and they won't let him do that. Of
course, as you might see, what they want to do practically is to take
the Rockefeller money and leave the Rockefeller out. Nobody will really
let him do anything. Everything goes this way when we seriously try to
do things. The fact is, it is a pretty small, helpless business, owning
a world," sighed Mr. Carnegie.

"This is why we are selling out, if anybody happens along. Anybody, that
is, who really sees what this piece of property is for and how to
develop it, can have it," said Mr. Carnegie, "and have it cheap."

Mr. Carnegie spoke these last words very slowly and wearily, and with
his most wistful look; and then, recalling himself suddenly, and handing
me a glass to look at New York with and see what I thought of it, he
asked to be excused for a moment, and saying, "I have fourteen libraries
to give away before a quarter past twelve," he hurried out of the room.




CHAPTER II

MR. CARNEGIE TRIES TO MAKE PEOPLE READ


I found, as I was studying the general view of New York as seen from the
top through Mr. Carnegie's glass, that there appeared to be a great many
dots--long rows of dots for the most part--possibly very high buildings,
but there was one building, wide and white and low, and more spread-out
and important-looking than any of the others, which especially attracted
my attention. It looked as if it might be a kind of monument or
mausoleum to somebody. On looking again I found that it was filled with
books, and was the Carnegie Public Library. There were forty more
Libraries for New York Mr. Carnegie was having put up, I was told, and
he had dotted them--thousands of them almost everywhere one could look,
apparently, on his own particular part of the planet.

A few days later, when I began to do things at a closer range, I took a
little trip to New York, and visited the Library; and I asked the man
who seemed to have it in charge, who there was who was writing books for
Mr. Carnegie's Libraries just now, or if there was any really adequate
arrangement Mr. Carnegie had made for having a few great books written
for all these fine buildings--all these really noble book-racks, he had
had put up. The man seemed rather taken aback, and hesitated. Finally, I
asked him point blank to give me the name of the supposed greatest
living author who had written anything for all these miles of Carnegie
Libraries, and he mentioned doubtfully a certain Mr. Rudyard Kipling. I
at once asked for his books, of course, and sat down without delay to
find out if he was the greatest living author the planet had, what it
was he had to say for it and about it, and more particularly, of course,
what he had to to say it was for.

I found among his books some beautiful and quite refined interpretations
of tigers and serpents, a really noble interpretation or conception of
what the beasts were for all the glorious gentlemanly beasts--and of
what machines were for--all the young, fresh, mighty, worshipful
engines--and what soldiers were for. But when I looked at what he
thought men were for, at what the planet was for, there was practically
almost nothing. The nearest I came to it was a remark, apparently in a
magazine interview which I cannot quote correctly now, but which
amounted to something like this: "We will never have a great world until
we have some one great artist or poet in it, who sees it as a whole,
focuses it, composes it, makes a picture of it, and gives the men who
are in it a vision to live for."

       *       *       *       *       *

Since then I have been trying to see what Messrs. Rockefeller, Carnegie,
and Morgan could do to produce and arrange what seemed to me the one
most important, imperative, and immediate convenience their planet could
have, namely, as Mr. Kipling intimated, some man on it, some great
creative genius, who would gather it all up in his imagination--the
beasts, and the people, and the sciences, and the machines--in short,
the planet as a whole, and say what it was for. It is from this point of
view that I have been drawn into writing the following pages on the next
important improvements--what one might call the spiritual Unreal-Estate
Improvements, for Messrs. Rockefeller, Carnegie, and Morgan's property
which will have to be installed. I have been going over the property
more or less carefully in my own way since, studying it and noting what
had been done by the owners, and what possibly might be done toward
arranging authors, inventors, seers, artists, or engineers or other
efficient persons who would be able to inquire, to think out for a
world, to express for it, some faint idea of what it was for.




