CHAPTER V

THE CROWD-MAN--AN INVENTION FOR MAKING CROWDS SEE


When Wilbur Wright flew around the Statue of Liberty in New York the
other day, his doing it was a big event; but a still bigger event, as it
seems to some of us, was the way he felt about New York when he did it.
All New York could not make him show off. Hundreds of thousands of
people on roofs could look up at the sky over New York, for him to go
by, all that they liked. He slipped down to Washington without saying
anything, on the 3:25 train, to attend to flying as part of the serious
business of the world.

Why fly around a little town like New York, or show your bright wings in
the light, or circle the Statue of Liberty for fun, when you are
reconstructing civilization, and binding a whole planet together, and
wrapping the heavens close down around the earth, and making railroads
everywhere out of the air? New York is always a little superficial and
funny about itself. All it needs to do, it seems to think, is to snap
its fingers at a man of genius anywhere on this broad world, whisper to
him pleasantly, and he will trot promptly up, of course, and do his
little turn for it.

But not Wilbur Wright. Wilbur Wright would not give two million people
an encore, or even come back to bow. As one looked over from Mount Tom
one could see all New York black and solid on the tops of its roofs and
houses looking up into a great hole of air for him, and Wilbur Wright
slipping quietly off down to Washington and leaving them there, a whole
great city under the sky, with its heads up!

A little experience like this has been what New York has needed for a
long time. It takes a scientist to do these things. I wish there were
some poet who would do as well. Even a prophet up above New York--or
seer of men and of years--glinting his wings in the light, the New York
_Sun_ and the _World_ and the _Times_ down below, all their opera-glasses
trained on him, and all those little funny reporters running helplessly
about, all the people pouring out from Doctor Parkhurst's church to
look up.... It would be something.

Probably there are very few capitals in the world--Paris, Berlin, or
London--that would not be profoundly stirred and possibly much improved
by having some man suddenly appear up over them, who would be so
interested in what he was doing that he would forget to notice whether
anybody was looking--who would be capable of slipping off quietly and
leaving an entire city with its heads up, and going on and attending to
business.

There have been times when we would have been relieved, some of us, if
the North Pole could have been discovered in this way and without large
audiences tagging. There are some of us who will never cease to regret
as long as we live that the North Pole could not have waited a little.
We would rather have had Wilbur Wright discover it. One can imagine how
he would do it: fly gracefully up to it all by himself, and discover it
some pleasant evening, and have it over with, and slip back on his soft
wings in the night, and not say anything about it. It is this Wilbur
Wright spirit that I would like to dwell on in these pages. It seems to
me it is a true modern spirit, the spirit which alone could make our
civilization great, and the spirit which alone could make crowds great.
It was the crowd that spoiled the way the Pole was discovered--all the
millions of people, vast, thoughtless audiences piling in and making a
show of it. Many people in America, all the vast crowds reading about
it, seemed to feel that they were more important than the Pole; and when
Captain Peary came back, vast crowds of these same people paid as much
as five dollars apiece for the privilege of being in the same room with
him. It was quite impossible not to contrast Captain Peary in his
attitude toward the crowd and Wilbur Wright. There seemed to be, and
there will always remain, a certain vulgarity in the way the North Pole
was discovered, and the way the whole world behaved in regard to it, and
the secret seems to have been in Captain Peary's failure to be a Wilbur
Wright. He allowed the Pole to be a Crowd affair. All the while as he
went about the country holding his little exhibits of the tip of the
planet we could not help wishing, many of us who were in the Audience,
that this man who sat there before us, the man who had the Thing in his
hand, who had collected the North Pole, would not notice us, would snub
us if need be a little, and would leave these people, these millions of
people, with their heads up and go quietly on to the South Pole and
collect that. It is because there are thousands of men who understand
just how Wilbur Wright felt when he slipped away the other day in New
York and left the entire city with its heads up that we have every
reason to expect that the crowd is to produce great leaders, and is to
become a great crowd, great and humble in spirit before God, before the
stars, and the atoms, and the microbes, and before Itself. In the
meantime, however, we see all about us in the world countless would-be
leaders of the crowd, who would perhaps not quite understand the way
Wilbur Wright felt that day when he slipped away from New York and left
the entire city with its heads up. Most newspaper men--men who are in
the habit of writing for a crowd and regarding a crowd quite
respectfully--will have wondered a little why Wilbur Wright could have
let such a crowd go by. Most actors and theatrical people would have
stayed over a train or so and given one more little performance with all
those wistful people on the roof-tops. There are only a very few
clergymen in England or America to-day who, with a great audience like
that and so many men in it, would ever have thought of slipping off on
the 3:25 train in the way Wilbur Wright did. The ministers and the
politicians of all countries are still wondering a little--if they ever
thought of it--how Wright did it. Most of the other people in the world
wonder a little, too, but I imagine that the great inventors of the
world who read about it the next morning did not wonder. The true
scientists, in this country and in Germany and in France, all understood
just how Wilbur Wright felt when he left New York with its heads up. The
great artists of the world, in literature, in painting, and
architecture; the great railroad builders, the city builders, the nation
builders, the great statesmen, the great biologists, and chemists,
understood. James J. Hill, with his face toward the Pacific, understood.
Alexander Graham Bell, out abroad doing the listening and talking and
thinking the thoughts of eighty million people, understood. Marconi,
making the ships whisper across the sea, and William G. McAdoo, shooting
a hundred and seventy thousand people a day through a hole under the
Hudson--understood.

And God, when He made the world. And Columbus when he discovered
America. And Jesus Christ when He was so happy and so preoccupied over
His vision of a new world, over inventing Christianity, that it seemed a
very small and incidental thing to die on the Cross--He understood.

Wilbur Wright's secret was that he had a vision. His vision was that a
human being could be greater and more powerful than the world had ever
believed before.

Just to be there was a great thought, to be allowed to be one of those
admitted, to be present at the first faint beginning, the first still
alighting of the human spirit from the earth upon the sky. Wilbur Wright
made the most ordinary man a genius a minute. He made him wonder softly
who he was--and the people all about him--who were they? and what would
they think, and what would they do next? The first flash of light on the
wings was a thousand years. It was as if almost for a moment he saw at
last the whole earth about him. History, churches, factories on it,
slipping out of its cocoon at last--its little, old, faded, tied-down
cocoon, and sailing upon the air--sailing with him, sailing with the
churches, with the factories, and with the schools, with History,
through the Invisible, through the Intangible--out to the Sun....

       *       *       *       *       *

Perhaps the reason that New York was a great city a few minutes the
other day when Wilbur Wright was there was that Wilbur Wright had a new
vision in the presence of all those men of something that they could do.
He touched the imagination of men about themselves. They were profoundly
moved because they saw him in their presence inventing a new kind and
new size of human being. He raised the standard of impossibility, and
built an annex on to the planet while they looked; took a great strip
off of space three miles wide and folded it softly on to the planet all
the way round before their eyes. For three miles more--three miles
farther up above the ground--there was a space where human beings would
have to stop saying, "I can't," and "You can't," and "We can't." If
people want to say "I can't," and "You can't," they will have to say it
farther and farther away from this planet now. Let them try Mars. The
modern imagination takes to impossibilities naturally with Wilbur Wright
against the horizon. The thing we next cannot believe is the next thing
to expect.

Nobody would have believed ten years ago that an architect could be
invented who would tell a man that his house would cost him thirty
thousand dollars, and then hand him back two thousand dollars when he
had finished it. But the man had been invented--he invented himself.

He represents the owner, and does as the owner would be done by if he
did it himself--if he had the technical knowledge and the time to do it.

Nobody would have believed a few years ago that a railway president,
when he had occasion to reduce the wages of several thousand employees
10 per cent., would begin by reducing his own salary 30 per cent., and
the salary of all the officials all the way down 15 per cent., or 20 per
cent.

Nobody would have believed some time ago that an organizing inventor
would be evolved who would meet his directors and tell them that, if
they would have their work done in their mills in three shifts instead
of two, the men would work so much better that it would not cost the
Company more than 10 per cent. more to offer the better conditions. But
such an organizing inventor has been invented, and has proved his case.

Luther Burbank has made a chestnut tree eighteen months old bear
chestnuts; and it has always taken from ten to twenty-five years to make
a tree furnish its first chestnut before. About the same time that
Luther Burbank had succeeded in doing this with chestnuts a similar type
of man, who was not particularly interested in chestnuts and wanted to
do something with human nature, who believed that human nature could
really be made to work, found a certain staple article that everybody
needs every day in a state of anarchy in the market. The producers were
not making anything on it. The wholesalers dealt in it without a profit,
and the retailers sold it without a profit, and merely because the other
things they sold were worthless without it.

----, who was the leading wholesale dealer and in the best position to
act, pointed out that, if the business was organized and everybody in it
would combine with everybody else and make it a monopoly, the price
could be made lower, and everybody would make money.

Of course this was a platitude.

It was also a platitude that human nature was not good enough, and could
not be trusted to work properly in a monopoly.

---- then proceeded to invent a monopoly--a kind of monopoly in which
human nature could be trusted.

He used a very simple device.

He began by being trusted himself.

Having personally and directly proved that human nature in a monopoly
could be trusted by being trusted himself, all he had to do was to
capitalize his knowledge of human nature, use the enormous market value
of the trust people had in him to gather people about him in the
business who had a good practical business genius for being trusted too
and for keeping trusted: everybody else was shut out.

The letter with which the monopoly was started (after dealing duly with
the technical details of the business) ended like this:

"... the soundest lines of business--_viz._, fair prices, fair profits,
fair division of profits, fair recognition of service, do as you would be
done by, money back where it is practicable, one's profit so small as to
make competition not worth while, open dealing, and open books."

He had invented a monopoly which shared its profits with the people, and
which the people trusted. He was a Luther Burbank in money and people
instead of chestnuts. He raised the standard of impossibility in people,
and invented a new way for human nature to work.




