CHAPTER VI

THE PEOPLE SAY "WHO ARE YOU?"


If news is governing, how does the President do his governing?

By being News, himself.

By using his appointing power and putting other men who are News
Themselves, news about American human nature--where all the people will
see it.

By telling the people directly (when he feels especially asked) news
about what is happening in his mind--news about what he believes.

By telling the people sometimes (as candidly as he can without giving
the people's enemies a chance to stop him), what he is going to do next,
sketching out in order of time, and in order of importance, his program
of issues.

By telling the people news about their best business men, the business
men and inventors who, in their daily business, free the energies,
unshackle the minds and emancipate the genius of the people.

By telling these business men news about the people--and interpreting
the people to them.

       *       *       *       *       *

It is by being news to the people himself that all the other news a
President can get into his government counts.

A man is a man according to the amount of news there is in him.

There are twenty personal traits in a President which of themselves
would all be national news of the first importance if he had them. The
bare fact that a President could have certain traits at all and still
get to be a President in this country, would be news.

One of the most important facts about news is that while it can be
distributed by machines, machines cannot make it, and as a rule they do
not understand it. Important and critical news is almost always fresh
and made by hand the first time. Most of the popular news as to what is
practical in American polities for the last forty years has been
produced by political machines, and of course men who were a good deal
like machines were the best men to finish the ideas off and to carry
them out.

As a result of course, all the really big leaders for the last forty
years, our most powerful and interesting personalities have been shut
out from being President of the United States. The White House was
merely being run as machinery and did not interest them. They watched it
grinding its ideas faithfully out from year to year of what America was
like and what American politicians were like, and finally at last in the
clatter of the machines there rings out suddenly across the land a shot
that no machinery had allowed for. Before any one knows almost there
slips suddenly by the side door into the White House a really
interesting man, and suddenly, all in one minute, almost, this man makes
being President of the United States the most interesting lively and
athletic feat in the country. And now, apparently that the idea has been
worked out in public before everybody, by hand, as it were, that a man
can be alive and interesting all over, can have at least a little touch
of news about him and still be a President in this country, another man
with some news in him has been allowed to us and suddenly politics
throughout all America has become a totally new revealing profession,
and men, instead of being selected because they were blurred
personalities, the ghosts of compromises, would-be everybodies--men who
had not decided who they were, and who could not settle down and let
people know which of their characters they had hit on at last to be
really theirs, men who had no cutting edge to do things, screw-drivers
trying to be chisels--were revealed to our people at last as vague,
mean, other-worldly persons, not fitting into our real American world at
all, and hopelessly visionary and impracticable in American politics.

And now one more hand-made man has been allowed to us.

The machines run very still in the White House.

The people of this country no longer go by the White House on their way
to their business and just hear it humdrumming and humdrumming behind
the windows as of yore. The nation stands in crowds around the gates and
would like to see in. The people wonder. They wonder a million columns a
day what is inside.

What is inside?

An American who governs by being news, himself.

The first thing that the people demand from our President now is that he
shall be news himself. The news that they have selected to know first
during the next four years--have put into the White House to know first
is Woodrow Wilson.

"Who are you, Woodrow Wilson, in God's name?" the steeples and smoking
chimneys, the bells and whistles, the Yales and Harvards, and the little
country schools, the crowds in the streets, and the corn in the fields
all say, "Who Are You?"

Then the people listen. They listen to his "I wills" and "I won'ts" for
news about him. They look for news about him in the headlines he steers
into the papers every morning, in the events he makes happen, in the
editorials he makes men think of, in the men he calls up and puts on the
National Wire--in all these, slowly, daily, hourly they drink up their
long, patient, hopeful answer to their question, "Who Are You, Woodrow
Wilson?"




