CHAPTER VIII

THE BASEMENT OF THE WORLD


Every man has, according to the scientists, a place in the small of his
back which might be called roughly, perhaps, the soul of his body. All
the little streets of the senses or avenues of knowledge, the spiritual
conduits through which he lives in this world, meet in this little
mighty brain in the small of a man's back.

About nine hundred millions of his grandfathers apparently make their
headquarters in this little place in the small of his back.

It is in this one little modest unnoticed place that he is supposed to
keep his race-consciousness, his subconscious memory of a whole human
race, and it is here that the desires and the delights and labours of
thousands of years of other people are turned off and turned on in him.
It is the brain that has been given to every man for the heavy everyday
hard work of living. The other brain, the one with which he does his
thinking and which is kept in an honoured place up in the cupola of his
being, is a comparatively light-working organ, merely his own private
personal brain--a conscious, small, and supposably controllable affair.
He holds on to his own particular identity with it. The great lower
brain in the small of his back is merely lent to him, as it were, out of
eternity--while he goes by.

It is like a great engine which he has been allowed the use of as long
as he can keep it connected up properly with his cerebral arrangements.

This appears to be mainly what the cerebral brain is for, this keeping
the man connected up. It acts as a kind of stopcock for one's infinity,
for screwing on or screwing off one's vast race-consciousness, one's
all-humanityness, all those unsounded deeps or reservoirs of human
energy, of hope and memory, of love, of passionate thought, of earthly
and heavenly desire that are lent to each of us as we slip softly by for
seventy years, by a whole human race.

A human being is a kind of factory. The engine and the works and all the
various machines are kept in the basement, and he sends down orders to
them from time to time, and they do the work which has been conceived up
in the headquarters. He expects the works down below to keep on doing
these things without his taking any particular notice of them, while he
occupies his mind, as the competent head of a factory should, with the
things that are new and different and special and that his mind alone
can do--the things which, at least in their present initial formative or
creative stage, no machines as yet have been developed to do, and that
can only be worked out by the man up in the headquarters himself
personally, by the handiwork of his own thought.

The more a human being develops, the more delicate, sensitive, strong,
and efficient, the more spirit-informed once for all the machines in the
basement are. As he grows, the various subconscious arrangements for
discriminating, assimilating and classifying material, for pumping up
power, light, and heat to headquarters, all of which can be turned on at
will, grow more masterful every year. They are found all slaving away
for him dimly down in the dark while he sleeps. They hand him up in his
very dreams new and strange powers to live and know with.

The men who have been the most developed of all, in this regard,
civilization has always selected and set apart from the others. It calls
these men, in their generation, men of genius.

Ordinary men do not try to compete with men of genius.

The reason that people set the genius apart and do not try to compete
with him is that he has more and better machinery than they have. It is
always the first thing one notices about a man of genius--the incredible
number of things that he manages to get done for him, apparently the
things that he never takes any time off, like the rest of us, to do
himself. The subconscious, automatic, mechanical equipment of his
senses, the extraordinary intelligence and refinement of his body, the
way his senses keep his spirit informed automatically and convey outer
knowledge to him, the power he has in return of informing this outer
knowledge with his spirit, with his will, with his choices, once for all,
so that he is always able afterward to rely on his senses to work out
things beautifully for him quite by themselves, and to hand up to him,
when he wants them, rare, deep, unconscious knowledge--all the things he
wants to use for what his soul is doing at the moment--it is these that
make the man of genius what he is. He has a larger and better factory
than others, and has developed a huge subconscious service in mind and
body. Having all these things done for him, he is naturally more free
than others and has more vision and more originality, his spirit is
swung free to build new worlds--to take walks with God, until at last we
come to look upon him, upon the man of genius, a little superstitiously.
We look up every little while from doing the things ourselves that he
gets done for him by his subconscious machinery, and we wonder at him,
we wonder at the strange, the mighty feats he does, at his
thousand-leagued boots, at his apparent everywhereness. His songs and
joys, sometimes, to us, his very sorrows, look miraculous.

And yet it is all merely because he has a factory, a great automatic
equipment, a thousand employee-sense perceptions, down in the basement
of his being, doing things for him that the rest of us do, or think we
are obliged to do ourselves, and give up all of our time to. He is not
held back as we are, and moves freely. So he dives under the sea
familiarly, or takes peeps at the farther side of the stars, or he flies
in the air, or he builds unspeakable railroads or thinks out ships or
sea-cities, or he builds books, or he builds little new
still-undreamed-of worlds out of chemistry, or he unravels history out
of rocks, or plants new cities and mighty states without seeming to try,
or perhaps he proceeds quietly to be interested in men, in all these
funny little dots of men about him; and out of the earth and sky, out of
the same old earth and sky everybody else had had, he makes new kinds
and new sizes of men with a thought like some mighty, serene child
playing with dolls!

It is generally supposed that the man of genius rules history and
dictates the ideals, the activities of the next generation, writes out
the specifications for the joys and sorrows of a world, and lays the
ground-plans of nations because he has an inspired mind. It is really
because he has an inspired body, a body that has received its orders
once for all, from his spirit. We would never wonder that everything a
genius does has that vivid and strange reality it has, if we realized
what his body is doing for him, how he has a body which is at work
automatically drinking up the earth into everything he thinks, drinking
up practicability, art and technique for him into everything he sees and
everything he hopes and desires. And every year he keeps on adding a new
body, keeps on handing down to his basement new sets, every day, of
finer and yet finer things to do automatically. The great spiritual
genius becomes great by economizing his consciousness in one direction
and letting it fare forth in another. He converts his old inspirations
into his new machines. He converts heat into power, and power into
light, and comes to live at last as almost any man of genius can really
be seen living--in a kind of transfigured or lighted-up body. The poet
transmutes his subconscious or machine body into words; and the artist,
into colour or sound or into carved stone. The engineer transmutes his
subconscious body into long buildings, into aisles of windows, into
stories of thoughtful machines. Every great spiritual and imaginative
genius is seen, sooner or later, to be the transmuted genius of some
man's body. The things in Leonardo da Vinci that his unconscious,
high-spirited, automatic senses gathered together for him, piled up in
his mind for him, and handed over to him for the use of his soul, would
have made a genius out of anybody. It is not as if he had had to work
out every day all the old details of being a genius, himself.

The miracles he seems to work are all made possible to him because of
his thousand man-power, deep subconscious body, his tremendous factory
of sensuous machinery. It is as if he had practically a thousand men all
working for him, for dear life, down in his basement, and the things
that he can get these men to attend to for him give him a start with
which none of the rest of us could ever hope to compete. We call him
inspired because he is more mechanical than we are, and because his real
spiritual life begins where our lives leave off.

So the poets who have filled the world with glory and beauty have been
free to do it because they have had more perfect, more healthful and
improved subconscious senses handing up wonder to them than the rest of
us have.

And so the engineers, living, as they always live, with that fierce,
silent, implacable curiosity of theirs, woven through their bodies and
through their senses and through their souls, have tagged the Creator's
footsteps under the earth, and along the sky, every now and then
throwing up new little worlds to Him like His worlds, saying, "Look, O
God, look at THIS!"--the engineers whose poetry is too deep to look
poetic have all done what they have done because the unconscious and
automatic gifts of their senses, of the powers of their observation,
have swung their souls free, given them long still reaches of thought
and vast new orbits of desire, like gods.

All the great men of the world have always had machinery.

Now, everybody is having it. The power to get little things,
innumerable, omnipresent, for-ever-and-ever things, tiny just-so things,
done for us automatically so that we can go on to our inspirations is no
longer to-day the special prerogative of men of genius. It is for all
of us. Machinery is the stored-up spirit, the old saved-up inspiration
of the world turned on for every man. And as the greatness of a man
turns on his command over machinery, on his power to free his soul by
making his body work for him, the greatness of a civilization turns upon
its getting machines to do its work. The more of our living we can learn
to do to-day, automatically, the more inspired and creative and godlike
and unmechanical our civilization becomes.

Machinery is the subconscious mind of the world.




