CHAPTER IX

THE CROWD'S IMAGINATION ABOUT PEOPLE


I would like to propose, as a basis for the judgment of men and events,
and as a basis for forecasting the next men and next events, and
arriving at a vision of action, a Theory of the World.

Every man has one.

Every man one knows can be seen doing his work in this world on a great
background, a kind of panorama or stage setting in his mind, made up of
history and books, newspapers, people, and experiences, which might be
called his Theory of the World.

It is his theory of the world which makes him what he is--his personal
judgment or personal interpretation of what the world is like, and what
works in it, and what does not work.

A man's theory as to why people do or do not do wrong is not a theory he
might in some brief disinterested moment, possibly at luncheon, take
time to discuss. His theory of what is wrong and of what is right, and
of how they work, touches the efficiency with which he works intimately
and permanently at every point every minute of his business day.

If he does not know, in the middle of his business day, what his theory
of the world--of human nature--is, let him stop and find out.

A man's theory of the world is the skylight or manhole over his work. It
becomes his hell or heaven--his day and night. He breathes his theory of
the world and breathes his idea of the people in it; and everything he
does may be made or may be marred by what, for instance, he thinks in
the long-run about what I am saying now on this next page. Whether he
is writing for people, or doing business with them over a counter, or
launching books at them, everything he does will be steeped in what he
believes about what I am saying now--it shall be the colour of the world
to him, the sound or timbre of his voice--what he thinks or can make up
his mind to think, of what I am saying--on this next page.




CHAPTER X

A DEMOCRATIC THEORY OF HUMAN NATURE


If the men who were crucifying Jesus could have been suddenly stopped at
the last moment, and if they could have been kept perfectly still for
ten minutes and could have thought about it, some of them would have
refused to go on with the crucifixion when the ten minutes were over. If
they could have been stopped for twenty minutes, there would have been
still more of them who would have refused to have gone on with it. They
would have stolen away and wondered about The Man in their hearts. There
were others who were there who would have needed twenty days of being
still and of thinking. There were some who would have had to have twenty
years to see what they really wanted, in all the circumstances, to do.

People crucified Christ because they were in a hurry.

They did what they wanted to do at the moment. So far as we know, there
were only two men who did what they would have wished they had done in
twenty years: there was the thief on the other cross, who showed The Man
he knew who He was; and there was the disciple John, who kept as close
as he could. John perhaps was thinking of the past--of all the things
that Christ had said to him; and the man on the other cross was thinking
what was going to happen next. The other people who had to do with the
crucifixion were all thinking about the thing they were doing at the
moment and the way they felt about it. But the Man was Thinking, not of
His suffering, but of the men in front of Him, and of what they could be
thinking about, and what they would be thinking about afterward--in ten
minutes, in twenty minutes, in twenty days, or in twenty years; and
suddenly His heart was flooded with pity at what they would be thinking
about afterward, and in the midst of the pain in His arms and the pain
in His feet He made that great cry to Heaven: "Father, forgive them;
they know not what they do!"

It is because Christians have never quite believed that The Man really
meant this when He said it that they have persecuted the Jews for two
thousand years. It is because they do not believe it now that they blame
Mr. Rockefeller for doing what most of them twenty years ago would have
done themselves. It was one of the hardest things to do and say that any
one ever said in the world, and it was said at the hardest possible time
to say it. It was strange that one almost swooning with pain should have
said the gentlest-hearted and truest thing about human nature that has
ever been said since the world began. It has seemed to me the most
literal, and perhaps the most practical, truth that has been said since
the world began.

It goes straight to the point about people. It gives one one's
definition of goodness both for one's self and for others. It gives one
a program for action.

Except in our more joyous and free moments, we assume that when people
do us a wrong, they know what they are about. They look at the right
thing to do and they look at the wrong one, and they choose the wrong
one because they like it better. Nine people out of ten one meets in the
streets coming out of church on Sunday morning, if one asked them the
question plainly, "Do you ever do wrong when you know it is wrong?"
would say that they did. If you ask them what a sin is, they will tell
you that it is something you do when you know you ought not to do it.

But The Man Himself, in speaking of the most colossal sin that has ever
been committed, seemed to think that when men committed a sin, it was
because they did not really see what it was that they were doing. They
did what they wanted to do at the moment. They did not do what they
would have wished they had done in twenty years.

I would define goodness as doing what one would wish one had done in
twenty years--twenty years, twenty days, twenty minutes, or twenty
seconds, according to the time the action takes to get ripe.

It would be far more true and more to the point instead of scolding or
admiring Mr. Rockefeller's skilled labour at getting too rich, to point
out mildly that he has done something that in the long-run he would not
have wanted to do; that he has lacked the social imagination for a great
permanently successful business. His sin has consisted in his not taking
pains to act accurately and permanently, in his not concentrating his
mind and finding out what he really wanted to do. It would seem to be
better and truer and more accurate in the tremendous crisis of our
modern life to judge Mr. Rockefeller, not as monster of wickedness, but
merely as an inefficient, morally underwitted man. There are things that
he has not thought of that every one else has.

We see that in all those qualities that really go to make a great
business house in a great nation John D. Rockefeller stands as the most
colossal failure as yet that our American business life has produced. To
point his incompetence out quietly and calmly and without scolding would
seem to be the only fair way to deal with Mr. Rockefeller. He merely has
not done what he would have wished he had done in twenty, well, possibly
two hundred years, or as long a time as it would be necessary to allow
for Mr. Rockefeller to see. The one thing that the world could accept
gracefully from Mr. Rockefeller now would be the establishment of a
great endowment of research and education to help other people to see in
time how they can keep from being like him. If Mr. Rockefeller leads in
this great work and sees it soon enough, perhaps he will stop suddenly
being the world's most lonely man.

Many men have been lonely before in the presence of a few fellow human
beings; but to be lonely with a whole nation--eighty million people; to
feel a whole human race standing there outside of your life and softly
wondering about you, staring at you in the showcase of your money,
peering in as out of a thousand newspapers upon you as a kind of moral
curiosity under glass, studying you as the man who has performed the
most athletic feat of not seeing what he was really doing and how he
really looked in all the world--this has been Mr. Rockefeller's
experience. He has not done what he would wish he had done in twenty
years.

Goodness may be defined as getting one's own attention, as boning down
to find the best and most efficient way of finding out what one wants to
do. Any man who will make adequate arrangements with himself at suitable
times for getting his own attention will be good. Any one else from
outside who can make such arrangements for him, such arrangements of
expression or--of advertising goodness as to get his attention, will
make him good.




