CHAPTER IV

PAPER BOOKS, MARBLE PILLARS, AND WOODEN BOYS


I have sometimes wished that Mr. Carnegie would post the following sign
up on his Libraries, on the outside where people are passing, and on the
inside in the room where people sit and think:

    A MILLION DOLLARS REWARD.

    WANTED, A GREAT LIVING AMERICAN AUTHOR FOR MY LIBRARIES IN THE
    UNITED STATES. AT PRESENT OUR GREAT AUTHOR IN AMERICA APPEARS
    TO HAVE BEEN LOST OR MISLAID; ANY ONE FINDING HIM, OR ANY ONE
    THAT MIGHT DO FOR HIM TEMPORARILY, PLEASE COMMUNICATE WITH ME.

    ANDREW CARNEGIE.

Mr. Carnegie's Libraries must be a source of constant regret to the
author of "Triumphant Democracy." They are generally made up of books
written in the Old World. It would be interesting to know what are the
real reasons great Libraries are not being written for Mr. Carnegie in
America, and what there is that Mr. Carnegie or other people can do
about it. They are certainly going to be written in America some time,
and certainly, unless the best and greatest part of the Carnegie Library
of the future is to be the American part of it, the best our Carnegie
Libraries will do for America will be to remind us of what we are not.
Unless we can make the American part of Mr. Carnegie's Libraries loom in
the world as big as Mr. Carnegie's chimneys, America--which is the last
newest experiment station of the world--is a failure.

It has occurred to me to try to express, for what it may be worth, a
point of view toward Triumphant Democracy Mr. Carnegie may have
inadvertently overlooked.

If Mr. Carnegie would establish in every town where he has put a
Library, by endowment or otherwise, a Commission, or what might be
called perhaps a Searching Party, in that community, made up of men of
inventive and creative temperament, who instinctively know this
temperament in others--men in all specialities, in all walks of life,
who are doing things better than any one wants to pay them to do
them--and if Mr. Carnegie would set these men to work, in one way and
another, looking up boys who are like them, boys about the town, who are
doing things better than any one wants to pay them to do them--he would
soon get a monopoly of the idealism of the world; he would collect in
thirty-five years, or in one generation, an array of living great men,
of national figures, men who would be monuments to Andrew Carnegie, as
compared with which his present libraries, big, thoughtless,
innumerable, humdrum, sogging down into the past, would be as nothing.
Mr. Carnegie has given forty libraries to New York; and I venture to say
that there is at this very moment, running round the streets of the
great city, one single boy, who has it in him to conceive, to imagine,
and hammer together a new world; and if Mr. Carnegie would invest his
fortune, not in buildings or in books, but in buying brains enough to
find that boy, and if the whole city of New York were to devote itself
for one hour every day for years to searching about and finding that
boy, to seeing just which he is, to going over all the other boys five
hours a day to pick him out, it would be--well, all I can say is, all
those forty libraries of Mr. Carnegie's, those great proud buildings,
would do well if they did not do one thing for six years but find that
boy!

There is a boy at this very moment with strings and marbles and a nation
in his pocket, a system of railroads--a boy with a national cure for
tuberculosis, with sun-engines for everybody--there is a boy with
cathedrals in him too, no doubt or some boy like young Pinchot, with
mountainsful of forests in his heart.

This is what Mr. Carnegie himself would like to do, but with his big,
stiff, clumsy libraries trailing their huge, senseless brick-and-mortar
bodies, their white pillars and things, about the country, unmanned,
inert, eyeless, all those great gates and forts of knowledge, Coliseums
of paper, and with the mechanical people behind the counters, the
policemen of the books, all standing about protecting them--with all
this formidable array, how can such a boy be hunted out or drawn in, or
how would he dare go tramping in through the great gates and hunting
about for himself? He could only be hunted out by people all wrought
through with human experience, men and women who would give the world to
find him, who are on the daily lookout for such a boy--by some special
kind of eager librarian, or by disguised teachers, anonymous poets, or
by diviners, by expert geniuses in boys. If Mr. Carnegie could go about
and look up and buy up wherever he went these men who have this
boy-genius in them, deliver them from empty, helpless, mere
getting-a-living lives; and if he could set these men, and set them
about thickly, among the books in his libraries--those huge anatomies
and bones of knowledge he has established everywhere, all his great
literary steel-works--men would soon begin to be discovered, to be
created, to be built in libraries ... but as it is now....

Gentle Reader, have you ever stood in front of one of them, looked up at
the windows, thought of all those great tiers, those moulds and blocks
of learning on the shelves; and have you never watched the weary people
that dribble in from the streets and wander coldly about, or sit down
listless in them--in those mighty, silent empires of the past? have you
never thought that somewhere all about them, somewhere in this same
library, there must be some white, silent, sunny country of the future,
full of children and of singing, full of something very different from
these iron walls of wisdom? And have you never thought what it would
mean if Mr. Carnegie would spend his money on search parties for people
among the books, or what it would mean if the entire library, if all the
books in it, became, as it were, wired throughout with live, splendid,
delighted men and women, to make connections, to establish the current
between the people and the books, to discover the people one by one and
follow them to their homes, and follow them in their lives, and take out
the latent geniuses, and the listless engineers and poets, and the
Kossuths, Caesars, the Florence Nightingales...?

It is only by employing forces that can be made extremely small,
invisible, personal, penetrating, and spiritual, that this sort of work
can be done. It must be delicate and wonderful workmanship, like the
magnet, like the mighty thistledown in the wind, like electricity, like
love, like hope--sheer, happy, warm human vision going about and casting
itself, casting all its still and tiny might, its boundless seed, upon
the earth: but it would pay.

The same people too, specialists in detecting and developing inventors,
could be supplied also to all other possible callings. They would
constitute a universal profession, penetrating all the others. They
would go hunting among foremen and in machine shops for the misplaced
geniuses, tried by wrong standards, underpaid for having other gifts.
They would keep a lookout through all the schools and colleges, looking
over the shoulders of scolding teachers and absent professors. They
would go about studying the playgrounds and mastering the streets.

We do not a little for the Submerged Tenth and the sons of the poor, and
we have schools or missions for the sons of the rich, but one of the
things we need next to-day is that something should be done for the
sons of the great neglected respectable classes. Far more important than
one more library--say in Denver, for instance would be a Denver Bureau
of Investigation, to be appointed, of high-priced, spirited men, of
expert humanists, to study difficulties, and devise methods and missions
for putting all society in Denver through filters or placers, and
finding out the rich human ore, finding out where everybody really
belonged, and what all the clever misplaced people were really for. Of
course it would take money to do all this, and flocks of free people who
are doing the work they love. But it is not book-racks, nor paper, nor
ink, nor stone steps, nor white pillars--it is free men and free women
America and England are asking of their Andrew Carnegies to-day.

Mr. Carnegie has not touched this human problem in his libraries. If
Society were fitted up all through with electric connections, men with a
genius for discovering continents in people, Columbuses, boy-geniuses;
and if there were established everywhere a current between every boy and
the great world, this would be something on which Mr. Carnegie could
make a great beginning with the little mite of his fortune. If we were
to have even one city fitted up in this way, it would be hard to say how
much it would mean--one city with enough people in it who were free to
do beautiful things, free to be curious about the others, free to follow
clues of greatness, free to go up the streams of Society to the still,
faint little springs and beginnings of things. It would soon be a
memorable city. A world would watch it, and other cities would grope
toward it. Instead of this we have these big, hollow, unmanned libraries
of Mr. Carnegie's everywhere, with no people practically to go with
them, no great hive of happy living men and women in and out all day
cross-fertilizing boys and books.

There seems to be something unfinished and stolid and brutal about a
Carnegie Library now. The spirit of the garden and the sea, of the
spring and the light, and of the child, is not in it. They have come to
seem to some of us mere huge Pittsburgs of brains--all these impervious,
unwieldy, rolling-mills of knowledge. I should think it would be a
terrible prospect to grow old with, just to sit and see them flocking
across the country from your window, all these huge smoke-stacks of
books in their weary, sordid cities; and the boys who might be great
men, the small Lincolns with nations in their pockets, the little Bells
with worlds in their ears, the Pinchots with their forests, the McAdoos
and Roosevelts, the young Carnegies and Marconis in the streets!




