V

_THE APPROACHES TO MR. FRAZER'S THEORY_


I. THE EVOLUTION OF GODS


Rites so remarkable as those of the pair of criminals, supposed to have
played their parts in Babylon and Jerusalem, each with his female mate,
are not historically known, but are part of Mr. Frazer's theory, and
have analogies in folklore. Institutions so unparalleled as a whole,
in our knowledge of human religion, cannot have been evolved except
through a long series of grades of development. Mr. Frazer traces these
grades throughout the 1,500 pages of his book. There are, in accordance
with the method, large sections of the work devoted to illustrative
examples of matters which do not bear directly on the main stream
of the argument, and these are apt, by the very abundance of their
erudition, to distract attention from the central hypothesis. To that I
try to adhere through its numerous ramifications.

To account, then, for these hypothetical rites of the double pairs
of divinised human beings, we are to suppose that, before attaining
the earliest germs of religion, men were addicted to magic, a theory
which we have already examined in the essay 'Magic and Religion.' They
believed that by imitating the cosmic processes, they could control or
assist them. Thus the Arunta of Central Australia have magical rites,
by which they assist the development of larvæ into grubs, increase and
improve the breed and reproductive energies of kangaroos, foster the
growth of edible tubers, and bring down rain. These rites are harmless,
and involve no sacrifices, human or animal, for the Arunta, we are
to believe, have no god to accept offerings.[1] But as men advanced
from almost the lowest savagery, they gradually attained to higher
material culture, developing the hitherto unknown arts of agriculture,
developing also religion, in the despair of magic, developing gods, and
evolving social and political rank, with kings at the head of society.
In disgust with their old original magic (by which they had supposed
that they controlled cosmic forces and animal and vegetable life), they
invented gods and spirits who, as they fancied, did really exercise
cosmic control. These gods they propitiated by prayer and sacrifice.
But though it was in the despair of magic that men invented gods and
religion, yet, as men will, they continued to exercise the magic of
which they despaired. They persisted, like the godless Arunta, in
imitating the processes of nature, in the belief (which, after all,
they had not abandoned) that such imitation magically aided the efforts
of nature or of the gods of nature.

Men now evolved three species of god, from one or other of which
descends the godhead of the Persian criminal, whipped and hanged, and
the Divinity of Christ. First, there were gods 'of an order different
from and superior to man.' Second, there were men in whom these
superior gods became incarnate. Third, there were men who were merely
better magicians than their neighbours, 'sensitives' who trembled at
a touch of nature, and at whose touch nature trembled.[2] It is not,
in thought, difficult to draw a firm line between these two kinds of
man-gods, though magic and religion overlap and shade into each other.
The distinction of the two types, the man incarnating god, and the
sorcerer with no god to incarnate, is absolutely essential, and must
be kept firmly in mind. Mr. Frazer says 'In what follows I shall not
insist on it,' on this essential distinction.[3] Essential it is: for
the second sort, the magical sort, of man-god, may, by Mr. Frazer's
theory, be prior to all religion. He is only a high kind of sorcerer,
'a dealer in magic and spells.' The other kind of man-god comes in
after magic is despaired of and gods are invented. I shall insist on
the distinction.

The growth of society was advancing and developing at the same time
as religion and agriculture. The original sorcerer or medicine-man,
or magic-worker, through his influence on his neighbours, was apt
to acquire leadership, and to accumulate property, as, indeed, I
myself remarked long ago in an essay on the 'Origin of Rank.'[4] In
Mr. Frazer's theory these magic-men finally develop into both kings
or chiefs and man-gods. I have observed that there is often a lay or
secular king or chief, a war-leader, beside them. His position, if it
becomes hereditary, is apt to end in leaving the man-god-king on one
side in a partly magical, partly religious, but not secular kingship,
whence it may evolve into a priesthood, carrying the royal title. The
man is more or less a man-god, more or less a priest, more or less a
controller of cosmic processes, but is still a titular king. Of course
all sorts of varieties occur in these institutions. The general result
is the divinity of kings, and their responsibility for the luck of the
state, and for the weather and crops. If the luck, the weather, and
the crops are bad, the public asks 'Who is to be punished for this?'
Under a constitution such as our own, the public notoriously makes the
Government responsible for the luck; a general election dismisses the
representatives of the party in power. But, four hundred years ago,
and previously, executions took the place of mere loss of office: the
heads of the Boyds, of Morton, or of Gowrie fell when these nobles lost
office.

In the earlier society with which we are dealing, the king, as
responsible for the weather and crops, is sometimes punished in
bad times. The Banjars 'beat the king till the weather changes,'
elsewhere the king is imprisoned, or, in a more constitutional manner,
merely deposed.[5] There are traces of actually killing the unlucky
and responsible monarch. In Sweden he is said, in a time of public
distress, to have been not only killed, but sacrificed to Odin. This is
not, however, an historical statement.


II. THE ALLEGED MORTALITY OF GODS


There were other magico-religious reasons for killing kings. Mr.
Frazer writes:[6] 'Lacking the idea of eternal duration, primitive man
naturally supposes the gods to be mortal like himself.'

Here is, I venture to think, a notable fault in the argument. Early
men, contrary to Mr. Frazer's account, suppose themselves to be
_naturally_ immortal. The myths of perhaps all races tell of a time
when death had not yet entered the world. Man was born deathless. Death
came in by an accident, or in consequence of an error, or an infraction
of a divine command. To this effect we have Zulu, Australian, Maori,
Melanesian, Central African, Vedic Aryan, Kamschadal, and countless
other myths; not to speak of the first chapters of Genesis.[7] 'In the
thought of immortality' early man is cradled. His divine beings are
usually regarded as prior to and unaffected by the coming of death,
which invades men, but not these beings, or not most of them.

Indeed, some low savages have not yet persuaded themselves that death
is natural. 'Amongst the Central Australian natives,' say Spencer and
Gillen, 'there is no such thing as belief in natural death; however
old or decrepit a man or woman may be when this takes place, it is at
once supposed that it has been brought about by the magic influence of
some enemy,' and it is avenged on the enemy, as in the blood-feud.[8]
These Australians in Mr. Frazer's opinion (though not in mine) are
'primitive.'

Thus, far from lacking the idea of eternal duration of life, 'primitive
man' has no other idea. Not that he formulates his idea in such a term
as 'eternal.' Mariner says, indeed, concerning the Tongan supreme being
Ta-li-y-Tooboo, 'Of his origin they had no idea, rather supposing him
to be eternal.' But, in Tongan, the metaphysical idea of eternity is
only expressed in the meaning of the god's name, 'wait-there-Tooboo.'
This god occasionally inspires the How, or elective king, but the How
was never sacrificed to provide the god with a sturdier incarnation,
a process which Mr. Frazer's theory of the Divinity of Christ demands
as customary. Being 'eternal' Tá-li-y-Tooboo was independent of a human
vehicle.[9]

These facts must be remembered, for it is indispensable to Mr. Frazer's
theory to prove that the immortals are believed, to a sufficient
extent, to be mortal. Hence the supposed need of killing divine kings,
their vehicles. Primitive man, according to Mr. Frazer, thinks his gods
mortal. But primitive man by his initial hypothesis had no gods at all.
Mr. Frazer clearly means that when man was no longer primitive, he
conceived the gods to be mortal like himself. I have elsewhere given
many examples of the opposite belief among races of many grades of
culture, from the Australian blacks to the immortal gods of Homer.[10]
The point will be found to be important later, and I must firmly
express my opinion that, so long as people believe their gods to be
alive, and testify that belief by prayers, hymns, and sacrifices, it
is impossible to argue from a few local, and contradictory, and easily
explicable myths, that these peoples believe their gods to be dead, or
in danger of dying. Here, I think, the common sense of students will
agree with me.

However, as this general and pervading belief in the mortality of the
gods is absolutely essential to Mr. Frazer's argument, perhaps the
point had better be settled. As examples of belief in the fact that the
god is dead, we have the Greenlanders.[11]

The Greenlanders believed that a wind could kill their most powerful
god, and that he would certainly die if he touched a dog. Mr. Tylor,
on the other hand, tells us that to I the summerland' of the Greenland
deity, 'beneath the sea, Greenland souls hope to descend at death.'
Let us trust that 'No Dogs are Admitted.' This Greenland divine being,
Torngarsuk, I so clearly held his place as supreme deity in the native
mind that,' as Cranz the missionary relates, 'many Greenlanders hearing
of God and His almighty power were apt to fall on the idea that it was
their Torngarsuk who was meant.' The Greenland deity was unborrowed;
he 'seems no figure derived from the religion of Scandinavian
colonists, ancient or modern.'[12]

From Cranz's evidence (and much more might be cited) the most powerful
god of the Greenlanders was not dead, nor likely to die, in spite of
the apprehensions of certain Greenlanders, communicated to a person not
named by Mr. Frazer, but quoted in a work of 1806.[13] At the best the
Greenland evidence is contradictory; all Greenlanders did not agree
with Mr. Frazer's Greenland authority. Nor was the Accuser of the
Brethren currently believed to be deceased, when the ancient folk-song
assures us that

    Some say the Deil's deid,
      The Deil's deid, the Deil's deid,
    Some say the Deil's deid,
      And buried in Kirkcaldy:
    Some say he's risen again,
      Risen again, risen again,
    Some say he's risen again,
      To dance the Hieland Laddie.

'Risen again' he was, and did dance the Hieland Laddie at Gledsmuir
and Falkirk. The 'Volkslied' scientifically represents the conflict of
opinion as unsettled, despite the testimony of the grave of Satan at
the lang toun of Kirkcaldy; like the grave of Zeus in Crete.

Mr. Frazer, then, ought not, I think, to assume a general belief in
the mortality of Greenland gods in face of contradictory but uncited
evidence.

1. A North American Indian told Colonel Dodge that 'the Great Spirit
that made the world is dead long ago. He could not possibly have
lived so long as this.'[14] Now this was the _ipse dixit_ and personal
inference of a vague modern 'North American Indian,' living in an age
which, as Mr. Frazer remarks, must 'breach those venerable walls' of
belief. To prove his case, Mr. Frazer needs to find examples of the
opinion that the 'Great Spirit' was believed to be dead (if he grants
that there ever existed an American belief in a Great Spirit) among the
American Indians as first studied by Europeans. I have elsewhere argued
that the supreme being of most barbaric races is regarded as otiose,
inactive, and so may come to be a mere name and by-word, like the
Huron Atahocan,[15] 'who made everything,' and the Unkulunkulu of the
Zulus, who has been so thrust into the background by the competition of
ancestral spirits that his very existence is doubted. 'In process of
time we have come to worship the spirits only, because we know not what
to say about Unkulunkulu.' 'We seek out for ourselves the spirits that
we may not always be thinking about Unkulunkulu.'[16] In the same way,
throughout the beliefs of barbaric races, the competition of friendly
and helpful spirits pushes back such beings as the Australian Baiame
and Mungan-ngaur, who exist where sacrifice to ancestral spirits has
not yet been developed; and the Canadian Andouagni of 1558.[17] Thus
a modern North American Indian may infer, and may tell Colonel Dodge,
that the creator is dead, because he is not in receipt of sacrifice or
prayer. But the cult of such high beings, where it existed and still
exists, in North America, the cult of Ti-ra-wá with whom the Pawnees
expect to live after death, of the Blackfoot Ná-pi of Ahone, Okeus,
Kiehtan, and the rest, proves belief in gods who are alive, and who are
not said to be in any danger of death.

2. A tribe of Philippine Islanders told the Spanish conquerors that
the grave of the Creator was on the top of Mount Cabunian. So the
Philippine Islanders did believe in a Creator. The grave may have been
the result of the usual neglect of the supreme being already explained,
or may have meant no more than the grave of Zeus in Crete, while Zeus
was being worshipped all over the Greek world.

3. Heitsi Eibib, of the Hottentots, had a number of graves, accounted
for by the theory of successive lives and deaths. But so had Tammuz and
Adonis yearly lives and deaths, yet the god was _en permanence_.

The graves of Greek gods maybe due to Euhemerism, a theory much more
ancient than Euhemerus. People who worship ancestral spirits sometimes
argue, like Mr. Herbert Spencer, that the gods were once spirits of
living men, and show the men's graves as proofs; 'the bricks are
alive to testify to it.' But that the Greeks regarded their gods as
mortal cannot be seriously argued, while they are always styled 'the
immortals' in contrast to mortal men; and while Apollo (who had a
grave) daily inspired the Pythia. Her death did not hurt Apollo. She
was not sacrificed for the benefit of Apollo. The grave of Zeus 'was
shown to visitors in Crete as late as about the beginning of our era.'
But was it shown as early as the time of Homer? Euhemerus was prior to
our era.

4. The Egyptian gods were kings over death and the dead, with tombs and
mummies in every province. But they were also deathless rulers of the
world and of men.

'If Ra rises in the heavens it is by the will of Osiris; if he sets it
is at the sight of his glory.' 'King of eternity, great god ... whoso
knoweth humility and reckoneth deeds of righteousness, thereby knows he
Osiris.'[18]

This is a living god, and Seb and Nut can scarcely die. Despite myth
and ritual the gods of Egypt lived till they 'fled from the folding
star of Bethlehem.'

5. As to the legend of 'great Pan is dead,' in the reign of Tiberius,
Mr. Frazer mentions a theory that not Pan, but Adonis or Tammuz was
dead; he was always dying. The story is pretty, but is not evidence.

6. About 1064 A.D. there was a Turkish story of the death of the King
of the Jinn. The Jinn are not gods but fairies, and we have heard of
fairy funerals.

7. Concerning 'the high gods of Babylon' it is especially needful
for Mr. Frazer to prove that they were believed to be mortal and
in danger of death, for Dr. Jastrow denies that they are mortal.
'The privilege of the gods' is 'immortality.'[19] But Mr. Frazer's
hypothesis derives the doctrine of the Divinity of Christ from the
opinion that he represented, in death, a long line of victims to a
barbarous superstition.[20] And that superstition was, in Mr. Frazer's
conjecture, that a substitute died for the King of Babylon, and that
the King of Babylon died to reinforce the vitality of a mortal god of
Babylon, whose life required a fresh human incarnation annually.

To prove the Babylonian belief in the mortality of the deities, Mr.
Frazer writes: 'The high gods of Babylon also, though they appeared
to their worshippers only in dreams and visions, were conceived to
be human in their bodily shape, human in their passions, and human
in their fate; for like men they were born into the world, and like
men they loved and fought and even died.'[21] How many of them died?
If they were dead in religious belief, how did they manage to attend
'the great assembly of the gods which, as we have seen, formed a chief
feature of the feast of Zakmuk, and was held annually in the temple of
Marduk at Babylon?'[22] Did Marduk die? If so, why is he addressed as

    O merciful one who lovest to give life to the dead!
    Marduk, King of heaven and earth,
    The spell affording life is thine,
    The breath of life is thine.
    Thou restorest the dead to life, thou bringest things
        to completeness (?)[23]

Supposing, again, that the King was really sacrificed to keep a god in
good condition--why only one sacrifice? There were at least scores of
gods, all of them, if I understand Mr. Frazer, in the same precarious
condition of health. They appear, he might argue, to have been
especially subject to hepatic diseases.

    O supreme mistress of heaven, may thy liver be pacified,

says a hymn to Ishtar.[24]

Of course every one sees that 'thy liver' is only a phrase for 'thy
wrath;' the liver (as in our phrases 'pluck' and 'lily-livered')
being taken for the seat of the 'pluck' of men. It is manifest that
the Babylonian gods are not dead but living, otherwise they could
not attend the yearly divine assembly, nor could they be addressed
in prayer. Moreover, if they could only be kept alive by yearly
sacrificing their human vehicles, great holocausts of human vehicles
would have been needed every year: one man for one god, and their name
was legion.

Once more, if men believed that gods could die, unless kept alive by
sacrifices of their human vehicles, we must say of the Greeks that they

                did not strive
     Officiously to keep alive

their deities. Had the Greeks known that this was in their power to
do, then Apollo, Dionysus, Cronos, Zeus, Hermes, Aphrodite, Ares had
not died. Yet die they did, if the graves of each of these mortals
prove the prevailing belief in their decease.[25] Mankind, according
to Mr. Frazer, believed in 'mighty beings,' 'who breathed into man's
nostrils and made him live.' He implored them 'to bring his immortal
spirit ... to some happier world ... where he might rest with them,'
and so on.[26] Yet, 'lacking the idea of eternal duration, primitive
man naturally supposed the gods to be mortal like himself.' Mr. Frazer
has, we see, also told us that they did not believe their gods to be
mortal. Probably, then, the belief in their immortality was a late
stage in a gradual process.[27] Yet it had not prevailed when the grave
of Zeus was shown 'about the beginning of our era.'[28] Man, then,
believed that he could keep one out of the crowd of gods alive (though
he implored them to keep _him_ alive) by sacrificing his rightful king
once a year, thereby overthrowing dynasty after dynasty, and upsetting
the whole organisation of the state. All this we must steadfastly
believe, before we can accept Mr. Frazer's theory of the origin of the
Nicene Creed. It is a large preliminary demand.

The gods keep on being 'immortals,' and this we must insist on, in
view of Mr. Frazer's theory that man-gods who are slain are slain to
keep alive the god who is incarnate in them, of which he does not
give one example. His instances of beliefs that the high gods are dead
notoriously contradict the prevalent belief that they are deathless.
And the prevalent belief regulates religion.

However, man-gods certainly die, and some South Sea Islanders--by a
scientific experiment--demonstrated that Captain Cook was no god,
because he died when stabbed, which a genuine god would not have
done. This, of course, proves that these benighted heathen knew the
difference between an immortal god and a deathly man as well as did
Anchises in the Homeric hymn to Aphrodite.


III. RELIGIOUS REGICIDE


Peoples who think that all the luck depends on their king-man-god (the
second sort, the superior sorcerer, with no god in him) hold, we are
to believe, that his luck and cosmic influence wane with his waning
forces. Therefore they kill him, and get a more vigorous recipient of
his _soul_ (not of a god) and of his luck.[29] Of king-killing for
this reason Mr. Eraser gives, I think, one adequate example. Of the
transmission of the soul of the slain divinity to his successor he 'has
no direct proof,' though souls of incarnating gods are transmitted
after natural deaths.[30]

Now this is a very important part of the long-drawn argument which is
to suggest that Christ died as a mock-king, who also represented a god.
First, we have seen that there are two kinds of man-god. In one kind a
real god, 'of an order different from and superior to man,' is supposed
to become incarnate. The other kind of man-god is only a superior
'sensitive' and sorcerer.[31]

Now Jesus, by Mr. Frazer's theory, died as representative of a god,
therefore as one of the first two kinds of man-gods. But Mr. Frazer
does not here, as I said, produce one solitary example of a man-god
proved to be of the first class--a king in whom an acknowledged god
is incarnate--being slain to prevent his inspiring god from waning
with the man's waning energies.[32] Many examples of that practice
are needed by the argument. I repeat that not one example is produced
in this place. Mr. Frazer's entire argument depends on his announced
failure to 'insist on' the distinction between two sorts of man-gods
which he himself has drawn.[33] So I keep on insisting.

Again, it can hardly be said that any examples are produced of a king
of the second sort (a man-god who is really no god at all, but a
'sensitive,' sorcerer, or magic-man) being slain to preserve the vigour
of his magic. The examples to be cited all but universally give no
proof of the idea of preserving man's _magical_ vigour from the decay
of old age.

The cases given, as a rule, are mere instances of superannuation. It
is possible (would that it were easy) to pension off aged professors
in the Scottish Universities. But to pension off a king merely means a
series of civil wars. The early middle ages 'tonsured' weak kings. How
tempting to represent this dedication of them to God as a mitigation of
sacrifice! Kings, in fact, among some barbaric races, are slain merely
by way of superannuation. Nay, the practice is not confined to kings.
It is usual among elderly subjects.[34]

Let us take Mr. Frazer's examples.[35]

1. A Congo people believe that the world would perish if their chitome,
or pontiff, died a natural death. So he was clubbed or strangled by
his successor. But what god is incarnate in the chitome? None is
mentioned.[36] The king himself 'is regarded as a god in earth, and all
powerful in heaven.'

2. The Ethiopian kings of Meroe were worshipped as gods, but were
ordered to die by the priests, on the authority of an alleged oracle
of the gods, 'whenever the priests chose.' That they first showed any
signs of decay 'we may conjecture.'[37] We have no evidence except that
the priests put an end to the king 'whenever they chose.' And, far
from alleging the king's decay or bad crops as the regular recognised
reason, they alleged a special oracle of the gods.

3. When the King of Unyoro, in Central Africa, is old, or very ill, his
_wives_ kill him (an obvious reason readily occurs: it is the wives,
not a god, who need a more spirited person), alleging an old prophecy
that the throne will pass from the dynasty if the king dies a natural
death. But it is not here shown that this king is a man-god of either
species; and the prophecy does not concern injury to a god, or to
magical _rapport_.[38]

4. The King of Kibanga, on the upper Congo, is killed by sorcerers
when he 'seems near his end.' So are old dogs and cats and horses in
this country, and peasants are even thought to provide euthanasia for
kinsfolk 'near their end.' If the King of Kibanga is a man-god, Mr.
Frazer does not say so.

5. If wounded in war the King of Gingero is killed by his comrades or
kinsfolk, even if he be reluctant. The reason alleged is 'that he may
not die by the hands of his enemies.' Did Saul, Brutus, and many other
warriors who refuse to survive wounds and defeat die as man-gods? Is
the King of Gingero a man-god?

6. Chaka, King of the Zulus, used hair-dye, having a great aversion to
grey hairs. The Zulus, a warlike people, would not elect, or accept, a
greyhaired king, and, though I know no instance of slaying a Zulu king
because he was old, Mr. Isaacs (1836) says that grey hair is 'always
followed by the death of the monarch.' Even if an historical example
were given, a warlike race merely superannuates a disabled war-leader
in the only safe way.

7. At last we reach a king-man-god in Sofala, who, according to Dos
Santos, was the only god of the Caffres, and was implored to give good
weather.[39] A modern Zulu told Dr. Callaway that 'when people say
the heaven is the chief's they do not believe what they say.'[40] The
Sofalese, or rather their neighbours, were perhaps more credulous; and
it appears to have been a custom or law among them that a blemished
king should kill himself, though a reforming prince denounced this as
insanity, and altered the law. We are told that the king-god of the
Sofalese was under this law, and a neighbouring king (who is nowhere
said to have been a man-god) was. But what god, if any, was incarnate
in this man-god, if he _was_ a man-god, like his neighbour?[41]

8. The Spartans were warned by an oracle against a lame king, as the
Mackenzies were warned by the Brahan seer against a set of physically
blemished lairds. The seer's prophecy was fulfilled.[42] We do not hear
that the Spartans Killed any lame king.

9. The King of the Eyeos is warned to kill himself, warned by a gift
of parrot's eggs, 'when the people have conceived an opinion of his
ill-government.' His wives strangle him, and his son succeeds, or did
so before 1774, when the King refused to die at the request of his
ministers. To make a case, it must be shown that the king was a man-god
of one or other variety. He is, in fact, merely king while popular,
'holding the reins of government no longer than whilst he merits the
approval of his people.'

10. The old Prussians were governed by a king called God's Mouth. 'If
he wanted to leave a good name behind,' when weak and ill he burned
himself to death, in front of a holy oak.

11. In Quilacare, in Southern India, the king cut himself to pieces,
before an idol, after a twelve years' reign. We are not told that he
was an incarnation of the god, if any, incorporated in, or represented
by, the idol.

12. The King of Calicut, on the Malabar coast, used to cut his
throat in public after a twelve years' reign. About 1680-1700 this
was commuted. If any man could cut his way through 30,000 or 40,000
guardsmen, to kill the king, he succeeded. Three men tried, but numbers
over-powered them. Other examples are given in which every regicide
might become king, if he could, like Macbeth. It was held, at Passier,
that God would not allow the king to be killed if he did not richly
deserve it. These kings are not said to incarnate gods.

13. Ibn Batuta once saw a man throw a rope into the air, and climb up
it. Another man followed and cut the first to pieces, which fell on
the ground, were reunited, and no harm done. This veracious traveller
also saw a man, at Java, kill himself for love of the Sultan, thereby
securing liberal pensions for his family, as his father and grandfather
had done before him. 'We may conjecture that formerly the Sultans of
Java, like the Kings of Quilacare and Calicut, were bound to cut their
own throats at the end of a fixed term of years,'[43] but that they
deputed the duty to one certain family. We _may_ conjecture, but,
considering the lack of evidence, and the stories that Ibn Batuta
freely tells, I doubt! Ibn, at the Court of Delhi, saw cups and dishes
I at a wish appear, and at a wish retire.' Did the Sultan of Java
incarnate a god?

14. This case is so extremely involved and hypothetical (it concerns
Sparta, where I never heard that the king was a man-god) that the
reader must be referred to the original.[44]

Meanwhile the list of instances is numerically respectable. But are
the instances to the point? Do they prove a practice of killing a
royal man-god, for the purpose of helping a god incarnate in him, or
even of preventing his magical power (or _mana_, in New Zealand) from
waning? They rather prove regicide as a form of superannuation, or as
the result of the machinations of priests, or of public discontent.
Above all, they do not demonstrate that the king is ever killed as an
incarnation of a deity who needs a sturdier person to be incarnate in.

So recalcitrant is the evidence, that of all Mr. Frazer's kings who are
here said to be gods, or to incarnate gods, not one is here said to be
put to death by his worshippers.[45] And of all his kings who are here
said to be put to death, not one is here said to incarnate a god.[46]
Such are the initial difficulties of the theory: to which we may add
that elderly men are notoriously killed by many savages just because
they are elderly, whether they are kings or commoners.

Mr. Frazer's point is that Christ died in 'a halo of divinity,'
visible 'wherever men had heard the old, old story of the dying and
rising god.'[47] But, apart from other objections already urged, Mr.
Frazer's present instances do not contain one example of a 'dying and
rising god,' stated to be represented by a living man who is therefore
killed; even if there are one or two cases of a slain king who is a
medicine-man, sorcerer, or cosmic sensitive. Thus the argument fails
from the first. Christ is to be reckoned divine as representing a king
who was killed as an incarnation of a god. But of regicide for this
reason no proof is afforded, as far as I can see.


IV. ANNUAL RELIGIOUS REGICIDE


Next we arrive at an absolutely necessary hypothesis, which I find it
difficult to accept. 'In some places it appears that the people could
not trust the king to remain in full mental and bodily vigour for more
than a year; hence at the end of a year's reign he was put to death,
and a new king appointed to reign in his turn a year, and suffer death
at the end of it.... When the time drew near for the king to be put
to death (in Babylon this appears to have been at the end of a single
year's reign), he abdicated for a few days, during which a temporary
king reigned and suffered in his stead.'[48]

Later we read of 'the time when the real king used to redeem his own
life by deputing his son to reign for a short time and die in his
stead.'[49]

The hypothesis is, then, that at Babylon the king used to be sacrificed
once a year. Later he appointed a son, or some other member of the
royal family, or some one else, to die for him, while, last of all, a
criminal was chosen.

Is not this a startling hypothesis? Yet on it the whole argument
about the Divinity of Christ depends. Mr. Frazer overestimates human
ambition. We wonder that Moray, Lennox, and Morton pined to be Regents
of Scotland. Yet at least they had a faint chance of escaping death
within the year. But the kings of Babylon had no chance: they were
sacrificed annually. Mr. Frazer asks us to suppose that any men of
royal race, anywhere, men free and noble, not captives, not condemned
criminals, would accept a crown, followed, in 365 days, by a death of
fire! A child knows that no men have ever acted in this way. Even if
they were so incredibly unlike all other human beings as to choose a
year's royalty, followed by burning to death, how was the succession
regulated? Even the primitive Arunta, naked savages in Central
Australia, have a kind of magistrate, merely a convener, called the
Alatunja, 'the head man of a local totemic group.' He is an hereditary
official, inheriting in the male line.[50] Does any one believe that a
poor black man would accept the Alatunjaship if he knew he was to be
roasted, and so die, at the end of a year? Now the Babylonians (or
rather the Persians) were infinitely more civilised than the Arunta.
Their kings were hereditary kings. How, then, would Mr. Frazer's system
work? The king is sacrificed; his eldest son succeeds; is sacrificed
next year; they soon work through the royal family. Thus, in Scotland,
Darnley is sacrificed (1567). Next year you sacrifice the baby, James
VI. Next year you begin on the Hamiltons. Chatelherault lasts a year:
then Arran, then Lord John, then Lord Claude. Beginning in 1567 you
work out that result in 1572. Then you start on the Lennox Stewarts.
You have Lennox offered up in 1573, his son Charles in 1574, and by
the end of the century you have exhausted the female and illegitimate
branches of the royal family. You can only sacrifice males, and these
must be adults, for each sacrificed man, by Mr. Frazer's theory, has to
consort before his death with a lady, probably 'a sacred harlot.'[51]

Mr. Frazer perhaps will say 'these Babylonian kings were polygamous,
and had large families of sons.' But think of the situation! When the
king comes to providing a son as a substitute, to reign for a few days
and be sacrificed in his stead, he may be a young king, just married.
Even if he could count on a male baby, or a score of them, annually,
they would be of no use: they could not consort with the sacred harlot,
which is indispensable.[52] So, after the young king is sacrificed,
we are in a quandary. We must overlook primogeniture, and begin
sacrificing the king's brothers; they will not last long; we fall back
on the cousins. Soon we need a new dynasty. Now no government could be
carried on in the circumstances imagined by Mr. Frazer. The country
would not stand it. No individual king would ever accept the crown.
Human beings never had such a preposterous institution. But, if they
had not, Mr. Frazer's whole theory of the Crucifixion is baseless, for
it all hangs on the yearly sacrifice of the divine king in Babylon.
Where there is no historical evidence of annual regicide, we must
appeal to our general knowledge of human nature. The reply is that
the thing is impossible. Moreover, that sacrifice is wholly without
evidence.

The only reason for believing that the kings of the great Babylonian
Empire, or even the kings of Babylon when it may have been a small
autonomous town, were sacrificed once a year, is the faint testimony
existing to show that once a year at a Persian feast a mock-king was
hanged. To account for that _hanging_ Mr. Frazer has to invent the
hypothesis that real kings, in olden times, were annually _sacrificed_.
The only corroboration of actual fact is in the savage instances of
king killing, _not_ annual, which we have explained as, in most cases,
a rude form of superannuation; in no case as certainly the deliverance
of a recognised god incarnate in the king There are also instances
in folklore of yearly mock executions of a king of the May, or the
like, and a dubious case in Lower Mœsia. These do not prove annual
sacrifices of actual kings in the past, if they prove any sacrifice
at all. In these circumstances, I venture to hold, science requires
us, if we must explain the alleged yearly hanging of a mock-king at
Babylon, to look for a theory, an hypothesis, which does not contradict
all that we know of human nature. For all of human nature that we
know is contradicted by the fancy that the kings of Babylon were
once sacrificed annually. I shall later produce a theory which, at
least, does not run counter to the very nature of man, and so far is
legitimate and scientific.

Mr. Frazer says that his theory 'will hardly appear extravagant or
improbable' when we remember that, in Ngoio, the chief who puts on the
cap of royalty one day is, by the rule, killed the next day.[53] So
nobody puts on the cap. And nobody would have put on the Babylonian
crown under the condition of being roasted to death at the end of the
year.

If the theory were correct, the king incarnating a god would be slain
yearly. But he would not like that, and would procure a substitute,
who would yearly be slain (_a_) as a proxy of the king, or (_b_) as
the god of vegetation, incarnate in the king, or as both. Yet, I
repeat, not a single instance has been given of a king who is slain for
magico-religious reasons, and who is also the incarnation of any god
whatever. The slain kings in the instances produced were, as a rule,
superannuated because they were old, or got rid of because they were
unpopular, or because a clerical cabal desired their destruction, or
for some other reason: at most, and rarely, because they were outworn
'sensitives.' We know scores of cases of god-possessed men, but none
are killed because they are god-possessed.

The argument has thus made no approach to Mr. Frazer's theory of the
origin of the belief in the divine character of Christ and of his
doctrine.

At this point Mr. Frazer's theory turns from god-mankings slain to
preserve their _mana_, or cosmic _rapport_, to persons who suffer for
these kings. Not one single historical proof that there ever was such
a custom is adduced. All is a matter of inference and conjecture.
There is, we saw, a region Ngoio, in Congo, where the throne is
perpetually vacant, because whoever occupied it was killed the day
after coronation day--no substitute is suggested, and no one sits in
the Siege Perilous.[54] There are cases of 'temporary kings,' as King
February, for three days in Cambodia--the temporary king being of a
cadet branch of the royal family. He is not killed. In Siam a temporary
king for three days conducted a _quête,_ or jocular pillaging, like our
Robin Hood in Scotland. This is an example of the _Period of Licence_
when law is in abeyance, and the importance of this period we shall
later prove. The mock-king also ploughed nine furrows, and stood later
with his right foot on his left knee. He did the same thing on a later
occasion, and omens were drawn from his steadiness; he was supposed,
if firm, to conquer evil spirits, and had another _quête_. In Upper
Egypt a king of unreason for three days holds mock tribunals, then is
condemned, and his 'shell' is burned; probably, as I shall show, to
mean that 'the gambol has been shown' and is over.[55] There are two
or three similar cases, and Mr. Frazer suggests that the mock-king is
invested with the 'divine or magical functions' of the real king. But
the local Pacha, on the Nile, has no such functions, and his august
representative wears 'a tall fool's cap.' None are put to death: the
Upper Egyptian case alone and dimly, if at all, suggests the proxy
supposed (as in Ibn Batuta's tale interpreted by Mr. Frazer) to die for
the king.

Next we approach instances of sons of kings who are sacrificed, but
these are cases of sin offerings (as when the King of Moab sacrificed
his son on the wall), and, even if the lads were substitutes for
their royal fathers, there is no presumption raised that the fathers
were habitually killed year by year, to keep their cosmic _rapport_
unimpaired, or to release the god incarnate within them, a custom of
which I find no example at all.

One instance of what he conjectures to be a proxy sacrifice for a king
Mr. Frazer finds in a festival at Babylon called the Sacæa.[56] To this
we return in due order. We must first examine cases of similar customs,
or inferred customs, in Greece and Borne.

Meanwhile we hope to have shown that Mr. Frazer's theory of the origin
of the belief in the Divinity of Christ already rests on three scarcely
legitimate hypotheses. First, there is the hypothesis that kings were
slain to release a known deity, incarnate in them, and to provide a
better human vehicle. Of this rite no instances were given. Next, there
is the hypothesis that the King of Babylon was annually sacrificed, and
succeeded by a new king, who was sacrificed at the end of the year.
Historical evidence does not exist, and the supposed custom is beyond
belief. Thirdly, we are to believe in proxies or substitutes who die
annually for the king. Of this practice no actual example is adduced.

Here, perhaps, the reader may be invited to ask himself whether he
believes that there ever was, anywhere, a custom of yearly killing the
king, the head of the state. If he cannot believe this, in the entire
lack of proof, he may admire the faith which can move this mountain
in the interests of Mr. Frazer's conclusions. For my part I may say
that I was so hypnotised, after first reading through the long roll of
Mr. Frazer's 'sad stories of the deaths of kings,' that I could only
murmur 'But there is no historical evidence for the yearly Babylonian,
or rather Persian, regicides.' Then I woke out of the hypnotic trance;
I shook off the drowsy spell of suggestion, and exclaimed 'The king is
killed _annually_!' Next, I asked myself whether mortal men would take
the crown, and how the arrangement would work, and, alas! it was my
belief in Mr. Frazer's theory that was shattered.

But the 'general reader,' perusing an argument of 1,400 pages, may
fall under the hypnotic spell of numerous 'cases,' though none are to
the point, and may accept an hypothesis, however violently opposed
to his knowledge of human nature. To that test we are, in a case
like this, compelled to appeal, however little we may value 'common
sense' in other fields of speculation. Ours is the field of normal
human nature, motive, and action, in which every man may be a judge.
I cannot but think that the author of the theory would have been
stopped by considerations so obvious and obstacles so insuperable.
But first he had the remote analogy of the Aztec war-prisoner who
personated a god, and to a god was sacrificed. That example is of no
real service: the man was a captive and could not help himself; he was
not King of Anahuac. Moreover, he was sacrificed: he was not put to a
death of special shame. Again, there was the Saturnian victim, if we
believe the legend about to be narrated. But he too was sacrificed:
he was not stripped, scourged, and hanged. Our author, however, was
fascinated by the Cross at the end of the long vista of the argument.
In place, therefore, of seeking, or at least in place of finding, a
simple explanation of the Persian custom, or leaving it unexplained,
he accepted the impossibility of the annual regicide at Babylon, and
was launched into a new wilderness of conjectures and inferences to
explain the absence, in the Persian case, of sacrifice and religion,
the presence of a merrymaking and a hanging.


V. THE SATURNALIA


We are next to look for an historical case of the yearly sacrifice,
not of a king, but of a mock-king. The argument thus carries us to
the Roman feast of the Saturnalia. This festival (in late times held
in December, 16-23) so closely resembled our Christmas in jollity,
that Pliny (like some of us) used to withdraw to the most retired
room in his Laurentine villa to escape the noise. Mr. Frazer does not
remark the circumstance, but in Rome before the Empire, or earlier,
the Saturnalia seem to have been a feast of one day only. 'Among our
ancestors,' says Macrobius, 'the Saturnalia were completed in a single
day,' though he does not seem very certain of his fact. Livy says:
'The Saturnalia were instituted as a festal day.'[57] After the time
of Caligula, the Saturnalia endured for five days, 'precisely like the
feast of the Sacæa at Babylon,' of which we are fated to hear a great
deal.[58]

It would thus appear that the Saturnalia were originally a feast of
one day, later lengthened to five days, and again to seven days. By
the time of writers like Lucian and Martial the feast continued for
a week, and Lucian represents Cronos (Saturn) as a jolly old king of
unreason.[59] The rich helped the poor, people made presents to each
other, 'a Christmas carol philosophy,' as Dickens calls it, prevailed.
The masters served the slaves at table; all was licence and riot. Wax
candles were given as presents (_cerea_), like those on our Christmas
trees. These _cerea_, according to Macrobius, were thought by some
antiquaries to be substitutes for human sacrifices. Originally, it was
said, the Pelasgi, before migrating to Italy, received an oracle from
Dodona:

    Τῷ πατρί πέμπετε Φῶτα

'Send a man to the Father,' that is, to the god Cronos or, in Italy,
Saturn. But, by a pun on the Greek _Φῶτα_, they were induced to
substitute lights, the wax candles.[60]

Now it is a really astonishing thing that, if actual human sacrifices
were offered after our era, at the Saturnalia, no Roman antiquary
(and there were plenty of antiquaries) should mention the fact, while
discussing the theory that _cerea_ were commutations of sacrifice. If,
now and then, under the Empire a survival or recrudescence of human
sacrifice was heard of in a rural district, the antiquaries would catch
at it greedily, as a proof that wax tapers really were commutations
of human sacrifice, which some doubted. That rural recrudescences do
occur we know from the recent case of burning an Irish peasant woman to
death, to deliver her from a fairy.[61]

Mr. Frazer, however, believes that survivals of human sacrifices at the
Saturnalia did really occur. He is 'tempted to surmise' that the king
of the revels (who answered to our 'Twelfth Night' 'King' or 'Queen of
the Bean') 'may have originally personated Saturn himself.'[62] In the
following page we read that the victim 'cut his own throat on the altar
of the god whom he personated.' The only known or alleged instance of
human sacrifice at the Saturnalia follows.

In A.D. 303, when the persecution under Diocletian began, one Dasius,
a Christian soldier, in Lower Mœsia, is said to have been the victim
whom the soldiers yearly chose for the mock-king of a _month_, not a
week, the Saturn of the occasion. Why a month, if the ancient feast
lasted but a day, and, later, but a week? After being a merry monarch
for thirty days, he should have cut his own throat at the altar of
Saturn (_Κρόνος_, in the Greek MSS.).[63] Dasius declined the crown
and was knocked on the head, on November 20, by a soldier, apparently
a christened man, named John. The Saturnalia at Rome lasted (at least
under the Empire) from December 16 to December 23. Dasius must have
been executed for his refusal, announced before his _month's_ reign
(only a week is elsewhere known) should have begun--on November 23;
if the regnal month ended on December 23. Thus the festive Saturnalian
kings at Rome may be guessed to descend from a custom, at Rome unknown,
but surviving among the soldiers, of killing a mock-king Saturnus.
Dasius was no slave or criminal, but himself a soldier. The revels of
a month, in place of a day or a week, must also, one presumes, be a
survival, though a day was the early limit. The date of the MSS. about
Dasius Mr. Frazer does not give, but he thinks that the longest MS. is
'probably based on official documents.' To the MSS. I shall return.

The grotesque figure of Carnival, destroyed at the end of a modern
Roman feast which does not fall in December, is also a survival of a
slain mock-king 'who personated Saturn,' so Mr. Frazer suggests, though
in ancient Rome even this carnival practice is to us unknown.[64]

It will already have been observed that even if the Romans were, in
some remote age, wont yearly to sacrifice a mock-king who represented
a god, they did not do so at Easter, as in the case of Christ, did not
do so in spring, and did not scourge the victim. Their rite, if it
really corresponded to that of the soldiers who slew Dasius, began
in November, and ended in December, lasting thirty days, or, _teste
Macrobio_, originally lasting one day. If the slaying of Dasius really
occurred, and was a survival of a custom once prevalent (as in ancient
Anahuac), then the early Saturnalia lasted for a month, from November
23 to December 23; but Roman antiquaries knew nothing of this. The
month date is remote indeed from Easter, so Mr. Frazer must try to show
that originally the Saturnalia were a spring festival, like carnival.

To make the carnival and Saturnalia coincide, Mr. Frazer points out
that 'if the Saturnalia, like many other seasons of licence, was always
observed at the end of the old year or the beginning of the new one,
it must, like the carnival, have been originally held in February
or March, at the time when March was the first month of the Roman
year.'[65] Thus, in conservative rural districts, the Saturnalia would
continue to be held in February, not, as at Rome, in December, though
Roman writers do not tell us so, and though non-Roman pagan peoples
held festival at the winter solstice. The soldiers who killed poor
Dasius were ultra-conservative, but they killed him in November, when
their month of Saturnalia began, not in February, when, as they held by
old usage, their Saturnalia should have been kept. The hypothesis may
be stated thus:

1. In rural districts 'the older and sterner practice' of murder may
long have survived.[66]

2. In rural districts the Saturnalia continued to be held in
February-March, not in December.[67]

3. Therefore the soldiers, who kept up 'the older and sterner practice'
of remote districts where the Saturnalia fell in February-March, killed
Dasius--in November!

4. Meanwhile, so wedded were the rural districts to Saturnalia in
February-March, that the feast continued in these months under the
Church and became our carnival.

5. The eclectic soldiers in Lower Mœsia kept up the _old_ killing and
full month of revelry (though we never hear of a full month in older or
later Rome), but they accepted the _new_ date, November (not kept in
Rome) and December; though in their remote rural homes the Saturnalia
were in February-March. Doubtless their officers insisted on the new
official date, while permitting the old month of revel and the human
sacrifice. Yet, apparently, of old there was but one day of revel.

But is the story of St. Dasius a true story? The editor and discoverer
of the Greek text in which the legend occurs at full length, Professor
Franz Cumont of Ghent, at first held that as far as the sacrifice
of the military mock-king goes the story is false. I have already
observed that Mr. Frazer says nothing about the date of the Greek
MS. containing the longest legend of Dasius. M. Cumont does. The MS.
is of the eleventh century of our era, and the original narrative,
he thinks, was done into Greek out of the Latin, which may have been
based on official documents, before the end of the seventh century[68]
A.D., by some one who knew Latin ill, wrote execrable Greek, did not
understand his subject, and was far from scrupulous. These sentiments
of M. Cumont 'set in a new and lurid light'--as Mr. Frazer says of
something else---the only evidence for the yearly military sacrifice
of a mock-king of the Saturnalia. Our author was unscrupulous, for he
makes Dasius profess the Nicene Creed before it was made. As to the
thirty days' revel, M. Cumont supposes _that_ to be a blunder of our
author, who did not know that the Saturnalia only occupied a week.[69]
M. Cumont held that the king of the feast had not to slay himself, but
only to sacrifice to Saturn; in fact, Bassus, his commanding officer,
does ask him, in the legend, to 'sacrifice to our gods, whom even the
barbarians worship.' Dasius, the MS. says, refused, and was knocked on
the head by a soldier named John. 'John' was likely to be a Christian,
and M. Cumont suggests that the ignorant translator of the Latin took
'sepultus est' ('he was buried' by a soldier named John) for 'pulsus,'
or 'depulsus est,' 'he was knocked on the head' (_ἐκρούσθη._) In
fact the Greek translator of the seventh century retouched his Latin
original _à plaisir_. Human sacrifices, says M. Cumont, had been
abolished since Hadrian's time. The soldiers, if they sacrificed a
mock-king, broke an imperial edict.[70]

Our evidence then would seem, if M. Cumont is right, to be that of an
unfaithful and not very scrupulous translator and embellisher of a
Latin text. He informs us by the way that similar noisy performances
went on in his own Christian period, not in December, but on New
Year's Day. The Saturnalia were thus pushed on a week from December
23; we do not learn that they were transferred to, or retained at,
February-March. The moral lesson of the legend is that we must not be
noisy on New Year's Day.

Thus M. Cumont did not at first accept the evidence for the annual
sacrifice of a mock-king representing the god Saturn. But M. Parmentier
suggested that an old cruel rite might have been introduced by Oriental
soldiers into Mœsia (303 A.D.) thanks to the licensed ferocity of the
persecutions under Diocletian. The victim, Dasius, was a Christian,
and the author of his legend told the tale to illustrate the sin of
revelry on New Year's Day. But what led to the revival of the cruelty?
M. Parmentier quoted the story of our Babylonian festival, the Sacæa,
in which a mock-king was scourged and slain. This or a similar rite
the Roman legions finally confused with their own Saturnalia, both as
to date and as to characteristics. The Oriental soldiers of the Roman
Empire imported into the army this Oriental feast and sacrifice: just
as they brought monuments of Mithra-worship into Mœsia. In an hour of
military licence and of persecution, the cohorts in Mœsia may actually
have tried to sacrifice a Christian private as a representative of King
Saturn.

So far the sacrifice is an Asiatic importation, not a Roman survival.
But M. Cumont, after reading M. Parmentier, returned from his disbelief
in the veracity of the Dasius legend. He thought that the extension of
the Saturnalia from one day to five days, after Caligula, might be due
to an imitation introduced by Eastern slaves in Rome (an influential
class) of the five days' feast of the Babylonian Sacæa. But thirty
days, as in Mœsia, are not five days. He also inclined to accept
the recently proposed identification of the Sacæa with a really old
Babylonian feast called _Zagmuk_, or Zakmuk, and with the Jewish Purim,
an identification which we shall later criticise. As to the imperial
edict forbidding human sacrifice, M. Cumont now suggested that it
had become a dead letter and impotent. In the general decadence of
303 monstrous cruelties flourished, and the Saturnalia were marked
by gladiatorial combats. Thus, in remote Mœsia, the half Oriental
soldiery might really sacrifice a Christian 'for the safety of his
comrades under arms.'

So far the sacrifice of Dasius looks rather like a cruelty introduced
into decadent Rome, and at the good-humoured Saturnalia, by Oriental
legionaries, than like a Roman survival or recrudescence of a regular
original feature of the Saturnalia. In any case the stripping and
scourging of the Sacæan mock-king, his hanging, and his simulated
resurrection (at which we shall find Mr. Frazer making a guess) are
absent, while the date of the alleged transaction (November-December)
does not tally with Purim, or Eastertide, or the date of the Sacæa.
The duration of the Dasius feast, thirty days, is neither Roman nor
Oriental. Thus, far from illuminating the Oriental practice, the rite
reported in Mœsia does but make the problem more perplexing. The
evidence has all the faults possible, and the conjecture that the Greek
writer invented the sacrifice, to throw discredit on the New Year
revels of his contemporaries, may be worth considering.

Perhaps I may hint that I think the historical evidence of the author
of the Dasius legend so extremely dubious that I might have expected
Mr. Frazer to offer a criticism of its character. The general reader
can gather from the 'Golden Bough' no idea of the tenuity of the
testimony, which, of course, is at once visible to readers of French
and Greek. We address ourselves to scholars, and for scholars Mr.
Frazer has provided the necessary citations, but my heart inclines to
regard the needs of the general reader. (Cf. 'Man,' May 1901, No. 53.)


VI. THE GREEK CRONIA


From Rome we turn to Greece. Cronos, in Greece, answered, more or less,
to Saturn in Rome, though how much of the resemblance is due to Roman
varnishing with Greek myth I need not here discuss. Now the Athenian
festival of Cronos fell neither in November, December, February,
nor March, but in July.[71] Therefore Mr Frazer needs to guess that
the July feasts of Cronos were once, or may have been, a spring
festival, like the carnival and like the Saturnalia, which (by another
hypothesis) were _originally_ in February or March, though of this we
have no proof. Indeed, it is contrary to use and wont for a populace
to alter a venerable folk-festival because of an official change in
the calendar. If the Romans for unknown ages had kept the Saturnalia
in spring they would not move the date of their gaieties, and cut off
three weeks (or twenty-nine days) of their duration, because the new
year was shifted from March to January. In Scotland, all through the
Middle Ages and much later, the year began in March. But Yule was not
shifted into March: it remained, and remains, like the Saturnalia, at
the winter solstice.

As proof that the Attic feast of Cronos (supposed to answer to the
Saturnalia) was originally in spring, not in July, Mr. Frazer writes:
'A cake with twelve knobs, which perhaps referred to the twelve months
of the year, was offered to Cronos by the Athenians on the fifteenth
day of the month Elaphebolion, which corresponded roughly to March,
and there are traces of a licence accorded to slaves at the Dionysiac
festival of the opening of the wine jars,' in the month of flowers
preceding.[72] It was a proper season for licence.

The possible meaning of the cake does not go for much, and Cronos is
not Dionysus. There was a spring festival of Cronos at Olympia, and
Aug. Mommsen thinks that the Athenian Cronos feast was originally
vernal, though Athenian tradition thought it was a harvest feast.[73]

The Attic customs, then, do not suit Mr. Frazer's argument. But he
has another Greek instance. Sacrificers called 'kings' offered to
Cronos, at Olympia, in spring, and why should they not once have been
sacrificed like Dasius, only in spring, not in November? This evidence
is an inference from a presumed survival of human sacrifice to Cronos,
who certainly received many such offerings.

We are not told, we do not know why the Athenian Cronia were shifted
from March to July, or when, but let no arbitrary proceedings of the
kind prevent them from being equated with the Saturnalia, only known to
us, in fact, as a December festival, not as a vernal rejoicing. It is
singularly unlucky that the July date of the Athenian Cronia does tally
with the June-July date of the Persian Sacæa, as given by Mr. Frazer
(and probably given correctly) in his second volume.[74] But in his
third volume he awakes to the desirableness of placing the Sacæa about
Eastertide, not in July, and so loses any benefit which his argument
might have acquired from the coincidence in date of the Attic harvest
feast (Cronia) and the Persian that date is originally established.[75]

How deeply this is to be regretted we shall see later, for periods of
licence like the Sacæa usually occur just after harvest, the real time
of the Cronia. Liberty to slaves of feasting with their masters was a
feature of the harvest Cronia, as of many other harvest rejoicings.[76]
But the conjecture that the Cronia originally were a vernal feast
removes them from such merrymakings of harvest licence as the Sacæa
in June-July. On the other hand, the conjecture that the Sacæa were
vernal brings them into touch with Eastertide, and with the other
conjecture that kings were once sacrificed at the conjecturally vernal
Cronia, and so has its value for Mr. Frazer's argument.


VII. THE SACÆA


We are still trying to find an historical case of a man who is
sacrificed in the character of a god and a king. The argument next
introduces us to the Sacæa at Babylon, when the mock-king was hanged,
the Persian feast, which, as we saw, M. Parmentier, following Herr
Meissner, is inclined to identify with the ancient Babylonian Zagmuk,
or Zakmuk, and with the Jewish Purim.

This identification, this theory that Zakmuk, Sacæa, and the Jewish
Purim are all the same feast, is essential to Mr. Frazer's theory.
But, before his theory was published, Meyer, in the new volume of
his 'History of Antiquity,' had declared that the identification is
impossible, philologically and as a matter of fact (_Geschichte des
Alterthums_). It would be interesting to know the meaning of the
word Sacæa, or _Sacea_, or _Sakia_, which Hyde translates 'convivial
drinking, drinking healths' (_compotatio, propinatio_).[77] We remember
the Persian butler, called a _Sáki_, in Omar Khayyam:

    The eternal _Sáki_ from the bowl has poured
    Myriads of other bubbles, and will pour.

If the wine-pourer, the _Sáki_, of Omar is etymologically connected
with the Sakæa, or Sacæa, then the feast means a wine-party. The
Greeks, however, connected the Sacæa with the Sacæ, an Oriental tribe
of the great race stretching from the Black Sea to Dacia. Indeed, in
Strabo's time, the feasters at the Sacæa dressed as Scythians (Sacæ)
and drank, as Horace tells us that the Scythians were used to drink.
This occurred at Zela, a town of Pontus, where a love goddess, in
Persian Anaitis, of the type of the Babylonian Ishtar, was adored. Mr.
Frazer even conjectures that her high priest, or a substitute, 'who
played the King of the Sacæa,' was yearly sacrificed here, perhaps as
Tammuz.[78] No record of the fact has reached us.

The interesting point about this derivation of Sacæa from the tribe of
the Sacæ is that the festival was believed, says Strabo, to commemorate
a great victory of the Persians over the Sacæ. In precisely the same
way the Persian feast of the Magophonia was supposed to commemorate
a victory over and massacre of the Magi.[79] Purim, again, was held
to commemorate a triumph of the Jews over the Persians and a massacre
of the Persians. In three cases, then, Sacæa, Magophonia, and Purim,
a feast which was a secular drinking bout, preserve the memory of
a bloody victory. I do not observe that Mr. Frazer notices this
coincidence.

But manifestly this kind of feast is not a feast of the death of a
mock-king, still less, if possible, a religious festival of the death
and resurrection of a vernal god.[80] Yet there really was (if we
accept rather poor evidence) _not_ a sacrifice but an execution of a
mock-king, a criminal, at the Sacæa, as held in Babylon. I quote our
authorities. First comes Athenæus, who is writing about feasts of
unreason, at which, in various regions, the slaves are waited upon by
their masters.[81] He says nothing of the execution of a mock-king. He
remarks: 'Berosus, in the first book of his "History of Babylon," says
that on the sixteenth day of the month Lous there is a great festival
celebrated at Babylon, which is called _Sakeas_, and it lasts five
days; and during these days it is the custom for the masters to be
under the orders of their slaves, and one of the slaves puts on a robe
like the king's, being called _Zoganes_, and is master of the house.
And Ctesias also mentions this festival in the second book of his
"History of Persia."' (Ctesias nourished rather earlier than Berosus,
who is about 200 B.C.)

Thus Athenæus is silent about the execution of a mock-king, though
doubtless he had the book of Berosus before him. And Dio Chrysostom,
who does speak of the execution, and he alone does so, says nothing
about Berosus, or any other authority. I cite the observations of Dio
Chrysostom. He puts them into the mouth of the cynic, Diogenes, who
is lecturing Alexander the Great, to tame his pride; and who tells
illustrative anecdotes, some of them absurd, much as Mr. Barlow was
used to instruct Masters Harry Sandford and Tommy Merton. Dio, then,
makes Diogenes say that at the Sacæa 'they take one of the prisoners
condemned to death and seat him upon the king's throne, and give him
the king's raiment, and let him lord it and drink, and run riot and use
the king's concubines during these days, and no man prevents him from
doing just what he likes. But afterwards they strip, and scourge, and
crucify (or hang, _ἐκρέμασαν_) him.'[82] He dies, not as a victim, by
sacrifice, but as a criminal, by a cruel and degrading form of capital
punishment.[83] According to Dio any condemned criminal would serve
the turn. But Mr. Frazer suggests that perhaps the profession of victim
was hereditary.[84]

Such is the story which Dio makes Diogenes tell Alexander, in a
humorous apologue against royal pride. 'You will soon be growing a
crest like a cock,' says Diogenes in Dio's essay. I cannot think that
evidence found only in a literary _tour de force_, and put into the
mouth of a professed humourist, proves historically that the mock-king
was actually hanged once a year, at a feast described by Athenæus,
Strabo, and Hesychius, who never mention so strange an affair as the
hanging. The reader will not find that Mr. Frazer suggests all these
doubts. Indeed, the student who avoids footnotes will believe that the
tale of the hanging is 'according to the historian Berosus, who, as a
Babylonian priest, spoke with ample knowledge.'[85]

Now, granting that there really was a yearly execution at Babylon of
a criminal, a mock-king, why was he put to death? We know what Mr.
Frazer's theory needs. It needs historical examples of men who, by
being sacrificed as victims, obtain a divine character, as representing
the god to whom they are sacrificed. The theory also demands that these
victims shall be arrayed and crowned as kings. It is desirable, too,
that they should perish about our Eastertide, and that they should be
supposed to rise again. The solitary example of a Saturnalian victim
in Mœsia did not fulfil these conditions. He was arrayed as a king,
indeed, and was sacrificed, if we believe the legend of St. Dasius; but
he was not stripped and scourged, and he died, not at Easter, but in
November: if he had not refused the part thrust on him he would have
died in December. There was no word about his resurrection. It was
found necessary to suggest that originally the Saturnalian victim died
in February-March, but this was not proved.

The other historical case, the mock-king of the Sacæa, also does not
fulfil the conditions required. He is robed, and crowned, and scourged,
but he is not sacrificed. We have no hint of a resurrection; none
of a religious character attaching to the feast; none of a divine
character attaching to the victim. The feast is traditionally a revel
commemorative of a victory: the victim is a condemned criminal. As to
the date of the death, Mr. Frazer has two contradictory theories. By
the first (which is correct) the victim died probably in June-July (if
not, certainly in September). By the second, the month date of the
death is fixed (provisionally) in March-April. Let me add that, to suit
Mr. Frazer's theory, the victim must not only have been divine at the
origin of the institution, but must have been recognised as divine at
the time of the Crucifixion of our Lord: otherwise our Lord's death, in
the character of the victim, could lend him no 'halo of divinity.'



[1] Spencer and Gillen, _Natives of Central Australia_..

[2] _G. B_. i. 80, 81.

[3] _G. B_. ii. 81.

[4] _Etudes Traditionistes_. A. L.

[5] _G. B_. i. 157.

[6] _G. B_. ii. 1-5.

[7] _Modern Mythology_, 'Myths of the Origin of Death.'

[8] Spencer and Gillen, p. 476.

[9] Mariner, ii. 127.

[10] _Making of Religion_, chapters xi.-xiii.

[11] _G. B_. ii. 1.

[12] _Prim. Cult_. ii. 308, 1871; ii. 340, 1873. In the edition of
1891, Mr. Tylor, in accordance with his altered ideas, dropped his
denial of borrowing, and said that Torngarsuk was later identified with
the devil--a common result of missionary teaching, just as Saints under
Protestantism became, or their statues became, 'idols.'

[13] _G. B_. ii. 1. Meiners, _Geschichte der Religionen_, Hanover,
1806, 1807, i. p. 48.

[14] E. I. Dodge, _Our Wild Indians_, p. 112.

[15] "Le Jeune", _Relations des Jésuites_, 1633, p. 16; 1634, p. 13.

[16] Callaway, _Religion of the Amazulu_, pp. 26, 27.

[17] Thevet, _Singularités de la France Antarctique_, ch. 77. Paris,
1855. Andouagni is a creator, not addressed in prayer. See 'Science and
Superstition,' pp. 10, 11.

[18] Hymns in Maspero, _Music de Boulaq_, pp. 49, 50.

[19] _Religion of Babylon and Assyria_, p. 483.

[20] _G. B_. iii. 198.

[21] _G. B_. ii. 3, 4, citing L. W. King, _Babylonian Religion and
Mythology,_ p. 8 (1899).

[22] _G. B_. iii. 154.

[23] Jastrow, _The Religion of Babylonia and Assyria_, p. 307. Boston,
U.S., 1898.

[24] Jastrow, p. 311.

[25] _G. B_. ii. 2.

[26] _G. B_. i. 77.

[27] _G. B_. i. 77, 78.

[28] _G. B_. ii. 1.

[29] _G. B_. ii. 6.

[30] _G. B_. ii. 56; i. 151 _et. seq._

[31] _G. B_. i. 80-82.

[32] The mortals who incarnate gods are catalogued in _G. B_. vol. i.
pp. 139-157. Not one is said to be put to death.

[33] _G. B_. i. 80, 81.

[34] _G. B_. ii. 6-8.

[35] _G. B_. ii. 8-57.

[36] _G. B_. i. 236.

[37] _G. B_. ii. 11.

[38] _Emin Pasha in Central Africa_, p. 91.

[39] _G. B_. i. 155; compare ii. 10.

[40] Callaway, _Religion of the Amazulu_, p. 122.

[41] Here the facts of Dos Santos are confused. In volume i. p. 155 we
read: 'The King of Quiteva, in Eastern Africa, ranks with the deity;'
'indeed, the Caffres acknowledge no other gods than their monarch,
and to him they address those prayers which other nations are wont to
prefer to heaven' (Dos Santos, Pinkerton, xvi. 682, 687, _seq_.). If
the Caffres have no gods, a god cannot be incarnate in their king. But,
elsewhere in Dos Santos (ii. p. 10), there is no 'King of Quiteva' (as
in i. p. 155). Quiteva is no longer a district, but we read 'contiguous
to the domains of the Quiteva;' a title like 'the Inca,' in fact, as
Dos Santos tells us the Quiteva is 'the King of Sofala.' Is Sofala also
known as Quiteva, and the King of Sofala as 'the Quiteva'? The King
of Quiteva 'ranks with the deity'--though the Caffres have no deity
for him to rank with (ii. 155). But when the Quiteva becomes 'King of
Sofala' (ii. 10), the neighbouring prince who kills himself is 'the
Sedanda,' who is not said to 'rank with the deity.' And Dos Santos
assures us that the Caffres _have_ a God, unworshipped!

[42] _Prophecies of the Brahan Seer_, Mackay, Stirling, 1900.

[43] _G. B_. ii. 18.

[44] _G. B_. ii. 18-24.

[45] _G. B_. i. 139-157.

[46] _G. B_. ii. 8-24.

[47] _G. B_. iii. 197.

[48] _G. B_. ii. 24, 26.

[49] _G. B_. iii. 194.

[50] Spencer and Gillen, Glossary, _s.v. Alatuja_ and pp. 9-11.

[51] _G. B_. iii. 178.

[52] _Ibid._

[53] _G. B_. ii. 26.

[54] _G. B_. ii. 26.

[55] _G. B_. ii. 30.

[56] _G. B_. ii. 24.

[57] Macrobius himself is an author of the fourth or fifth century of
our era. Macrobius, i. x. 2; Livy, ii. xxi. 2.

[58] Cumont, _Revue de Philologie_, July 1897, vol. xxi. p. 149, citing
Mommsen, C.I.L. I(2) p. 337, and Marquhardt, _Staatsverw_.
iii.(2) 587.

[59] Lucian, _Saturnalia_, 2.

[60] Macrobius, i. vii. 31-33.

[61] The reason was probably a mere 'blind' for wife-murder.

[62] _G. B_. iii. p. 140.

[63] _Analecta Bollandiana_, xvi. pp. 5-16.

[64] _G. B._ iii. p. 143.

[65] _G. B_. iii. p. 144.

[66] _G. B_. iii. p. 142.

[67] _G. B_. ii. p. 144.

[68] Later (_Rev. de Philol._, xxi. 3, pp. 152, 153), M. Cumont dates
the Greek at about 500-600 A.D., because there were then apprehensions,
as in the MS., of the end of the world. But so there were in 1000 A.D.

[69] December 16-23. So also thinks M. Parmentier, _Rev. Phil_. xxi.
p. 143, note 1. M. Parmentier says that we must either suppose the
victim to have been selected by lot a whole month in advance (of which
practice I think we have no evidence), or else cast doubt on the whole
story, except the mere martyrdom of Dasius. But the latter measure M.
Parmentier thinks too sceptical.

[70] Porphyry, _De Abstinentia_, ii. 56; Lactantius, i. 21.

[71] _G. B_. iii. 147.

[72] _G. B_. iii. 148.

[73] _G. B_. iii. 147, note 2; 148, note 2.

[74] _G. B_. ii. 253, 254.

[75] _G. B_. ii. 254.

[76] _G. B_. ii. 147.

[77] Hyde, _De Bel. Pers_. p. 267.

[78] _G. B_. iii. 163, 164.

[79] Strabo, p. 512.

[80] Herodotus, iii. 79.

[81] Athenæus, xiv. p. 639, c.

[82] Dio, _Oratio_ iv., vol. i. p. 76, Dindorf.

[83] Mr. Frazer, in his text, attributes the statement to Berosus,
a Babylonian priest of about 200 B.C. In fact, we do not know Dio's
authority for the tale (_G. B_. ii. 24, note I). Mr. Frazer admits this
in his note. Ctesias may be Dio's source, or he may be inventing. On
the other hand, Macrobius, a late Roman writer, says that the Persians
used to regard 'as due to the gods the lives of consecrated men whom
the Greeks call Zanas' (Macrobius, _Saturnalia_, iii. 7, 6). But what
Zanæ are the learned do not know: whether the word means _ζωγανας_, or
the Zanes at Olympia (Pausanias, v. xxi. 2; _G. B_. ii. 24, note I).
Moreover, Macrobius may have drawn his facts from Dio. But Dio says
nothing about 'consecrated men.'

[84] _G. B_. iii. 186.

[85] _G. B_. ii. 24.




