XV

_WALKING THROUGH FIRE_


Perhaps the topic of this paper may be ranged under the head of
'Magic,' though in many cases the rite of passing through fire is
sanctioned by religion, and the immunity of the performers is explained
by the protection of gods. The immunity is really the curious feature.
Mr. Frazer describes the Chinese vernal festival of fire in spring,
connected as it is with the widespread custom of 'renewing the fire'
at a certain season. The chief performers are labourers, who must fast
for three days and observe chastity for a week; while they are taught
in the temple how to discharge the difficult and dangerous duty which
is to be laid upon them. 'The fire is made in an enormous brazier of
charcoal, sometimes twenty feet wide.' The fire is gratified with salt
and rice, thrown on it by a Taoist priest. Further, 'two exorcists,
barefooted, and followed by two peasants, traverse the fire again and
again till it is somewhat beaten down.' The procession of performers
then walks through amidst much excitement. Their immunity is ascribed
to the horny consistency of the soles of their feet, and they suffer
if the fire touches their ankles.[1] Various Indian examples are given
by Mr. Frazer. Captain Mackenzie found the performance remote from the
'sensational,' and thought that only girls with tender soles were
likely to suffer. A case is also quoted from Strabo, women being the
performers, and the instance of the Hirpi of Soracte is well known.[2]
Mr. Frazer is interested mainly in the religious, magical, or ritual
significance of the rite, which varies in different places. To me, on
the other hand, the immunity of the performers appears a subject worthy
of physiological inquiry.

The subject occurs everywhere in history, legend, folklore, law, and
early religion, and yet nobody has thought it worth while to collect
the ancient reports and to compare them with well-authenticated modern
examples. In Mr. Tylor's celebrated work, 'Primitive Culture,' only one
or two casual allusions are made to the theme. 'They built the high
places of Baal, in the valley of the son of Hinnom, to cause their sons
and daughters to pass through to Moloch,' that is to pass through the
fire, 'whether in ritual or symbolical sacrifice.'[3] As a supposed
rite of purification the ceremony is again touched upon lightly.[4]
Again: 'The ancient ceremony of passing through a fire, or leaping over
burning brands, has been kept up vigorously in the British Isles,'[5]
namely, at the midsummer ceremonies, when it is, or was, the custom to
jump over, or run through, light fires. Nobody would guess that a rite
of passing deliberately, and unscathed, through ovens or furnaces yet
exists in Japan, Bulgaria, the Society Islands, Fiji, Southern India,
Trinidad, the Straits Settlements, the Isle of Mauritius, and, no
doubt, in other regions.

We must distinguish between such sportive playing with fire as
prevailed recently in our isles and the more serious Fire Ceremony
of Central Australia, which tests endurance on the one hand, and
the apparent contravention of a natural law on the other. Again, we
must discount the popular reply that the hand can be rapidly plunged
into molten metal and withdrawn without injury, for we do not happen
to be concerned with such a brief exposure to heat. Once more, the
theory of the application of some unknown chemical substance must be
rejected, because, as we shall prove, there are certainly cases in
which nothing of the kind is done. Moreover, science is acquainted
with no substance--alum or diluted sulphuric acid, or the like--which
will produce the result of preventing cauterisation.[6] Sir William
Crookes, at least, is not familiar with any such resources of science.
His evidence as to fire-handling by D. D. Home is familiar, and I
understand that Mr. Podmore can only explain it away by an hypothesis
of a trick played in a bad light, by means of an asbestos glove or some
such transparent trick.[7] Perhaps he adds a little 'hallucination' on
the part of the spectators. But asbestos and hallucination are out of
the question in the cases which I am about to quote.

Home was, or feigned to be, in a state of trance when he performed
with fire. The seeress of Lourdes, Bernadette, was also in religious
contemplation when she permitted the flame of a candle to play through
her clasped fingers (which were unscathed) for a timed quarter of an
hour.[8] Some Indian devotees, again, aver that they 'meditate' on some
divine being while passing over the glowing embers, and the Nistinares
of Bulgaria, who dance in the fire, are described as being in a more
or less abnormal mental condition. But even this condition is absent
in the well-attested Raiatean and Fijian examples, in which also no
kind of chemical preparation is employed. Finally, where savages are
concerned, the hardness of the skins of their feet is dwelt upon, as in
the Chinese case already quoted. But, first, the sole of the boot would
be scorched in the circumstances, while their feet are not affected;
next, the savages' feet were _not_ leathery (so Dr. Hocken avers);
thirdly, one of the Europeans who walked through the fire at Rarotonga
declares that the soles of his own feet are peculiarly tender. Thus
every known physical or conjectured psychical condition of immunity
fails to meet the case, and we are left wholly without an ascertained,
or a good conjectural, 'reason why' for the phenomena.

I shall begin with the most recent and the best authenticated cases,
and work back in time, and in civilisation. Mr. Tregear, the well-known
lexicographer of the Maori and the allied Mangarova languages, lately
sent me the twenty-ninth number of 'The Journal of the Polynesian
Society,' March 1899, Wellington, N.Z. Professors Max Müller and
Sayce were Honorary Members of the Society, which studies Polynesian
languages, customs, and conditions. Mr. Tregear attests the upright,
truth-telling character of the British official, who is the narrator of
his own experiment. As the journal is not widely circulated in England,
I quote the whole of the brief report.

      THE UMU-TI, OR FIRE-WALKING CEREMONY

      BY COLONEL GUDGEON, BRITISH RESIDENT, RAROTONGA

      [In this Journal, vol. ii p. 105, Miss Teuira Henry
      describes this ceremony as practised in Raiatea, of the
      Society group. We have lately received from Colonel
      Gudgeon the following account of his experiences in
      walking barefooted across the glowing hot stones of a
      native oven, made in Rarotonga by a man from Raiatea.
      Since the date of the paper quoted, it has come to
      light that the Maoris of New Zealand were equally
      acquainted with this ceremony, which was performed by
      their ancestors. On reading Colonel Gudgeon's account
      to some old chiefs of the Urewera tribe, they expressed
      no surprise, and said that their ancestors could also
      perform the ceremony, though it has long gone out of
      practice.--EDITORS.]

      I must tell you that I have seen and gone through the fire
      ceremony of the _Umu-ti_.

      The oven was lit at about dawn on the 20th of January,
      and I noticed that the stones were very large, as also
      were the logs that had been used in the oven for heating
      purposes.

      About 2 P.M. we went to the oven and there found the
      _tohunga_ (a Raiatea man) getting matters ready, and I
      told him that, as my feet were naturally tender, the
      stones should be levelled down a bit. He assented to this,
      and evidently he had intended to do so, for shortly after,
      the men with very long poles, that had hooks, began to
      level the stones flat in the oven, which was some 12 ft.
      in diameter. He then went with his disciple and pointed
      to two stones that were not hot, and instructed him the
      reason was that they had been taken from a _marae_, or
      sacred place.

      He then unwound two bundles, which proved to be branches
      of a large-leaved _Ti_ (or _Dracæna_) plucked, it is said,
      from two of these trees standing close together, and it
      is said that the initiated can on such occasions see the
      shadow of a woman with long hair, called _te varua kino_
      (evil spirit), standing between the trees. The right-hand
      branch is the first plucked, and it is said that the
      branches bend down to be plucked.

      So much for the Shamanism, and now for the facts.

      The _tohunga_ (priest) and his _tauira_ (pupil) walked
      each to the oven, and then halting, the prophet spoke a
      few words, and then each struck the edge of the oven with
      the _ti_ branches. This was three times repeated, and then
      they walked slowly and deliberately over the two fathoms
      of hot stones. When this was done, the _tohunga_ came
      to us, and his disciple handed his _ti_ branch to Mr.
      Goodwin, at whose place the ceremony came off, and they
      went through the ceremony. Then the _tohunga_ said to Mr.
      Goodwin, 'I hand my _mana_ (power) over to you; lead your
      friends across.' Now, there were four Europeans--Dr. W.
      Craig, Dr. George Craig, Mr. Goodwin, and myself--and I
      can only say that we stepped out boldly. I got across
      unscathed, and only one of the party was badly burned;
      and he, it is said, was spoken to, but, like Lot's wife,
      looked behind him--a thing against all rules.

      I can hardly give you my sensations, but I can say this:
      that I knew quite well I was walking on red-hot stones
      and could feel the heat, yet I was not burned. I felt
      something resembling slight electric shocks, both at the
      time and afterwards, but that is all. I do not know that
      I should recommend every one to try it. A man must have
      _mana_ to do it; if he has not, it will be too late when
      he is on the hot stone of Tama-ahi-roa.

      I cannot say that I should have performed this wizard
      trick had I not been one of the fathers of the Polynesian
      Society, and bound to support the superiority of the New
      Zealander all over Polynesia--indeed all over the world. I
      would not have missed the performance for anything.

      To show you the heat of the stones, quite half an hour
      afterwards some one remarked to the priest that the stones
      would not be hot enough to cook the _ti_. His only answer
      was to throw his green branch on the oven, and in a
      quarter of a minute it was blazing. As I have eaten a fair
      share of the _ti_ cooked in the oven, I am in a position
      to say that it was hot enough to cook it well.

      I walked with bare feet, and after we had done so, about
      200 Maoris followed. No one, so far as I saw, went through
      with boots on. I did not walk quickly across the oven,
      but with deliberation, because I feared that I should
      tread on a sharp point of the stones and fall. My feet
      also were very tender. I did not mention the fact, but
      my impression as I crossed the oven was that the skin
      would all peel off my feet. Yet all I really felt when
      the task was accomplished was a tingling sensation not
      unlike slight electric shocks on the soles of my feet, and
      this continued for seven hours or more. The really funny
      thing is that, though the stones were hot enough an hour
      afterwards to burn up green branches of the _ti_, the very
      tender skin of my feet was not even hardened by the fire.

      Many of the Maoris thought they were burned, but they were
      not--at any rate not severely.

      Do not suppose that the man who directed this business was
      an old _tohunga_. He is a young man, but of the Raiatea
      family, who are hereditary fire-walkers.

      I can only tell you it is _mana--mana tangata_ and _mana
      atua_.

On this report a few remarks may be offered. (1) No preparation of
any chemical, herbal, or other sort was applied to the Europeans, at
least. (2) 'The handing over the _mana_' (or power) was practised
by Home, sometimes successfully (it is alleged), as when Mr. S.
C. Hall's scalp and white locks were unharmed by a red-hot coal;
sometimes unsuccessfully. A clergyman of my acquaintance still bears
the blister caused when he accepted a red-hot coal from the hand of
Home, as he informs--me by letter. (3) The 'walk' was shorter than
seems common: only 12 ft. (4 paces). (4) A friend of Colonel Gudgeon's
was badly burned, and the reason assigned was a good folklore reason,
since the days of Lot's wife, of Theocritus, and of Virgil: he looked
behind. (5) The feeling as if of 'slight electric shocks' is worthy
of notice. (6) Colonel Gudgeon clearly believes that a man without
_mana_ had better not try, and by _mana_, here, he probably means
'nerve.' As we can hardly suppose, in spite of Home, that _mana_,
in a supernormal sense, can be 'handed over' by one man to another,
Colonel Gudgeon's experience seems equally to baffle every theory of
'how it is done.' Perhaps we can all do it. People may make their own
experiments. Perhaps Colonel Gudgeon faced fire in a manner so unusual
as a result of Dr. Hocken's description of the Fijian rite at Mbenga,
an isle twenty miles south of Suva. This account was published in the
'Transactions of the New Zealand Institute,' vol. xxxi. 1898, having
been read before the Otago Institute on May 10, 1898, and is here
reprinted in full as follows:--

      AN ACCOUNT OF THE FIJI FIRE CEREMONY

      BY DR. T. M. HOCKEN, F.L.S.

      Amongst the many incidents witnessed during a recent visit
      to the tropical island of Fiji, probably none exceeded
      in wonder and interest that of which I propose to give
      some account this evening, and to which may be applied
      the designation of 'fire ceremony.' It is called by the
      natives '_vilavilairevo_.' In this remarkable ceremony a
      number of almost nude Fijians walk quickly and unharmed
      across and among white-hot stones, which form the pavement
      of a huge native oven--termed '_lovo_'--in which shortly
      afterwards are cooked the succulent sugary roots and pith
      of the _Cordyline terminalis_, one of the cabbage trees,
      known to the Maoris as the '_ti_,' and to the Fijians as
      the '_masawe._' This wonderful power of fire-walking
      is now not only very rarely exercised, but, at least as
      regards Fiji, is confined to a small clan or family--the
      _Na Ivilankata_--resident on Bega (= Mbenga), an island of
      the group, lying somewhat south of Suva, and twenty miles
      from that capital.

      A small remnant of the priestly order at Raiatea, one of
      the Society Islands, is yet able to utter the preparatory
      incantation, and afterwards to walk through the fire.

      It exists also in other parts of the world, as in parts
      of India, the Straits Settlements, West India Islands,
      and elsewhere. Very interesting accounts of the ceremony
      as seen at Raiatea and at Mbenga are to be found in the
      second and third volumes of the 'Journal of the Polynesian
      Society,' and in Basil Thomson's charming 'South Sea
      Yarns.' These descriptions filled our small party of
      three--my wife, Dr. Colquhoun, and myself--with the desire
      to witness it for ourselves, and, if possible, to give
      some explanation of what was apparently an inexplicable
      mystery. Our desires were perfectly realised.

      The Hon. Mr. A. M. Duncan, a member of the Legislative
      Council of Fiji, and agent at Suva of the Union Steamship
      Company, to whom I carried a letter of introduction from
      Mr. James Mills, the managing director of that Company,
      was most courteous and obliging, and promised his best
      efforts in the matter. His energy and ready response
      succeeded, with the result that a large party from Suva
      enjoyed such a day as each one must have marked with a red
      letter.

      It was necessary to give the natives three days in which
      to make their preparations--constructing the oven and
      paving it with stones, which then required heating for
      thirty-six or forty-eight hours at least with fierce fires
      fed with logs and branches. They had also to gather their
      stores of food to form the foundation of the huge feast
      whose preparation was to succeed the mystic ceremony.
      During these three days we lost no opportunity of
      collecting from former witnesses of the ceremony whatever
      information or explanation they could afford, but with
      no very satisfactory result: the facts were undisputed,
      but the explanations quite insufficient. Some thought
      that the chief actors rubbed their bodies with a secret
      preparation which rendered them fireproof; others that
      lifelong friction on the hard hot rocks, coral-reefs, and
      sands had so thickened and indurated the foot-sole that it
      could defy fire; but all agreed as to the _bona fides_ of
      the exhibition. The incident recounted in the 'Polynesian
      Journal' was also confirmed---where Lady Thurston threw
      her handkerchief upon the shoulder of one of the actors,
      and though it remained there but a few seconds before
      being picked off by means of a long stick, it was greatly
      scorched.[9]

      The story or legend attached to this weird gift of
      fire-walking was told us, with some variation, by two or
      three different people, and it is mainly as follows: A
      far-distant ancestor of the present inheritors of this
      power was walking one day when he espied an eel, which
      he caught, and was about to kill. The eel squeaked out
      and said, 'Oh! Tui Na Galita (= Eng-Galita), do not kill
      me; spare me. I am a god and I will make you so strong in
      war that none shall withstand you.' 'Oh, but,' replied Na
      Galita, 'I am already stronger in war than any one else,
      and I fear no one.' 'Well, then,' said the eel. 'I will make
      your canoe the fastest to sail on these seas, and none
      shall come up with it.' 'But,' replied Na Galita, as it
      is, none can pass my canoe.' 'Well, then,' rejoined the
      eel. 'I will make you a great favourite among women, so
      that all will fall in love with you.' 'Not so,' said Na
      Galita, 'I have one wife, of whom I am very fond, and I
      desire no other.' The poor eel then made other offers,
      which were also rejected, and his chances of life were
      fading fast when he made a final effort. 'Oh, Na Galita,
      if you will spare me, I will so cause it that you and your
      descendants shall henceforth walk through the _masawe_
      oven unharmed.' 'Good,' said Na Galita, 'now I will let
      you go.' This story varies somewhat from that told in the
      'Polynesian Journal.'[10]

      The eventful morning was blazingly hot and brilliant,
      and the vivid-blue sky was without a cloud as we steamed
      down towards Mbenga in the s.s. _Hauroto_. Mr. Vaughan,
      an eminent inhabitant of Suva, who has charge of the
      Meteorological Department there, was of our party, and
      carried the thermometer. This was the most suitable for
      our purpose procurable; it was in a strong japanned-tin
      casing, and registered 400° Fahr. We had also three
      amateur photographers.

      Owing to the numerous coral-reefs and shallows, we finally
      transhipped into the _Maori_, a steamer of much less
      draught. Approaching the silent verdure-clad islet, with
      its narrow beach of white coral sand, we saw a thin blue
      haze of smoke curling above the lofty cocoanut trees at
      a little distance in the interior, which sufficiently
      localised the mysterious spot. We now took the ship's
      boat, and soon, stepping ashore, made our way through a
      narrow pathway in the dense bush until we came to an open
      space cleared from the forest, in the midst of which was
      the great _lovo_, or oven.

      A remarkable and never-to-be-forgotten scene now presented
      itself. There were hundreds of Fijians, dressed according
      to the rules of nature and their own art--that is, they
      were lightly garlanded here and there with their fantastic
      _likulikus_ of grass, ornamented with brilliant scarlet
      and yellow hibiscus flowers and streamers of the delicate
      ribbonwood. These hung in airy profusion from their necks
      and around their waists, showing off to advantage their
      lovely brown glossy skins. In addition, many wore clean
      white cotton _sulus_, or pendant loin-cloths. All were
      excited, moving hither and thither in wild confusion, and
      making the forest ring again with, their noisy hilarity.
      Some climbed the lofty cocoa-palms, hand over hand, foot
      over foot, with all the dexterity of monkeys. The top
      reached, and shrouded amongst the feathery leaves, they
      poured down a shower of nuts for the refreshment of their
      guests.

      The celerity with which they opened the nuts was something
      astonishing, and afforded an example, too, as to the mode
      of using stone implements. A stout strong stick, 3 ft.
      long, and sharpened at both ends, was driven into the
      ground, and a few smart strokes upon it soon tore from the
      nut its outer thick covering. The upper part of the shell
      was then broken off by means of a long sharp-edged stone
      as cleanly and regularly as the lid of an egg is removed
      with a knife, and then was disclosed a pint of delicious
      milk--a most welcome beverage on that over-poweringly hot
      day.

      The great oven lay before us, pouring forth its torrents
      of heat from huge embers which were still burning fiercely
      on the underlying stones. These were indeed melting
      moments for the spectators. The pitiless noontide sun,
      and the no less pitiless oven-heat, both pent up in the
      deep well-like forest clearing, reduced us to a state of
      solution from which there was no escape. Despite this the
      photographers took up their stations, and others of us
      proceeded to make our observations. The _lovo_, or oven,
      was circular, with a diameter of 25 ft. or 30 ft.; its
      greatest depth was perhaps 8 ft., its general shape that
      of a saucer, with sloping sides and a flattish bottom,
      the latter being filled with the white-hot stones. Near
      the margin of the oven, and on its windward side, the
      thermometer marked 114°.

      Suddenly, and as if Pandemonium had been let loose, the
      air was filled with savage yells; a throng of natives
      surrounded the oven, and in a most ingenious and effective
      way proceeded to drag out the smouldering unburnt logs and
      cast them some distance away. Large loops of incombustible
      lianas attached to long poles were dexterously thrown
      over the burning trunks, much after the manner of the
      head-hunters of New Guinea when securing their human prey.
      A twist or two round of the loop securely entangled the
      logs, which were then dragged out by the united efforts
      of scores of natives, who all the while were shouting
      out some wild rhythmical song. This accomplished, the
      stones at the bottom of the oven were disclosed, with here
      and there flame flickering and forking up through the
      interstices. The diameter of the area occupied by those
      stones was about 10 ft., but this was speedily increased
      to a spread of 15 ft. or more by a second ingenious
      method. The natives thrust their long poles, which were
      of the unconsumable wi-tree (_Spondias dulcis_), between
      the stones at intervals of perhaps 1 ft. A long rope-like
      liana--_wa_--previously placed underneath the poles, and
      1 ft. or 2 ft. from their extremities, was now dragged
      by scores of lusty savages, with the effect of spreading
      and levelling the stones. This done, our thermometer
      was suspended by a simple device over the centre of the
      stones, and about 5 ft. or 6 ft. above them; but it had
      to be withdrawn almost immediately, as the solder began
      to melt and drop, and the instrument to be destroyed. It,
      however, registered 282° Fahr., and it is certain that had
      not this accident occurred, the range of 400° would have
      been exceeded, and the thermometer burst.

      During all these wild scenes we had seen nothing of the
      main actors--of the descendants of Na Galita. Doubtless
      to give more impressive effect, they had been hiding in
      the forest depths until the signal should be given and
      their own supreme moment arrive. And now they came on,
      seven or eight in number, amidst the vociferous yells of
      those around. The margin reached, they steadily descended
      the oven slope in single file, and walked, as I think,
      leisurely, but as others of our party think, quickly,
      across and around the stones, leaving the oven at the
      point of entrance. The leader, who was longest in the
      oven, was a second or two under half a minute therein.
      Almost immediately heaps of the soft and succulent leaves
      of the hibiscus, which had been gathered for the purpose,
      were thrown into the oven, which was thus immediately
      filled with clouds of hissing steam. Upon the leaves and
      within the steam the natives, who had returned, sat or
      stood pressing them down in preparation for cooking the
      various viands which were to afford them a sumptuous feast
      that evening or on the morrow.

      But for us the most interesting part of the drama was
      over, and it only remained to review observations and
      draw conclusions. Just before the great event of the
      day, I gained permission to examine one or two of the
      fire-walkers prior to their descent into the oven. This
      was granted without the least hesitation by the principal
      native magistrate of the Rewa district, N'Dabea by name,
      but generally known as Jonathan. This native is of great
      intelligence and influence, is a member of the Na Galita
      Clan, and has himself at various times walked through
      the fire. On this occasion he took no other part in the
      ceremony than that of watching or superintending it. The
      two men thus sent forward for examination disclosed no
      peculiar feature whatever. As to dress, they were slightly
      garlanded round the neck and the waist; the pulse was
      unaffected, and the skin, legs, and feet were free from
      any apparent application. I assured myself of this by
      touch, smell, and taste, not hesitating to apply my tongue
      as a corroborative. The foot-soles were comparatively soft
      and flexible--by no means leathery and insensible. Thus
      the two Suvan theories were disposed of. This careful
      examination was repeated immediately after egress from
      the oven, and with the same result. To use the language
      of Scripture, 'No smell of fire had passed upon them.' No
      incantations or other religious ceremonial were observed.
      Though these were formerly practised, they have gradually
      fallen into disuse since the introduction of Christianity.
      I did not succeed in procuring the old incantation
      formula; doubtless it was similar to that of the old
      Raiatean ceremony, which is given in the second volume of
      the 'Polynesian Society's Journal,' p. 106.

      Whilst walking through the fire, Dr. Colquhoun thought the
      countenances of the fire-walkers betrayed some anxiety.
      I saw none of this; nor was it apparent to me at either
      examination. The stones, which were basaltic, must have
      been white-hot, but due to the brilliance of the day this
      was not visible.

      Various natives, being interrogated for an explanation,
      replied, with a shrug, 'They can do this wonderful thing;
      we cannot. You have seen it; we have seen it.' Whilst
      thus unable to suggest any explanation or theory, I am
      absolutely certain as to the truth of the facts and the
      _bona fides_ of the actors. A feature is that, wherever
      this power is found, it is possessed by but a limited few.
      I was assured, too, that any person holding the hand of
      one of the fire-walkers could himself pass through the
      oven unharmed. This the natives positively assert.

      My friend Mr. Walter Carew, for thirty years a Resident
      Commissioner and Stipendiary Magistrate in Fiji, has
      frequently conversed with Jonathan (referred to above),
      who, whilst withholding no explanation, can give none. He
      says, 'I can do it, but I do not know how it is done;'
      and, further, that at the time he does not experience any
      heat or other sensation.

      Does any psychical condition explain these facts, as
      suggested in Lang's 'Modern Mythology'?[11] I certainly
      did not observe any appearance of trance or other mental
      condition. In connection with this Mr. Carew thinks that
      intense faith is the explanation, and that if this were
      upset, the descendants of Na Galita would be no longer
      charmed. But it is difficult to see how any mental state
      can prevent the action of physical law. Hypnotism and
      anæsthetics may produce insensibility to pain, but do not
      interfere with the cautery.

      Many of the so-called fire miracles are remarkable indeed,
      but are readily explained, and by no means come within
      the present category. Such, for instance, as plunging
      the hand, which is protected by the interposed film of
      perspiration assuming the globular state of water, into
      boiling lead. Similarly, many conjuring feats. At the
      beginning of this century an Italian--Lionetti--performed
      remarkable experiments: rubbed a bar of red-hot iron over
      his arms, legs, and hair, and held it between his teeth;
      he also drank boiling oil. Dr. Sementini, of Naples,
      carefully examined these experiments, and experimented
      himself until he surpassed the fireproof qualities of his
      suggestor. He found that frequent friction with sulphurous
      acid rendered him insensible to red-hot iron; a solution
      of alum did the same. A layer of powdered sugar covered
      with soap made his tongue insensible to heat. In these
      and similar instances, however, an explanation, though
      probably not a very sufficient one, has been given, but
      in that forming the subject of this paper no solution has
      been offered. Lang's chapter on the 'Fire Walk' should be
      consulted; his account of the Bulgarian Nistinares is as
      wonderful and inexplicable as anything here recited. The
      whole subject requires thorough scientific examination.

My next case occurs among a civilised race, the Japanese, and is
vouched for by Mr. Lafcadio Hearn, an American writer, whose book I
have not at hand, and by Colonel Andrew Haggard.[12] Colonel Haggard
saw the fire-walk done in Tokio, on April 9, 1899. The fire was 6 yards
long by 6 ft wide. The rite was in honour of a mountain god. Ablutions
in cold water were made by the performers, and Colonel Haggard was
told by one young lady that she had not only done the fire-walk, but
had been 'able to sit for a long time, in winter, immersed in ice-cold
water, without feeling the cold in the least.' After some waving of
wands and sprinkling of salt, people of all ages walked through, not
glowing stones in this case, but 'red-hot charcoal.' 'I examined their
feet afterwards: they were quite soft, and not a trace of fire upon
them.' Colonel Haggard says that the rite is 'a very unusual thing'
in Japan: many of the Japanese living in Tokio had never heard of it
before. Colonel Haggard was unable to get any clear answer as to why
the rite is performed. The priest talked something about a good God who
had power over the bad element of fire. It is not clear how, the rite
being so unusual, two Japanese ladies told Colonel Haggard that they
had 'frequently gone through the fiery ordeal.'

If any one is anxious to know the particulars of the rite as practised
in the isle Mauritius, he may communicate with our police officials
there, who annually superintend the performance. Coolies from southern
India do just what is done by Japanese and Fijians. Our administration,
however, does not permit women to pass through the fire.

After giving these recent examples in Mauritius, Japan, Rarotonga, and
an isle of the Fijian group, I am obliged to fall back on the evidence
already set forth in Chapter XII. of my book, 'Modern Mythology'
(1897). The Bulgarian practice I take from the 'Recueil de Folklore,
de Littérature et de Science,' edited by the Bulgarian Minister of
Public Instruction, with the aid of Drs. Schischmanof (whom I know
personally) and Mastov. In a private letter, Dr. Schischmanof hints
at _extase religieuse_, as in the self-mutilations of Dervishes and
Fakirs. _Their_ performances are extraordinary enough, but there was
no religious ecstasy in the little Japanese boy of six, whom Colonel
Haggard saw pass through the fire, none in Colonel Gudgeon, none in the
Fijians observed by Dr. Hocken. The fire-walkers in Bulgaria are called
_Nistinares_, and the faculty is regarded as _hereditary_. We find the
same opinion in Fiji, in ancient Italy, and in the Spain of the last
century. In Spain the fire-walkers were employed to help to put out
fires. The story is given in the essay on the last Earl Marischal in
my 'Companions of Pickle' (p. 24), and is derived from d'Alembert's
account of the Earl: 'There is a family or caste in Spain, who, from
father to son, have the power of going into the flames without being
burned, and who, by dint of charms permitted by the Inquisition, can
extinguish fires.' The Duchess of Medina Sidonia thought this a proof
of the verity of the Catholic faith, and, wishing to convert the Earl,
asked him to view the performance. But he insisted on lighting the fire
himself, and to that the Spaniards would not consent, the Earl being a
heretic.

To return to the Bulgarian Nistinares, they dance in the fire on May
21, the feast of SS. Helena and Constantine. Great fires of scores of
cartloads of dry wood are made. On the embers of those the Nistinares
(who turn blue in the face) dance and utter prophecies, afterwards
placing their feet in the muddy ground where libations of water have
been poured forth. The report says nothing as to the state of their
feet. The Nistinare begins to feel the effect of the fire after his
face has resumed its wonted colour and expression.

As for India. I may cite Mr. Stokes, in 'The Indian Antiquary' (ii.
190); Dr. Oppert, in his 'Original Inhabitants of India' (p. 190);
and Mr. Crookes, in 'Introduction to Popular Religion and Folklore in
Northern India' (p. 10). Mr. Stokes uses evidence from an inquest on a
boy that fell into the fire and died of his injuries, at Periyângridi.
The fire-pit was 27 ft. long by 7 ft. bread, and a span in depth.
Thirteen persons walked through. Mr. Stokes did not witness the
performance (which is forbidden by our law), but explains that the fire
'would hardly injure the tough skin of the sole of a labourer's feet.'
Yet it killed a boy!

The incredulous say that the fire-walkers smear their feet with oil
from the fat of the green frog. Dr. Oppert, admitting that 'the heat
is unbearable in the neighbourhood of the ditch,' says that the
walkers 'as a rule do not do themselves much harm.' This is vague.
Equally vague is the reference to rumours about a certain preservative
ointment.'

In Trinidad. British West Indies, Mr. Henry K. St. Clair, writing to
me, describes (September 14, 1890) the feat as performed by Indian
coolie immigrants. He personally witnessed the rite, which was
like that described to me by Mr. Stephen Ponder. In both cases the
performers were Klings. The case witnessed by Mr. Ponder took place in
the Straits Settlements, Province Wellesley. The trench was about 20
yards long by 6 ft. wide and 2 ft. deep. A pyre of wood, 4 or 5 ft.
high, was lighted at noon; by 4 p.m. it was a bed of red-hot embers.
The men, who with long rakes smoothed the ashes, could not stand the
heat 'for more than a minute at a time.' A little way from the end
of the trench was a hole full of water. Six coolies walked the whole
length, and thence into the water. 'Not one of them showed the least
sign of injury.' They had been prepared by a 'devil-doctor,' not a
Brahmin. On a later occasion Mr. Ponder heard that one of them fell
'and was terribly burnt.'

In these cases, Trinidad (and Mauritius) and the Straits Settlements,
the performers are South Indian coolies. In all cases there were
multitudes of European spectators, except in Mauritius, where, I learn,
Europeans usually take no interest in the doings of the heathen.

Turning to Tonga, we have the account of Miss Teuira Henry.[13] The
sister and sister's child of Miss Henry have walked over the red-hot
stones, as in the Rarotonga and Fijian cases. The ovens are 30 ft. in
diameter. The performance was photographed by Lieutenant Morne, of
the French Navy, and the original photograph was sent to the Editor
of the 'Polynesian Journal,' with a copy from it by Mr. Barnfield,
of Honolulu. The ceremony, preparatory to cooking the _ti_ plant, is
religious, and the archaic hymn sung is full of obsolete words. Mr.
Hastwell, of San Francisco, published a tract, which I have not seen,
on the Raiatean rite, witnessed by himself. The stones were I heated
to a red and white heat.' The natives 'walked leisurely across' five
times; 'there was not even the smell of fire on their garments' (cited
in the 'Polynesian Journal,' vol. ii. No. 3). There is corroborative
evidence from Mr. N. J. Tone, from Province Wellesley, Straits
Settlements, in the 'Polynesian Journal,' ii. 3, 193. He did not see
the rite, arriving too late, but he saw the fire-pit, and examined the
naked feet of the walkers. They were uninjured. Mr. Tone's evidence is
an extract from his diary.

As to Fiji there are various accounts. The best is that of Mr. Basil
Thomson, son of the late Archbishop of York. Mr. Thomson was an
official in Fiji, and is a well-known anthropologist. His sketch in his
'South Sea Yarns' (p. 195, _et seq._) is too long for quotation. The
rite is done yearly, before cooking the _masáwe_ (a _dracæna_) in the
oven through which the clan Na Ivilankata walk. 'The pit was filled
with a white-hot mass, shooting out little tongues of white flame.'
'The bottom of the pit was covered with an even layer of hot stones
... the tongues of flame played continually among them.' The walkers
planted 'their feet squarely and firmly on each stone.' Mr. Thomson
closely examined the feet of four or five of the natives when they
emerged. 'They were cool and showed no trace of scorching, nor were
their anklets of dried tree-fern burnt,' though 'dried tree-fern is as
combustible as tinder.' 'The instep is covered with skin no thicker
than our own, and we saw the men plant their insteps fairly on the
stone.' A large stone was hooked out of the pit before the men entered,
and one of the party dropped a pocket-handkerchief upon the stone 'when
the first man leapt into the oven and snatched what remained of it up
as the last left the stones.' Every fold that touched the stone was
charred. Mr. Thomson kindly showed me the handkerchief. He also showed
me a rather blurred photograph of the strange scene. It has been rudely
reproduced in the 'Folk Lore Journal,' September 1895.

Such is part of the modern evidence; for the ancient, see 'Æneid,'
xi. 784 _et seq._; Servius on the passage; Pliny, 'Hist. Nat.' vii.
2; Silius Italicus, v. 175. This evidence refers to the Hirpi of
Mount Soracte, a class exempted from military service by the Roman
Government, because, as Virgil makes Aruns say, 'Strong in faith we
walk through the midst of the fire, and press our footsteps in the
glowing mass.' The Hirpi, or wolves, were perhaps originally a totem
group, like the wolf totem of Tonkaway Red Indians; they had, like the
Tonkaway, a rite in which they were told to 'behave like wolves.'[14]
The goddess propitiated in their fire-walk was Feronia, a fire-goddess
(Max Müller), or a lightning goddess (Kuhn), or a corn goddess
(Mannhardt). Each of these scholars bases his opinion on etymology.

I have merely given evidence for the antiquity, wide diffusion, and
actual practice of this extraordinary rite. Neither physical nor
anthropological science has even glanced at it (except in Dr. Hocken's
case), perhaps because the facts are obviously impossible. I ought
to make an exception for Sir William Crookes, but he, doubtless, was
hallucinated, or gulled by the use of asbestos, or both. Perhaps Mr.
Podmore can apply these explanations to the spectators whom I have
cited. For my part, I remain without a theory, like all the European
observers whom I have quoted. But, in my humble opinion, all the usual
theories, whether of collective hallucination (photographic cameras
being hallucinated), of psychical causes, of chemical application, of
leathery skin on the soles of the feet, and so on, are inadequate.
There remains 'suggestion.' Any hypnotist, with his patient's
permission (in writing and witnessed), may try the experiment.

Since this paper was written I have seen an article, 'Les Dompteurs
du Feu,' on the same topic, by Dr. Th. Pascal.[15] The first part
of the essay is an extract from the 'Revue Théosophique Française.'
No date is given, but the rite described was viewed at Benares on
October 26, 1898. I am unable to understand whether Dr. Pascal is
himself the spectator and narrator of the 'Revue Théosophique,' or
whether he quotes (he uses marks of quotation) some other writer.
The phenomena were of the usual kind, and the writer, examining the
feet of two of the performers, found the skin of the soles fine and
intact. In four cases, in which the performers had entered the fire
after the procession--with the Master of the Ceremonies and two excited
persons, who split cocoanuts with swords--had gone, there were slight
cauterisations, healed two days later. The author of this passage
speaks of a Brahmin (apparently 'the Master of the Ceremonies') who
observed to Mr. Govinda Das, 'that the control of the fire was not so
complete as usual, because the images of the sanctuary had been touched
by Mahomedans and others in the crowd.'

The second case, not given with marks of quotation, occurred in the
park of Maharajah Tagore on December 7, 1898. 'A Frenchman, the son
of Dr. Javal of Paris, was present.' The narrator, '_nous_,' was also
present, and went up after the rite to venture his hand in the furnace.
He was warned that the Brahmin had left ten minutes before, and that
'the fire had recovered its activity.' The Maharajah, however, caused
the ceremony to be repeated, and some minutes after all was ready.
The narrator then traversed the fire, barefoot, at _un petit trot_,
'a little less than two paces a second.' As 100 yards can be run in
ten seconds, this trot was remarkably slow. He felt in paces one and
two a sensation of burning, in the five following paces a sensation of
intense heat. There were three small brown marks on his feet, which
formed blisters, but did not interfere with walking, and healed 'in
some days.' He now learned that the Brahmin's _premier aide_ did the
ceremony not quite successfully. He is convinced that, but for the
ceremony, he would have been seriously injured.

The third case was at Benares in February 1899. Three Hindoos collided
and fell in: neither they nor their clothes were burned.

The author clearly regards the performers of the ceremony as able
'to tame considerably the destructive energy of the fire.' This, of
course, is the theory of the savage devotees. The ceremony was only a
procession of sacred images carried in a glazed sanctuary, and words,
not known to the spectator, were uttered by the Brahmin. Holy water was
sprinkled, and a cocoanut was thrown into the oven. As has been said,
incantations are pronounced in Fiji and elsewhere.[16]

The following case is recent: it is culled from 'The Daily Mail,'
November 9, 1900.


      ORDEAL BY FIRE

      According to the 'Japan Herald,' on Monday last a party
      of distinguished Americans (the American Minister and
      his wife, two naval officers, and others) attended the
      religious rites of the Ontake Jinsha, a powerful sect of
      Shintoists.

      A heap of burning charcoal was placed in a large furnace.
      The officiating priest read a service over the fire,
      after which the foreign visitors, to the number of seven,
      including ladies, took off their shoes and walked over the
      fire, their naked feet showing no sign of scorching.

      The performance called forth, says the report, the
      enthusiastic approval of the spectators.

      Yet more recent is the next case, from Honolulu, the
      reporter being Mr. Gorten, a correspondent of the 'Boston
      Evening Transcript,' March 20, 1891. We quote the
      passage:--


      We have already witnessed still another strange sight
      suggestive of necromancy and the incantations of the
      East. Papa Ita, a Tahitan, has given us exhibitions of
      the famous fire-walking which is still practised in the
      South Sea Islands and parts of Japan and India. On the
      vacant land swept a year ago by the Chinatown fire a great
      elliptical pit was dug and a large quantity of wood placed
      therein, on which were piled the lava rocks. All day the
      fire burned till the stones were of a white heat; then
      the white-haired native from Tahiti approached the fiery
      furnace dressed in a robe of white tapa, with a girdle
      and head-dress of the sacred ti leaves and a bundle of
      leaves in his hand for a wand. Striking the ground with
      the ti-leaf wand, he uttered an incantation in his own
      language, which was a prayer to his gods to temper the
      heat and allow him to pass; then calmly and deliberately,
      with bare feet, he walked the length of the pit, bearing
      aloft the ti-leaf wand. Pausing a moment on the other
      side, he again struck the ground and returned over the
      same fiery path. This was several times repeated, and he
      even paused a few seconds when in the middle of the pit to
      allow his picture to be taken. The stones were undoubtedly
      hot and were turned by means of long poles just before the
      walking, to have the hottest side up, and from between the
      rocks the low flames were continually leaping up. The heat
      that radiated to the spectators was intense. It was a fact
      that others followed with shoes on, but no one could be
      found to accept the standing offer of 500 dollars to any
      one who would, with bare feet, follow Papa Ita. None but
      natives of course believe there is anything supernatural,
      but we cannot explain how he does it. It cannot be called
      a fake, for he really does what he claims to do, and none,
      so far, dare imitate him. The natives fall down before
      him, as a great Kapuna, and many interested in the welfare
      of the Hawaiians deplore these exhibitions, feeling it is
      bad for the natives, in that it strengthens their old
      bonds of superstition, to the undoing of much of the
      advancement they have made. Just now Papa Ita is touring
      the other islands of the group, and rumour has it that
      his manager will take him to the Pan-American Exhibition
      at Buffalo. In that case people in the States can see and
      judge of this curious exhibition for themselves.

I end with the only instance (forwarded from a correspondent by Mr.
T. S. O'Connor) of the ascertained use of an ointment to diminish the
effect of the fire. Dr. Hocken and Colonel Gudgeon, as we saw, found no
trace of this device; nor is it mentioned in the Japanese evidence.

                 Port of Spain, Trinidad, B.W.I., June 8, 1897.
      You referred some time ago to the fire-walkers. I have
      seen some of these gents performing quite recently, and
      got an explanation from a coolie customer of ours who
      watched the business with me. It seems they rub themselves
      with an oil, made from the root of the tabicutch (don't
      know the Latin name), which has the property of producing
      profuse sweat, and the two combine, causing an oily
      covering which warms very slowly and is difficult to dry
      up by heat. But even then it is essential that the men be
      good Stoics. I give the explanation for what it is worth,
      but saw the preparation myself, and had some of the stuff
      scraped off a man, who was ready for the rite, put it on
      a piece of tin and held it in the fire, and it certainly
      neither dried up nor got hot in a hurry.


It is clear that this explanation does not explain several of the cases
wherein no anointing is used. We can only agree with Dr. Hocken that
the performances deserve the study of physiologists and physicians.
The explanation of Iamblichus, 'they walk on fire unharmed,' is that
'the god within them does not let fire harm them.' This implies that an
exalted psychical condition of the performers secures their immunity.
But in the cases where Europeans bore a part, and even in Dr. Hocken's
examination of the natives, there was no sign of other than the normal
mental condition. As fresh evidence comes in, it is perhaps not
impossible that science will interest herself in the problem.



[1] _G. B_. iii. 307, 308, citing _Internationales Archiv für
Ethnographie_ (1896), pp. 193-195.

[2] _G. B_. iii. 311, 312; Strabo, xii. 2-7, for Castabala in
Cappadocia; Virgil, _Æn_. xi. 784; and Servius's Commentary.

[3] _Primitive Culture_, ii. p. 281.

[4] _Ibid._ ii. p. 429.

[5] _Ibid._ i. p. 85.

[6] See note at end of chapter.

[7] _Studies in Psychical Research_, pp. 58-59.

[8] Dr. Dozous timed the 'miracle.' Boissarie, _Lourdes_, p. 49.

[9] I have not seen this account.

[10] See also Mr. Thomson's _South Sea Yarns._

[11] I would now withdraw the suggestion in the light of recent
evidence.

[12] _The Field_, May 20, 1899, p. 724.

[13] _Polynesian Journal_, vol. ii. No. 2, pp. 105-108.

[14] Serv. _Æneid_, vii. 800.

[15] _Annales des Sciences Psychiques_, July-August, 1899.

[16] In the _Wide World Magazine_ (December 1899), a Japanese lady
describes the performance witnessed by Colonel Haggard, already cited.




APPENDIX A


MR. TYLOR'S THEORY OF BORROWING


I feel so nervous about differing from Mr. Tylor as to the borrowing
of the idea of a superior and creative being from the Jesuits by the
Red Indians that I have reconsidered his essay.[1] He is arguing that
'the Great Spirit belongs not to the untutored but to the tutored minds
of the savages.' I am not contending for the use of the words 'Great
Spirit' as of native origin, and as employed to designate what I call a
superior being. That the natives had an untaught belief in such a being
is my opinion, not that they styled him 'Great Spirit.'

Mr. Tylor refers us to 'Relations des Jésuites,' 1611, p. 20, in the
Quebec edition of 1858. Here (to translate the passage) I read: 'They
believe in a god, so they say, but can only name him by the name of the
sun, _Niscaminou_, and know no prayers, nor manner of adoring him.'
When hungry they put on sacred robes, turn to the east, and say, 'Our
Sun, or our God, give us to eat.' Here, then, are prayer, vestments,
and turning to the east. The Jesuits, then, did not introduce these for
the first time; nor did they introduce the conception of the superior
being thus implored.

A similar relation of the sun to the being addressed in prayer exists
now among the Blackfoot Indians of America. With them the word _Natos_
is 'equivalent to holy or divine,' and is also the name of the sun.
To Natos prayer and sacrifice are offered, and the cruel rites of the
Natos-dance are performed. Tongues of cattle are served out to the
virtuous: 'this rite partakes of the nature of a sacrament.' Youths
sacrifice a finger, in recognition of prayers answered by Natos.
'Prayer is made to Natos only, and everything in Okán' (the ceremony)
'is sacred to him alone.'[2]

These are advanced, elaborate, and thoroughly native observances, of
which the germ may be found in the religions described in the Jesuit
'Relations' of 1611.

Mr. Tylor says 'especially through missionary influence, since 1500,
ideas of ... retribution after death for deeds done in life have been
implanted on native polytheism in various parts of the world.' But his
Jesuit authority of 1611, in the passage cited by him, writes: 'They
believe in the immortality of the soul, and in recompenses for good men
and bad, confusedly, and in a general way, but they seek and care no
further as to the manner of such things' (_comment cela doibt estre_).
Mr. Tylor's authority does not, I confess, appear to me to support his
opinion. The natives believed in future 'retribution.'

His other texts[3] show us savages consulting each his Manitou, 'a
powerful being' (_quelque nature puissante_), or _diable_. A Manitou is
'any superior being, good or bad:' the God of the Jesuits is _le bon
Manitou_, Satan is _le mauvais Manitou_.

I am not arguing that these phrases are more than the pigeon-French
of the savage flock, or that the ideas expressed did not later become
implanted in their minds. But Mr. Tylor, in his essay of 1892, omits
what he quotes in his 'Primitive Culture,' the Jesuit evidence of
1633 (p. 16) to 'one Atahocan who made everything. Speaking of God
in a hut one day, they asked me, "What is God?" I replied, "The All
Powerful One, who made heaven and earth." They then began to say to
each other, "Atahocan, Atahocan, he is Atahocan."' 'They have no
worship which they are used to pay to him whom they hold for their
god.' (This is the religious condition of the Kaffirs described by Dos
Santos in Pinkerton, xvi. 687.) Now it is Atahocan who interests me, as
pre-missionary: no doubt he was not called _le bon Manitou_--but there
he was! In 1634 Father Le Jeune consulted a very hostile sorcerer,
who minimised Atahocan. 'They do not know,' said the sorcerer, 'who
was the author of the world, perhaps Atahocan: it was uncertain. They
only spoke of Atahocan as one speaks of something so remote as to be
dubious. In fact the word _Nitatahocan_ means in their language, "I
tell a story, an old tale."'[4] The 'sorcerer,' a servant of familiar
spirits, had no interest in Atahocan, though the tribesmen recognised
in him the God and Creator of Father Le Jeune. There was but a waning
tradition of a primal maker; interesting and important just because it
was waning, and therefore could not be of fresh European introduction.
The beings in receipt of sacrifice were _Khichikouai_, to whom they
threw fat on the fire, with prayer.'[5] It appears to me that these
affable familiar ghosts, practically serviceable, had cast the otiose
Atahocan into the background. But he, like Andouagni, Kiehtan, and
others, was certainly there before the Jesuits, and these beings are
elsewhere cited by Mr. Tylor. The question is one of the existence of
belief in such a being, not (for me at least) of the origin, which may
well be post-European, of the words 'Kitchi Manitu, or Great Spirit.'
If the Mandans believed, as Mr. Tylor does not deny in 'Omahank
Numakchi, the Creator, whose name appears to mean Lord of Earth,' it is
quite unimportant that 'there is no Mandan deity whose name answers to
that of Great Spirit.'[6]

I mentioned, in the first essay of this book, Mr. Max Müller's version
of Bishop Salvado's account of Motagon, a dead creator in Western
Australia. Mr. Tylor recognises him as Sir George Grey's Mettagong, 'an
insignificant demon identified with the phosphoric fungus.' But did
that demon 'die in decrepit old age long ago,' like Bishop Salvado's
Motagon? There seems to be no hope of making anything clear out of
Motagon. Mr. Oldfield, cited by Mr. Tylor for Australia, I have never
quoted: his account cannot be uncontaminated. Yet the natives may
have believed in an evil spirit before they adorned him with horns,
as Mr. Oldfield states, which no indigenous beast possesses. 'Their
doctrine of a _horned_ devil' must be modern, though not necessarily
their belief in a bad spirit. With Mr. Tylor's theory of Baiame as 'a
missionary translation of the word for creator,' as early as 1850, I
have already dealt in my second essay, showing that Baiame is a native
pre-missionary word, whatever may be its etymology. Mrs. Langloh Parker
renders it, not 'maker' (from _baia_, to cut, or fashion), but 'big
man.'



[1] _J.A.I_. Feb. 1892.

[2] _The Blackfoot Sun-dance_, Rev. J. MacLean, Toronto. 1889.

[3] _Rel. des Jésuites_, 1633, p. 16; 1637, p. 49.

[4] _Rel. des Jésuites_, 1634, p. 13.

[5] _Ibid._ pp. 32, 33.

[6] _J. A. I_. Feb. 1892, p. 287.




APPENDIX B

THE MARTYRDOM OF DASIUS


It is difficult to ascertain the facts about this affair. There are
first two brief narratives. One is printed in the 'Ménologie de
Basile.'[1] The other is in Cod. Ambrosianus, D 74, fol. 65_r_. M.
Cumont thinks that both have a single source--namely, an abridgment of
the 'Acts of St. Dasius,' published by himself from the Parisinus 1539,
a MS. of the eleventh century. The two brief late narratives say that
the _Greeks_ in Dorostolum held a yearly feast of Cronos. Thirty days
before the feast they chose a handsome young soldier, clad him in royal
raiment, and allowed him thirty days of revelry, after which he was
to sacrifice himself at the altar of Cronos. The lot fell on Dasius,
who preferred to die as a martyr of Christ. Diocletian and Maximian,
hearing of this, commanded him to be put to the sword. The second MS.
names Bassus as the officer at whose tribunal Dasius was arraigned.

The long MS. first published by M. Cumont says that the man on whom the
lot fell personated Cronos himself. On the thirtieth day of revelry
he died by the sword as a victim to the 'unclean idols.' The author
then adds that, in his own time, so-called Christians do devil-worship
by dancing about in skin of beasts at the new year--which is not the
date of the Saturnalia (December 17-23). Unlike these sinners, who
thus give themselves to the devil, Dasius determined to refuse to be a
sacrifice to heathen gods. He would never sacrifice himself to Cronos.
He proclaimed himself a Christian, was thrown into a dark cell, and was
brought before Bassus, 'the Legate,' next day.

Bassus asked what he was charged with, his name, and profession. Dasius
gave his name, profession, and religion. Bassus (who appears to have
been a mild kind of man) bade him revere the images of the Emperors,
whose salt he ate (δορρουμένων ἡμῑν τὰ σιτηρέσια). Dasius, in a
covenanting spirit, replied that he served no earthly monarch. Bassus
again invited him to adore the images of the Emperor, 'which homage
even barbarous nations pay.' Dasius defied the devil, and anticipated,
in his confession, the still unformulated Nicene Creed. Bassus, keeping
his temper to a marvel, said that every man must obey constituted
authority. Dasius answered, 'Do to me whatever your filthy and impious
Emperors command.' Bassus then offered him two hours for reflection,
'that you may consider in yourself _how you may live among us with
honour_.' Dasius refused the respite in vulgar and insolent terms.
Bassus then ordered him to be decapitated. He had a last chance, being
offered incense to burn before the Imperial effigies, but he threw it
on the ground, and was done to death.

Not a word about the mock-kingship passed between Dasius and Bassus,
who merely asked him to perform the customary sacrifice, that he might
'live honourably in the regiment' (ὅπως δυνηθείης ζῆν ἡμῶν ἐν δόξῃ).
How could Dasius live on if he was to be sacrificed 'at any rate'? Why
did not Dasius tell Bassus the supposed facts of the case--that he
objected to a month of unhallowed revelry, followed by self-sacrifice
to Cronos? Bassus obviously knew nothing about all that. A soldier only
has his orders; Dasius insulted the religion and the head of the State:
he declined to retract, and Bassus had to administer the law. If Dasius
did not like the law he need not have enlisted.

The two brief MSS. give us none of this conversation between Bassus
and Dasius. That foul-tongued confessor, according to Mr. Frazer,
'refused to play the part of the heathen god and soil his last days
by debauchery. The threats and arguments of his commanding officer,
Bassus, failed to shake his constancy, and accordingly he was
beheaded.'[2] But Bassus, a perfect gentleman, never asked Dasius to
soil his last days by debauchery, or to play the part of a heathen god.
He merely offered to Dasius the usual test, just as Claverhouse might
have offered the Abjuration Oath. The position of Dasius was exactly
that of a dragoon of 1684 who 'refused the abjuration.'

In my opinion, Dasius probably was executed for his scruples,
insolently expressed, if we believe his biographer; and, if we do not
believe his biographer, the evidence ceases to exist. The biographer,
knowing about the usual King of the Saturnalia in every Roman
household, and wishing to check the survivals of pagan revelry at
the new year, declared that the King of the Saturnalia was actually
sacrificed to Saturn. But in his own account of the conversations
between Dasius and his commanding officer not a word is said about the
Saturnalia and the sacrifice of the mock-king. On the other hand, the
commanding officer, or military judge, labours to save the life of
Dasius, not being aware that it is in any way endangered--except by
his recusancy. This hardly appears in Mr. Frazer's brief summary. But
a glance at the original 'Acts of St. Dasius' shows the nature of the
evidence.[3]

If any part of it has an official basis, as M. Cumont supposes, that
part must be the examination of Dasius by Bassus. Here occurs no hint
of sacrificing Dasius as Saturn; Bassus expects him to throw incense
on the flame, and to continue an honourable soldier of the Empire. He
knows nothing about sacrificing Dasius. Thus, as historians regard
evidence the statement about the yearly victim of Saturn, a statement
made long after the event, and after the establishment of Christianity,
is weak indeed. For it has no corroboration in the works of Latin or
Greek historians or antiquaries. But anthropology is not history, and
Mr. Frazer argues, 'the martyrologist's account of the Saturnalia
agrees so closely with the accounts of similar rites elsewhere, which
could not possibly have been known to him, that the substantial
accuracy of his description may be regarded as established.'[4]

Now we have the Aztec case and the Sacæan case. But the Aztec victim
is a captive, not a free soldier, whose life Bassus is most anxious
to preserve. The Sacæan victim is not sacrificed, and is a condemned
criminal. Now Mr. Frazer has said 'when a nation becomes civilised, if
it does not drop human sacrifices altogether, it at least selects as
victims only such wretches as would be put to death at any rate.'[5]
But a valuable soldier, like Dasius, is not a wretch who would be put
to death at any rate. Again, among the numerous cases of periods of
licence, like the Sacæa, we know only one instance of sacrifice, and
that of a criminal, in Ashanti. Our business is to prove that free
Roman soldiers voluntarily sacrificed themselves at the Saturnalia. The
Aztec sacrifice of a captive, the Persian execution of a criminal, with
folklore rites of analogous description, scarcely make the Roman custom
probable, while the direct evidence is only that of the martyrologist.
His evidence merely asserts, as to the death of Dasius, that he
perished for refusing the usual test. Again, as M. Parmentier argues,
the sacrifice, if it existed, may have been of Oriental importation. In
this condition of the evidence, especially as it allots thirty days to
the Saturnalia, an otherwise unheard-of period, suspension of judgment
seems prudent.


[1] Urbino, 1727, vol. i. p. 198.

[2] _Golden Bough_, iii. 141.

[3] _Analecta Bollandiana_, xvi. pp. 5-16. The precise position of a
'Legatus' like Bassus is rather indistinct. If an officer, he need not
have asked Dasius what his 'profession' was.

[4] _G. B_. iii. 142.

[5] _G. B_. iii. 120.




APPENDIX C

THE RIDE OF THE BEARDLESS ONE


Mr. Frazer's argument about the Ride of the Beardless One, and the
possible traces of a similar burlesque performance preluding to or
succeeding the Crucifixion, is not easy to follow. Perhaps, in the
text, I may have misconceived my author's meaning. We know the ride
of the beardless one in Persia through the work of Hyde, published at
Oxford in 1700, and again in 1760. I condense Hyde's account as given
by Mr. Frazer.[1] The date of the festivity of the beardless one was
'the first day of the first month, which in the most ancient Persian
calendar corresponds to March, so that the date of the ceremony agrees
with that of the Babylonian New Year Festival of Zakmuk.' In Mr.
Frazer's third volume, the Sacæa synchronise with Zakmuk, though in
his second volume the Sacæa are of June-July. We shall suppose him, in
the present passage, to adhere to the date of March for the Sacæa. The
ride of the beardless one, if so, occurs at the Sacæan date. But Hyde
found that some Persians regarded the ride of the beardless one as of
recent institution; if they were right, it has no traceable connection
with the ancient Sacæa. Nor was there any mock-king concerned in the
ride of the beardless one; and there was no probable sacred harlot;
still less were there two beardless ones, with two sacred harlots,
as in Mr. Frazer's theory of the Sacæa. At all events Hyde says no
more about the sacred harlots than Dio Chrysostom or any other ancient
author records in the case of the Sacæa. Far from being attired as a
king, the beardless buffoon was led about naked, on a horse, mule, or
ass, fanning himself and complaining of heat, while people soused him
in ice, snow, or cold water. Attended by the household of the king or
governor, he extorted contributions. The goods seized between dawn and
morning prayers fell to the governor or king; what the buffoon took
between the first and second prayers he kept; and then he vanished. The
populace might beat him later, if they caught him.

Now if this holiday farce existed, at the Sacæa and at Zakmuk, during
the time of the exile, the Jews could not borrow the Sacæan custom
of hanging a mock-king, for, on Mr. Frazer's theory (if I do not
misunderstand it), the ride of the beardless one came in 'after the
serious meaning of the custom' (the hanging of the mock-king) 'had been
forgotten.' The ride of the beardless one is 'a degenerate copy of the
original'--of the Sacæan whipping, hanging, and scourging a condemned
criminal--which had fallen out of use, I presume. Lagarde is not of
that opinion: he thinks that the author of the Book of Esther knew and
combined the colours of the Persian Magophonia, the Sacæa, and the ride
of the beardless. In fact, Dio Chrysostom does not tell us that the
Sacæan mock-king rode, whether naked or in splendour, through the city;
nor that he made a forced collection, which he was not allowed to live
to enjoy. These things may have occurred, but no record proves them.
Yet Mr. Frazer has, provisionally, to conjecture that the Sacæan victim
had a ride of honour, and made a collection, and that our Lord enjoyed
the same privileges. 'The description of His last triumphal ride into
Jerusalem reads almost like an echo of that brilliant progress through
the streets of Susa which Haman aspired to and Mordecai accomplished.'
Our Lord does not appear to have been either naked, like the beardless
one, or clad in splendour, like Mordecai, or crowned and robed,
or attended by the men-at-arms of Pilate or Herod. He borrowed an
ass, with her colt, and the multitude strewed branches and cried,
'Hosanna to the Son of David.' He then 'overthrew the tables of the
money-changers, and cast out all them that sold and bought in the
Temple: 'a raid,' as Mr. Frazer says. But it is not on record that He
seized any property, and His motive has been regarded as an objection
to commercial transactions in a sacred edifice.

It may seem a little arbitrary to connect these acts of Christ, not
with what the Sacæan victim, to our knowledge, ever did, but with what
was done by the beardless buffoon, his degenerate copy. We have first
to guess that the Sacæan mock-king acted like him whom we have to guess
to be his late 'degenerate copy;' and then to read into the Gospels an
idea derived from accounts of the ancient or modern buffoon. Moreover,
while Christ represents the mock-king of the Sacæa in 'the high tragedy
of the ancient ceremony'--for _He_ is put to death--his counterpart,
Barabbas, has a conjectural ride which is mere 'farce,' like that of
the beardless buffoon. Now Mr. Frazer says that, 'after the serious
meaning of the Sacæan custom had been forgotten, and the substitute
was allowed to escape with his fife, the high tragedy of the ancient
ceremony would rapidly degenerate into farce.'[2]

The degeneration was rapid indeed: in the twinkling of an eye. Christ
was _not_ allowed to escape with his life: 'the high tragedy of the
ancient ceremony' existed in his case. But instantly 'the high tragedy'
was forgotten! Barabbas, Christ's counterpart, in Mr. Frazer's theory,
'may very well ... have been going about the streets, rigged out in
tawdry splendour, with a tinsel crown on his head, and a sham sceptre
in his hand, preceded and followed by all the tag-rag and bobtail of
the town, hooting, jeering, and breaking coarse jests at his expense,
while some pretended to salute his mock majesty, and others belaboured
the donkey on which he rode. It was in this fashion, probably, that in
Persia the beardless and one-eyed man made his undignified progress
through the town, to the delight of ragamuffins and the terror of
shopkeepers whose goods he confiscated if they did not hasten to lay
their peace-offerings at his feet.'[3]

All this as to Barabbas implies that the 'high tragedy' of the Sacæa
was already lost in the 'farce' of the 'degenerate copy,' the ride
of the beardless. If so, why did Christ lose his life? If _He_ died
solemnly as a recognised god (which Mr. Frazer seems to me to deny
in iii. 120 and asserts in iii. 194-197), why is his no less sacred
counterpart, Barabbas, also and simultaneously a counterpart of the
beardless buffoon?

Either the whole affair was solemn and tragic, the Haman (Christ) and
the Mordecai (Barabbas) being recognised as divine, or the whole affair
was farce, and in neither Christ nor Barabbas was there any recognised
divinity. Mr. Frazer makes the belief in the divinity of Christ depend
on the contemporary recognition of the godhead of the Sacæan victim,
whose male issue was also perhaps recognised as divine.[4] But he
also assures us that the divinity of the Sacæan victim must have been
'forgotten.'[5] In the same way Christ, as victim, was recognised as
divine, and so, necessarily, was his counterpart, Barabbas; 'whether
in sober fact, or pious fiction, the Barabbas or Son of that Divine
Father who generously gave his own Son to die for the world.'[6]
Yet this Son of the Divine Father was so remote from sacred that,
just three pages before his Sonhood is asserted, we have a picture
of him riding about on a donkey among the jeers of the 'tag-rag and
bobtail.'[7] It is difficult to accept both of the theories (not very
self-consistent in my humble opinion), which Mr. Frazer seems able to
hold simultaneously or alternately. If Barabbas rode a donkey amid
the jeers of the ragamuffins, then Christ had no triumphal entry into
Jerusalem. He, too, had merely a burlesque ride, if Barabbas had a
burlesque ride, as Mr. Frazer thinks probable. By the essence of his
theory, Christ and Barabbas were counterparts, both were divine, or
neither was divine, in general opinion. If Barabbas was a personage in
a low farce (as Mr. Frazer supposes), so was Christ, and no halo of
divinity can accrue from taking part in a burlesque, which cannot also
be a high tragedy, with divine actors. As if difficulties were never to
cease, the beardless buffoon is a degenerate copy of the Sacæan victim.
But while _he_ was a proxy for the king, and also a representative of
Humman, or Marduk, or Tammuz, or Gilgamesh, or Eabani, or a god not
yet identified: in his popular form, as the beardless buffoon, 'his
pretence of suffering from heat, and his final disappearance, suggest
that, if he personified either of the seasons, it was the departing
winter rather than the coming summer.'[8]

If so, was the buffoon of the popular ceremony the folklore original
of the Sacæan mock-king, or was he a degenerate copy of that versatile
victim with a new meaning popularly assigned to him? We are to
'recognise in him the familiar features of the mock or temporary
king,'[9] though he has neither crown, sceptre, robes, nor aught
to cover his nakedness. If he is not the popular original of the
mock-king of the Sacæa, how does he, and how does his magic, put us
'in a position finally to unmask the leading personages in the Book
of Esther'?[10] If he is a new popular interpretation of the Sacæan
mock-king, a misconstrued survival, he cannot help to explain the
Sacæa, or 'Esther,' especially if, as a player in a farce which was a
mitigation of the Sacæa, he had not come into existence when 'Esther'
was written. But, if the beardless buffoon represents the popular
germ of the Sacæan victim, then that victim was originally neither
the king's proxy, nor Tammuz, nor Marduk, nor Gilgamesh, nor Eabani,
but perhaps 'the departing winter.' He can only serve the theory, in
that capacity, if provided with a counterpart to represent the coming
summer, while he and his counterpart both have female mates, of whom
there is not a ghost of a trace in our authorities, whether in the
instance of the Sacæa, the Ride of the Beardless, or the Crucifixion.
Nobody says that there were two beardless buffoons, yet there is just
as much evidence for them as for the conjectural two sacred characters,
with two sacred harlots, at the Sacæa. We must avoid the _multiplicatio
entium præter necessitatem_.


[1] _G. B_. iii. 181, 182.

[2] _G. B_. iii. 183.

[3] _G. B_. iii. 192.

[4] _G. B_. iii. 186.

[5] _G. B_. iii. 120.

[6] _G. B_. iii. 195.

[7] _G. B_. iii. 192.

[8] _G. B_. iii. 184.

[9] _G. B_. iii. 182.

[10] _G. B_. iii. 184.



INDEX




    ADONIS. _See_ Tammuz
    Agathias (Byzantine poet), cited, 130
    Ahone (aboriginal N. American god), 20, 39
    Alatunjas (Arunta headmen), 101, 259, 260, 265, 267, 269
    Alcheringa (mythical heroic age, or period of fabulous ancestors,
       of the Arunta), 15, 251, 253, 254
    Alcheringites (fabulous ancestors), 251, 252
    Algonquin deity, 39
    Alkna Buma (Arunta clairvoyant), and new-born babies, 262
    Amadhlozi (Zulu ancestral spirits), 227, 228
    Anahuac: human sacrifices, 193
    Anaitis (Persian love goddess), 119, 194
    Andamanese: religious beliefs, 231, 232
    Andouagni (aboriginal Canadian god), 10;
       no form of prayer addressed to 10, 11, 12, 21, 89
    Anthropology, present-day neglect of its study, 7;
       errors of the 'higher criticism,' 9;
       gods not addressed in prayer, 10, 11;
       conflicting evidence of race beliefs, 11;
       coincidence of testimony, 12, 13.
       _See_ under names of tribes and gods
    Argyllshire: superstition among women connected
       with cup-marked rocks, 252, 254
    Arician grove of Diana, the, and its ghastly priest, 207 _et seq._
    Arthurian legend: the magical sword, 211
    Arunta (tribe of Central Australia), their theory of evolution of our
       species and the nature of life, 15;
       scope of their ideas, 16;
       practice of magic, 46, 61, 62, 65;
       magical rites to assist the processes of nature, 82, 83;
       periods of licence, 193, 194, 196, 198;
       totems, 250, 251, 252;
       cited, 67, 68, 101, 259, 263, 264, 265 note, 266, 267
    Ashanti: licence at the harvest festival, 188, 189
    Asia Minor Greek cities: use of scapegoats in times of calamity, 190
    Astarte (Semitic goddess). _See_ Ishtar
    Atahocan (Huron deity), 42, 89, 238, 296, 297
    Athenæus, on the Sacæa, 119, 120, 121;
       cited, 132, 185, 186, 195, 196
    Athenian festival of Cronos, 116, 117
    Athens: scapegoats killed in times of distress, 190
    Atholl, Earl of (pretender to royalty), mock crowning of, 203
    Atua (Samoan), tree of protection, 219

    Australian blacks: alleged endeavour to delay the course of the sun, 3;
       religious ideas unborrowed, 44;
       attention to the dead, 49;
       Christian Deity identified by them with their own supreme
       beings, 49;
    religious ideas vary according to fertility of soil, 50;
    invent to please whites, 50, 51;
    emergence of gods from ancestors, 51;
    religious beliefs, 231, 232;
    engraved churinga and rock paintings, 245 _et seq._;
    fire ceremony of, 271.
    _See_ also under tribal names
    Aztecs: beliefs, 75; human sacrifice at harvest festival, 127, 173, 300

    BABYLON: annual sacrifice of a criminal proxy king, 77;
       hypothesis of that rite, 91, 101, 103, 106
    Backhouse, Mr. (Quaker), his 'Visit to Australian Colonies,' cited, 26
    Bagolos (tribe): human sacrifices, 129
    Baiame (Pei-a-mei, or Baiamai) (Australian moral creative being),
       25-32, 35, 36, 39, 40, 42, 43, 66, 67, 89, 226, 238, 297
    Balder (Scandinavian spirit), the Eddaic myth of, 213-217
    Ballima (Australian spiritual paradise), 36, 37
    Banjars (tribe): beat their king till the weather changes, 85
    Barabbas: a counterpart of the sacred Victim, 201, 303, 304
    Bau (Babylonian goddess), 137, 138
    Beiderbecke, Mr., on South African gods, 236, 237
    Beiruk, William (Australian black), on Bunjil, 34
    Benares: fire-walking, 290, 291
    Benedictine Mission at Nursia, 13
    Bernadette (seeress of Lourdes): fire-handling, 272
    Berosus, quoted, on the Sacæa, 119, 120, 142, 144, 185, 196
    Birds, wise, Australian and American myth of, 24
    Blackfoot Indians (N. America): religious ideas, 295
    Bluebeard: new version, 167
    Bobowissi (W. African deity), 39
    Bora (Australian initiatory mysteries), women excluded from, 30,
       58, 66, 71, 195
    Borrowed religion, 15 _et seq_., 295
    Boyma. _See_ Baiame
    Brahan warning to the Mackenzies, superstitious belief, 98
    Brebeuf, Father, on the Oki, 19, 42
    Brewin (Kurnai supreme being), 27, 49, 52, 53
    Brinton: etymology of the god Kiehtan, 20
    British Isles: fire-walking, 271
    Brough Smyth, Mr., cited, 41, 54
    Bryant's ark, 5
    Buckley (convict), on the Australian ideas of a god, 26
    Bulgaria, Nistinares of: fire-handling, 272, 283, 285, 286
    Bullimah (Australian paradise), 36
    Bull-roarers, (in savage mysteries), 65, 67, 71, 248, 255
    Bunjil (Australian god), 32, 34, 41, 66
    Bunyip (fabled Australian monster), 26

    CALICUT (Malabar): religious self-slaughter of the king, 98, 217
    Caligula and the priest of Diana, 209
    Callaway, Dr., on Zulu beliefs, 97, 225, 227, 228, 229, 231,
       232, 233, 234, 237, 238
    Calvary, 200 _et seq._
    Cambodia: temporary kings, 105; period of licence, 187
    Cameron, Mr. A. L. P., on the tribes of New South Wales, 70
    Canadian aboriginal god, Andouagni, 10, 11, 12, 21, 89
    Carew, Mr., on fire-walking, 283
    Carnival, destruction of, at end of modern Roman festival, 110
    Catlin, on Mandan Mystery Play of the Flood, 23, 24
    Catullus, cited, 184
    Celebes, the: harvest customs, 267
    Cbaka (Zulu king), 97, 228, 229, 230
    Cheviots, the: cup and ring incised on boulders, 241
    Chinese vernal festival of fire, 270
    Chitome (Congo 'pontiff'), 133
    Christ: theories concerning, 76, 78, 79, 100, 106, 110, 200, 206
    Christian faith, origin of the, 76 _et seq._
    Churinga (Australian), wood or stone marked with circles, cups, _&c,_
       244, 245, 246, 247, 248, 249, 251, 252, 253, 254, 255
    Churinga ilkinia, sacred rock-drawing of totem, 246, 249
    Coleridge, Hartley, cited, 31
    Collins, Mr. ('New South Wales'), on native use of word 'father,' 32
    Colquhomi, Dr., on fire-walking, 282
    Congo tribes, 61; their pontiff not permitted to die a natural death,
      96, 133
    Craig, Dr. George: fire-walking, 275
    Craig, Dr. W.: fire-walking, 275
    Craigie, Mr. W. A., on the myth of Balder, 214
    Cranz (missionary), on Greenlanders' beliefs, 21, 87, 88
    Crawford, Mr. Lindsay, cited, 57 note
    Crœsus, 129
    Cronos festival, the, 108, 109, 116, 117
    Crookes, Mr., cited, on fire-walking, 286
    Crookes, Sir William, cited, 289
    Crucifixion, a theory of the, 80, 103
    Crystal-gazing, 32
    Ctesias, on the Sacæa, 120
    Cumont, Professor Franz, on the legend of Dasius, 112;
       on the Saturnalia, 113, 114, 115, 142;
       cited, 183, 298, 300
    'Cup and ring:' a solution, 241 _et seq._
    Curr, Mr., on Australian native beliefs, 51

    DARAMULUN (Australian deity), 27, 66, 71
    Darwin, cited, 6
    Dasius, story of the martyrdom of, 79, 109, 110, 111, 112, 113, 114,
       115, 121, 182, 185, 298, 301
    Davis, Mr. John Moore, on Australian native sacrifice of
       the first-born, 54
    Dawson, Mr. ('Aborigines of Australia'), on native religious worship,
       33, 34
    Deputy gods, 39
    Devils, expulsion of, savage licence following, 187
    Diana, grove of (near Aricia): the golden bough in, 207 _et seq._
    Diana of the Chersonese, 208
    Dieri, the (Central Australian tribe): ancestral spirit
    worship, 50, 56, 62, 63, 64
    Dio Chrysostom, on the festival of Sacæa, 79, 120 and note, 121, 132,
       147, 185, 186, 199, 302
    Divine scapegoats, 189 _et seq._
    Dodge, Colonel, on North American beliefs, 88, 89
    Donnelly, Mr. W. A., discovery of stones marked with cup and ring,
       _&c_, 245, 246
    Dos Santos, on Caffre beliefs, 97 and note, 234, 235
    Druid: origin of the word, 215 note
    Druid circles, 242
    Druids, gathering mistletoe, 215
    Dumbuck (Scotland): marked stones at, 245, 246, 253
    Dunbuie (Scotland): stones marked with rings at, 245. 246, 247, 253
    Duncan. Hon. L. M.: fire-walking, 277
    Dyaks, their superstition regarding new-born children, 261

    EABANI (feast of), 164, 165, 166, 178, 180, 181
    Eddaic myth of Balder, 213-217
    Egyptian Book of the Dead, 72; gods, tombs and mummies, 90;
       King of Unreason, 105; sacrifice of red-haired men, 128
    Ellis, Sir A. B., 13; theory of borrowed gods, 42; on Ashanti harvest
       festival, 188
    Erech, Eabani feast at, 164, 165
    Esther, Book of, 147, 180; theories concerning, 161-181
    Ethiopian kings of Meroe: worshipped as gods, killed by priests, 96
    Evolution of gods, 82 _et seq._
    Euhemerism, 90
    European influences on savage beliefs, 11
    Euthyphro, cited, 59, 60
    Everard, Mr. H. S. C, cited, 211
    Eyeos, sacrifice of king of, 98, 221
    Eyre, Mr., on the Australian blacks' idea of origin of creation, 40, 41
    Ezekiel, 151, 176

    FARWARDIGAN (Persian feast), 168, 169
    Fijian hymns, 72; periods of licence, 195, 196, 198; fire
       ceremony, 273,
       277-283, 288
    Fire-walking, 270 _et seq._
    First-born, eating the, 54
    First-fruits, 267 _et seq._
    Fisher's ghost, 54
    Fison, Mr. Lorimer, on the emerging of gods from ancestors, 50, 56
    Foelsche, Mr., on savage belief in a benevolent creator or demiurge, 57
       note, 58
    Frazer, Mr. J. G., theories of: comparative study of human beliefs
       and institutions, 6, 7;
       religion the despair of magic, 10, 60;
       magic preceded the invention of god 47;
       limited definition of religion, 48, 59;
       the Australians who practise magic have little or no
          religion, 49-52;
       on the Jewish Passover, 53; its Australian parallel, 53, 54;
       speculative generalisations, 55;
       arbitrary selection of witnesses, 55-58;
       ascription of wrong beliefs to the Arunta, 61;
       inadvertent proof that irreligious Australians are religious, 62-65;
       invented powerful beings, 68;
       religion, the conciliation of higher powers by prayer and
          sacrifice, 69;
       shooting stars, 74; imported religious ideas, 75;
       origin of the belief in the divinity of Christ, 76-78;
       use of the legend of Dasius, 79, 109-115;
       mental prepossession on the Crucifixion, 80;
       double pairs of divinised human beings, 82;
       alleged mortality of gods, 85-94;
       religious regicide, 94-100;
       annual religious regicide, 101-104;
       mock kings, 103 _et seq._;
       persons who suffer for god-man kings, 104-107;
       survivals of human sacrifice at the Saturnalia, 109-115;
       modern Carnival, 110, 111;
       the Greek Cronia, 115-118;
       the Sacæa, 118-122;
       again mock kings, 120, 121, 123;
       attempts to prove the Sacæan criminal divine, 123-140;
       sacrifice by hanging, 127-132;
       date of the Sacæa, 135-138; the
       Sacæan victim, 138;
       analogies of Zakmuk, Sacæa, and Purim, 141-160;
       human victims at Purim, 153;
       connection of Mordecai, Esther, Vashti, and Haman with Babylonian
          and Elamite gods, 161;
       the ride of the beardless Persian buffoon, 168, 171, 301-305;
       festivals of licence, 185-199;
       divine scapegoat, 189;
       Calvary, 200-204;
       the ghastly priest of the grove of Diana, 206-223;
       the Quiteva, 234; taboo, 268; fire-walking, 270
       Fuegian idea on flapper shooting, 267

    GASON, Mr., on the beliefs of the Dieri, 56, 57
       note; on Mara Mura, 62, 63
    German theory of Purim, 147
    Georgia, stone-markings in, 243
    Ghost-worship, 31
    Gilgamesh and Eabani, legend of, 164, 165, 180, 181
    Gillen. _See_ Spencer and Gillen
    Gingero, king of: killed by kinsmen if wounded in war, 96
    Gods, the evolution of, 82 _et seq._
    Goethe, and native Australian beliefs, 35
    Gold Coast: savage period of licence, 186
    Goodwin, Mr.: fire-walking, 275
    Gorten, Mr.: fire-walking, 292
    Gounja Ticquoa (Hottentot supreme deity), 232
    Greek religious beliefs paralleled with those of savage races, 38;
       graves of gods, 90, 93
    Greenlanders: religious beliefs, 87, 88
    Greenway, Mr., on the derivation of Baiame, 25; 44
    Greyhair: Zulu superstition concerning, 97
    Grogoragally (Aust. son of god), 36, 37, 39
    Gudgeon, Colonel: the Te Umuti, or fire-walking, 273, 274, 276, 285
    Günther, Mr., cited, 44
    Guyaquar Indians, human sacrifices by, when sowing, 127

    HADDON, Mr.: New Guinea art, 249
    Haggard, Colonel Andrew, on fire-walking, 284, 285
    Haggard, Mr. Rider, cited, 228
    Hale, Mr. Horace, on the Australian god Baiame, 25, 27, 28, 29;
       on Koin, 27; cited, 43
    Hall, Mr. S. C.: fire-handling, 276
    Haman: theories concerning, 134, 161-181
    Haman (Elamite deity), 78
    Hanging, sacrifice by, 77, 78, 80, 127 _et seq._, 138, 148, 153,
       175, 177, 178, 189, 195, 197, 199
    Hartland, Mr., quoted, on savage ideas of superior beings, 35, 36;
       prayers for the dead, 36;
       censure of Mr. Manning's terminology, 36;
       origin of belief in a supreme being, 224;
       on Zulu beliefs, 227, 229, 232, 233, 234
    Hastwell, Mr.: fire-walking, 287
    Hays of Errol, their mistletoe life-token, 216 note
    Hearn, Mr. Lafcadio, on fire-walking, 284
    Heitsi Eibib (Hottentot superior being), 90
    Hennessy, Mr. Pope, quoted, 58
    Henry, Miss Teuira: fire-walking, 287
    Heraldry, 260
    Heriot, cited, on the Virginian Creator, 22
    Herodotus, cited, 149
    Hesychius, on the Sacæa, 121
    Hindoo Koosh: harvest licence, 187
    Hippolytus, legend of, 209, 218
    Hirpi of Soracte, the, 271; fire-walking, 289
    Hobamok (son of the god Kiehtan), 38, 39
    Hocken, Dr. T. M., on fire-walking, 273, 276, 277-283, 285, 293, 294
    Home, D. D., fire-handling by, 272, 276
    Honolulu: fire-walking, 292
    Horses of Virbius, 139
    Hos (N.-E. Indian tribe): feast of licence, 187
    Hottentot religious beliefs, 231, 232
    How (Tongan elective king), 86
    Howitt, Mr. A. W., on the Australian god Baiame, 25, 31, 32, 34;
       the Kurnai goblin Brewin, 27;
       initiated by the Kurnai, 52;
       change of views on Brewin, 53;
       on the attributes of native great spirits, 66;
       cited, 12, 39, 40, 41, 43, 44
    Humman (Elamite deity), 139, 156, 157, 158, 159, 161, 166, 169, 172,
    173-181, 189

    IBN BATUTA: travellers' tales, 99;
       Javan family deputed to die for the Sultan, 99
    Images, clay or waxen, as vicarious objects of revenge, 3
    India: fire-walking, 286
    Indo-China: offering of first-fruits to a god, 267
    Ireland: late superstition in, 109;
       incised patterns on stones, 253
    Iruntarinia (evil spirits), inimical through new-born
       children, 262, 264
    Isaacs, Mr., quoted, on Zulu superstitions, 97
    Ishtar (goddess), 125, 157, 164, 175, 177, 178, 179
    Islamite suggestions of a God to savage races, 11

    JASTROW, Professor, on mental prepossession, 80;
       Babylonian gods, 91;
       the Tammuz feast, 136, 137;
       the Zakmuk, 142;
       the Book of Esther, 162;
       the Purim, 162;
       cited, 157, 166, 178, 179;
    Java: self-slaughter of kings and their substitutes, 99
    Jensen, Dr., on the feast of Purim, 150, 151, 152, 159, 162, 164, 165,
       166, 172, 173, 176, 177, 179
    Jesuits, credited with suggesting the idea of a great spirit to savage
       races, 23;
       cited, 42, 45
       Jevons, Mr.,
       on taboo, 259, 260, 261, 268
    Jewish Passover, the, theory of, 53
    Jews: hanging a mock-king at the Purim festival, 78;
       condemned criminals representing life and death of vegetation, 78
    Jinn, the, 91
    Johnson, Dr., cited, 263

    KALARI (Australian bull-roarer.) 71
    Kalk (Kallak): Australian bull-roarer, 71
    Kalunga (African god), 237
    Kamchatka: religious beliefs, 226
    Kamilaroi (Australian tribe): religious beliefs, 28, 29, 31, 43, 66
    Karunga (African god), 236, 237
    Khonds: human sacrifices, 129
    Kibanga (Upper Congo): king killed by sorcerers when dying, 96
    Kiehtan (New England god), 20, 21, 38, 39, 90
    Kingsley, Miss Mary, cited, 12, 42, 45
    Kitchi Manitou (North American Indian great spirit), 18
    Kittanitowit (Algonquin great living spirit), 20
    Koin (Australian supernatural black man), 27
    Kolb (missionary), cited, 232
    Kudulu (African tribe): human sacrifices, 129
    Kuenen, Professor, cited, 147
    Kurnai (Australian tribe), 32;
       initiate Mr. Howitt in the mysteries, 52, 53; 67

    LAFITAU, Père, on the Manitou and Okki, 18, 19
    L'Allemant, Père, on the Virginian creator, 22
    Lagarde. Professor, on Persian feasts, 168, 169, 171, 302
    Lagos: animal and human sacrifices, 128
    Le Jeune, Father, on the meaning of Manitou, 18;
       the Algonquin god, 21, 23; cited, 42, 297
    Licence, periods of, at ancient and savage festivals, 185-199
    Lionetti (Italian conjurer), fire-handling experiments, 283
    Lithuanian beer custom, 266
    Livingstone, Dr., on Kaffir beliefs, 232
    Livy, on the Saturnalia, 108
    Loan-gods (or borrowed religion), theory of, 17 _et seq._
    Lucian, on the Saturnalia, 108
    Lyall, Sir Alfred, 55;
       on the foundation of natural religion, 59, 60;
       speculative generalisation, 74;
       quoted, 198, 220
    Lydian kings as sacrifices, 129

    MACDONALD, Mr., quoted, 235 note, 236
    Mackenzie, Captain, on fire-walking, 270
    Macrobius, on the Saturnalia, 108, 111, 120 note, 205
    Magic, or witchcraft, 3, 10, 16; 46 _et seq. See_ under tribal names
    Magophonia (Persian feast), 119, 149, 168
    Makogo (Wathi Wathi tribesman), on the future life, 72
    Mandan Deluge legend, the, 23, 24, 25
    Man-gods, 84, 93, 94, 95, 96, 99, 104, 138, 192
    Manitou, meaning of the word, 18;
       superior being, 296
    Manning, Mr., on early religious beliefs in New South Wales, 35;
       his terminology in question, 35, 36, 37;
       on exclusion of women from religious knowledge, 39;
       rebuffed by natives in his inquiries, 42;
       on taboo, 261
    Marduk (Babylonian god), 92, 137, 138, 139, 142, 149, 156, 157, 158,
       159, 161, 164, 165, 166, 171, 175, 176, 177, 178, 179, 180, 181, 189
    Marimos: human sacrifices, 129
    Mariner, on Tongan beliefs, 86
    Matthews, Mr., cited, 57 note
    Masai (African tribe), 12
    Mauritius: fire-walking, 284
    Maximilian, Prince, on Mandan beliefs, 24
    Maxwell, Sir Herbert, on trout and May flies, 266
    Mbenga (Fiji): fire-walking, 276, 277, 279
    Meath, portable engraved stones at, 253
    Medicine-men, 33, 100
    Meissner, Herr, on the Zakmuk and Sacæa festivals, 118, 142
    Merodach. _See_ Marduk
    Mexicans: human sacrifices at stages of the maize's growth, 128; 184
    Meyer ('Hist of Antiq.'), quoted, 118
    Millar, Mr., quoted, on the Dunbuie finds, 247, 248
    Mistletoe: a magical plant, 212, 213, 214, 215, 216, 217, 221
    Mithra-worship, 114
    Moab: sacrifice of sons of kings, 105
    Mock-kings, sacrifices of, 79, 94, 105, 110, 114, 119, 120, 131,
       134, 131, 137, 153, 169, 178, 181, 182-185, 196, 197, 199
    Mœsia: mock-king personating a god, 79; sacrifice of kings, 103;
       the killing of Dasius at the Saturnalia, 109, 112; cited, 114, 115,
       121, 183, 185
    Moffat, Mr., on Kaffir beliefs, 232
    Molunga, Mulungu (Caffre god), 234, 235, 236
    Mommsen, Prof. Aug., on the Cronos feast, 116
    Montagnets (North American Indians), their application of the word
       Manitou, 18
    Moodgeegally (patron of the mysteries), 67
    Moravian missionaries on Baiame, 25
    Mordecai (companion of Nehemiah), 161, 171
    Mordecai (Babylonian supreme god?), 78;
       theories concerning, 134, 135, 161-181
    Morgan, Mr., compiler of Buckley's 'Life and Adventures,' 26
    Morimo (Bechuana deity), 232, 237
    Mortality of gods, 85 _et seq._
    Motagon (Australian dead creator), 297
    Movers, Dr., on the Sacæa festival, 130, 174;
       cited, 198
    Mukuru (African deity), the missionaries' God, 236
    Mulkari (Queensland deity), 40
    Müller, K. O., cited, 180
    Mundari (tribe): licence at festivals, 187
    Mungan-ngaur (Kurnai god), 27, 32, 52, 53, 66, 68, 89
    Munro, Dr., on the incised stone finds at Dumbuck and Dunbuie,
       255, 256
    Mura Mura (Dierian ancestors deified), 50, 57 note, 62, 63, 235
    Murrings (Australian blacks), 52
    Mystery Play of the Flood (Mandan), 23
    Myths. _See_ under names of tribes and gods
    Mzima (spirits of the dead), 236

    NANGA (Fijian harvest festival), orgies at, 195
    Ná-pi (Blackfoot deity), 90
    Natos (Blackfoot deity), 295
    Nature's processes assisted by magical rites, 82, 83
    Nebuchadnezzar, 140
    Nepaul: period of licence, 187
    New England: the god Kiehtan, 20, 21; religious beliefs, 38
    New Guinea, British: character of decorative art, 249
    New South Wales: native sacrifice of the first-born, 54
    New Zealand: the king's mana or magical power, 99
    Ngoio (Congo): daily kings, 104
    Niscaminou (Red Indian deity), 295
    Nöldeke, Professor, on the feast of Purim, 158, 159, 160, 161,
       162, 172, 176, 177, 179
    Noorele (Australian creator), 39, 40, 41, 66
    North American Indians, religious beliefs of, 88, 89.
       _See_ also under tribal names
    Nursia (Australia) Benedictine Mission at, 12
    Nyankupon (West Africa), 39

    OHIO, stone markings in, 243
    Ointment used by fire-walkers, 293
    Okeus (aboriginal Canadian god), 20, 21, 90
    Oki (Huron word for spirit), 19, 21, 22, 42
    Okki (Lafitau's 'Grand Esprit'), 19
    'Old Mars' (Roman god and scapegoat), 190
    Omuambo creation tales, 237
    Ontake Jinsha (Shintoists): fire-walking, 291
    Oorooma (native Australian hell), 37
    Oppert, Dr.: fire-walking, 286
    Orestes, story of his temple to Diana, 208, 209, 218
    Otyihereró: different names for god and spirit, 236
    Ovaherero, the (African tribe), god of, 236
    Oxford University, and the study of anthropology, 7

    PALMER, Mr., on the tribes of the Gulf of Carpentaria, 42, 44;
       cited, 74
    Pan, legend of, 91
    Parker, Mrs. Langloh, on unborrowed character of Australian
       beliefs, 34, 35, 36;
       prayers for the dead, 36;
       cited, 297
    Parmentier, M., on the Saturnalia, 113 note, 114; on the Sacæa, 118;
       cited, 183, 301
    Pascal, Dr. Th.: fire-walking, 290
    Patterns, incised, on portable small stones, 253
    Pausanias, quoted, 209
    Pei-a-mei. _See_ Baiame
    Period of Licence, the, 105 _et seq._
    Persia: annual sacrifice of a criminal proxy king, 77;
       ride of the beardless buffoon, 167, 168, 169, 171, 301-305
    Philippine Islanders: religious beliefs, 90
    Phurdigan (Persian feast), 149
    Pin-sticking of enemy's image, 3
    Pirnmeheal (Australian god), 34, 66
    Pliny, 108; on the Druids, 215, 216
    Podmore, Mr., on fire-handling, 272
    Polynesia: tattooing, 243; taboo, 259
    Ponder, Mr. Stephen: fire-walking in Straits Settlements, 286
    Pondo: period of licence, 188, 195
    Priest, the ghastly, of the Arician grove of Diana, 207 _et seq._
    Proserpine (goddess), 208, 211, 212
    Prussian king, 'God's mouth,' self-immolation, 98, 130
    Puluga (Andamanese god), 224, 226
    Purdaghân (Persian festival), 189
    Purim (Jewish festival): date, origin,
    rites, details, theories, conjectures,
    analogies, 77, 118, 119, 124, 141, 142, 145-160, 161, 162, 163, 168,
       169, 176-181, 188, 189, 194, 198, 202

    QUEENSLAND deity, Mulkari, 40
    Quilacare (Southern India): self-slaughter of the king, 98
    Quiteva, the (Sofala deity), 97 note, 234

    RAIATEA (Society Islands): fire-walking, 273, 274, 277, 287
    Rain-making magic, 62, 63, 64, 65
    Rarotonga (New Zealand): fire-walking, 273-276
    Regicide, religious, 94, 100
    Red Indian beliefs, 295
    Religious beliefs of barbaric races.
       _See_ under tribal names and gods
    Ride of the beardless buffoon, 301-305
    Ridley, Mr. (missionary), on the Australian god Baiame, 25, 29, 30;
       on native ideas of great spirits, 66, 67;
       cited, 44, 238
    Romans: customs at the Saturnalia, 108 _et seq._
    Ross, Mr. Denison, cited, 143, 145
    Roth, Dr., quoted, on the Queensland god Mulkari, 40

    SACÆ (Oriental tribe), 118, 119, 143, 194
    Sacæa (Persian festival), date, origin, rites, theories,
       details, analogies, 77, 79, 80, 81, 106, 114, 117, 118,
       119, 122, 123, 124, 126, 127, 130,
       131, 132, 134, 135, 136, 138, 139,
       141, 144, 145-160, 163, 164, 169,
       170, 172, 176-199, 201, 202, 203,
       223, 301-305
    St. Clair, Mr. Henry R.: fire-walking, 286
    St. Dasius, martyrdom. _See_ Dasius
    St. Paul, cited, 201
    Sakeas. _See_ Sacæa
    Salvado, Bishop, cited, 297
    Samoan trees of refuge for criminals, 219, 220, 222
    Sandes, Sandan (Persian deity), 130
    Saturn, 108, 139, 183, 184
    Saturnalia (Roman festival), rites, details, theories and analogies
       concerning, 79, 108, 109, 110, 183, 184, 195
    Sayce, Mr., cited, 133, 147
    Scapegoats, 189 _et seq_
    Schischmanof, Dr.: Bulgarian fire-handling, 285
    Science and superstition: definition, 1 _et seq._
    Scotland: incised patterns on rocks and stones, 253, 254
    Sementini, Dr.: fire-handling, 283
    Servius (early commentator on Virgil), on the golden bough in
       the grove of Diana. 207, 208, 209
    Shaw, quoted, 232
    Shooting stars, Wathi Wathi interpretation of, 73, 74
    Siam: temporary kings, 105
    Siebert, Mr. (German missionary), on ancestral gods, 50, 56, 63
    Simpson, Sir James, on the cup and ring, 242, 243, 244, 245, 246
    Sioux: human sacrifices for magical purposes, 128
    Skidi (Wolf Pawnees): animal and human sacrifices, 128
    Slate spear-heads, 247
    Smith, Captain ('History of Virginia'), on Okki, 19
    Smith, Mr. Robertson, cited, 133, 134, 136, 137, 138, 142
    Sofalese (Caffre tribe), their king-god, 97
    South African religions, 224 _et seq._
    _See_ under tribal names South Sea Islanders and Captain Cook, 94
    Spain: fire-walking, 285
    Spartans: lame kings, 98
    Spencer, Mr. Herbert, cited, 6, 35
    Spencer and Gillen, Messrs., cited, 15, 67, 86, 193, 194 note,
       244, 245, 246, 248, 259, 260, 265
    Statius, on the Arician grove, 209
    Stevenson, R. L., on tapu in the Pacific Islands, 268
    Stirling, Dr., cited, 62
    Stokes, Mr.: fire-walking, 286
    Stones carved with cup and rings, universality of, 242 _et seq._
    Strabo, on the Sacæa festival, 119-120;
       cited, 149, 185, 186, 194, 195, 271
    Strachey, William (successor of Captain Smith in Virginia), on the
       position of Okeus, 20
    Straits Settlements: fire-walking, 286, 287
    Strannam (Gaelic), tundun, bull-roarer, 255
    Suetonius, on the 'ghastly priest,' 209
    Superstition, definition of, 2 _et seq._
    Superstitions. _See_ under names of tribes, gods, and authorities
    Sweden: ancient treatment of king in times of public distress, 85;
       cake-eating, 266
    Sword, the magical, 211

    TABOO, 257 _et seq._
    Tagore: fire-walking, 290
    Tá-li-y-Tooboo (Tongan supreme being), 86
    Tammuz (Babylonian god of vegetation), theories concerning, 123-127,
       133-139, 141, 143, 144, 149, 151, 152, 153, 155, 157, 159, 160,
       161, 164, 172, 176-180, 183, 189, 192
    Ta-ta-thi (New South Wales tribe), 70, 71
    Te Umu-ti (Maori), or fire-walking ceremony, 273-276
    Thargelia (Athenian festival): scapegoats, 190
    Tha-tha-pali (Watha Watha deity), 70, 73, 74
    Thevet, M., on the Canadian Indians' belief in a 'creator,' 21
    Thomson, Mr. Basil: fire-walking, 288
    Threlkeld, Mr., on the Australian god Koin, 27;
       translation of the Gospel of St. Luke, 27;
       first worker at the dialects of the Baiame-worshipping
       tribes, 27, 29;
       cited, 43, 44, 45
    Thuremlin (superior being), 71
    Thurston, Lady, her experiment in fire-walking, 278
    Ti-ra-wá (Pawnee deity), 89, 128
    Tokio (Japan): fire-walking, 284
    Tone, Mr. N. J.: fire-walking, 287
    Tonga: the How religious function, 268; fire-walking, 287
    Tongan religious beliefs, 86
    Tonquin: period of licence, 187, 188, 195, 196
    Torngarsuk (Greenlanders' great spirit), 21, 87
    Totems, 246, 249-251, 264, 265, 266, 289
    Traditions. _See_ under names of tribes, gods, and authorities
    Tree spirits, 210 _et seq._
       regear, Mr., on fire-walking, 273
    Trinidad (W. Indies): fire-walking, 286
    Tshi-speaking races, 42
    Tsui Goab (idealised Hottentot medicine man), 232
    Tulong (deity), 70, 71
    Tundun (patron of Kurnai mysteries and bull-roarer), 66, 67, 68
    Turner, Mr., quoted, on Polynesian tree sanctuaries, 219
    Turramulan, Taramuhin (Australian god), 31
    Twanyirika (Arunta great spirit), 65, 66, 67, 68, 71, 263, 264
    Tylor, Mr.: on the Canadian deity Andouagni, 16;
       modification of his views on primitive culture, 17;
       the high gods of low races, 18;
       the Great Spirit or Manitou of the North American Indians, 18;
       the word Oki, 19; summary of Winslow, 20;
       the Greenlanders' Torngarsuk, 21;
       attribution of the idea of the great spirit to missionary
          influence, 22;
       Mandan Deluge legend, 23, 24;
       Australian god Baiame, 25-32;
       ideas of European importation, 51;
       native Australian beliefs, 75;
       Greenlanders' beliefs, 87, 88 note;
       Zulu beliefs, 226;
       fire-walking, 271;
       theory of borrowed gods, 295

    UBEBE (Zulu native), on his race's beliefs, 230, 231
    Ukoto (Zulu native), on his race's beliefs, 228, 229
    Ulangeni (Zulu native): repudiates idea of borrowed
       Hottentot deity, 231, 232
    Umdabuko (Zulu creator), 229, 230
    Umdali (Kaffir creator), 232
    Umhlanga (Zulu), bed of reeds whence man sprung, 230
    Umpengula Mbandi (Zulu native), on native beliefs, 228, 229,
       230, 232, 238
    Umvelingangi (Zulu deity), 225, 228
    Unkulunkulu (Zulu deity), 89, 226, 227, 228, 229, 230, 231,
       233, 235, 236, 238
    Unyoro, the king of: not allowed by his wives a natural death, 96
    Upolu (Samoan Islands): sacred tree asylums for criminals, 219
    Urabunna (tribe of Central Australia), 16
    Urkus (savage tribe), 58
    Uthlanga (Zulu source of being), 230
    Utikxo (Zulu deity), 231, 232, 233, 234, 235, 230, 238

    VASHTI, theories concerning, 78, 161, 171, 175, 177, 178, 180
    Vave (Samoan god), 219
    Vegetation, gods of, 5, 206 _et seq._
    Virbius (deity of vegetation), 139
    Virgil, his golden bough, 207 _et seq._
    Virginia: aborigines' chief god Okki, 19
    Volsunga Saga: the magical sword, 207, 211

    WAITZ, Dr.: on Australian religious customs, 30;
       rejects the hypothesis of Australian borrowed beliefs, 43, 44;
       quoted, 232
    Walking through fire, 270 _et seq._
    Wallace, Sir William: mock crowning, 203
    Warramunga (Australian tribe): sacred rock-drawing, 246
    Wathi Wathi (New South Wales tribe),
       religious beliefs, 70, 72, 74
    Way of Souls, the, 72, 73
    Wellhausen, Dr.: on the Jewish exile, 181
    West Africa, taboo in, 259;
       human sacrifices, 128
    Wilson, Professor Daniel, on cups and rings, 243, 244
    Winslow, quoted, on Kiehtan (New England native deity), 20, 38
    Wiraijuri (Australian tribe), beliefs of, 66
    Witchcraft. _See_ Magic
    Woiworung dirge, a, 41
    Women debarred from the mysteries, 27, 33, 52, 71

    XERXES (the king in Book of Esther), 148, 161, 167

    YERRUNTHALLY (Queensland tribe): idea of shooting stars, 74
    Ynglinga Saga, the, 214

    ZAGMUK, Zakmuk (Babylonian festival), details and theories concerning,
       118, 137, 141-144, 145-160, 162, 163, 164, 165, 179, 181, 301
    Zeus, grave of, 90, 93; 157
    Zoganes (Babylonian slave-lord), theories concerning, 124, 125, 130,
       139, 185, 186, 195, 196, 197, 198
    Zulus: ghost worshippers, 31;
       religious beliefs, 97;
       period of licence, 188, 195;
       harvest custom, 267.
       _See_ under tribal names






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Magic and Religion, by Andrew Lang


