CHAPTER III. (_Continued_).

THE CONCEPTION OF ARTISTIC BEAUTY.

PART II.--THE END OF ART.


3. The question then arises, what the interest or the _End_ is which
man proposes to himself when he reproduces such a content in the
form of works of art. This was the third point of view which we set
before us with reference to the work of art, and the closer discussion
of which will finally make the transition to the actual and true
conception of art.

If in this aspect we glance at the common consciousness, a current idea
which may occur to us is--

([Greek: a]) The principle of the _imitation of nature_. According
to this view the essential purpose of art consists in imitation, in
the sense of a facility in copying natural forms as they exist in a
way that corresponds precisely to them; and the success of such a
representation, exactly corresponding to nature, is supposed to be what
affords complete satisfaction.

([Greek: a]) This definition contains, _prima facie_, nothing beyond
the purely formal[70] aim that whatever already exists in the external
world, just _as_ it is therein, is now to be made a second time by man
as a copy of the former, as well as he can do it with the means at his
command. But we may at once regard this repetition as--

([Greek: aa]) A _superfluous_ labour, seeing that the things
which pictures, theatrical representations, etc., imitate and
represent--animals, natural scenes, incidents in human life--are before
us in other cases already, in our own gardens or our own houses, or
in cases within our closer or more remote circle of acquaintance.
And, looking more closely, we may regard this superfluous labour as a
presumptuous sport which--

([Greek: bb]) Comes far short of nature. For art is restricted in its
means of representation; and can produce only _one-sided_ deceptions,
_i.e._ for instance, a semblance of reality addressed to one sense
only; and, in fact, it invariably gives rise, if it rests in the formal
purpose of _mere imitation_, to a mere parody[71] of life, instead of
a genuine vitality. Just so the Turks, being Mohammedans, tolerate,
as is well known, no pictures copied from men or the like; and when
James Bruce, on his journey to Abyssinia, showed paintings of fish
to a Turk, the man was amazed at first, but soon enough made answer:
"If this fish shall rise up against you on the last day, and say, 'You
have created for me a body, but no living soul,' how will you defend
yourself against such an accusation?" The prophet, moreover, it is
recorded in the Sunna, said to the two women, Ommi Habiba and Ommi
Selma, who told him of pictures in Æthiopian churches--"These pictures
will accuse their authors on the day of judgment!"

There are, no doubt, as well, examples of completely deceptive
imitation. Zeuxis' painted grapes have from antiquity downward been
taken to be the triumph of this principle of the imitation of nature,
because the story is that living doves pecked at them. We might add
to this ancient example the modern one of Büttner's monkey, which bit
in pieces a painted cockchafer in Rösel's "Diversions of the Insect
World," and was pardoned by his master, in spite of his having thereby
spoilt a beautiful copy of this valuable work, because of this proof
of the excellence of the pictures. But when we reflect on these and
similar instances, it must at once occur to us that, in place of
commending works of art because they have _actually_ deceived _even_
pigeons and monkeys, we ought simply to censure the people who mean
to exalt a work of art by predicating, as its highest and ultimate
quality, so poor an effect as this. In general, we may sum up by saying
that, as a matter of mere imitation, art cannot maintain a rivalry with
nature, and, if it tries, must look like a worm trying to crawl after
an elephant.

([Greek: gg]) Considering the unvarying failure--comparative failure,
at least--of imitation when contrasted with the original in nature,
there remains as end nothing beyond our pleasure in the sleight
of hand[72] which can produce something so like nature. And it is
doubtless open to man to be pleased at producing over again what is
already present in its own right, by his labour, skill, and industry.
But enjoyment and admiration, even of this kind, naturally grow frigid
or chilled precisely in proportion to the resemblance of the copy to
the natural type, or are even converted into tedium and repugnance.
There are portraits which, as has been wittily said, are sickeningly
like; and Kant adduces another instance relative to this pleasure in
imitation as such, viz. that we soon grow tired of a man--and there
are such men--who is able to mimic the nightingale's strain quite
perfectly; and as soon as it is discovered that a man is producing
the notes, we are at once weary of the song. We then recognize in it
nothing but a conjuring trick, neither the free production of nature,
nor a work of art; for we expect from the free productive capacity
of human beings something quite other than such music as this, which
only interests us when, as is the case with the nightingale's note, it
gushes forth from the creature's own vitality without special purpose,
and yet recalls the utterance of human feeling. In general, such
delight at our skill in mimicking can be but limited, and it becomes
man better to take delight in what he produces out of himself. In this
sense the invention of any unimportant and technical product has the
higher value, and man may be prouder of having invented the hammer,
the nail, and so forth, than of achieving feats of mimicry. For this
fervour of abstract[73] copying is to be evened with the feat of the
man who had taught himself to throw lentils through a small opening
without missing. He displayed this skill of his before Alexander, and
Alexander presented him with a bushel of lentils as a reward for his
frivolous and meaningless art.

([Greek: b]) Moreover, seeing that the principle of imitation is
purely formal, to make it the end has the result that _objective
beauty_ itself disappears. For the question is in that case no longer
_of what nature_ that is which is to be copied, but only whether it
is _correctly_ copied. The object and content of the beautiful comes
then to be regarded as matter of entire indifference. That is to
say, if we go outside the principle and speak of a difference of
beauty and ugliness in considering beasts, men, landscapes, actions,
or characters, this must nevertheless, in presence of the maxim in
question,[74] be set down as a distinction that does not belong
particularly to art, for which nothing is left but abstract imitation.
In this case the above-mentioned lack of a criterion in dealing with
the endless forms of nature reduces us, as regards the selection of
objects and their distinction in beauty and ugliness, to subjective
_taste_ as an ultimate fact, which accepts no rule and admits of no
discussion. And, in fact, if in selecting objects for representation we
start from what _men_ think beautiful or ugly, and therefore deserving
artistic imitation--that is, from their taste,--then all circles of
natural objects open to us, and not one of them will be likely to
fail of a patron. Among men, for instance, it is the case that at
any rate every bridegroom thinks his bride beautiful, and indeed,
perhaps, he alone; though not, it may be, every husband his wife; and
that subjective taste for such beauty has no fixed rule one may hold
to be the good fortune of both parties. If we, moreover, look quite
beyond individuals and their accidental taste, to the taste of nations,
this again is full of extreme diversity and contrast. How often we
hear it said that a European beauty would not please a Chinese or
even a Hottentot, in as far as the Chinaman has quite a different
conception of beauty from the negro, and the negro in turn from the
European, and so forth. Indeed, if we look at the works of art of those
extra-European peoples--their images of the gods, for instance--which
their fancy has originated as venerable and sublime, they may appear to
us as the most gruesome idols, and their music may sound to our ears
as the most horrible noise; while they, on their side, will regard our
sculptures, paintings, and musical productions as trivial or ugly.

([Greek: g]) But even if we abstract from an objective principle of
art, and if beauty is to be based on subjective and individual taste,
we shall still soon find on the side of art itself that the imitation
of nature, which certainly appeared to be a universal principle and
one guaranteed by high authority, is at any rate not to be accepted
in this universal and merely abstract form. For if we look at the
different arts it will at once be admitted that even if painting and
sculpture represent objects which appear like those of nature, or
the type of which is essentially borrowed from nature, yet works of
architecture on the other hand--and architecture belongs to the fine
arts--and the productions of poetry, in as far as they do not confine
themselves to mere description, are by no means to be called imitations
of nature. At least, if we desired to maintain the principle as
valid in the case of these latter arts, we should have to make a long
circuit by conditioning the proposition in various ways, and reducing
the so-called truth[75] at any rate to probability. But if we admitted
probability we should again be met by a great difficulty in determining
what is probable and what is not; and still, moreover, one would
neither consent nor find it possible to exclude from poetry all wholly
arbitrary and completely original[76] imaginations.

The end of art must, therefore, lie in something different from the
purely formal[77] imitation of what we find given, which in any case
can bring to the birth only _tricks_ and not _works_ of art. It is,
indeed, an element essential to the work of art to have natural shapes
for its foundation; seeing that its representation is in the medium of
external and therefore of natural phenomena. In painting, for instance,
it is an important study to know how to copy with precision the colours
in their relations to one another, the effects of light, reflections,
etc., and, no less, the forms and figures of objects down to their
subtlest characteristics.[78] It is in this respect chiefly that the
principle of naturalism in general and of copying nature has recovered
its influence in modern times. Its aim is to recall an art which has
grown feeble and indistinct to the vigour and crispness of nature;
or, again, to invoke against the purely arbitrary and artificial
conventionalism, as unnatural as it was inartistic, into which art
had strayed, the uniform, direct, and solidly coherent sequences of
nature. But however true it is that there is something right in this
endeavour from one point of view, yet still the naturalism at which it
aims is not as such the substantive and primary concern that underlies
fine art. And, therefore, although external appearance in the shape
of natural reality constitutes an essential condition of art, yet,
nevertheless, neither is the given natural world its _rule_, nor is the
mere imitation of external appearance _as_ external its _end_.

(_b_) The further question then arises--What _is_ the true content
of art, and with what aim is this content to be presented. On this
subject our consciousness supplies us with the common opinion that it
is the task and aim of art to bring in contact with our sense, our
feeling, our inspiration, _all_ that finds a place in the mind of man.
Art, it is thought, should realize in us that familiar saying, "Homo
sum: humani nihil a me alienum puto." Its aim is therefore placed in
arousing and animating the slumbering emotions, inclinations, and
passions; in filling the _heart_, in forcing the human being, whether
cultured or uncultured, to feel the whole range of what man's soul in
its inmost and secret corners has power to experience and to create,
and all that is able to move and to stir the human breast in its
depths and in its manifold aspects and possibilities; to present as a
delight to emotion and to perception all that the mind possesses of
real and lofty in its thought and in the Idea--all the splendour of
the noble, the eternal, and the true; and no less to make intelligible
misfortune and misery, wickedness and crime; to make men realize the
inmost nature of all that is shocking and horrible, as also of all
pleasure and delight; and, finally, to set imagination roving in
idle toyings of fancy, and luxuriating in the seductive spells of
sense-stimulating visions. This endlessly varied content, it is held,
art is bound to embrace, partly in order to complete the natural
experience in which our external existence consists, and partly with
the general aim of provoking the passions of our nature, both in order
that the experiences of life may not leave us unmoved, and because
we desire to attain to a receptivity that welcomes all phenomena.
Now, such a stimulus is not given in this sphere by actual experience
itself, but can only come by the semblance thereof, by art, that is,
deceptively substituting its creations for reality. The possibility
of this deception by means of artistic semblance rests on the fact
that all reality must, for man, traverse the medium of perception and
ideas, and cannot otherwise penetrate the feelings and the will. In
this process it is quite indifferent whether his attention is claimed
by immediate external reality, or whether this effect is produced by
another means--that is, by images, symbols, and ideas, containing
or representing _the content_ of reality. Man can frame to himself
ideas of things that are not actual as though they were actual. Hence
it is all the same to our feelings whether external reality or only
the semblance of it is the means of bringing in contact with us a
situation, a relation, or the import of a life. Either mode suffices to
awaken our response to its burden, in grief and in rejoicing, in pathos
and in horror,[79] and in traversing the emotions and the passions
of wrath, hatred, compassion, of anxiety, fear, love, reverence, and
admiration, or of the desire of honour and of fame.

This awakening of all feelings in us, the dragging of the heart
through the whole significance of life, the realization of all such
inner movements by means of a presented exterior consisting merely in
deception--all this was what, from the point of view which we have been
considering, constituted the peculiar and pre-eminent power of art.

Now, as this mode of treatment credits art with the vocation of
impressing on the heart and on the imagination good and bad alike,
and of strengthening man to the noblest, as of enervating him to the
most sensuous and selfish emotions, it follows that the task set before
art is still purely formal, and so it would have no certain purpose,
but would merely furnish the empty form for every possible kind of
significance and content.

(_c_) It is a fact that art does include this formal side, in that it
has power to present every possible subject-matter in artistic dress,
before perception and feeling, just exactly as argumentative[80]
reflection has the power of manipulating all possible objects and modes
of action, and of furnishing them with reasons and justifications.
But when we admit so great a variety of content we are at once met
by the remark that the manifold feelings and ideas, which art aims
at provoking or reinforcing, intersect and contradict, and by mutual
interference cancel one another. Indeed, in this aspect, in so far
as art inspires men to directly opposite emotions, it only magnifies
the contradiction of our feelings and passions, and either sets them
staggering like Bacchantes, or passes into sophistry and scepticism,
in the same way as argumentation.[81] This diversity of the material
of art itself compels us, therefore, not to be content with so
formal[82] an aim for it, seeing that rationality forces its way into
this wild diversity, and demands to see the emergence of a higher
and more universal purpose from these elements in spite of their
self-contradiction, and to be assured of its being attained. Just in
the same way the State and the social life of men are, of course,
credited with the purpose that in them _all_ human capacities and _all_
individual powers are to be developed and to find utterance in _all_
directions and with _all_ tendencies. But in opposition to so formal a
view there at once arises the question in what _unity_ these manifold
formations must be comprehended, and what _single end_ they must have
for their fundamental idea and ultimate purpose.

As such an end, reflection soon suggests the notion that art has the
capacity and the function of mitigating the fierceness of the desires.

([Greek: a]) In respect to this first idea, we have only to ascertain
in what feature peculiar to art it is that the capacity lies of
eliminating brutality and taming and educating the impulses,
desires, and passions. Brutality in general has its reason in a
direct selfishness of the impulses, which go to work right away,
and exclusively for the satisfaction of their concupiscence. Now,
desire is most savage and imperious in proportion as, being isolated
and narrow, it occupies the _whole man_, so that he does not retain
the power of separating himself as a universal being from this
determinateness, and becoming aware of himself as universal. Even if
the man in such a case says, "The passion is stronger than I," it is
true that the abstract I is then separated for consciousness from
the particular passion; but still only in a formal way, inasmuch as
this separation is only made in order to pronounce that, against the
power of the passion, the I as such is of no account whatever. The
savageness of passion consists, therefore, in the oneness of the I
as universal with the limited content of its desires, so that the
man has no will outside this particular passion. Now, such brutality
and untamed violence of passion is softened through art, to begin
with, by the mere fact that it brings before the man as an idea what
in such a state he feels and does. And even if art restricts itself
to merely setting up pictures of the passions before the mind's eye,
or even if it were actually to flatter them, still this is by itself
enough to have a softening power, inasmuch as the man is thereby at
least _made aware_, of what, apart from such presentation, he simply
_is_. For then the man observes his impulses and inclinations, and
whereas before they bore him on without power of reflection, he now
sees them outside himself, and begins already to be free from them, in
so far as they form an object which he contrasts with himself. Hence
it may frequently be the case with the artist that when attacked by
grief he softens and weakens the intensity of his own feelings in its
effect on his own mind by representing it in art. Tears, even, are
enough to bring comfort; the man, who to begin with is utterly sunk
and concentrated in grief, is able thus, at any rate, to utter in a
direct fashion this his inner state. Still more of a relief however,
is the utterance of what is within in words, images, pictures, sounds,
and shapes. For this reason it was a good old custom at deaths and
funerals to appoint wailing women, in order to bring the grief before
the mind in its utterance. Manifestations of sympathy, too, hold up
the content of a man's misfortune to his view; when it is much talked
about he is forced to reflect upon it, and is thereby relieved. And
so it has always been held that to weep or to speak one's fill is a
means to obtain freedom from the oppressive weight of care, or at least
to find momentary relief for the heart. Hence the mitigation of the
violence of passion has for its universal reason that man is released
from his immediate sunkenness[83] in a feeling, and becomes conscious
of it as of something external to him, towards which he must now enter
into an _ideal_ relation. Art, by means of its representations, while
remaining within the sensuous sphere, delivers man at the same time
from the power of sensuousness. Of course we may often hear those
favourite phrases about man's duty being to remain in immediate oneness
with nature, but such oneness in its abstraction is simply and solely
coarseness and savagery; and art, in the very process of dissolving
this oneness for man, is raising him with gentle hand above and away
from mere sunkenness in nature. Man's mode of occupying himself with
works of art is always purely contemplative,[84] and educates thereby,
in the first place, no doubt, merely attention to the representations
themselves, but then, going beyond this, it cultivates attention to
their significance, the power of comparison with other contents, and
receptivity for the general consideration of them, and for the points
of view which it involves.

([Greek: b]) To the above there attaches itself in natural connection
the second characteristic which has been ascribed to art as its
essential purpose, viz. the _purification_ of the passions, instruction
and _moral_ perfecting. For the characteristic that art was to bridle
savageness and educate the passions remained quite abstract and
general, so that a question must again arise about a _determinate_ kind
and an essential _end_ of this education.

([Greek: aa]) The doctrine of the purification of passion suffers
indeed under the same defect as the above doctrine of the mitigation of
the desires; yet, when more closely looked at, it at any rate arrives
at the point of accentuating the fact that the representations of art
may be held to lack a standard by which their worth or unworthiness
could be measured. This standard simply means their effectiveness in
separating pure from impure in the passions. It therefore requires
a content that has capacity to exercise this purifying power, and,
in as far as the production of such an effect is taken to constitute
the substantive end of art, it must follow that the purifying content
must be brought before consciousness in its _universality_ and
_essentiality_.

([Greek: bb]) In this latter aspect the end of art has been pronounced
to be that it should _teach_. Thus, on the one side, the peculiar
character of art would consist in the movement of the emotions and in
the satisfaction which lies in this movement, even in fear, compassion,
in painful pathos and shock--that is to say, in the satisfying
engagement of the emotions and passions, and to that extent in a
complacency, entertainment, and delight in the objects of art, in their
representation and effect; but, on the other side, this purpose (of
art) is held to find its higher standard only in its instructiveness,
in the _fabula docet_,[85] and thus in the useful influence which the
work of art succeeds in exerting on the subject.[86] In this respect
the Horatian saw,[87] "Et prodesse volunt et delectare poetæ," ("Poets
aim at utility and entertainment alike") contains, concentrated in
a few words, all that has subsequently been elaborated in infinite
degrees, and diluted into the uttermost extreme of insipidity as a
doctrine of art. As regards such instruction we have, then, to ask,
whether it is meant to be directly or indirectly, explicitly or
implicitly contained in the work of art.

If, speaking generally, we are concerned about a purpose which is
universal and not contingent, it follows that this purpose, considering
the essentially spiritual nature of art, cannot but be itself
spiritual, and indeed, moreover, one which is not contingent,[88] but
actual in its nature and for its own sake. Such a purpose in relation
to teaching could only consist in bringing before consciousness,
by help of the work of art, a really and explicitly significant
spiritual content. From this point of view it is to be asserted that
the higher art ranks itself, the more it is bound to admit into
itself such a content as this, and that only in the essence of such
a content can it find the standard which determines whether what is
expressed is appropriate or inappropriate. Art was, in fact, the first
_instructress_ of peoples.

But the purpose of instruction may be treated as _purpose_, to such a
degree that the universal nature of the represented content is doomed
to be exhibited and expounded directly and obviously as abstract
proposition, prosaic reflection, or general theorem, and not merely
in an indirect way in the concrete form of a work of art. By such a
severance the sensuous plastic form, which is just what makes the
work of art a work of _art_, becomes a mere otiose accessory, a husk
which is expressly pronounced to be mere husk, a semblance expressly
pronounced to be mere semblance. But thereby the very nature of the
work of art is distorted. For the work of art ought to bring a content
before the mind's eye, not in its generality as such, but with this
generality made absolutely individual, and sensuously particularized.
If the work of art does not proceed from this principle, but sets in
relief its generalized aspect with the purpose of abstract instruction,
then the imaginative and sensuous aspect is only an external and
superfluous adornment, and the work of art is a thing divided against
itself,[89] in which form and content no longer appear as grown into
one. In that case the sensuously individual and the spiritually
general are become external to one another.

And further, if the purpose of art is limited to this _didactic_
utility, then its other aspect, that of pleasure, entertainment, and
delight, is pronounced to be in itself _unessential_, and ought to have
its substance merely in the utility of the teaching on which it is
attendant. But this amounts to pronouncing that art does not bear its
vocation and purpose in itself, but that its conception is rooted in
something else, to which it is a _means_. Art is, in this case, only
one among the several means which prove useful and are applied for
the purpose of instruction. This brings us to the boundary at which
art is made no longer to be an end on its own merits, seeing that
it is degraded into a mere toy of entertainment or a mere means of
instruction.

([Greek: gg]) This boundary becomes most sharply marked when a question
is raised, in its turn, about a supreme end and aim for the sake of
which the passions are to be purified and men are to be instructed.
This aim has often, in modern times, been declared to be _moral_
improvement, and the aim of art has been placed in the function of
preparing the inclinations and impulses for moral perfection, and
of leading them to this goal. This idea combines purification with
instruction, inasmuch as art is, by communicating an insight into
genuine moral goodness--that is, by instruction,--at the same time
to incite to purification, and in this way alone to bring about the
improvement of mankind as its useful purpose and supreme goal.

Regarding art in reference to moral improvement, the same has _prima
facie_ to be said as about the didactic purpose. We may readily grant
that art must not as a principle take for its aim the immoral and its
furtherance. But it is one thing to take immorality for the express
aim of representation, and another to abstain from taking morality.
Every genuine work of art may have a good moral drawn from it, but, of
course, in doing so much depends on interpretation and on him who draws
the moral. Thus one may hear the most immoral representations defended
by saying that we must know evil, or sin, in order to act morally; and,
conversely, it has been said that the portrayal of Mary Magdalene,
the beautiful sinner who afterwards repented, has seduced many into
sin, because art makes it look so beautiful to repent, and you must
sin before you can repent. But the doctrine of moral improvement, if
consistently carried out, goes in general yet further. It would not be
satisfied with the possibility of extracting a moral from a work of art
by interpretation, but it would, on the contrary, display the moral
instruction as the substantive purpose of the work of art, and, indeed,
would actually admit to portrayal none but moral subjects, moral
characters, actions, and incidents. For art has the choice among its
subjects, in contradistinction to history or the sciences which have
their matter fixed for them.

In order that we may be able to form a thoroughly adequate estimate of
the idea that the aim of art is moral from this point of view, we must
inquire first of all for the definite standpoint of the morality on
which this doctrine is based. If we look closely at the standpoint of
morality as we have to understand it in the best sense at the present
day, we soon find that its conception does not immediately coincide
with what apart from it we are in the habit of calling in a general
way virtue, respectability,[90] uprightness, etc. To be respectable
and virtuous is not enough to make a man moral.[91] Morality involves
_reflection_ and the definite consciousness of that which duty
prescribes, and acting out of such a prior consciousness. Duty itself
is the law of the will, which man nevertheless lays down freely out of
his own self, and then is supposed to determine himself to this duty
for duty's and its fulfilment's sake, by doing good solely from the
conviction which he has attained that it is the good. Now this law, the
duty which is chosen for duty's sake to be the guide of action, out
of free conviction and the inner conscience, and is then acted upon,
is, taken by itself,[92] the abstract universal of the will, and is the
direct antithesis of nature, the sensuous impulses, the self-seeking
interests, the passions, and of all that is comprehensively entitled
the feelings[93] and the heart. In this antagonism the one side is
regarded as _negativing_ the other; and, seeing that both are present
as antagonists within the subject (person), he has, as determining
himself out of himself, the choice of following the one or the other.
But, according to the view under discussion, a _moral_ aspect is
acquired by such a decision, and by the act performed in accordance
with it, only through the free conviction of duty on the one hand, and,
on the other hand, through the conquest, not only of the particular or
separate will, of the natural motives, inclinations, passions, etc.,
but also through that of the nobler emotions and the higher impulses.
For the modern moralistic view starts from the fixed antithesis
of the will in its spiritual universality to its sensuous natural
particularity,[94] and consists not in the completed reconciliation of
these contrasted sides, but in their conflict with one another, which
involves the requirement that the impulses which conflict with duty
ought to yield to it.

This antithesis does not merely display itself for our consciousness,
in the limited region of moral action; but also emerges as a
fundamental distinction and antagonism between that which is real
essentially and in its own right,[95] and that which is external
reality and existence. Formulated in the abstract, it is the contrast
of the universal and particular, when the former is explicitly fixed
over against the latter, just as the latter is over against the former;
more concretely, it appears in nature as the opposition of the abstract
law against the abundance of individual phenomena, each having its
own character; in the mind, as the sensuous and spiritual in man, as
the battle of the spirit against the flesh, of duty for duty's sake,
the cold command, with the individual interest, the warm feelings,
the sensuous inclinations and impulses, the individual disposition
as such; as the hard conflict of inward freedom and of natural
necessity; further, as the contradiction of the dead conception--empty
in itself--compared with full concrete vitality, or of theory and
subjective thought contrasted with objective existence and experience.

These are antitheses which have not been invented, either by the
subtlety of reflection or by the pedantry of philosophy, but which
have from all time and in manifold forms preoccupied and disquieted
the human consciousness, although it was modern culture that
elaborated them most distinctly, and forced them up to the point of
most unbending contradiction. Intellectual culture and the modern
play of understanding create in man this contrast, which makes him an
amphibious animal, inasmuch as it sets him to live in two contradictory
worlds at once; so that even consciousness wanders back and forward
in this contradiction, and, shuttle-cocked from side to side, is
unable to satisfy itself _as_ itself on the one side as on the other.
For, on the one side, we see man a prisoner in common reality and
earthly temporality, oppressed by want and poverty, hard driven by
nature, entangled in matter, in sensuous aims and their enjoyments;
on the other side, he exalts himself to eternal ideas, to a realm of
thought and freedom, imposes on himself as a _will_ universal laws and
attributions, strips the world of its living and flourishing reality
and dissolves it into abstractions, inasmuch as the mind is put upon
vindicating its rights and its dignity simply by denying the rights
of nature and maltreating it, thereby retaliating the oppression and
violence which itself has experienced from nature. Such a discrepancy
in life and consciousness involves for modern culture and its
understanding the demand that the contradiction should be resolved.
Yet the understanding cannot release itself from the fixity of these
antitheses. The solution, therefore, remains for consciousness a mere
_ought_, and the present and reality only stir themselves in the
unrest of a perpetual to and fro, which seeks a reconciliation without
finding it. Then the question arises, whether such a many-sided and
fundamental opposition which never gets beyond a mere ought and a
postulated solution, can be the genuine and complete[96] truth, and,
in general, the supreme purpose. If the culture of the world[97] has
fallen into such a contradiction, it becomes the task of philosophy to
undo or cancel it, _i.e._ to show that neither the one alternative in
its abstraction nor the other in similar one-sidedness possesses truth,
but that they are essentially self-dissolving; that truth only lies in
the conciliation and mediation of the two, and that this mediation is
no mere postulate, but is in its nature and in reality accomplished
and always self-accomplishing. This intuition agrees directly with the
natural faith and will, which always has present to the mind's eye
precisely this resolved antithesis, and in action makes it its purpose
and achieves it. All that philosophy does is to furnish a reflective
insight into the essence of the antithesis in as far as it shows that
what constitutes truth is merely the resolution of this antithesis, and
that not in the sense that the conflict and its aspects in any way
_are not_, but in the sense that they _are_, _in reconciliation_.

(_d_) Now, as an ultimate aim implied a higher standpoint in the case
of moral improvement, we shall have to vindicate this higher standpoint
for art no less than for morals. Thereby we at once lay aside the
false position, which has already been remarked upon, that art has to
serve as a means for moral ends, and to conduce to the moral end of
the world, as such, by instruction and moral improvement, and thereby
has its substantive aim, not in itself, but in something else. If,
therefore, we now continue to speak of an aim or purpose, we must, in
the first instance, get rid of the perverse idea, which, in asking
"What is the aim?" retains the accessory meaning of the question,
"What is the _use_?". The perverseness of this lies in the point that
the work of art would then be regarded as aspiring to something else
which is set before consciousness as the essential and as what ought
to be; so that then the work of art would only have value as a useful
instrument in the realization of an end having substantive importance
_outside_ the sphere of art. Against this it is necessary to maintain
that art has the vocation of revealing _the truth_ in the form of
sensuous artistic shape, of representing the reconciled antithesis
just described, and, therefore, has its purpose in itself, in this
representation and revelation. For other objects, such as instruction,
purification, improvement, pecuniary gain, endeavour after fame and
honour, have nothing to do with the work of art as such, and do not
determine its conception.

It is from this point of view, into which _reflective_ consideration
of the matter resolves itself, that we have to apprehend the idea of
art in its inner necessity, as indeed it was from this point of view,
historically speaking, that the true appreciation and understanding
of art took its origin. For that antithesis, of which we spoke, made
itself felt, not only within general reflective culture, but no less in
philosophy as such, and it was not till philosophy discovered how to
overcome this antithesis absolutely, that it grasped its own conception
and, just in as far as it did so, the conception of nature and of art.

Hence this point of view, as it is the re-awakening of philosophy
in general, so also is the re-awakening of the science of art; and,
indeed, it is this re-awakening to which alone æsthetic as a science
owes its true origin, and art its higher estimation.




