CHAPTER II.

METHODS OF SCIENCE APPLICABLE TO BEAUTY AND ART.


If we now investigate _the required mode of scientific consideration_,
we here again meet with two opposite ways of treating the subject,
each of which appears to exclude the other, and so to hinder us from
arriving at _any true result_.

On one side we see the science of art merely, so to speak, busying
itself about the actual productions of art from the outside, arranging
them in series as a history of art, initiating discussions about extant
works, or sketching out theories intended to provide the general points
of view that are to govern both criticism and artistic production.

On the other side we see science abandoning itself independently to
reflection upon the beautiful, and producing mere generalities which do
not touch the work of art in its peculiarity, creating, in short, an
abstract philosophy of the beautiful.

1. As regards the former mode of treatment, which starts from the
empirical side, it is the indispensable road for any one who means
to become a student of art. And just as in the present day every
one, even though he is not busied with natural science, yet pretends
to be equipped with the essentials of physical knowledge, so it has
become more or less obligatory for a cultivated man to possess some
acquaintance with art,[30] and the pretension to display one's-self as
a dilettante and connoisseur is pretty universal.

(_a_) If such information is really to be recognized as
art-scholarship,[31] it must be of various kinds and of wide range. The
first necessity is an exact acquaintance with the immeasurable region
of individual works of art of ancient and modern times, works which
in part have actually perished, in part belong to distant countries
or portions of the world, or which adverse fortune has withdrawn from
one's own observation. Moreover, every work belongs to its _age_, to
its _nation_, and to its environment, and depends upon particular
historical and other ideas and aims. For this reason art-scholarship
further requires a vast wealth of historical information of a very
special kind, seeing that the individualized nature of the work of
art is related to individual detail and demands special matter to
aid in its comprehension and elucidation. And lastly, this kind of
scholarship not only needs, like every other, a memory for information,
but a vivid imagination in order to retain distinctly the images of
artistic forms in all their different features, and especially in order
to have them present to the mind for purposes of comparison with other
works.

(_b_) Within this kind of consideration, which is primarily historical,
there soon emerge various points of view which cannot be lost sight
of in contemplating a work of art, inasmuch as our judgments must be
derived from them. Now these points of view, as in other sciences
which have an empirical starting-point, when extracted and put
together form universal criteria and rules, and, in a still further
stage of formal generalization, _Theories of the arts_. This is not
the place to go into detail about literature of this kind, and it
may, therefore, suffice to mention a few writings in the most general
way. For instance, there is Aristotle's "Poetics," the theory of
tragedy contained in which is still of interest; and to speak more
particularly, among the ancients, Horace's "Ars Poetica" and Longinus's
"Treatise on the Sublime" suffice to give a general idea of the way
in which this kind of theorizing has been carried on. The general
formulæ which were abstracted by such writers were meant to stand
especially as precepts and rules, according to which, particularly in
times of degeneration of poetry and art, works of art were meant to be
produced. The prescriptions, however, compiled by these physicians of
art had even less assured success than those of physicians whose aim
was the restoration of health.

Respecting theories of this kind, I propose merely to mention that,
though _in detail_ they contain much that is instructive, yet their
remarks were abstracted from a very limited circle of artistic
productions, which passed for _the_ genuinely beautiful ones, but yet
always belonged to a but narrow range of art. And again, such formulæ
are in part very trivial reflections which in their generality proceed
to no establishment of particulars, although this is the matter of
chief concern.

The above-mentioned Horatian epistle is full of these reflections, and,
therefore, is a book for all men, but one which for this very reason
contains much that amounts to nothing, _e.g._--

    "Omne tulit punctum qui miscuit utile dulci
    Lectorem delectando pariterque monendo"--

"He carries all votes, who has mingled the pleasant and the useful,
by at once charming and instructing his reader." This is just like so
many copybook headings,[32] _e.g._ "Stay at home and earn an honest
livelihood," which are right enough as generalities, but lack the
concrete determinations on which action depends.

Another kind of interest was found, not in the express aim of directly
causing the production of genuine works of art, but in the purpose
which emerged of influencing men's judgment upon works of art by such
theories, in short of _forming taste_. In this aspect, Home's "Elements
of Criticism," the writings of Batteux, and Ramler's "Introduction
to the Fine Arts," were works much read in their day. Taste in this
sense has to do with arrangement and treatment, the harmony and finish
of what belongs to the external aspect of a work of art. Besides,
they brought in among the principles of taste views that belonged to
the psychology that was then in vogue, and that had been drawn from
empirical observation of capacities and activities of the soul, of
the passions and their probable heightening, succession, etc. But it
remains invariably the case that every man judges works of art, or
characters, actions, and incidents according to the measure of his
insight and his feelings; and as that formation of taste only touched
what was meagre and external, and moreover drew its precepts only from
a narrow range of works of art and from a _borné_ culture of intellect
and feelings, its whole sphere was inadequate, and incapable of seizing
the inmost and the true, and of sharpening the eye for the apprehension
thereof.

Such theories proceed in general outline, as do the remaining
non-philosophic sciences. The content which they subject to
consideration is borrowed from our idea of it, as something found
there; then further questions are asked about the nature of this idea,
inasmuch as a need reveals itself for closer determinations, which
are also found in our idea of the matter, and drawn from it to be
fixed in definitions. But in so doing, we find ourselves at once on
uncertain and debatable ground. It might indeed appear at first as if
the beautiful were a perfectly simple idea. But it soon becomes evident
that manifold sides may be found in it, one of which is emphasized by
one writer and another by another, or, even if the same points of view
are adopted, a dispute arises on the question which side after all is
to be regarded as the essential one.

With a view to such questions it is held a point of scientific
completeness to adduce and to criticize the various definitions of the
beautiful. We will do this neither with historical _exhaustiveness_,
so as to learn all the subtleties which have emerged in the defining
process, nor for the sake of the _historical_ interest; but we will
simply produce by way of illustration, some of the more interesting
modern views which come pretty close in their purport to what in fact
the idea of the beautiful does involve. For such purpose we have
chiefly to mention Goethe's account of the beautiful, which Meyer
embodied in his "History of the Formative Arts[33] in Greece," on which
occasion he also brings forward Hirt's view, though without mentioning
him.

Hirt, one of the greatest of genuine connoisseurs in the present day,
in his brochure about artistic beauty (_Horen_,[34] 1797, seventh
number), after speaking of the beautiful in the several arts, sums
up his ideas in the result that the basis of a just criticism of
beauty in art and of the formation of taste is the conception of the
_Characteristic_. That is to say, he defines the beautiful as the
"perfect, which is or can be an object of eye, ear, or imagination."
Then he goes on to define the perfect as "that which is adequate to its
aim, that which nature or art aimed at producing within the given genus
and species[35] in the formation of the object." For which reason,
in order to form our judgment on a question of beauty, we ought to
direct our observation as far as possible to the individual marks which
constitute a definite essence. For it is just these marks that form
its characteristics. And so by _character_ as the law of art he means
"that determinate individual modification[36] whereby forms, movement
and gesture, bearing and expression, local colour, light and shade,
chiaroscuro[37] and attitude distinguish themselves, in conformity, of
course, with the requirements of an object previously selected." This
formula gives us at once something more significant than the other
definitions. If we go on to ask what "the characteristic" is, we see
that it involves in the first place _a content_, as, for instance,
a particular feeling, situation, incident, action, individual; and
secondly, the _mode_ and _fashion_ in which this content is embodied
in a representation. It is to this, the mode of representation, that
the artistic law of the "characteristic" refers, inasmuch as it
requires that every particular element in the mode of expression shall
subserve the definite indication of its content and be a member in the
expression of that content. The abstract formula of the characteristic
thus has reference to the degree of appropriateness with which the
particular detail of the artistic form sets in relief the content
which it is intended to represent. If we desire to illustrate this
conception in a quite popular way, we may explain the limitation which
it involves as follows. In a dramatic work, for instance, an action
forms the content; the drama[38] is to represent how this action takes
place. Now, men and women do all sorts of things; they speak to each
other from time to time, at intervals they eat, sleep, put on their
clothes, say one thing and another, and so forth. But in all this,
whatever does not stand in immediate connection with that particular
action considered as the content proper, is to be excluded, so that in
reference to it nothing may be without import. So, too, a picture, that
only represented a single phase of that action, might yet include in
it--so wide are the ramifications of the external world--a multitude
of circumstances, persons, positions, and other matters which at
that moment have no reference to the action in question, and are not
subservient to its distinctive character.

But, according to the rule of the characteristic, only so much ought
to enter into the work of art as belongs to the display[39] and,
essentially, to the expression of that content and no other; for
nothing must announce itself as otiose and superfluous.

This is a very important rule, which may be justified in a certain
aspect. Meyer, however, in his above-mentioned work, gives it as his
opinion that this view has vanished and left no trace, and, in his
judgment, to the benefit of art. For he thinks that the conception in
question would probably have _led_ to caricature. This judgment at
once contains the perversity of implying that such a determination
of the beautiful had to do with _leading_. The Philosophy of art
does not trouble itself about precepts for artists, but it has to
ascertain what beauty in general is, and how it has displayed itself
in actual productions, in works of art, without meaning to give rules
for guidance. Apart from this, if we examine the criticism, we find
it to be true, no doubt, that Hirt's definition includes caricature,
for even a caricature may be characteristic; but, on the other hand,
it must be answered at once that in caricature the definite character
is intensified to exaggeration, and is, so to speak, a superfluity of
the characteristic. But a superfluity ceases to be what is properly
required in order to be characteristic, and becomes an offensive
iteration, whereby the characteristic itself may be made unnatural.
Moreover, what is of the nature of caricature shows itself in the light
of the characteristic representation of what is ugly, which ugliness
is, of course, a distortion. Ugliness, for its part, is closely
connected with the content, so that it may be said that the principle
of the characteristic involves as a fundamental property both ugliness
and the representation of what is ugly. Hirt's definition, of course,
gives no more precise information as to what is to be characterized and
what is not, in the artistically beautiful, or about the content of the
beautiful, but it furnishes in this respect a mere formal rule, which
nevertheless contains some truth, although stated in abstract shape.

Then follows the further question--what Meyer opposes to Hirt's
artistic principle, _i.e._ what he himself prefers. He is treating, in
the first place, exclusively of the principle shown in the artistic
works of the ancients, which principle, however, must include the
essential attribute[40] of beauty. In dealing with this subject he is
led to speak of Mengs and Winckelmann's principle[40] of the Ideal, and
pronounces himself to the effect that he desires neither to reject nor
wholly to accept this law of beauty, but, on the other hand, has no
hesitation in attaching himself to the opinion of an enlightened judge
of art (Goethe), as it is definite,[41] and seems to solve the enigma
more precisely.

Goethe says: "The highest principle of the ancients was the
_significant_, but the highest result of successful _treatment_, the
_beautiful_."

If we look closer at what this opinion implies, we find in it again two
elements; the content or matter in hand, and the mode and fashion of
representation. In looking at a work of art we begin with what presents
itself immediately to us, and after that go on to consider what is its
significance or content.

The former, the external element, has no value for us simply as it
stands; we assume something further behind it, something inward, a
significance, by which the external semblance has a soul breathed into
it.[42] It is this, its soul, that the external appearance indicates.
For an appearance which means something, does not present to the mind's
eye itself and that which it is _qua_ external, but something else; as
does the _symbol_ for instance, and still more obviously the _fable_,
whose moral and precept constitutes its meaning. Indeed every _word_
points to a meaning and has no value in itself. Just so the human
eye, a man's face, flesh, skin, his whole figure, are a revelation of
mind and soul, and in this case the meaning is always something other
than what shows itself within the immediate appearance. This is the
way in which a work of art should have its meaning, and not appear as
exhausted in these mere particular lines, curves, surfaces, borings,
reliefs in the stone, in these colours, tones, sounds, of words, or
whatever other medium is employed; but it should reveal life, feeling,
soul, import and mind, which is just what we mean by the significance
of a work of art.

Thus this requirement of _significance_ in a work of art amounts to
hardly anything beyond or different from Hirt's principle of the
_characteristic_.

According to this notion, then, we find distinguished as the elements
of the beautiful something inward, a content, and something outer which
has that content as its significance; the inner shows itself in the
outer and gives itself to be known by its means, inasmuch as the outer
points away from itself to the inner.

We cannot go into detail on this head.

(_c_) But the earlier fashion alike of rules and of theories has
already been violently thrown aside in Germany--especially owing to
the appearance of genuine living poetry,--and the rights of genius,
its works and their effects, have had their value asserted against the
encroachment of such legalities and against the wide watery streams of
theory. From this foundation both of an art which is itself genuinely
spiritual, and of a general sympathy and communion with it, have
arisen the receptivity and freedom which enabled us to enjoy and to
recognize the great works of art which have long been in existence,
whether those of the modern world,[43] of the middle ages, or even of
peoples of antiquity quite alien to us (_e.g._ the Indian productions);
works which by reason of their antiquity or of their alien nationality
have, no doubt, a foreign element in them, yet in view of their
content--common to all humanity and dominating their foreign
character--could not have been branded as products of bad and barbarous
taste, except by the prejudices of theory. This recognition, to speak
generally, of works of art which depart from the sphere and form of
those upon which more especially the abstractions of theory were based,
led, in the first instance, to the recognition of a peculiar kind of
art--that is, of _romantic_ art,--and it therefore became necessary to
apprehend the idea and the nature of the beautiful in a deeper way than
was possible for those theories. With this influence there co-operated
another, viz. that the idea in its self-conscious form, the thinking
mind, attained at this time, on its side, a deeper self-knowledge in
philosophy, and was thereby directly impelled to understand the essence
of art, too, in a profounder fashion.

Thus, then, even judging by the phases of this more general evolution
of ideas, the theoretical mode of reflection upon art which we were
considering has become antiquated alike in its principles and in
its particulars. Only the _scholarship_ of the history of art has
retained its permanent value, and cannot but retain it, all the more
that the advance of intellectual receptivity, of which we spoke, has
extended its range of vision on every side. Its business and vocation
consists in the æsthetic appreciation of individual works of art, and
in acquaintance with the historical circumstances that externally
condition such works; an appreciation which, if made with sense and
mind, supported by the requisite historical information, is the
only power that can penetrate the entire individuality of a work of
art. Thus Goethe, for instance, wrote much about art and particular
works of art. Theorizing proper is not the purpose of this mode of
consideration, although no doubt it frequently busies itself with
abstract principles and categories, and may give way to this tendency
without being aware of it. But for a reader who does not let this
hinder him, but keeps before him the concrete accounts of works of art,
which we spoke of just now, it at all events furnishes the philosophy
of art with the perceptible illustrations and instances, into the
particular historical details of which philosophy cannot enter.

This, then, may be taken to be the first mode of the study of art,
starting from particular and extant works.

2. There is an essential distinction between this and the opposite
aspect, the wholly theoretical reflection, which made an effort to
understand beauty as such out of itself alone, and to get to the bottom
of its idea.

It is well known that Plato was the first to require of philosophical
study, in a really profound sense, that its objects should be
apprehended, not in their _particularity_, but in their _universality_,
in their genius, in their own nature and its realization: inasmuch as
he affirmed that the truth of things[44] did not consist in individual
good actions, true opinions, beautiful human beings or works of art,
but in _goodness_, _beauty_, _truth_ themselves. Now, if the beautiful
is in fact to be known according to its essence and conception, this
is only possible by help of the thinking idea, by means of which
the logico-metaphysical nature of the _Idea as such_, as also that
of the _particular Idea of the beautiful_ enters into the thinking
consciousness. But the study of the beautiful in its separate nature
and in its own idea may itself turn into an abstract Metaphysic, and
even though Plato is accepted in such an inquiry as foundation and
as guide, still the Platonic abstraction must not satisfy us, even
for the logical idea of beauty. We must understand this idea more
profoundly and more in the concrete, for the emptiness of content
which characterizes the Platonic idea is no longer satisfactory to the
fuller philosophical wants of the mind of to-day. Thus it is, no doubt,
the case that we, too, in modern times, must in our philosophy of art
start from the idea of the beautiful, but we ought not to abide by the
fashion of Platonic ideas, which was purely abstract, and was the mere
beginning of the philosophic study of beauty.

3. The philosophic conception of the beautiful, to indicate its true
nature at least by anticipation, must contain, reconciled within it,
the two extremes which have been mentioned, by combining metaphysical
universality with the determinateness of real particularity. Only thus
is it apprehended in its truth, in its real and explicit nature. It is
then fertile out of its own resources, in contrast to the barrenness of
one-sided reflection. For it has in accordance with its own conception
to develop into a totality of attributes, while the conception itself
as well as its detailed exposition contains the necessity of its
particulars, as also of their progress and transition one into another.
On the other hand, again, these particulars, to which the transition
is made, carry in themselves the universality and essentiality of
the conception as the particulars of which they appear. The modes of
consideration of which we have so far been treating, lack both these
qualities,[45] and for this reason it is only the complete conception
of which we have just spoken that can lead to substantive, necessary,
and self-complete determinations.




