CHAPTER IV.

HISTORICAL DEDUCTION OF THE TRUE IDEA OF ART IN MODERN PHILOSOPHY.


I Shall touch briefly upon the historical side of the transition above
alluded to, partly for its historical interest, partly because, in
doing so, we shall more closely indicate the critical points which
are important, and on the foundation of which we mean to continue
our structure. In its most general formulation, this basis consists
in recognizing artistic beauty as one of the means which resolve and
reduce to unity the above antithesis and contradiction between the
abstract self-concentrated mind and actual nature, whether that of
external phenomena, or the inner subjective feelings and emotions.

1. The Kantian philosophy led the way by not merely feeling the lack
of this point of union, but attaining definite knowledge of it, and
bringing it within the range of our ideas.[98] In general, Kant
treated as his foundation for the intelligence as for the will, the
self-related rationality or freedom, the self-consciousness that
finds and knows itself in itself as infinite.[99] This knowledge of
the absoluteness of reason in itself which has brought philosophy to
its turning-point in modern times, this absolute beginning, deserves
recognition even if we pronounce Kant's philosophy inadequate, and
is an element in it which cannot be refuted. But, in as far as Kant
fell back again into the fixed antithesis of subjective thought and
objective things, of the abstract universality and the sensuous
individuality of the will, it was he more especially who strained to
the highest possible pitch the above-mentioned contradiction called
morality,[100] seeing that he moreover exalted the practical side of
the mind above the theoretical. In presence of this fixed antithesis,
with its fixity acknowledged by the understanding, he had no course
open but to propound the unity merely in the form of subjective
ideas of the reason to which no adequate reality could be shown to
correspond, or again, to treat it as consisting in postulates which
might indeed be deduced from the practical reason, but whose essential
nature[101] was not for him knowable by thought, and whose practical
accomplishment remained a mere ought deferred to infinity. Thus, then,
Kant no doubt brought the reconciled contradiction within the range
of our ideas, but he succeeded neither in scientifically unfolding its
genuine essence nor in presenting it as the true and sole reality. Kant
indeed pressed on still further, inasmuch as he recognized the required
unity in what he called the _intuitive understanding_; but here,
again, he comes to a standstill in the contradiction of subjectivity
and objectivity, so that although he suggests in the abstract a
solution of the contradiction of concept and reality, universality
and particularity, understanding and sense, and thereby points to the
Idea, yet, on the other hand, he makes this solution and reconciliation
itself a purely _subjective_ one, not one which is true and actual in
its nature and on its own merits.[102] In this respect the Critique
of the power of judgment, in which he treats of the æsthetic and
teleological powers of judgment, is instructive and remarkable. The
beautiful objects of nature and art, the rightly adapted products
of nature, by connecting which Kant is led to a closer treatment of
organic and animated beings, are regarded by him only from the point of
view of the reflection which subjectively judges of them. Indeed Kant
defines the power of judgment generally as "the power of thinking the
particular as contained under the universal;" and he calls the power
of judgment _reflective_ "when it has only the particular given to it,
and has to find the universal under which it comes." To this end it
requires a law, a principle, which it has to impose upon itself; and
Kant suggests as this law that of _Teleology_. In the idea of freedom
that belongs to the practical reason, the accomplishment of the end
is left as a mere "ought," but in the teleological judgment dealing
with animated beings, Kant hits on the notion of regarding the living
organism in the light that in it the idea, the universal, contains
the particulars as well. Thus in its capacity as end, it determines
the particular and external, the structure of the limbs, not from
without, but from within, and in the sense that the particular conforms
to the end _spontaneously_. Yet even in such a judgment, again, we
are supposed not to know the objective nature of the thing, but only
to be enunciating a subjective mode of reflection. Similarly, Kant
understands the _æsthetic_ judgment as neither proceeding from the
understanding as such _qua_ the faculty of ideas, nor from sensuous
perception as such with its manifold variety, but from the free play of
the understanding and of the imagination. It is in this free agreement
of the faculties of knowledge, that the thing is related to the subject
or person, and to his feeling of pleasure and complacency.

(_a_) Now this complacency is, in the first place, to be devoid of any
interest, i.e., _devoid of relation to our appetitive faculty_. If
we have an interest, by way of curiosity for instance, or a sensuous
interest on behalf of our sensuous want, a desire of possession and
use, then the objects are not important to us for their own sake, but
for the sake of our want. In that case, what exists has a value only
with reference to such a want, and the relation is of such a kind that
the object is on the one side, and on the other stands an attribution
which is distinct from the object, but to which we relate it. If, for
instance, I consume the object in order to nourish myself by it, this
interest lies only in me, and remains foreign to the object itself.
Now, what Kant asserts is, that the relation to the beautiful is not
of this kind. The æsthetic judgment allows the external existence
to subsist free and independent, giving licence to the object to
have its end in itself. This is, as we saw above, an important
consideration.[103]

(_b_) The beautiful, in _the second place_, says Kant, is definable
as that which, without a conception, _i.e._ without a category of the
understanding, is perceived as the object of a _universal_ delight.
To estimate the beautiful requires a cultivated mind; the natural
man[104] has no judgment about the beautiful, seeing that this judgment
claims universal validity. The universal is, indeed to begin with,
_as such_ an abstraction; but that which in itself and on its own
merits[105] is true, bears in itself the attribution and the claim
to be valid even universally. In this sense the beautiful, too, ought
to be _universally_ recognized, although the mere conceptions of the
understanding are competent to no judgment thereupon. The good, that,
for instance, which is right in particular actions, is subsumed under
universal conceptions, and the act passes for good when it succeeds
in corresponding to these conceptions. Beauty, on the other hand,
according to the theory, should awaken a universal delight directly,
without any such relation. This amounts to nothing else than that, in
contemplating beauty, we are not conscious of the conception and of the
subsumption under it, and do not permit to take place the severance
of the individual object and of the universal conception which in all
other cases is present in the judgment.

(_c_) In the _third_ place, the beautiful (Kant says) has the form of
teleology,[106] in as far as a teleological character is perceived in
the object without the idea of an end. At bottom this only repeats the
view which we have just discussed. Any natural production, _i.e._ a
plant or an animal, is organized teleologically, and is so immediately
a datum to us in this its teleology that we have no separate abstract
idea of the end, distinct from its given reality. It is in this way
that even _the beautiful_ is to be displayed to us as teleological.
In finite teleology[107] end and means remain external to one another,
inasmuch as the end stands in no essential inner relation to the
material medium of its accomplishment. In this case, the idea of the
end in its abstraction[108] distinguishes itself from the object in
which the end appears as realized. The beautiful, on the other hand,
exists as teleological in itself, without means and end revealing
themselves in it as distinct aspects. For instance, the purpose of
the limbs of an organism is the vitality which exists as actual in
the limbs themselves; separately they cease to be limbs. For in the
living thing the end and the material medium of the end are so directly
united, that the existing being only exists so long as its purpose
dwells in it. The beautiful, Kant maintains, when considered from this
point of view, does not wear its teleology as an external form attached
to it; but the teleological correspondence of the inner and outer is
the immanent nature of the beautiful object.

(_d_) Lastly, Kant's treatment determines the beautiful, in the
_fourth_ place, as being recognized, without a conception, as object
of a _necessary_ delight. Necessity is an abstract category, and
indicates an inner essential relation of two aspects; _if_ the one is,
and _because_ the one is, _then_ (_and therefore_) the other is. The
one in its nature involves the other as well as itself, just as cause,
_e.g._, has no meaning without effect. The delight which the beautiful
involves is such a necessary consequence, wholly without relation to
conceptions, _i.e._ to categories of the understanding. Thus, for
instance, we are pleased no doubt by what is symmetrical, and this
is constructed in accordance with a conception of the understanding.
But Kant requires, to give us pleasure, even more than the unity and
equality that belong to such a conception of the understanding.

Now, what we find in all these Kantian laws is a non-severance of
that which in all other cases is presupposed in our consciousness to
be distinct. In the beautiful this severance finds itself cancelled,
inasmuch as universal and particular, end and means, conception
and object thoroughly interpenetrate one another. And thus, again,
Kant regards the beautiful in _art_ as an agreement in which the
particular itself _is_ in accordance with the conception. Particulars,
as such, are _prima facie_ contingent, both as regards one another
and as regards the universal, and this very contingent element,
sense, feeling, temper, inclination, is now in the beauty of art not
merely _subsumed_ under universal categories of the understanding
and _controlled_ by the conception of feeling in its abstract
universality, but so united with the universal that it reveals itself
as inwardly and in its nature and realization[109] adequate thereto.
By this means the beauty of art becomes embodiment of a thought, and
the material is not externally determined by this thought, but exists
itself in its freedom. For in this case the natural, sensuous, the
feelings and so forth have _in themselves_ proportion, purpose, and
agreement; while perception and feeling are exalted into spiritual
universality, and thought itself, not content with renouncing its
hostility to nature, finds cheerfulness therein. Thus feeling,
pleasure, and enjoyment are justified and sanctified, so that nature
and freedom, sensuousness and the idea, find their warrant and
their satisfaction all in _one_. Yet even this apparently complete
reconciliation is ultimately inferred[110] to be, nevertheless,
merely subjective in respect of our appreciation as in respect of our
production, and not to be the naturally and completely true and real.

These we may take as the main results of the Kantian Criticism, so far
as they have interest for us in our present inquiry. This criticism
forms the starting-point for the true conception of artistic beauty.
Yet this conception had to overcome the Kantian defects before it could
assert itself as the higher grasp of the true unity of necessity and
freedom, of the particular and the universal, of the sensuous and the
rational.

2. And so it must be admitted that the artistic sense of a profound,
and, at the same time, philosophic mind was beforehand with philosophy
as such, in demanding and enunciating the principle of totality and
reconciliation as against that abstract endlessness of reflective
thought, that duty for duty's sake, that intelligence devoid of plastic
shape, which apprehend nature and reality, sensation and feeling as
a mere _limit_, and as an absolutely hostile element. For _Schiller_
must be credited with the great merit of having broken through the
Kantian subjectivity and abstractness of thought, and having dared
the attempt to transcend these limits by intellectually grasping the
principles of unity and reconciliation as the truth, and realizing
them in art. Schiller, in his æsthetic discussions, did not simply
adhere to art and its interest without concerning himself about its
relation to philosophy proper, but compared his interest in artistic
beauty with the principles of philosophy; and it was only by starting
from the latter, and by their help that he penetrated the profounder
nature and notion of the beautiful. Thus we feel it to be a feature in
one period of his works that he has busied himself with thought--more
perhaps than was conducive to their unsophisticated beauty as works of
art. The intentional character of abstract reflection and even the
interest of the philosophical idea are noticeable in many of his poems.
This has been made a ground of censure against him, especially by way
of blaming and depreciating him in comparison with Goethe's agreeable
straightforwardness[111] and objectivity. But in this respect Schiller,
as poet, did but pay the debt of his time; and the reason lay in a
perplexity which turned out only to the honour of that sublime soul and
profound character, and to the profit of science and cognition.

At the same epoch the same scientific stimulus withdrew Goethe,
too, from poetry, his proper sphere. Yet just as Schiller immersed
himself in the study of the inner depths of the _mind_, so Goethe's
idiosyncrasy led him to the _physical_ side of art, to external nature,
to animal and vegetable organisms, to crystals, to cloud formation,
and to colour. To such scientific research Goethe brought the power of
his great mind, which in these regions put to rout[112] the science
of mere understanding with its errors, just as Schiller, on the other
side, succeeded in asserting the idea of the free totality of beauty
against the understanding's science of volition and thought. A whole
set of Schiller's productions is devoted to this insight of his into
the nature of art, especially the "Letters upon Æsthetic Education."
In these letters the central point from which Schiller starts is that
every individual human being has within him the capacity of an ideal
humanity. This genuine human being, he says, is represented by the
State,[113] which he takes to be the objective, universal, or, so to
speak, normal form in which the diversity of particular subjects or
persons aims at aggregating and combining itself into a unity. There
were, then, he considered, two imaginable ways in which the human
being in time (in the actual course of events) might coincide with the
human being in the Idea: on the one hand, by the State, _qua_ genus
or class-idea of morality,[114] law, and intelligence, destroying
individuality; on the other hand, by the individual raising himself
to the level of his genus, _i.e._ by the human being that lives in
time ennobling himself into the human being of the Idea. Now reason,
he thinks, demands unity as such, the generic character, but nature
demands diversity and individuality; and both these legislative
authorities have simultaneous claims on man. In presence of the
conflict between these antagonistic elements, æsthetic education simply
consists in realizing the requirement of mediation and reconciliation
between them. For the aim of this education is, according to Schiller,
to give such form to inclination, sensuousness, impulse, and heart,
that they may become rational in themselves, and by the same process
reason, freedom, and spirituality may come forward out of their
abstraction, and uniting with the natural element, now rationalized
throughout, may in it be invested with flesh and blood. Beauty is thus
pronounced to be the unification of the rational and the sensuous, and
this unification to be the genuinely real.

This notion of Schiller's may be readily recognized in the general
views of "Anmuth und Würde,"[115] and in his poems more particularly
from the fact that he makes the praise of women his subject matter;
because it was in their character that he recognized and held up to
notice the spontaneously present combination of the spiritual and
natural.

Now this _Unity_ of the universal and particular, of freedom and
necessity, of the spiritual and the natural, which Schiller grasped
from a scientific point of view as the principle and essence of art,
and laboured indefatigably to evoke into actual existence by help of
art and æsthetic culture, was considered, by a further advance, _as
the Idea itself_, and was thus constituted the principle of knowledge
and of existence, while the Idea in this sense was recognized as the
sole truth and reality. By means of this recognition, science, in
Schelling's philosophy, attained its absolute standpoint, and although
art had previously begun to assert its peculiar nature and dignity in
relation to the highest interests of humanity, yet it was now that
the actual _notion_ of art and its place in scientific theory were
discovered. Art was now accepted, even if erroneously in one respect,
which this is not the place to discuss, yet in its higher and genuine
vocation. No doubt before this time so early a writer as Winckelmann
had been inspired by his observation of the ideals of the ancients in a
way that led him to develop a new sense for the contemplation of art,
to rescue it from the notions of commonplace aims and of mere mimicry
of nature, and to exert an immense influence in favour of searching out
the idea of art in the works of art and in its history. For Winckelmann
should be regarded as one of the men who have succeeded in furnishing
the mind with a new organ and new methods of study in the field of art.
On the theory, however, and the scientific knowledge of art his view
has had less influence.

3. To touch briefly on the further course of the subject, A. W. and
Friedrich von Schlegel, in proximity to the renaissance of philosophy,
being covetous of novelty and with a thirst for what was striking and
extraordinary, appropriated as much of the philosophical idea as
their natures, which were anything but philosophical, and essentially
of the critical stamp, were capable of absorbing. Neither of them can
claim the reputation of a speculative thinker. But it was they who,
armed with their critical understanding, set themselves somewhere near
the standpoint of the Idea, and with great plainness of speech and
audacity of innovation, though with but a poor admixture of philosophy,
directed a clever polemic against the traditional views. And thus they
undoubtedly introduced in several branches of art a new standard of
judgment in conformity with notions which were higher than those that
they attacked. As, however, their criticism was not accompanied by the
thorough philosophical comprehension of their standard, this standard
retained a character of indefiniteness and vacillation, with the result
that they sometimes did too much and sometimes too little. No doubt
they are to be credited with the merit of bringing afresh to light
and extolling in a loving spirit much that was held obsolete and was
inadequately esteemed by their age, e.g. the work of the older painters
of Italy and the Netherlands, the "Nibelungen Lied," etc.; and, again,
they endeavoured with zeal to learn and to teach subjects that were
little known, such as the Indian poetry and mythology. Nevertheless,
they attributed too high a value to the productions of such epochs,
and sometimes themselves fell into the blunder of admiring what was
but mediocre, _e.g._ Holberg's comedies, and attaching a universal
importance to what had only relative value, or even boldly showing
themselves enthusiasts for a perverse tendency and subordinate
standpoint as if it were something supreme.

Out of this tendency, and especially out of the sentiments[116] and
doctrines of Fried. von Schlegel, there further grew in all its
manifold shapes the so-called _Irony_. This idea had its deeper root,
if we take it in one of its aspects, in Fichte's philosophy, in so
far as the principles of his philosophy were applied to art. Fried.
von Schlegel, as also Schelling, started from Fichte's point of view;
Schelling, to pass wholly beyond it, Fried. von Schlegel to develop it
in a peculiar fashion, and to tear himself loose from it. As regards
the intimate connection of Fichte's principles with one tendency
(among others) of the irony, we need only lay stress on the following
point, that Fichte establishes the =I= as the absolute principle of
all knowledge, of all reason and cognition; and that in the sense of
the =I= which is, and is no more than, utterly abstract and formal.
For this reason, in the second place, this =I= is in itself absolutely
simple, and, on the one hand, every characteristic, every attribute,
every content is negated therein--for every positive matter is
annihilated by absorption into this abstract freedom and unity; on the
other side, every content which is to be of value for the =I=, is given
position and recognition only by favour of the =I=. Whatever is, is
only by favour of the =I=,[117] and what is by my favour =I= am in turn
able to annihilate.

Now, if we abide by these utterly empty forms which have their origin
in the absoluteness of the abstract =I=, then nothing has value in
its real and actual nature, and regarded[118] in itself, but only as
produced by the subjectivity of the =I=. But if so, it follows that
the =I= is able to remain lord and master of everything, and in no
sphere of morality or legality, of things human or divine, profane or
sacred, is there anything that would not have to begin by being given
position by the =I=, and that might not, therefore, just as well be in
turn annihilated thereby. This amounts to making all that is actual in
its own right[119] a mere _semblance_, not true and real for its own
sake and by its own means, but a mere appearance due to the =I=, within
whose power and caprice it remains, and at its free disposal. To admit
it or to annihilate it stands purely in the pleasure of the =I= which
has attained absoluteness in itself and simply as =I=.

In the third place,[120] then, the =I= is a _living_, active
individual, and its life consists in bringing its individuality to its
own consciousness as to that of others, in uttering itself and taking
shape in phenomena. For every human being while he lives, seeks to
realize himself, and does realize himself. With respect to beauty and
art this receives the meaning of living as artist and forming one's
life _artistically_. But, according to the principle before us, =I=
live as artist when all my action and utterance in general, whenever it
has to do with any content, is for me on the level of mere _semblance_,
and assumes a shape which is wholly in my power. So =I= am not really
in _earnest_, either about this content, or generally, about its
utterance and realization. For genuine earnest comes into being only
by means of a substantial interest, a matter that has something in
it, truth, morality, and so forth; by means of a content which, as
such (without my help) is enough to have value for me as something
essential, so that =I= myself only become essential in my own eyes
in as far as =I= have immersed myself in such a matter and have come
to be in conformity with it in my whole knowledge and action. At the
standpoint according to which the artist is the =I= that binds and
looses[121] of its own power, for whom no content of consciousness
counts as absolute and as essentially real, but only as itself an
artificial and dissoluble semblance, such earnest can never come into
being, as nothing has validity ascribed to it but the formalism of the
=I=. By others, indeed, my self-display in which =I= present myself to
them may be taken seriously, inasmuch as they interpret me as though I
were really concerned about the matter in hand; but therein they are
simply deceived, poor _borné_ creatures, without talent and capacity to
apprehend and to attain my standpoint. And this shows me that not every
one is so free (_formally_[122] free, that is) as to see in all that
usually has value, dignity, and sanctity for mankind, simply a product
of his own power of caprice, whereby he is able to set his seal on the
value of such matters, and to determine himself and obtain a content by
their means, or not. And then this skill in living an ironical artist
life apprehends itself as a _God-like geniality_,[123] for which every
possible thing is a mere dead creature, to which the free creator,
knowing himself to be wholly unattached, feels in no way bound, seeing
that he can annihilate as well as create it. He who has attained such
a standpoint of God-like geniality looks down in superiority on all
mankind besides, for they are pronounced _borné_ and dull in as far as
law, morality, and so forth retain for them their fixed, obligatory,
and essential validity. And the individual who thus lives his artist
life assigns himself indeed relation to others, lives with friends,
mistresses, etc., but as genius he sets no value on this relation to
his determinate reality and particular actions, or to what is universal
in its own right; that is, he assumes an ironical attitude towards it.

This is the universal import of the genial God-like irony, as that
concentration of the =I= into itself for which all bonds are broken,
and which will only endure to live in the bliss of self-enjoyment.[124]
This irony was the invention of Herr Fried. von Schlegel, and many
followed him in prating about it then, or are prating of it afresh just
now.

The proximate form of this negativity which displays itself as irony
is, then, on the one hand the futility[125] of all that is matter of
fact, or moral and of substantive import in itself; the nothingness of
all that is objective, and that has essential and actual value. If the
=I= remains at this point of view, all appears to it as nothing worth
and as futile, excepting its own subjectivity, which thereby becomes
hollow and empty, and itself mere conceit.[126] But on the other hand,
the reverse may happen, and the I may also find itself unsatisfied
in its enjoyment of itself, and may prove insufficient to itself, so
as in consequence to feel a craving for the solid and substantial,
for determinate and essential interests. Out of this there arises
misfortune and antinomy, in that the subject desires to penetrate into
truth and has a craving for objectivity, but yet is unable to abandon
its isolation and retirement into itself, and to strip itself free of
this unsatisfied abstract inwardness (of mind), and so has a seizure
of sickly yearning[127] which we have also seen emanate from Fichte's
school. The discontent of this quiescence and feebleness,--which does
not like to act or to touch anything for fear of surrendering its
inward harmony, and, for all its craving after the absolute, remains
none the less unreal and empty, even though pure in itself,--is the
source of morbid saintliness[128] and yearning. For a true saintly soul
acts and is a reality. But all that craving is the feeling of the
nullity of the empty futile[129] subject or person, which lacks the
strength to escape this its futility,[129] and to fill[130] itself with
something of substantial value.

In so far, however, as the Irony was treated as a form of art, it did
not content itself with conferring artistic shape upon the life and
particular individuality of the artist. In addition to the works of art
presented by his own actions, etc., the artist was bound to produce
external works of art as creations of his fancy. The principle of these
productions, which for the most part can only come to the birth in
poetical form, is, in due course, the representation of the Divine as
the Ironical. The ironical, as "genial" individuality, consists in the
self-annihilation of what is noble, great, and excellent; and thus even
the objective shapes of art will have to represent the mere principle
of absolute subjectivity, by displaying what has value and nobleness
for man as null in its self-annihilation. This implies, not merely that
we are not to be serious about the right, the moral, and the true, but
that the highest and best of all has nothing in it, inasmuch as in its
exhibition through individuals, characters, and actions, it refutes
and annihilates itself, and so is irony at its own expense. This mode,
taken in the abstract, borders closely on the principle of comedy; but
yet within this affinity the comic must be essentially distinguished
from the ironical. For the comic must be limited to bringing to nothing
what is in itself null, a false and self-contradictory phenomenon;
for instance, a whim, a perversity, or particular caprice, set over
against a mighty passion; or even a _supposed_ reliable principle or
rigid maxim may be shown to be null. But it is quite another thing
when what is in reality moral and true, any substantial content as
such, exhibits itself as null in an individual and by his means. Such
an individual is then null and despicable in character, and weakness
and want of character are thus introduced into the representation. In
this distinction between the ironical and the comic it is therefore
an essential question what import that has which is brought to
nothing. In the case supposed they are wretched worthless subjects,
persons destitute of the power to abide by their fixed and essential
purpose, but ready to surrender it and let it be destroyed in them.
The "Irony" loves this irony of the characterless. For true character
involves on the one hand an essential import in its purpose; on the
other hand, adherence to that purpose, such that the individuality
would be robbed of its whole existence if forced to desist from and
to abandon it. This stability and substance constitute the keynote of
character. _Cato_ can live only as Roman and as republican. Now, if
Irony is taken as the keynote of the representation, this means that
the supremely inartistic is taken as the true principle of the work of
art. For the result is in part insipid figures; in part shapes void
of import and of conduct,[131] seeing that their substantive nature
turns out to be a nullity; and in part, finally, those yearning moods
and unresolved contradictions of the heart that attach themselves to
such conceptions. Representations of this kind can awake no genuine
interest. And for this reason it is from the Irony that we have eternal
lamentations over the lack of profound feeling, artistic insight, and
genius in the public, inasmuch as it does not understand these heights
of Irony. That is to say, the public does not like all this mediocrity,
half grotesque and half characterless. And it is well that these
unsubstantial languishing natures afford no pleasure; it is a comfort
that such insincerity and hypocrisy are not approved, and that, on the
contrary, man has a desire no less for full and genuine interests than
for characters which remain true to the weighty purposes of their lives.

It may be added as an historical remark that those who more
particularly adopted irony as the supreme principle of art were Solger
and Ludwig Tieck.

This is not the place to speak of Solger at the length which is due to
him, and I must content myself with a few observations. Solger was
not like the others, satisfied with superficial philosophical culture,
but the genuine speculative need of his innermost nature impelled him
to descend into the depths of the philosophic idea. And therein he hit
upon the dialectical element of the Idea, the point to which I give the
name of "infinite absolute negativity," the activity of the idea in
that it negates itself as the infinite and universal, so as to become
finiteness and particularity, and just as really cancels this negation
in turn, establishing thereby the universal and infinite in the finite
and particular. Solger got no further than this negativity, and it is
no doubt an element in the speculative idea, but yet when conceived
as this mere dialectic unrest and dissolution both of infinite and of
finite _no more than_ an element; not, as Solger maintains, _the entire
Idea_. Unhappily Solger's life was too soon interrupted for him to
have achieved the concrete development of the philosophical Idea. And
so he never got beyond this aspect of negativity, which has affinity
with the dissolution that Irony effects of what is determinate and of
what has substantive value in itself, a negativity in which he saw the
principle of artistic activity. Yet in his actual life, considering the
solidity, seriousness, and strength of his character, he neither was
himself, in the sense above depicted, an ironical artist, nor was his
profound feeling for genuine works of art, developed in protracted art
studies, in this respect of an ironical nature. So much in vindication
of Solger, whose life, philosophy, and art merit to be distinguished
from the previously mentioned apostles of irony.

As regards Ludwig Tieck, his culture, too, dates from that period
in which for some time Jena was the literary centre.[132] Tieck and
others of these distinguished people display great familiarity with the
phrases in question, but without telling us what they mean by them.
Thus, Tieck no doubt always says there ought to be Irony; but when he
himself approaches the criticism of great works of art, though his
recognition and portrayal of their greatness is excellent, yet, if we
fancy that now is the best opportunity to explain where the Irony is,
_e.g._ in such a work as "Romeo and Juliet," we are taken in--for we
hear no more about the Irony.




