CHAPTER III.

THE CONCEPTION OF ARTISTIC BEAUTY.

PART I.--THE WORK OF ART AS MADE AND AS SENSUOUS.


After the above prefatory remarks, we approach closer to our subject,
the philosophy of artistic beauty. Inasmuch as we are undertaking to
treat it scientifically we must begin with its _Conception_. Not till
we have established this conception can we map out the division, and
with it the plan of the entirety of the science; for a division, if it
is not, as is the case with unphilosophical inquiries, taken in hand in
a purely external manner, must find its principle in the conception of
the object itself.

In presence of such a demand we are at once met by the question,
"Whence do we get this conception?" If we begin with the given
conception of artistic beauty itself, that is enough to make it a
_pre-supposition_ and mere assumption; now, mere assumptions are not
admitted by the philosophical method, but whatever it allows to pass
must have its truth demonstrated, _i.e._ displayed as necessary.

We will devote a few words to coming to an understanding upon this
difficulty, which concerns the introduction to every philosophical
branch of study when taken in hand by itself.

The object of every science presents _prima facie_ two aspects: in the
first place, that such an object _is_; in the second place, _what_ it
is.

In ordinary science little difficulty attaches to the first of these
points. It might even, at first sight, look ridiculous, if the
requirement were presented that in astronomy and physics it should
be demonstrated that there was a sun, heavenly bodies, magnetic
phenomena, etc. In these sciences, which have to do with what is given
to sense, the objects are taken from external experience, and instead
of demonstrating them ("beweisen") it is thought sufficient to show
them ("weisen"). Yet even within the non-philosophical sciences,
doubts may arise about the existence of their objects, as _e.g._ in
psychology, the science of mind, it may be doubted if there _is_ a
soul, a mind, _i.e._ something subjective, separate, and independent,
distinct from what is material; or in theology, whether a God _is_. If,
moreover, the objects are of subjective kind, _i.e._ are given only
in the mind, and not as external sensuous objects, we are confronted
by our conviction that there is nothing in the mind but what its own
activity has produced. This brings up the accidental question whether
men have produced this inner idea or perception in their minds or not,
and even if the former is actually the case, whether they have not made
the idea in question vanish again, or at any rate degraded it to a
merely _subjective idea_, whose content has no natural and independent
being. So, for instance, the beautiful has often been regarded as not
naturally and independently necessary in our ideas, but as a mere
subjective pleasure or accidental sense. Our external intuitions,
observations, and perceptions are often deceptive and erroneous, but
still more is this the case with the inner ideas, even if they have in
themselves the greatest vividness, and are forcible enough to transport
us irresistibly into passion.

This doubt whether an object of inward ideas and inward perception
as such is or is not, as also the accidental question whether the
subjective consciousness has produced it in itself, and whether the act
or mode in which it brought it before itself was in its turn adequate
to the object in its essential and independent nature--all this is just
what aroused in men the higher scientific need, which demands that,
even if we have an idea that an object is, or that there is such an
object, the object must yet be displayed or demonstrated in terms of
its necessity.

This proof, if it is developed in a really scientific way, must also
satisfy the further question _What_ an object is. But to expound this
relation would carry us too far in this place, and we can only make the
following remarks on the point.

If we are to display the necessity of our object, the beautiful in art,
we should have to prove that art or beauty was a result of antecedents
such as, when considered in their true conception, to lead us on with
scientific necessity to the idea of fine art. But in as far as we begin
with _art_, and propose to treat of the essence of _its_ idea and of
the realization of that idea, not of antecedents which go before it _as
demanded by_ its idea, so far art, as a peculiar scientific object,
has, for us, a pre-supposition which lies beyond our consideration,
and which, being a different content, belongs in scientific treatment
to a different branch of philosophical study. For it is nothing short
of the whole of philosophy that is the knowledge of the universe as in
itself _one single_ organic totality which develops itself out of its
own conception, and which, returning into itself so as to form a whole
in virtue of the necessity in which it is placed towards itself, binds
itself together with itself into _one single_ world of truth. In the
coronal of this scientific necessity, each individual part is just as
much a circle that returns into itself, as it has, at the same time, a
necessary connection with other parts. This connection is a backward
out of which it derives itself, as well as a forward, to which in its
own nature it impels itself on and on, in as far as it is fertile by
creating fresh matter out of itself, and issuing it into the further
range of scientific knowledge. Therefore, it is not our present aim
to demonstrate the idea of beauty from which we set out, that is, to
derive it according to its necessity from the pre-suppositions which
are its antecedents in science. This task belongs to an encyclopædic
development of philosophy as a whole and of its particular branches.
For us, the idea of beauty and of art is a pre-supposition given in
the system of philosophy. But as we cannot in this place discuss this
system, and the connection of art with it, we have not yet the idea
of the beautiful before us _in a scientific form_; what we have at
command are merely the elements and aspects of it, as they are or have
at former periods been presented, in the diverse ideas of the beautiful
and of art in the mere common consciousness. Having started from this
point, we shall subsequently pass to the more profound consideration of
the views in question, in order thereby to gain the advantage of, in
the first place, obtaining a general idea of our object, and further,
by a brief criticism effecting a preliminary acquaintance with its
higher principles, with which we shall have to do in the sequel. By
this mode of treatment our final introduction will act, so to speak, as
the overture to the account of the subject itself, and will serve the
purpose of a general collection and direction of our thoughts towards
the proper object-matter of our discussion.

What we know, to begin with, as a current idea of the work of art,
comes under the three following general predicates:--

(1) We suppose the work of art to be no natural product, but brought to
pass by means of human activity.

(2) To be essentially made _for_ man, and, indeed, to be more or less
borrowed from the sensuous and addressed to man's sense.

(3) To contain an _end_.

1. As regards the first point, that a work of art is taken to be a
product of human activity, this view has given rise (_a_) to the view
that this activity, being the _conscious_ production of an external
object, can also be _known_, and _expounded_ and learnt, and prosecuted
by others. For, what one can do, it might seem, another can do,[46] or
imitate,[47] as soon as he is acquainted with the mode of procedure;
so that, supposing universal familiarity with the rules of artistic
production, it would only be a matter of any one's will and pleasure
to carry out the process in a uniform way, and so to produce works of
art. It is thus that the above-mentioned rule-providing theories and
their precepts, calculated for practical observance, have arisen. But
that which can be executed according to such instruction, can only be
something formally regular and mechanical. For only what is mechanical
is of such an external kind that no more than a purely empty exercise
of will and dexterity is required to receive it among our ideas and
put it in act; such an exercise not needing to be supplemented by
anything concrete, or anything that goes beyond the precepts conveyed
in general rules. This is most vividly displayed when precepts of the
kind in question do not limit themselves to what is purely external
and mechanical, but extend to the meaning-laden spiritual activity
of true art. In this region the rules contain nothing but indefinite
generalities; _e.g._ "The theme ought to be interesting, and each
individual ought to be made to speak according to his rank, age, sex,
and position." But if rules are meant to be adequate on this subject,
their precepts ought to have been drawn up with such determinateness
that they could be carried out just as they are expressed, without
further and original activity of mind. Being abstract, however, in
their content, such rules reveal themselves, in respect of their
pretension of being adequate to fill the consciousness of the artist,
as wholly inadequate, inasmuch as artistic production is not formal
activity in accordance with given determinations. For it is bound as
spiritual activity to work by drawing on its own resources, and to
bring before the mind's eye a quite other and richer content and ampler
individual creations than any abstract formulæ can dictate. Such rules
may furnish guidance in case of need, if they contain anything really
definite, and therefore of practical utility; but their directions can
only apply to purely external circumstances.

(_b_) The tendency which we have just indicated has therefore been
abandoned, and, in place of it, the opposite principle has been pursued
to no less lengths. For the work of art came to be regarded no longer
as the product of an _activity general_ in mankind, but as the work of
a mind endowed with wholly peculiar gifts. This mind, it is thought,
has then nothing to do but _simply_ to give free play to its particular
gift, as though it were a specific force of nature, and is to be
entirely released from attention to laws of universal validity, as
also from the interference of reflection in its instinctively creative
operation. And, indeed, it is to be guarded therefrom, inasmuch as its
productions could only be infected and tainted by such a consciousness.
In this aspect the work of art was pronounced to be the product of
_talent_ and _genius_, and stress was laid on the natural element
which talent and genius contain. The view was partly right. Talent is
specific, and genius universal capability, with which a man has not the
power to endow himself simply by his own self-conscious activity. We
shall treat this point more fully in the sequel.

In this place we have only to mention the aspect of falsity in the
view before us, in that all consciousness respecting the man's own
activity was held, in the case of artistic production, not merely
superfluous, but even injurious. Production on the part of talent
and genius then appears, in general terms, as a _state_, and, in
particular, as a state of _inspiration_. To such a state, it is said,
genius is in part excited by a given object, and in part it has the
power of its own free will to place itself therein, in which process,
moreover, the good service of the champagne bottle is not forgotten.
This notion became prominent in Germany in the so-called _epoch of
genius_, which was introduced by the early poetical productions of
Goethe, and subsequently sustained by those of Schiller.[48] In their
earliest works these poets began everything anew, in scorn of all the
rules which had then been fabricated, transgressed these rules of set
purpose, and, while doing so, distanced all rivals by a long interval.
I will not enter more closely into the confusions which have prevailed
respecting the conception of inspiration and genius, and which prevail
even at the present day respecting the omnipotence of inspiration
as such. We need only lay down as essential the view that, though
the artist's talent and genius contains a natural element, yet it is
essentially in need of cultivation by thought, and of reflection on
the mode in which it produces, as well as of practice and skill in
producing. A main feature of such production is unquestionably external
workmanship, inasmuch as the work of art has a purely technical side,
which extends into the region of handicraft; most especially in
architecture and sculpture, less so in painting and music, least of
all in poetry. Skill in this comes not by inspiration, but solely by
reflection, industry, and practice; and such skill is indispensable to
the artist, in order that he may master his external material, and not
be thwarted by its stubbornness.

Moreover, the higher an artist ranks, the more profoundly ought he to
represent the depths of heart and mind; and these are not known without
learning them, but are only to be fathomed by the direction of a man's
own mind to the inner and outer world. So here, too, _study_ is the
means whereby the artist brings this content into his consciousness,
and wins the matter and burden of his conceptions.

In this respect one art may need the consciousness and cognition of
such matter more than others. Music, for instance, which concerns
itself only with the undefined movement of the inward spiritual
nature, and deals with musical sounds as, so to speak, feeling
without thought, needs little or no spiritual content to be present
in consciousness. It is for this reason that musical talent generally
announces itself in very early youth, while the head is still empty
and the heart has been but little moved, and is capable of attaining
to a very considerable height in early years, before mind and life
have experience of themselves. And again, as a matter of fact we
often enough see very great expertness in musical composition, as
also in execution, subsist along with remarkable barrenness of mind
and character. The reverse is the case with poetry. In poetry all
depends on the representation,--which must be full of matter and
thought--of man, of his profounder interests, and of the powers that
move him; and therefore mind and heart themselves must be richly and
profoundly educated by life, experience, and reflection, before genius
can bring to pass anything mature, substantial, and self-complete.
Goethe's and Schiller's first productions are of an immaturity, and
even of a rudeness and barbarism, that are absolutely terrifying.
This phenomenon, that the greater part of those attempts display a
predominant mass of thoroughly prosaic and in part of frigid and
commonplace elements, furnishes the chief objection to the common
opinion, that inspiration is inseparable from youth and youthful
fire. Those two men of genius, it may be said, were the first to give
our nation works of true poetry, and yet it was only their mature
manhood[49] that presented us with creations profound, substantial, and
the outcome of genuine inspiration, while no less thoroughly perfect
in form. Thus, too, it was not till his old age that Homer devised and
uttered his immortal songs.

(_c_) A third view, which concerns the idea of the work of art as
a product of human activity, refers to the position of such a work
towards the external appearances of nature. It was an obvious opinion
for the common consciousness to adopt on this head, that the work of
art made by man ranked _below_ the product of nature. The work of art
has no feeling in itself, and is not through and through a living
thing, but, regarded as an external object, is dead. But we are wont
to prize the living more than the dead. We must admit, of course,
that the work of art has not in itself movement and life. An animated
being in nature is within and without an organization appropriately
elaborated down to all its minutest parts, while the work of art
attains the semblance of animation on its surface only, but within is
common stone, or wood and canvas, or, as in the case of poetry, is
idea, uttering itself in speech and letters. But this aspect, viz.
its external existence, is not what makes a work into a production of
fine art; it is a work of art only in as far as, being the offspring
of mind, it continues to belong to the realm of mind, has received
the baptism of the spiritual, and only represents that which has been
moulded in harmony with mind. A human interest, the spiritual value
which attaches to an incident, to an individual character, to an action
in its plot and in its _dénoûment_, is apprehended in the work of art,
and exhibited more purely[50] and transparently than is possible on
the soil of common unartistic reality. This gives the work of art a
higher rank than anything produced by nature, which has not sustained
this passage through the mind. So, for instance, by reason of the
feeling and insight of which a landscape as depicted by an artist is a
manifestation, such a work of mind assumes a higher rank than the mere
natural landscape. For everything spiritual is better than anything
natural. At any rate, no existence in nature is able, like art, to
represent divine ideals.

Upon that which, in works of art, the mind borrows from its own
inner life it is able, even on the side of external existence, to
confer _permanence_; whereas the individual living thing of nature
is transient, vanishing, and mutable in its aspect, while the work
of art persists. Though, indeed, it is not mere permanence, but the
accentuation of the character which animation by mind confers, that
constitutes its genuine pre-eminence as compared with natural reality.

Nevertheless, this higher rank assigned to the work of art is in turn
disputed by another idea of the common consciousness. It is said that
nature and its products are a work of God, created by his goodness and
wisdom, whereas the work of art is _merely_ a human production, made
after man's devising by man's hands. In this antithesis between natural
production as a divine creation and human activity as a merely finite
creation, we at once come upon the misconception, that God does _not_
work in man and through man, but limits the range of his activity to
nature alone. This false opinion is to be entirely abandoned if we
mean to penetrate the true conception of art. Indeed, in opposition to
such an idea, we must adhere to the very reverse, believing that God
is more honoured by what mind does or makes than by the productions or
formations of nature. For not only is there a divinity in man, but in
him it is operative under a form that is appropriate to the essence of
God, in a mode quite other and higher than in nature. God is a Spirit,
and it is only in man that the medium through which the divine element
passes has the form of conscious spirit, that actively realizes itself.
In nature the corresponding medium is the unconscious, sensible, and
external, which is far below consciousness in value. In the products
of art God is operative neither more nor less than in the phenomena of
nature; but the divine element, as it makes itself known in the work
of art, has attained, as being generated out of the mind, an adequate
thoroughfare for its existence; while existence in the unconscious
sensuousness of nature is not a mode of appearance adequate to the
Divine Being.

(_d_) Granting, then, that the work of art is made by man as a creation
of mind, we come to the last question, which will enable us to draw a
deeper result from what has been said. What is man's need to produce
works of art? On the one hand the production may be regarded as a
mere toy of chance and of man's fancies, that might just as well be
let alone as pursued. For, it may be said, there are other and better
means for effecting that which is the aim of art, and man bears in him
interests that are yet higher and of more import than art has power
to satisfy. But, on the other hand, art appears to arise from the
higher impulse and to satisfy the higher needs, at times, indeed, even
the highest, the absolute need of man, being wedded to the religious
interests of whole epochs and peoples, and to their most universal
intuitions respecting the world. This inquiry concerning the not
contingent but absolute need of art we cannot as yet answer completely,
seeing that it is more concrete than any shape which could here be
given to the answer.[51] We must, therefore, content ourselves for the
present with merely establishing the following points.

The universal and absolute need out of which art, on its formal
side,[52] arises has its source in the fact that man is a _thinking_
consciousness, _i.e._ that he draws out of himself, and makes explicit
_for himself_, that which he is, and, generally, whatever is. The
things of nature are only _immediate and single_, but man as mind
_reduplicates_ himself, inasmuch as _prima facie_ he _is_ like the
things of nature, but in the second place just as really is _for_
himself, perceives himself, has ideas of himself, thinks himself,
and only thus is active self-realizedness.[53] This consciousness
of himself man obtains in a twofold way: _in the first place
theoretically_, in as far as he has inwardly to bring himself into
his own consciousness, with all that moves in the human breast, all
that stirs and works therein, and, generally, to observe and form an
idea of himself, to fix before himself what thought ascertains to be
his real being, and, in what is summoned out of his inner self as in
what is received from without, to recognize only himself. Secondly,
man is realized for himself by _practical_ activity, inasmuch as he
has the impulse, in the medium which is directly given to him, and
externally presented before him, to produce himself, and therein at
the same time to recognize himself. This purpose he achieves by the
modification of external things upon which he impresses the seal of his
inner being, and then finds repeated in them his own characteristics.
Man does this in order as a free subject to strip the outer world of
its stubborn foreignness, and to enjoy in the shape and fashion of
things a mere external reality of himself.[54] Even the child's first
impulse involves this practical modification of external things. A boy
throws stones into the river, and then stands admiring the circles that
trace themselves on the water, as an effect in which he attains the
sight of something that is his own doing. This need traverses the most
manifold phenomena, up to the mode of self-production in the medium
of external things as it is known to us in the work of art. And it is
not only external things that man treats in this way, but himself no
less, _i.e._ his own natural form, which he does not leave as he finds
it, but alters of set purpose. This is the cause of all ornament and
decoration, though it may be as barbarous, as tasteless, as utterly
disfiguring or even destructive as crushing Chinese ladies' feet, or
as slitting the ears and lips. It is only among cultivated men that
change of the figure,[55] of behaviour, and of every kind and mode of
self-utterance emanates from spiritual education.[56]

The universal need for expression in art[57] lies, therefore, in man's
rational impulse to exalt the inner and outer world into a spiritual
consciousness for himself, as an object in which he recognizes his own
self. He satisfies the need of this spiritual freedom when he makes
all that exists explicit for himself _within_, and in a corresponding
way realizes this his explicit self _without_, evoking thereby, in
this reduplication of himself, what is in him into vision and into
knowledge for his own mind and for that of others. This is the free
rationality of man, in which, as all action and knowledge, so also art
has its ground and necessary origin. The specific need of art, however,
in contradistinction to other action, political or moral, to religious
imagination and to scientific cognition, we shall consider later.

2. We have so far been considering that aspect of the work of art
in which it is made by man. We have now to pass on to its second
characteristic, that it is made for man's _sense_, and for this reason
is more or less borrowed from the sensuous.

(_a_) This reflection has furnished occasion for the consideration
to be advanced that fine art is intended to arouse feeling, and
indeed more particularly the feeling which we find suits us--that, is
pleasant feeling. Looking at the question thus, men have treated the
investigation of fine art as an investigation of the feelings, and
asked what feelings it must be held that art ought to evoke,--fear, for
example, and compassion; and then, how these could be pleasant--how,
for example, the contemplation of misfortune could produce
satisfaction. This tendency of reflection is traceable particularly to
Moses Mendelssohn's times, and many such discussions are to be found
in his writings. Yet such an investigation did not lead men far, for
feeling is the indefinite dull region of the mind; what is felt remains
wrapped in the form of the most abstract individual subjectivity,[58]
and therefore the distinctions of feeling are also quite abstract, and
are not distinctions of the actual object-matter itself. For instance,
fear, anxiety, alarm, terror, are no doubt of one and the same sort
of feeling variously modified, but in part are mere quantitative
heightenings, in part are forms which in themselves have nothing to do
with their content itself, but are indifferent to it. In the case of
fear, for instance, an existence is given in which the subject (_i.e._
a person) has an interest, but at the same time sees approaching
the negative that threatens to annihilate this existence, and so
finds immediately in himself, as a contradictory affection of his
subjectivity, the two at once, this interest and that negative. Now,
such fear considered in itself is not enough to condition any content,
but is capable of receiving into itself the most diverse and opposite
matters.[59] Feeling, as such, is a thoroughly empty form of subjective
affection. No doubt this form may in some cases be manifold in itself,
as is hope, grief, joy, or pleasure; and, again, may in such diversity
comprehend varied contents, as there is a feeling of justice, moral
feeling, sublime religious feeling, and so forth. But the fact that
such content is forthcoming in different forms of feeling is not enough
to bring to light its essential and definite nature; they remain purely
subjective affections of myself, in which the concrete matter vanishes,
as though narrowed into a circle of the utmost abstraction.[60]
Therefore, the inquiry into the feelings which art arouses, or ought to
arouse, comes utterly to a standstill in the indefinite, and is a mode
of study which precisely abstracts from the content proper and from
its concrete essence and notion. For reflection upon feeling contents
itself with the observation of the subjective affection in its
isolation, instead of diving into and fathoming the matter in question
itself, the work of art, and, while engaged with it, simply letting
go the mere subjectivity and its states. In feeling it is just this
vacant subjectivity that is--not merely retained, but--given the first
place, and that is why men are so fond of having emotions. And for the
same reason such a study becomes tedious from its indefiniteness and
vacancy, and repulsive from its attentiveness to little subjective
peculiarities.

(_b_) Now, as a work of art is not merely to do in general something of
the nature of arousing emotion--for this is a purpose which it would
have in common, without specific difference, with eloquence, historical
composition, religious edification, and so forth--but is to do so only
in as far as it is beautiful, reflection hit upon the idea, seeing that
beauty was the object, of searching out a _peculiar feeling of beauty_
to correspond to it, and of discovering a particular _sense of beauty_.
In this search it soon appeared that such a sense is no blind instinct
made rigidly definite by nature, and capable from the beginning in
its own independent essence of discerning beauty. Hence it followed
that education came to be demanded for this sense, and the educated
sense of beauty came to be called _taste_, which, although an educated
appreciation and apprehension of the beautiful, was yet supposed to
retain the nature of immediate feeling. We have already mentioned
how abstract theories undertook to educate such a sense of taste, and
how external and one-sided that sense remained. The criticism of the
time when those views prevailed, was not only defective in _universal_
principles, but also, in its particular references to individual works
of art, was less directed to justifying a _definite_ judgment--the
power to make one not having at that time been acquired--than to
advancing the general education of taste. For this reason such
education in its turn came to a standstill in the indefinite, and
merely endeavoured so to equip feeling as sense of beauty by help
of reflection, that there might thenceforth be capacity to find out
beauty whenever and wherever it should exist. Yet the depths of the
matter remained a sealed book to mere taste, for these depths demand
not only sensibility and abstract reflection, but the undivided reason
and the mind in its solid vigour; while taste was only directed to the
external surface about which the feelings play, and on which one-sided
maxims may pass for valid. But, for this very reason, what is called
good taste takes fright at all more profound effects of art, and is
silent where the reality comes in question, and where externalities
and trivialities vanish. For when great passions and the movements
of a profound soul are unveiled, we are no longer concerned with the
finer distinctions of taste and its pettifogging particularities. It
feels that genius strides contemptuously over such ground as this, and,
shrinking before its power, becomes uneasy, and knows not which way to
turn.

(_c_) And thus, as we should expect, men have abandoned the tendency
to consider works of art solely with an eye to the education of taste,
and with the purpose of merely displaying taste. The _connoisseur_,
or scholar of art, has replaced the art-judge, or man of taste. The
positive side of art-scholarship, so far as it concerns a thorough
acquaintance with the entire circumference[61] of the individual
character in a given work of art, we have already pronounced to
be essential to the study of art. For a work of art, owing to its
nature as at once material and individual, is essentially originated
by particular conditions of the most various kinds, to which belong
especially the time and place of its production, then the peculiar
individuality of the artist, and in particular the grade of technical
development attained by his art. Attention to all these aspects
is indispensable to distinct and thorough insight and cognition,
and even to the enjoyment of a work of art; it is with them that
connoisseurship, or art-scholarship, is chiefly occupied; and all that
it can do for us in its own way is to be accepted with gratitude. Yet,
though such scholarship is entitled to rank as something essential,
still it ought not to be taken for the sole or supreme element in the
relation which the mind adopts towards a work of art, and towards art
in general. For art-scholarship (and this is its defective side) is
capable of resting in an acquaintance with purely external aspects,
such as technical or historical details, etc., and of guessing but
little, or even knowing absolutely nothing, of the true and real nature
of a work of art. It may even form a disparaging estimate of the value
of more profound considerations in comparison with purely positive,
technical, and historical information. Still, even so, art-scholarship,
if only it is of a genuine kind, at least strives after definite
grounds and information, and an intelligent judgment, with which is
closely conjoined the more precise distinction of the different, even
if partly external, aspects in a work of art, and the estimation of
their importance.

(_d_) After these remarks upon the modes of study which have arisen
out of that aspect of a work of art in which, being a sensuous object,
it is invested with a relation to man as a sensuous being, we will
now consider this aspect in its more essential relation to art as
such, and so ([Greek: a]) partly as regards the work of art as object,
([Greek: b]) partly with respect to the subjectivity of the artist, his
genius, talent, and so on; but without entering into matter relative to
these points that can only proceed from the knowledge of art in its
universal idea. For we are not yet on genuinely scientific ground, but
have only reached the province of external reflection.

([Greek: a]) The work of art then, of course, presents itself to
sensuous apprehension. It is addressed to sensuous feeling, outer or
inner, to sensuous perception and imagination, just as is the nature
that surrounds us without, or our own sensitive nature within. Even
a speech, for instance, may be addressed to sensuous imagination
and feeling. Notwithstanding, the work of art is not only for the
_sensuous_ apprehension as sensuous object, but its position is of such
a kind that as sensuous it is at the same time essentially addressed to
the _mind_, that the mind is meant to be affected by it, and to find
some sort of satisfaction in it.

This intention of the work of art explains how it is in no way meant
to be a natural product and to possess natural life, whether a natural
product is to be ranked higher or lower than a _mere_ work of art, as
it is often called in a depreciatory sense.

For the sensuous aspect of the work of art has a right to existence
only in as far as it exists for man's mind, but not in as far as _qua_
sensuous thing it has separate existence by itself.[62] If we examine
more closely in what way the sensuous is presented to man, we find
that what is sensuous may bear various relations to the mind.

(_aa_) The lowest mode of apprehension, and that least appropriate to
the mind, is purely sensuous apprehension. It consists naturally in
mere looking, listening, feeling, just as in seasons of mental fatigue
it may often be entertaining to go about without thought, and just to
hear and look around us. The mind, however, does not rest in the mere
apprehension of external things by sight and hearing, it makes them
objects for its own inner nature, which then is itself impelled in a
correspondingly sensuous form to realize itself in the things, and
relates itself to them as _desire_. In this appetitive relation to
the outer world, the man stands as a sensuous particular over against
the things as likewise particulars; he does not open his mind to them
with general ideas as a thinking being, but has relations dictated
by particular impulses and interests to the objects as themselves
particulars, and preserves himself in them, inasmuch as he uses them,
consumes them, and puts in act his self-satisfaction by sacrificing
them to it. In this negative relation desire requires for itself not
merely the superficial appearance of external things, but themselves in
their concrete sensuous existence. Mere pictures of the wood that it
wants to use, or of the animals that it wants to eat, would be of no
service to desire. Just as little is it possible for desire to let the
object subsist in its freedom. For its impulse urges it just precisely
to destroy this independence and freedom of external things, and to
show that they are only there to be destroyed and consumed. But, at the
same time, the subject himself, as entangled in the particular limited
and valueless interests of his desires, is neither free in himself,
for he does not determine himself out of the essential universality
and rationality of his will, nor free in relation to the outer world,
for his desire remains essentially determined by things, and related
to them. This relation of desire is not that in which man stands
to the work of art. He allows it to subsist as an object, free and
independent, and enters into relation with it apart from desire, as
with an object which only appeals to the theoretic side of the mind.
For this reason the work of art, although it has sensuous existence,
yet, in this point of view, does not require concrete sensuous
existence and natural life; indeed, it even _ought_ not to remain on
such a level, seeing that it has to satisfy only the interests of mind,
and is bound to exclude from itself all desire. Hence it is, indeed,
that practical desire rates individual things in nature, organic and
inorganic, which are serviceable to it, higher than works of art, which
reveal themselves to be useless for its purpose, and enjoyable only for
other modes of mind.

([Greek: bb]) A second mode in which the externally present may be
related to the mind is, in contrast with singular sensuous perception
and desire, the purely theoretical relation to the _Intelligence_. The
theoretic contemplation of things has no interest in consuming them as
particulars, in satisfying itself sensuously, and in preserving itself
by their means, but rather in becoming acquainted with them in their
universality, in finding their inner being and law, and in conceiving
them in terms of their notion. Therefore the theoretical interest
lets the single things be, and holds aloof from them as sensuous
particulars, because this sensuous particularity is not what the
contemplation exercised by the intelligence looks for. For the rational
intelligence does not belong, as do the desires, to the individual
subject[63] as such, but only to the individual as at the same time
in his nature universal. In as far as man has relation to things in
respect of this universality, it is his universal reason which attempts
to find himself in nature, and thereby to reproduce the inner essence
of things, which sensuous existence, though having its ground therein,
cannot immediately display. But again, this theoretic interest, the
satisfaction of which is the work of science, is in the scientific
form no more shared by art, than the latter makes common cause with
the impulse of the purely practical desires. Science may, no doubt,
start from the sensuous thing in its individuality, and may possess a
sensuous idea of the way in which such an individual presents itself in
its individual colour, shape, size, etc. Still, this isolated sensuous
thing, as such, has no further relation to the mind, inasmuch as the
intelligence aims at the universal, the law, the thought and notion of
the object. Not only, therefore, does it abandon all intercourse with
the thing as a given individual, but transforms it within the mind,
making a concrete object of sense into an abstract matter of thought,
and so into something quite other than the same object _qua_ sensuous
phenomenon. The artistic interest, as distinguished from science, does
not act thus. Artistic contemplation accepts the work of art just as
it displays itself _qua_ external object, in immediate determinateness
and sensuous individuality clothed in colour, figure, and sound, or as
a single isolated perception, etc., and does not go so far beyond the
immediate appearance of objectivity which is presented before it, as
to aim, like science, at apprehending the notion of such an objective
appearance as a universal notion.

Thus, the interest of art distinguishes itself from the practical
interest of _desire_ by the fact that it permits its object to subsist
freely and in independence, while desire utilizes it in its own service
by its destruction. On the other hand, artistic contemplation differs
from theoretical consideration by the scientific intelligence, in
cherishing interest for the object as an individual existence, and not
setting to work to transmute it into its universal thought and notion.

[Greek: gg] It follows, then, from the above, that though the sensuous
must be present in a work of art, yet it must only appear as surface
and _semblance_ of the sensuous. For, in the sensuous aspect of a work
of art, the mind seeks neither the concrete framework of matter, that
empirically thorough completeness and development of the organism
which desire demands, nor the universal and merely ideal thought.
What it requires is sensuous presence, which, while not ceasing to be
sensuous, is to be liberated from the apparatus of its merely material
nature. And thus the sensuous in works of art is exalted to the rank
of a mere _semblance_ in comparison with the immediate existence of
things in nature, and the work of art occupies the mean between what is
immediately sensuous and ideal thought. This semblance of the sensuous
presents itself to the mind externally as the shape, the visible look,
and the sonorous vibration of things--supposing that the mind leaves
the objects uninterfered with (physically), but yet does not descend
into their inner essence (by abstract thought), for if it did so, it
would entirely destroy their external existence as separate individuals
_for it_. For this reason the sensuous aspect of art only refers to the
two _theoretical_ senses of _sight_ and _hearing_, while smell, taste,
and feeling remain excluded from being sources of artistic enjoyment.
For smell, taste, and feeling have to do with matter as such, and with
its immediate sensuous qualities; smell with material volatilization
in air, taste with the material dissolution of substance,[64] and
feeling with warmth, coldness, smoothness, etc. On this account these
senses cannot have to do with the objects of art, which are destined to
maintain themselves in their actual independent existence, and admit
of no purely sensuous relation. The pleasant for these latter senses
is not the beautiful in art. Thus art on its sensuous side purposely
produces no more than a shadow-world of shapes, sounds, and imaginable
ideas;[65] and it is absolutely out of the question to maintain that it
is owing to simple powerlessness and to the limitations on his actions
that man, when evoking worlds of art into existence, fails to present
more than the mere surface of the sensuous, than mere _schemata_.[66]
In art, these sensuous shapes and sounds present themselves, not simply
for their own sake and for that of their immediate structure,[67] but
with the purpose of affording in that shape satisfaction to higher
spiritual interests, seeing that they are powerful to call forth a
response and echo in the mind from all the depths of consciousness.
It is thus that, in art, the sensuous is _spiritualized_, _i.e._ the
_spiritual_ appears in sensuous shape.

([Greek: _b_]) But for this very reason we have a product of art only
in so far as it has found a passage through the mind, and has been
generated by spiritually productive activity. This leads us to the
other question which we have to answer--how, that is, the sensuous
side, which is indispensable to art, is operative in the artist as a
productive state of the subject or person. This, the method and fashion
of production, contains in itself as a subjective activity just the
same properties which we found objectively present in the work of art;
it must be a spiritual activity which, nevertheless, at the same time
has in itself the element of sensuousness and immediateness. It is
neither, on the one hand, purely mechanical work, as mere unconscious
skill in sensuous sleight of hand,[68] or a formal activity according
to fixed rules learnt by rote; nor is it, on the other hand, a
scientific productive process, which passes from sense to abstract
ideas and thoughts, or exercises itself exclusively in the element
of pure thinking; rather the spiritual and the sensuous side must in
artistic production be as one. For instance, it would be possible in
poetical creation to try and proceed by first apprehending the theme to
be treated as a prosaic thought, and by then putting it into pictorial
ideas, and into rhyme, and so forth; so that the pictorial element
would simply be hung upon the abstract reflections as an ornament or
decoration. Such a process could only produce bad poetry, for in it
there would be operative as two _separate activities_ that which in
artistic production has its right place only as undivided unity.

This genuine mode of production constitutes the activity of artistic
_fancy_. It is the rational element which, _qua_ spirit, only exists
in as far as it actively extrudes itself into consciousness, but yet
does not array before it what it bears within itself till it does so in
sensuous form. This activity has, therefore, a spiritual import, which,
however, it embodies in sensuous shape. Such a process may be compared
with the habit even of a man with great experience of the world, or,
again, with that of a man of _esprit_[69] or wit, who, although he
has complete knowledge of the main stakes of life, of the substantive
interests that hold men together, of what moves them, and of what is
the power that they recognize, yet neither has himself apprehended
this content in the form of general rules, nor is able to explain it
to others in general reflections, but makes plain to himself and to
others what occupies his consciousness always in particular cases,
whether real or invented, in adequate instances, and the like. For in
his ideas, everything shapes itself into concrete images, determinate
in time and place, to which, therefore, names and other external
circumstances of all kinds must not be wanting. Yet such a kind of
imagination rather rests on the recollection of states that he has gone
through, and of experiences that have befallen him, than is creative
in its own strength. His recollection preserves and reproduces the
individuality and external fashion of occurrences that had such and
such results with all their external circumstances, and prevents the
universal from emerging in its own shape. But the productive fancy of
the _artist_ is the fancy of a great mind and heart, the apprehension
and creation of ideas and of shapes, and, indeed, the exhibition of
the profoundest and most universal human interests in the definite
sensuous mould of pictorial representation. From this it follows
at once, that in one aspect Fancy unquestionably rests on natural
gifts--speaking generally, on talent--because its mode of production
requires a sensuous medium. It is true that we speak in the same way
of scientific "talent," but the sciences only presuppose the universal
capacity of thought, which has not, like Fancy, a natural mode (as
well as an intellectual one), but abstracts just precisely from all
that is natural (or native) in an activity; and thus it would be more
correct to say that there is no specifically scientific talent in the
sense of a _mere_ natural endowment. Now, Fancy _has_ in it a mode of
instinct-like productiveness, inasmuch as the essential plasticity and
sensuousness of the work of art must be subjectively present in the
artist as natural disposition and natural impulse, and, considering
that it is unconscious operation, must belong to the natural element
in man, as well as to the rational. Of course, natural capacity leaves
room for other elements in talent and genius, for artistic production
is just as much of a spiritual and self-conscious nature; we can but
say that its spirituality must, somehow, have an element of natural,
plastic, and formative tendency. For this reason, though nearly every
one can reach a certain point in an art, yet, in order to go beyond
this point, with which the art in the strict sense begins, it is
impossible to dispense with native artistic talent of the highest order.

Considered as a natural endowment, moreover, such talent reveals itself
for the most part in early youth, and is manifested in the impelling
restlessness that busies itself, with vivacity and industry, in
creating shapes in some particular sensuous medium, and in seizing on
this species of utterance and communication as the only one, or as the
chief and the most suitable one. And thus, too, a precocious technical
facility, that up to a certain grade of attainment is without effort,
is a sign of natural talent. A sculptor finds everything transmute
itself into shapes, and he soon begins to take up the clay and model
it. And, speaking generally, whatever men of such talents have in their
imagination, whatever rouses and moves their inner nature, turns at
once into shape, drawing, melody, or poem.

([Greek: g]) Thirdly, and to conclude: the _content_ of art is also in
some respects borrowed from the sensuous, from nature; or, in any case,
even if the content is of a spiritual kind, it can only be seized and
fixed by representing the spiritual fact, such as human relations, in
the shape of phenomena with external reality.




