Chapter X. Conclusion


    “In Europe we know that an age is dying. Here it would be easy to
    miss the signs of coming changes, but I have little doubt that it
    will come. A realization of the _aimlessness_ of life lived to
    labor and to die, having achieved nothing but avoidance of
    starvation, and the birth of children also doomed to the weary
    treadmill, has seized the minds of millions.” _Sir Auckland
    Geddes, British Ambassador to the U. S. 1920._


In conclusion let me say very briefly, as I said in the beginning, that
this little book has aimed to be only a sketch. The Problem of Life is
old. I have endeavored to approach it afresh, with a new method, in a new
spirit, from a new point of view. The literature of the subject is vast.
It displays great knowledge and skill. Much of it is fitted to inform and
to inspire such as really read with a genuine desire to understand. Its
weakness is due to the absence of a true conception of what human beings
are. That is what I miss in it and it is that lack of fundamental and
central thought that I have striven to supply. If I have succeeded in
that, I have no fear—all else will follow quickly, inevitably, as a matter
of course. For a fundamental conception, once it is formed and expressed,
has a strange power—the power of enlisting the thought and cooperation of
many minds. And no conception can have greater power in our human world
than a _true_ conception of the nature of Man. For that most important of
truths the times are ripe; the world is filled with the saddest of
memories, with gloom, forebodings and fear. Without the truth in this
matter, there can be no rational hope—history must go on in its dismal
course; but _with_ the truth, there is not only hope but certitude that
the old order has passed and that humanity’s manhood dates from the
present day. That I have here presented the truth in this matter—the true
conception of the human class of life—I have personally no doubt; and I
have no doubt that that conception is to be the base, the guide, the
source of light, of a new civilization. Whether I am mistaken or not, time
will decide. I feel as Buckle felt in writing his _History of
Civilization_:


    “Whether or not I have effected anything of real value ... is a
    question for competent judges to decide. Of this, at least, I feel
    certain, that whatever imperfections may be observed, the fault
    consists, not in the method proposed, but in the extreme
    difficulty of any single man putting into full operation all the
    parts of so vast a scheme. It is on this point, and on this alone,
    that I feel the need of great indulgence. But, as to the plan
    itself, I have no misgivings. Of defects in its execution I am not
    unconscious. I can only plead the immensity of the subject, the
    shortness of a single life and the imperfection of every single
    enterprise. I, therefore, wish this work to be estimated, not
    according to the finish of its separate parts, but according to
    the way in which those parts have been fused into a complete and
    symmetrical whole. This, in an undertaking of such novelty and
    magnitude, I have a right to expect, and I would moreover, add,
    that if the reader has met with opinions adverse to his own, he
    should remember, that his views are, perhaps, the same as those
    which I too once held, and which I have abandoned, because, after
    a wider range of study, I found them unsupported by solid proof,
    subversive of the interest of Man, and fatal to the progress of
    his knowledge. To examine the notions in which we have been
    educated, and to turn aside from those which will not bear the
    test, is a task so painful, that they who shrink from the
    sufferings should pause before they reproach those by whom the
    suffering is undergone.... Conclusions arrived at in this way are
    not to be overturned by stating that they endanger some other
    conclusions; nor can they be even affected by allegation against
    their supposed tendency. The principles which I advocate are based
    upon distinct arguments supported by well ascertained facts. The
    only points, therefore, to be ascertained, are, whether the
    arguments are fair, and whether the facts are certain. If these
    two conditions have been obeyed, the principles follow by an
    inevitable inference.”


And why have I sought throughout to follow the spirit of mathematics?
Because I have been dealing with ideas and have desired, above all things
else, to be right and clear. Ideas have a character of their own—they are
right or wrong independently of our hopes and passions and will. In the
connection of ideas there is an unbreakable thread of destiny. That is why
in his _Mathematical Philosophy_ Professor Keyser has truly said:


    “Mathematics is the study of Fate—not fate in a physical sense,
    but in the sense of the binding thread that connects thought with
    thought and conclusions with their premises. Where, then, is our
    freedom? What do you love? Painting? Poetry? Music? The muses are
    _their_ fates. Whoso loves them is free. Logic is the muse of
    Thought.”


No doubt mathematics is truly impersonal in method; too impersonal maybe
to please the sentimentalists before they take the time to think;
mathematical analysis of life phenomena elevates our point of view above
passion, above selfishness in any form, and, therefore, it is the only
method which can tell us genuine truths about ourselves. Spinosa even in
the 17th Century had well realized this fact and although imperfect in
many ways, his was an effort in the right direction and this quoted
conclusion may well be a conclusion for ourselves in the 20th century:


    “The truth might forever have remained hid from the human race, if
    mathematics, which looks not to the final cause of figures, but to
    their essential nature and the properties involved in it, had not
    set another type of knowledge before them.... When I turned my
    mind to this subject, I did not propose to myself any novel or
    strange aim, but simply to demonstrate by certain and indubitable
    reason, those things which agree best with practice. And in order
    that I might enquire into the matters of the science with the same
    freedom of mind with which we are wont to treat lines and surfaces
    in mathematics; I determined not to laugh or to weep over the
    actions of men, but simply to understand them; and to contemplate
    their affections and passions, such as love, hate, anger, envy,
    arrogance, pity and all other disturbances of soul not as vices of
    human nature, but as properties pertaining to it in the same way
    as heat, cold, storm, thunder pertain to the nature of the
    atmosphere. For these, though troublesome, are yet necessary, and
    have certain causes through which we may come to understand them,
    and thus, by contemplating them in their truth, gain for our minds
    much joy as by the knowledge of things that are pleasing to the
    senses.”


If only this little book will _initiate_ the scientific study of Man, I
shall be happy; for then we may confidently expect a science and art that
will know how to direct the energies of man to the advancement of human
weal.

What else? Many topics have not even been broached. Time-binding
energy—what may it not achieve in course of the aeons to come? What light
may it not yet throw upon such fundamental phenomena as _Space_, _Time_,
_Infinity_, and so on? What, if any, are the limits of Time-binding? In it
are somehow involved all the higher functions of mind. Is Time identical
with Intelligence? Is either of them the other’s cause? Is Time _in_ the
Cosmos or is the latter in the former? Is the Cosmos intelligent? Many no
doubt and marvelous are the fields which the scientific study of man will
open for research.




Appendix I. Mathematics And Time-Binding


The purpose of this appendix is to give an expression of some new ideas
which evolve directly out of the fact that humans are time-binders and
which may serve as suggestions for the foundation of _scientific
psychology_. The problem is of exceeding difficulty to give expression to
in any form and therefore much more difficult to express in any exact or
correct form, and so I beg the reader’s patience in regard to the language
because some of the ideas are in themselves correct and sometimes very
suggestive in spite of the language used. I am particularly interested
that mathematicians, physicists and metaphysicians should read it
carefully, forgive me the form, and look into the suggestions, because
scientific psychology if such a science is to exist, would by necessity
have to be a branch of physics. I particularly beg the mathematicians and
physicists not to discard this appendix with too hasty a judgment of “Oh!
metaphysics,” and also the metaphysicians not to do the same with an
equally hasty judgment “Oh! mathematics.” I hope that if this appendix is
sympathetically understood, mathematicians and physicists will be moved to
investigate the problem. If mathematicians and physicists would be more
tolerant toward metaphysics and if metaphysicians would be moved to study
mathematics, both would find tremendous fields to work in.

Some scientists are very pedantic and therefore intolerant in their
pedantry and they may say “the fellow should learn first how to express
himself and then ask our attention.” My answer is that the problems
involved are too pressing, too vital, too fundamental for humankind, to
permit me to delay for perhaps long years before I shall be able to
present the subject in a correct and satisfactory form, and also that the
problems involved cover too vast a field for a single man to work it
conclusively. It seems best to give the new ideas to the public in a
suggestive form so that many people may be led to work on them more fully.

The old word “metaphysics” is an illegitimate child of ignorance and an
unnecessary word in the scientific study of nature. Every phenomenon of
nature can be classed and studied in physics or chemistry or mathematics;
the problem, therefore, is not in any way _super_natural or
_super_physical, but belongs rather to an unknown or an undeveloped branch
of physics. The problem, therefore, may be not that of some _new_ science,
but rather that of a new branch of mathematics, or physics, or chemistry,
etc., or all combined.

It is pathetic that only after many aeons of human existence the
dimensionality of man has been discovered and his proper status in
_nature_ has been given by the definition of “time-binder.” The old
metaphysics, in spite of its being far from exact, accomplished a great
deal. What prevented metaphysics from achieving more was its use of
unmathematical method, or, to be more explicit, its failure to understand
the importance of dimensions. Metaphysics used words and conceptions of
multi-dimensional meanings which of necessity resulted in hopeless
confusion, in “a talking” about words, in mere verbalism. An example will
serve to make this clear. If we were to speak of a cow, a man, an
automobile, and a locomotive as “pullers,” and if we were not to use any
other names in connection with them, what would happen? If we
characterized these things or beings, by one common characteristic,
namely, “to pull,” havoc would be introduced into our conceptions and in
practical life; we would try to milk an automobile or we would try to
extract gasoline from a cow, or look for a screw in a man, or we would
speculate about any or all of these things. Too obviously nonsensical—but
exactly the same thing happens, in a much more subtle way, when we use
such words as “life in a crystal” or “memory in animals”; we are thus
mentally making a mistake no less nonsensical than the talk of “milking an
automobile” would be. Laymen are baffled by the word dimension. They
imagine that dimensions are applicable only to space, which is three
dimensional, but they are mistaken; a moving object is
four-dimensional—that is, it has three dimensions as any object at rest,
but, when the object is moving, a fourth dimension is necessary to give
its _position_ at any one instant. We see, therefore, that a moving body
has four dimensions, and so on. As a matter of fact, scientific psychology
will very much need mathematics, but a special _humanized_ mathematics.
Can this be produced? It seems to me that it can.

It is a well known fact that experimental sciences bring us to face facts
which require further theoretical elaboration; in this way experimental
sciences are a permanent source of inspiration to mathematicians because
new facts bring about the need of new methods of analysis.

In this book a new and experimental fact has been disclosed and analysed.
It is the fact that humanity is a time-binding class of life where the
time-binding capacity or the time-binding ENERGY is the highest function
of humanity, including all the so-called mental, spiritual, will, etc.,
powers. In using the words mental, spiritual, and will powers, I
deliberately accept and use them in the popular, ordinary sense without
further analysing them.

Once the word and concept _Time_ enters, the ground for analysis and
reasoning at once becomes very slippery. Mathematicians, physicists, etc.,
may feel that the expression is just a “well adapted one,” and they may
not be very much inclined to look closer into it or attentively to analyse
it. Theologians and metaphysicians probably will speculate a great deal
about it vaguely, with undefined terms and incoherent ideas with
incoherent results; which will not lead us toward a scientific or true
solution, but will keep us away from the discovery of truth.

In the meantime two facts remain facts: namely, mathematicians and
physicists have almost all agreed with Minkowski “that space by itself and
time by itself, are mere shadows, and only a kind of blend of the two
exists in its own right.” The other fact—psychological fact—is that _time_
exists psychologically by itself, undefined and not understood. One chief
difficulty is always that humans have to sit in judgment upon their own
case. The psychological time as such, is our own human time; scientific
time as such, is also our own human time. Which one of them is the best
concept—which one more nearly corresponds to the truth about “time”? What
is time (if any) anyway? Until now we have gone from “Cosmos” to “Bios,”
from “Bios” to “Logos,” now we are confronted with the fact that
“Logos”—Intelligence—and Time-binding are dangerously near to akin to each
other, or may be identical. Do we in this way approach or go back to
“Cosmos”? Such are the crucial questions which arise out of this new
concept of Man. One fact must be borne in mind, that “the principles of
dynamics appeared first to us, as experimental truths; but we have been
obliged to use them as definitions. It is by definition that force is
equal to the product of mass by acceleration, or that action is equal to
reaction.” (_The Foundation of Science_, by Henri Poincaré); and
mathematics also has its whole foundation in a few axioms, “self evident,”
but _psychological facts_. It must be noted that the time-binding
energy—the higher or highest energies of man (one of its branches anyway,
for sake of discrimination let us call it “_M_”) when it works properly,
that is, mathematically, does _not_ work _psychologically_ but works
ABSTRACTLY: the higher the abstraction the less there is of the
psychological element and the more there is, so to say, of the pure,
impersonal time-binding energy (_M_). The definition of a man as a
time-binder—a definition based on facts—suggests many reflections. One of
them is the possibility that one of the functions of the time-binding
energy in its pure form, in the highest abstraction (_M_), works
automatically—machine-like, as it were, shaping _correctly_ the product of
its activity, but whether _truly_ is another matter. Mathematics does not
presume that its conclusions are true, but it does assert that its
conclusions are correct; that is the inestimable value of mathematics.
This becomes a very comprehensive fact if we approach and analyse the
mathematical processes as some branch (_M_) of the time-binding process,
which they are; then this process at once becomes impersonal and cosmic,
because of the time-binding involved in it, no matter what _time_ is (if
there is such a thing as time).

Is the succession of cosmos, bios, logos, time-binding taking us right
back to cosmos again? Now if we put _psychological_ axioms into the
time-binding apparatus, it will thrash out the results _correctly_, but
whether the results are _true_ is another question.

To be able to talk about these problems I have to introduce three new
definitions, which are introduced only for practical purposes. It may
happen that after some rewording these definitions may become scientific.

I will try to define “truth” and for this purpose I will divide the
concept “truth” into three types:

(1) Psychological, or private, or relative truth, by which I will mean
such conceptions of the truth as any one person possesses, but different
from other types of truth (α1, α2, ... αn)

(2) Scientific truth (αs), by which I will mean a psychological truth when
it is approved by the time-binding faculties or apparatus in the present
stage of our development. This scientific truth represents the
“bound-up-time” in our present knowledge; and finally,

(3) The absolute truth, which will be the _final definition_ of a
phenomenon based upon the final knowledge of _primal causation valid in
infinity_.

For simplicity’s sake I will use the signs α1, α2, ... αn for the
“psychological,” “private,” or “relative” truths, between which, for the
moment, I will not discriminate.

αs1, αs2, ... αsn, will be used for scientific truths, and finally
αinfinity for the absolute truth valid in infinity.

To make it easier to explain, I will illustrate the suggestions by an
example. Let us suppose that the human time-binding capacities or energies
in the _organic_ chemistry correspond to radium in the _inorganic_
chemistry; being of course of different dimensions and of absolutely
different character. It may happen, for it probably is so, that the
complex time-binding energy has many different stages of development and
different kinds of “rays” _A_, _B_, _C_, ... _M_....

Let us suppose that the so-called mental capacities are the _M_ rays of
the time-binding energy; the “spiritual” capacities, the _A_ rays; the
“will” powers, the _B_ rays; and so on. Psychological truths will then be
a function of all rays together, namely _A_ _B_ _C_ ... _M_ ... or _f_
(_A_ _B_ _C_ ... _M_ ...), the character of any “truth” in question will
largely depend upon which of these elements prevail.

If it were possible to isolate completely from the other rays the “mental”
process—the “logos”—the _M_ rays—and have a complete abstraction (which in
the present could only be in mathematics), then the work of _M_ could be
compared to the work of an impersonal machine which always gives the same
_correctly_ shaped product _no matter what is_ the material put into it.

It is a fact that mathematics is correct—impersonal—passionless. Again, as
a matter of fact, all the basic axioms which underlie mathematics are
"psychological axioms"; therefore it may happen that these "axioms" are
not of the αinfinity type but are of the _f_ (_A_ _B_ _C_ ...) personal
type and this may be why mathematics cannot account for psychological
facts. If psychology is to be an _exact science_ it must be mathematical
in principle. And, therefore, mathematics must find a way to embrace
psychology. Here I will endeavor to outline a way in which this can be
done. To express it correctly is more than difficult: I beg the
mathematical reader to tolerate the form and look for the sense or even
the feelings in what I attempt to express. To make it less shocking to the
ear of the pure mathematician, I will use for the “infinitesimals” the
words “very small numbers,” for the “finite” the words “normal numbers”
and for the “transfinite” the words “very great numbers.” Instead of using
the word “number” I will sometimes use the word “magnitude” and under the
word “infinity” I will understand the meaning as “limitless.” The base of
the whole of mathematics or rather the starting point of mathematics was
“psychological truths,” axioms concerning normal numbers, and magnitudes
that were tangible for the senses. Here to my mind is to be found the
kernel of the whole trouble. The _base_ of mathematics was _f_ (_A_ _B_
_C_ ... _M_ ...); the _work_, or the development, of mathematics is _f_
(_M_); this is the reason for the “ghosts” in the background of
mathematics. The _f_ (_M_) evolved from this _f_ (_A_ _B_ _C_ ... _M_ ...)
_base_ a wonderful abstract theory absolutely correct for the normal, the
very small, and for the very great numbers. But the rules which govern the
small numbers, the normal, or psychological numbers, and the great
numbers, are not the same. As a matter of fact, in the meantime, the
physical world, the psychological world, is composed exclusively of very
great numbers and of very small magnitudes (atoms, electrons, etc.). It
seems to me that, if we want really to understand the world and man, we
shall have to start from the beginning, from 0, then take the next very
small number as the first _finite_ or “normal number”; then the old
finites or the normal numbers would become very great numbers and the old
very-great numbers would become the very great of the second order and so
on. Such transposed mathematics would become psychological and philosophic
mathematics and mathematical philosophy would become philosophic
mathematics. The immediate and most vital effect would be, that the
_start_ would be made not somewhere in the middle of the magnitudes but
from the beginning, or from the limit “zero,” from the “0”—from the
intrinsic “to be or not to be”—and the next to it would be the very first
small magnitude, the physical and therefore psychological continuum (I use
the words physical continuum in the way Poincaré used them) would become a
mathematical continuum in this new philosophic mathematics. This new
branch of philosophic, psychological mathematics would be absolutely
rigorous, correct and _true_ in addition to which, maybe, it would change
or enlarge and make humanly tangible for the layman, the concept of
numbers, continuum, infinity, space, time and so on. Such a mathematics
would be the mathematics for the time-binding psychology. Mathematical
philosophy is the highest philosophy in existence; nevertheless, it could
be changed to a still higher order in the way indicated here and become
philosophic or psychological mathematics. This new science, of course,
would not change the ordinary mathematics for ordinary purposes. It would
be a special mathematics for the study of Man dealing only with the
“natural finites” (the old infinitesimals) and great numbers of different
orders (including the normal numbers), but starting from a real, common
base—from 0, and next to it very small number, which is a common
_tangible_ base for _psychological_ as well as _analytical_ truths.

This new philosophic mathematics would eliminate the concept of
“infinitesimals” as such, which is an _artificial_ concept and is not as a
_concept_ an element of Nature. The so-called _infinitesimals are Nature’s
real, natural finites_. In mathematics the infinitesimals were an
analytical—an “_M_”—time-binding—necessity, because of our starting point.
I repeat once again that this transposition of our starting point would
not affect the normal mathematics for normal purposes; it would build
rather a new philosophic mathematics rigorously correct where analytical
facts would be also psychological facts. This new mathematics would not
only give correct results but also _true_ results. Keeping in mind _both_
conceptions of time, the scientific time and the psychological time, we
may see that the human capacity of “Time-binding” is a very practical one
and that this time-binding faculty is a _functional_ name and definition
for what we broadly mean by human “intelligence”; which makes it obvious
that time (in any understanding of the term) is somehow very closely
related to intelligence—the mental and spiritual activities of man. _All
we know about _“time”_ will explain to us a great deal about Man, and all
we know about Man will explain to us a great deal about time_, if we
consider _facts_ alone. The “ghosts” in the background will rapidly vanish
and become intelligible facts for philosophic mathematics. The most vital
importance, nevertheless, is that taking zero as the limit and the next to
it very small magnitude for the real starting point, it will give us a
mathematical science from a natural base where _correct_ formulas will be
also true formulas and will correspond to psychological truths.

We have found that man is an exponential function where time enters as an
exponent. If we compare the formula for organic growth _y==e__kt_, with
the formula “_P R__T_,” we see that they are of the same type and the _law
of organic growth_ applies to the human _time-binding energy_. We see,
too, that the time-binding energy is also “_alive_” and multiplying in
larger and larger families. The formula for the decomposing of radium is
the same—only the exponent is negative instead of positive. This fact is
indeed very curious and suggestive. Procreation, the organic growth, is
also some function of time. I call “time-linking” for the sake of
difference. Whether the energy of procreation or that of “time-linking”
can be accounted for in units of chemical energy taken up in food, I do
not know. Not so with the mind—this “time-binding,” higher exponential
energy, “able to direct basic powers.” If we analyse this energy, free
from any speculation, we will find that this higher energy which is
somehow directly connected with “time”—no matter what time is—is able to
_produce_, by transformation or by drawing on other sources of energy, new
energies unknown to nature. Thus the solar energy transformed into coal
is, for instance, transformed into the energy of the drive of a piston, or
the rotary energy in a steam engine, and so on. It is obvious that no
amount of _chemical_ energy in food can account for such an energy as the
time-binding energy. There is only one supposition left, namely, that the
time-binding apparatus has a source for its tremendous energy in the
_transformation of organic atoms_, and—what is very characteristic—the
results are _time_-binding energies.

This supposition is almost a certainty because it seems to be the only
possible supposition to account for that energy. This supposition, which
seems to be the only supposition, would bring us to face striking facts,
namely, the transformation of organic atoms, which means a direct drawing
upon the cosmic energy; and this cosmic energy—time—and intelligence are
somehow connected—if not indeed equivalent. Happily these things can be
verified in scientific laboratories. Radium was discovered only a few
years ago and is still very scarce, but the results for science and life
are already tremendous because scientific methods were applied in the
understanding and use of it. We did not use any zoological or theological
methods, but just direct, correct and scientific methods. There is no
scarcity in “human radium,” but, to my knowledge, physicists have never
attempted to study this energy from that point of view. I am confident
that, if once they start, there will be results in which all the so-called
“supernatural, spiritual, psychic” phenomena, such as are not fakes, will
become scientifically understood and will be consciously utilized. Now
they are mostly wasted or only played with. It may happen that the science
of Man—as the science of time-binding—will disclose to us the inner and
final secrets—the final truth—of nature, valid in infinity.

It is very difficult to give in such a book as this an adequate list of
the literature which may help to orient the reader in a general way in the
great advance science has made in the last few years. This book is a
pioneer book in its own way, and so there are no books dealing directly
with its subject. There are two branches of science and one art which are
fundamental for the further development of the subject; these two sciences
are (1) Mathematical philosophy and (2) Scientific biology, the art is the
art of creative engineering.

In mathematical philosophy there are to my knowledge only four great
mathematical writers who treat the subject as a distinct science. They are
two English scientists, Bertrand Russell and A. N. Whitehead; one
Frenchman, Henri Poincaré (deceased); and one American, Professor C. J.
Keyser. Messrs. Russell and Whitehead approach the problems from a purely
logical point of view and therein lies the peculiar value of their work.
Henri Poincaré was a physicist (as well as a mathematician) and,
therefore, approaches the problems somewhat from a physicist’s point of
view, a circumstance giving his philosophy its particular value. Professor
Keyser approaches the problems from both the logical and the warmly human
points of view; in this is the great human and practical value of his
work.

These four scientists are unique in their respective elaborations and
elucidations of mathematical philosophy. It is not for me to advise the
reader what selections to make, for if a thorough knowledge of the subject
is desired the reader should read all these books, but not all readers are
willing to make that effort toward clear thinking (which in the meantime
will remain of the _highest_ importance in science). Some readers will
wish to select for themselves and to facilitate their selection I will lay
out a “Menu” of this intellectual feast by giving in some cases the
chapter heads.

For many temporary reasons I was not able, before going into print, to
give a fuller list of the writings of those four unique men; but there is
no stroke of their pen but which should be read with great
attention—besides which there is a very valuable literature about their
work.



(1) The purely mathematical foundation:


RUSSELL, BERTRAND.


“The Principles of Mathematics.” Cambridge University, 1903.

(I am not giving any selections from the contents of this book because
this book should, without doubt, be read by every one interested in
mathematical philosophy.)

“The Problems of Philosophy.” H. Holt & Co., N. Y., 1912.

“Our Knowledge of the External World, as a Field for Scientific Method in
Philosophy.” Chicago, 1914.

“Introduction to Mathematical Philosophy.” Macmillan, N. Y.

Selection from contents: Definition of number. The Definition of order.
Kinds of relations. Infinite cardinal numbers. Infinite series and
ordinals. Limits and continuity. The axiom of infinity and logical types.
Classes. Mathematics and logic.

“Mysticism and Logic.” Longmans Green & Co. 1919. N. Y.

Selection from contents: Mathematics and the metaphysicians. On scientific
method in philosophy. The ultimate constituents of matter. On the notion
of cause.


WHITEHEAD, ALFRED N.


“An Introduction to Mathematics.” Henry Holt & Co. 1911. N. Y.

“The Organization of Thought Educational and Scientific.” London, 1917.

Selections from contents: The principles of mathematics in relation to
elementary teaching. The organization of thought. The anatomy of some
scientific ideas. Space, time, and relativity.

“An Enquiry Concerning the Principles of Natural Knowledge.” Cambridge,
1919.

Selection from contents: The traditions of science. The data of science.
The method of extensive abstraction. The theory of objects.

“The Concept of Nature.” Cambridge, 1920.

Selection from contents: Nature and thought. Time. The method of extensive
abstraction. Space and motion. Objects. The ultimate physical concepts.

“Principia Mathematica.” By A. N. Whitehead and Bertrand Russell.
Cambridge, 1910-1913.

This monumental work stands alone. “As a work of constructive criticism it
has never been surpassed. To every one and especially to philosophers and
men of natural science, it is an amazing revelation of how the familiar
terms with which they deal plunge their roots far into the darkness
beneath the surface of common sense. It is a noble monument to the
critical spirit of science and to the idealism of our time.”

“Human Worth of Rigorous Thinking.” C. J. Keyser.



(2) The physicist’s point of view:


POINCARÉ, HENRI.


“The Foundations of Science.” The Science Press, N. Y., 1913.

Selection from contents: Science and hypothesis. Number and magnitude.
Space. Force. Nature. II. The value of science. The mathematical sciences.
The physical sciences. The objective value of science. III. Science and
method. Science and the scientist. Mathematical reasoning. The new
mechanics. Astronomic science.



(3) The human, civilizing, practical life, point of view:


KEYSER, CASSIUS J.


“Science and Religion: The Rational and the Super-rational.” The Yale
University Press.

“The New Infinity and the Old Theology.” The Yale University Press.

“The Human Worth of Rigorous Thinking.” Essays and Addresses. Columbia
University Press, 1916.

Selection from contents: The human worth of rigorous thinking. The human
significance of mathematics. The walls of the world; or concerning the
figure and the dimensions of the Universe of space. The universe and
beyond. The existence of the hypercosmic. The axiom of infinity: A new
presupposition of thought. Research in American Universities. Mathematical
productivity in the United States.

“Mathematical Philosophy, the Study of Fate and Freedom. Lectures for
Educated Laymen.” Forthcoming Book.

Selection from contents of general interest: The mathematical obligations
of philosophy. Humanistic and industrial education. Logic the muse of
thought. Radiant aspects of an over-world.—Verifiers and falsifiers.
Significance and nonsense.—Distinction of logical and psychological. A
diamond test of harmony.—Distinction of doctrine and method.—Theoretical
and practical doubt.—Mathematical philosophy in the rôle of critic. A
world uncriticised—the garden of the devil. “Supersimian” Wisdom.
Autonomous truth and autonomous falsehood. Other Varieties of truth and
untruth. Mathematics as the study of fate and freedom. The prototype of
reasoned discourse often disguised as in the Declaration of Independence,
the Constitution of the United States, the Origin of Species, the Sermon
on the Mount.—Nature of mathematical transformation. No transformation, no
thinking. Transformation law essentially psychological, Relation function
and transformation as three aspects of one thing. Its study, the common
enterprise of science. The static and the dynamic worlds. The problem of
time and kindred problems. Importation of time and suppression of time as
the classic devices of sciences.—The nature of invariance. The ages-old
problem of permanence and change. The quest of what abides in a fluctuant
world as the binding thread of human history. The tie of comradeship among
the enterprises of human spirit.—The concept of a group. The notion simply
exemplified in many fields, is “Mind” a group. The philosophy of the
cosmic year.—Limits and limit processes omnipresent as ideals and
idealization, in all thought and human aspiration. Ideals the flint of
reality.—Mathematical infinity, its dynamic and static aspects. Need of
history of the Imperious concept. The rôle of infinity in a mighty
poem.—Meaning of dimensionality. Distinction of imagination and
conception. Logical existence and sensuous existence. Open avenues to
unimaginable worlds.—The theory of logical types. A supreme application of
it to definition of man, and the science of human welfare.—The psychology
of mathematics and the mathematics of psychology. Both of them in their
infancy. Consequent retardation of science. The symmetry of thought. The
asymmetry of imagination.—Science and engineering. Science as engineering
in preparation. Engineering as science in action. Mathematics the guide of
the engineer. Engineering the guide of humanity. Humanity the civilizing
or Time-Binding class of life. Qualities essential to engineering
leadership. The ethics of the art. The engineer as educator, as scientist,
as philosopher, as psychologist, as economist, as statesman, as
mathematical thinker—as a Man.




Appendix II. Biology And Time-Binding


The life of one man is short, and to very few is it given to achieve much
in their lifetime. Extensive achievements are made almost entirely by many
men taking up the work done by a discoverer. In such a case, we arrive at
a _complete_ “truth,” not by the production of one man but by a chain of
men, but the initial discovery not only has to be produced but correctly
defined before it can be used and that is the important point to be made.
What we do not realize is the tremendous amount of mental work that is
lost by an incorrect use of words.

Human thought—that unique, subtle and yet most energetic phenomenon of
nature—is in the main wantonly wasted, because we do not use, or take
pains to use, suitable language; at the same time, false definitions lead
to consequences not merely wasteful but positively harmful. When ideas and
facts are falsely defined, they tend to bring us to false conclusions, and
false conclusions lead us in wrong directions, and life and knowledge
greatly suffer in consequence. Our progress is not a well ordered pursuit
after truth, as pure chance plays too large a part in it.

Until lately, logic was supposed to be the science of correct thinking,
but modern thought has progressed so far that the old logic is not able to
handle the great accumulated volume—the great complicated mass of existing
ideas and facts—and so we are forced to look for another instrument much
more expedient and powerful. There is no need to establish a new science
to replace logic; we simply have to look closer into the sciences at hand
and realize the fact, which was with us all the time, namely, that
mathematics and mathematical reasoning is nothing else than the true logic
of nature—nature’s universal tongue—the one means of expression that is
the same for all peoples. This is not a play on words, it is a fact which,
after investigation, everybody must admit. Everybody who wants to think
logically must think mathematically or give up any pretense of correct
thinking—there is no escape and all who refuse to investigate the justice
of this statement put themselves outside the pale of logically thinking
people. The application of rigorous thinking to life will even
revolutionize scientific methods by the introduction of right definitions,
correct classifications, just language, and so will lead to trustworthy
results. Very probably all our doctrines and creeds will have to be
revised; some rejected, some rectified, some broadened; bringing about
unanimity of all sciences and thus greatly increasing their effectiveness
in the pursuit of truth. This application of mathematics to life will even
revolutionize mathematics itself. In App. I it is suggested tentatively
how this may be accomplished.

As the seemingly ultimate and highest experimentally known energy is the
human time-binding energy, this new concept may lead to a change in our
present concepts of matter, space and time, in much the same way as the
discovery of radium has affected them. This problem can be solved only by
_scientific_ experiments with the _time_-binding energy.

In many, even in most, of the cases, the analysis of these phenomena
presents great technical difficulty, but why confuse our minds by being
afraid of, or being a slave of words? If instead of calling wine _wine_,
we called it by its chemical formula, would this, in any way, change the
quality of wine? Of course not. All the “qualities” will remain because
they are facts, and cannot be altered by words.

A most pathetic picture of the havoc and chaos which wrong use of words
brings into life and science is exhibited in all fields of thought by the
endless and bitter fighting over words not well defined. Mathematics has
been able to make its most stupendous achievements because of its method
of exact analysis of the continuum, dimensions, classes, relations,
functions, transfinite numbers, etc., and also of space and time.
Hitherto, not all of these conceptions in their sharply defined form have
had direct application to our daily life or to our world conception. The
thoughts expressed in App. I may suggest this “missing link”—connecting
mathematics more intimately with life.

Modern science knows that all energies can be somehow transformed from one
kind to another and that all of them represent one type of energetic
phenomena, no matter what is the origin of each. For example, a galvanic
or chemical battery produces the same kind of electricity as the
mechanical process of friction or the interaction of cosmic laws as in the
dynamo. In some instances, when our systems are suitably adjusted, the
transformations are reversible, that is, the energy results in a chemical
process—an accumulator; the chemical process results in electricity—the
galvanic battery; motion results in electricity—the dynamo; electricity
results in motion—the electric motor; etc. We know all energies are
somehow related to each other, in that their transformation is possible.
The effects produced by the same type of energy are absolutely the same—no
matter what its origin. The marvel of an electric lamp is the same marvel,
whether the origin of the electricity be chemical, mechanical or cosmic as
in the dynamo. The experiments in scientific biology have proved this to
be true in living organisms and just this is the tremendous importance of
the discoveries in scientific biology. Light and other energies react on
organisms in the same way as the chemical reactions and these phenomena
are reversible. More than that, living complex organisms have been
produced which grew to maturity through a chemical or mechanical treatment
of the egg, and this has been accomplished in the infancy of scientific
biology! (See _The Organisms as a Whole_, by Jacques Loeb.)

All phenomena _in nature_ are _natural_ and should be approached as
_such_. The human mind is at least an energy which can direct other
energies; it is incorrect and misleading to call it _super_natural. It is
of course true that we do not fully understand the nature of the human
mind and we shall learn to understand it when and only when we acquire
sense enough to recognize it as _natural_. If we persist in saying and
believing that the “spiritual evidences cannot be explained on a material
base,” this statement should be equally applicable to electricity or
radium. If this statement is false for these phenomena, it is equally
false for the mind or the so-called spiritual and will powers. The
scientific understanding of these phenomena will not “degrade” these
phenomena, _because that cannot be done. Facts remain facts and no
scientific explanation of a phenomenon can lower or degrade that which is
a fact._ Electricity is electricity and nothing else, no matter what its
origin; human time-binding energies (embracing all faculties) are the
highest of the known energies—equally magnificent and astonishing—no
matter what the base; and the scientific understanding of them will only
_add_ to our respect for them and for ourselves; it will unmistakably help
us to develop them indefinitely by mathematical analysis. The _base_ is
not the phenomenon—sulphuric acid and zinc _are not_ electricity;
time-binding energies _are not_ a pound of beefsteak, although a pound of
beefsteak may help to save life and be therefore _instrumental_ in the
production of a poem or of a sonata; but by no means can a beefsteak be
taken for either of them.

I have attempted, with some measure of success I trust, to solve these
problems in science and life; the results are astonishing, as they lead us
to a much higher and more embracing ethics than society has ever had. By
this analysis I prove that the understanding of this most stupendous but
NATURAL phenomenon of human life brings us to the scientifical source of
ethics and I prove that the so-called “highest ideals of humanity” have
nothing of “sentimentalism” or of the “_super_natural” in them, but are
exclusively the _fulfilment_ of the _natural laws_ for the _human class of
life_. The recognition of the fact that the phenomena of the human mind
are natural and as such conform to natural law has the further advantage
over the “supernatural” attitude in that we can no more evade a law of
human nature than the law of gravity; in other words, human ethics will
have the validity of natural law. With the supernatural attitude, it was
simple enough to avoid the issues of life, by a simple statement—“I do not
believe”—and that was enough to break all bonds and be free from the
“supernatural morale”—but to get away from the “natural morale” and
_remain_ HUMAN is IMPOSSIBLE. Whereas, with an artificially formulated
morale it was easy enough to break away by a simple mental speculation,
and feel perfectly satisfied as long as one escaped the jail; with a
morale made clear that it is a NATURAL LAW for the human class of life,
the curtain of sophistry and speculation is removed and everyone who
breaks away from the NATURAL LAWS FOR HUMANS, WILL KNOW BY HIMSELF, THAT
HE IS OUTSIDE THE LAW—FOR HUMANS.

Engineers are not metaphysicians, their field is not one of clever
argument but one of proved facts; their work is not to befog the air with
cloudy expressions or sophistry, but to create; their method is scientific
and their tool is mathematics. It is known that in remote antiquity, in
some temples electrical phenomena were known and were used to keep the
ignorant masses in awe and obedience. Shall we follow the methods used by
those magicians or shall we squarely face facts? Shall we look upon life,
and the usually so-called mental, spiritual phenomena, etc., as
_super_natural, simply because we do not understand them? It seems evident
that everything which _exists in nature, is natural_, no matter how simple
or complicated a phenomenon it is; and on no occasion can the so-called
“_super_natural” be anything else than a completely natural law, though it
may, at the moment, be above or beyond our present understanding. The
attitude of mind which admits the _super_natural blinds and frustrates any
analysis or any attempt at analysis. The unprejudiced analysis of the
so-called “supernatural” does not _alter_ any part of the strange and high
functions of it. The phenomena of the human time-binding energy are and
will remain the most precious, subtle and highest of known functions, no
matter what the origin. _Facts_ may not be _denied_ or _falsified_ if
analysis is to arrive at correct conclusions. The high dimensionality of
the human mind, the so-called spiritual and will powers, _are facts_ and
must be _accepted_ as such. It is about time to establish an exact science
to deal with them. The problems of animal life were approached without
prejudice, no supernatural “spark” was bothering us in our analysis—an
animal was an animal and nothing else—we did not intermix dimensions,
therefore we see that the “social structure” of the animals on a farm
never breaks down as they are managed on a scientific base with an
understanding of _their_ proper standards. Animals to-day live more
happily than man. We don’t allow animals to practice the “survival of the
fittest,” or “competition,” which is far too destructive. Our present
social system imposes these disastrous methods upon man alone, and the
result is that the hideous proverb “Homo homini lupus” has become true.

In modern science facts are not wanting, we have first but to know them.
If we take, for example, sulphuric acid and zinc and make what we call a
galvanic battery, we see that from two chemical substances a third—a
salt—is made in addition to which we have a peculiar energy produced
called electricity. Who does not know the marvelous properties of this
phenomenon?

Scientific biology has made tremendous progress lately; engineers cannot
afford to ignore the facts established in laboratory researches. The
problem of “life” and of other energies, hitherto considered
“_super_natural,” is well in hand, and proves to be none the less
astonishing though entirely natural. A number of scientists all over the
world are working at this problem and the scientific facts which they have
established, and which cannot now be denied, belong to-day to the realm of
practical life. Engineers, of course, have to know these facts;
mathematicians have to establish correct dimensions in the study of all
the sciences and people will have to study mathematical philosophy; only
then can the process of integration in any phase of thought be made
without mistakes. There is no escape from that, if _truth_ is what we
really want. But here one objection may be raised, an objection which for
some is a serious one indeed; namely, what will take the place of the old
philosophy, law and ethics, if human life is nothing else than a
physico-chemical process? To quote Doctor Jacques Loeb from his
_Mechanistic Conception of Life_: “If on the basis of a serious survey,
this question (_that all life phenomena can be unequivocally explained in
physico-chemical terms_—Author) can be answered in the affirmative, our
social and ethical life will have to be put on a scientific basis and our
rules of conduct must be brought into harmony with the results of
scientific biology. Not only is the mechanistic conception of life
compatible with ethics, it seems the only conception of life which can
lead to an understanding of the source of ethics.”

I hope to have proved in this book that _scientific_ ethics is based on
natural laws for the human class of life; that it is based on the
experimentally proved fact that Man is a Time-binder, naturally active as
such in time; and that this concept or definition of Man is rigorously
scientific and accounts for the highest functions of man—the highest of
the mental and spiritual perfections—without the need of any
“_super_natural” hypothesis.

Scientific biology proves the fact that life and all of its phenomena are
the results of some special physico-chemical processes, which manifest
themselves in some peculiar energies, of which the human mind is the
highest known form. These processes are known to be reversible, in that
some of these peculiar energies cause physico-chemical changes in their
own base; the process involved I propose to call biolysis, as I propose to
call biolyte the substances produced. These phenomena have a parallel
analogy in inorganic chemistry—in electricity—the difference being only in
the scale or dimension. When an electric current is passed through a
special battery called an accumulator or reversible battery, chemical
changes occur, in that new compounds are formed which possess a reversible
capacity; namely, in reproducing the former materials—that is, electricity
is generated. This process of forming chemical substances by the passing
of an electrical current is called electrolysis and the product so
produced is called electrolyte. At the same time it is a known fact that
organic chemistry is infinitely more complicated and variable than
inorganic chemistry. The energy produced by the reactions of some organic
chemical groups are, therefore, of a more complicated character and of
another dimension. One of these energies of organic chemistry which lately
has come into the scope of scientific analysis is called life—its
physico-chemical base is the protoplasm, which _result_ I call the
“time-linking” capacity or energy. This name is important for the
consequences it will bring about later on. The time-binding capacity or
energy of man (no matter what time is—if it is), which is unique to man,
is a most subtle complex; it is the highest known energy and probably has
many subdivisions. Ears are sensitive to the vibration of the air. Eyes
are sensitive to the more subtle vibrations of light; in a similar way,
the time-binding apparatus is sensitive to the most subtle energies;
besides which it has the capacity to register not only all of our
sensations but also the time-binding energies of other people; and it
apparently has the capacity to register the energies of the universe.

Here again we see the same continuity of phenomena; the protoplasm as a
complex organic physico-chemical unit which has the peculiarity to “live,”
to grow and multiply “autonomously” and this same autonomous peculiarity
_applies_ to the _time-binding energy_; it grows and multiplies
“autonomously” in its own dimension. The time-binding energy is a complex
radiating energy somewhat like the emanations of radium and it probably
also has many different subdivisions. _Note that the transformation of the
atom_ or the transformation of _radio-active substances after passing
different stages, is not complete but probably ends in lead, whereas the
transformation which occurs in the production of the time-binding energy
probably is complete or nearly complete and is that which I call the
time-binding energy. (See _App. I_.)_ All the higher characteristics of
man which it is customary to call the “mental, spiritual and will powers,”
etc., are embraced in this exact definition of energy—in the capacity of
time-binding. A diagram will better explain the continuity, evolution and
mechanism of this time-binding energy.

[ A series of circles, connected by lines, the leftmost circle being C1,
then next C2, and so on to C7. The first is connected to the second by
line T1, the second to the third by T2, etc. Each circle after the first
has within it an energy indication, E1, E2, etc. ]

Biology and Time-Binding.


_C__1_ is the physico-chemical base (for simplicity I represent the whole
complex as one base) of the human time-binding energy. _T__1_ is the
thought produced by a physico-chemical process (corresponding, for
illustration’s sake only, to electricity produced by a galvanic battery).
The thought _T__1_ in turn produces a physico-chemical effect _E__1_ on
the base _C__1_ (corresponding for the same reason to electrolysis and
electrolyte in electricity). _C__1_ and _E__1_ combined, or _C__2_
produces _T__2_ which again in turn affects the base and produces a
physico-chemical effect _E__2_, this new combination produces the energy
_T__3_, and so on ... theoretically without limits, as long as there is
_any source_ of energy upon which this special energy can draw. This
theory which I call the “spiral theory” represents a suggestive working
mechanism of the time-binding energy and is in accord with the latest
scientific discoveries. It explains the processes of all the mental and
so-called spiritual energies which have been such a puzzle to humanity,
and it also explains other phenomena which, until now, have had no
scientific explanation whatever.

The animals are _not_ time-binding, they have _not_ the capacity of the
“spiral”; therefore, they have not autonomous progress. At the same time,
it will be obvious that if we teach humans false ideas, we affect their
time-binding capacities and energies very seriously, by affecting in a
wrong way the physico-chemical base. This energy is so peculiar that it
embraces, if I may use the old expression, the highest ideals (when the
time-binding energy is unobstructed and is allowed to work normally), and
also the most criminal ideas (when the time-binding energy is obstructed
by false teachings and in consequence works abnormally). We cannot make
animals moral or immoral because they have not this time-binding capacity.
Whereas human progress can be very seriously affected by false ideas; in
other words, the biolyte of false teachings in the animal dimension must
be very different from the biolyte of true ideas in the human dimension.
Nature or nature’s laws happily cannot be completely deviated from or
violated—the time-binding energy cannot be completely suppressed in the
time-binding class of life. The false teachings that we are animals and
essentially brutal and selfish can, of course, degrade human nature not
only down to the animal level but lower still. Happily now science can
explain and prove how fundamentally fiendish in effect are these teachings
in the life and progress of human beings. It will be a shock to those who
teach, preach and practice animal standards and in the same breath
contradict themselves in any talking about “immortality” and “salvation”;
a little thought makes it perfectly clear that “animal standards” and
“salvation” or “immortality” simply exclude each other. With the natural
law of time-binding realized, the way is open to entering scientifically
upon the problem of immortality. The time-binding energies as well as
“life” follow the same type of exponential function. “The constant
synthesis then of specific material from simple compounds of a
non-specific character is the chief feature by which living matter differs
from non-living matter.... This problem of synthesis leads to the
assumption of immortality of the living cell, since there is no _a priori_
reason why this synthesis should ever come to a standstill of its own
accord as long as enough food is available and the proper outside physical
conditions are guaranteed.... The idea that the body cells are naturally
immortal and die only if exposed to extreme injuries such as prolonged
lack of oxygen or too high a temperature helps to make one problem more
intelligible. The medical student, who for the first time realizes that
life depends upon that one organ, the heart, doing its duty incessantly
for the seventy years or so allotted to man, is amazed at the
precariousness of our existence. It seems indeed uncanny that so delicate
a mechanism should function so regularly for so many years. The mysticism
connected with this and other phenomena of adaptation would disappear if
we would be certain that all cells are really immortal and that the fact
which demands an explanation is not the continued activity but the
cessation of activity in death. Thus we see that the idea of the
immortality of the body cell if it can be generalized may be destined to
become one of the main supports for a complete physico-chemical analysis
of life phenomena since it makes the durability of organisms
intelligible....” (_The Organism as a Whole_, by Jacques Loeb.)

The outlook for those who live and profess selfish, greedy, “space-binding
animal standards” is not very promising as disclosed by the “spiral,” but
unhappily we cannot help them; only time-binding—only fulfilling the
natural laws for humans—can give them the full benefit of their natural
capacities by which they will be able to raise themselves above animals
and their fate.

The results obtained in scientific biological researches are growing very
rapidly and every advance in their knowledge proves this theory to be
true. If they differ in a few instances it is not because the principles
of this theory are wrong, but because they intermix dimensions and use
words not sufficiently defined which always results in confusion and the
checking of the progress of science.

Most of the problems touched upon in this appendix from a mathematical
point of view are based upon laboratory facts. We have only to collect
them and there is little need of imagination to see their general bearing.
Since we have discovered the fact that Man is a time-binder (no matter
what time is) and have introduced the sense of dimensionality into the
study of life phenomena in general, a great many facts which were not
clear before become very clear now.

I wrote this book on a farm without any books at hand and I had been out
of touch with the progress of science for the five years spent in the war
service and war duties. My friend Dr. Grove-Korski, formerly at Berkeley
University, drew my attention particularly to the books of Dr. Jacques
Loeb. I found there a treasury of laboratory facts which illustrate as
nothing better could, the correctness of my theory. I found with deep
satisfaction that the new “scientific biology” is scientific because it
has used mathematical methods with notable regard to dimensionality—they
do not “milk an automobile.”

For the mathematician and the engineer, the “tropism theory of animal
conduct,” founded by Dr. J. Loeb, is of the greatest interest, because
this is a theory which analyses the functions and reactions of an organism
_as a whole_ and therefore there is no chance for confusion of ideas or
the intermixing of dimensions.


    “Physiologists have long been in the habit of studying not the
    reactions of the whole organism but the reactions of isolated
    segments; the so-called reflexes. While it may seem justifiable to
    construct the reactions of the organism as a whole from the
    individual reflexes, such an attempt is in reality doomed to
    failure, since the reactions produced in an isolated element
    cannot be counted upon to occur when the same element is part of
    the whole, on account of the mutual inhibitions which the
    different parts of the organism produce upon each other when in
    organic connection; and it is, therefore, impossible to express
    the conduct of a whole animal as the algebraic sum of the reflexes
    of its isolated segments.... It would, therefore, be a
    misconception to speak of tropism as of reflexes, since tropisms
    are reactions of the organism as a whole, while reflexes are
    reactions of isolated segments. Reflexes and tropisms agree,
    however, in one respect, inasmuch as both are obviously of a
    purely physico-chemical character.” _Forced Movements—Tropism and
    Animal Conduct._ By Jacques Loeb.


I will quote here only a very few passages, but these books are of such
importance that every mathematician and engineer should read them. They
are, if I may say so, a “mathematical biology”—the survey of a life long
study of “tropisms,” which is the name given to express “forced movements”
in organisms. They give the quintessence of laboratory experiments as to
what are the effects of different energies such as light (heliotropism),
electricity (galvanotropism), gravity (geotropism), etc., in their
reaction and influence upon the movements and actions of living organisms.
These experiments are conclusive and the conclusions arrived at cannot be
overlooked or evaded. The tremendous practical results of such scientific
methods are based upon two principles, namely: that, (1) the scientists
must think mathematically, their studies of the phenomena must be in
“systems” as a complex whole, and they must not intermix dimensions; (2)
they must see the danger and not be afraid of old words with wrong
meanings, but must use clear and rigorous thinking to eliminate the
prejudices in science—the poison of metaphysical speculating with words,
or verbalism. These books give ample proofs of how misleading and
obscuring are the words used and how basically wrong are the conclusions
arrived at by such scientists as still persist in using the
anthropomorphic or teleological methods of analysis. If a sceptical or
doubtful reader is interested to see an ample proof of how deadly is the
effect which an incorrect or unmathematical manner of thinking brings into
science and life—he also may be referred to these books. The following
quotations prove biologically that man is of a totally different
dimension—a totally different being than an animal. From Dr. Conklin I
quote only from his _Heredity and Environment_ and to save a repetition of
the title of the book, I will indicate the quotations by using only his
name. (All italics are indicated by A. K.)


    “It would be of the greatest importance to show directly that the
    _homologous proteins of different species are different_. _This
    has been done_ for hemoglobins of the blood by Reichert and Brown,
    who have shown by crystallographic measurements that the
    hemoglobins of any species are definite substances for that
    species.... The following sentences by Reichert and Brown seem to
    indicate that this may be true for the crystals of hemoglobin.
    ‘_The hemoglobins of any species are different substances for that
    species._ But upon comparing the corresponding substances
    hemoglobins in different species of a genus it is generally found
    that they differ the one from the other to a greater or less
    degree; the differences being such that when complete
    crystallographic data are available the different _species can be
    distinguished_ by these _differences in their hemoglobins_’....
    The facts thus far reported imply the suggestion that heredity of
    the genus is determined by the proteins of a definite constitution
    differing from the proteins of other genera. This constitution of
    the proteins would therefore be responsible for the genus
    heredity. The different species of a genus have all the same genus
    proteins, but the proteins of each species of the same genus are
    apparently different again in chemical constitution and hence they
    may give rise to the specific biological or immunity reactions.”
    _The Organism as a Whole_, by Jacques Loeb.

    “_All peculiarities which are characteristic of a race, species,
    genus, order, class and phylum are of course inherited_, otherwise
    there would be no constant characteristics of these groups and no
    possibility of classifying organisms. The chief characters of
    every living thing are unalterably fixed by heredity. Men do not
    gather grapes of thorns nor figs of thistles. Every living thing
    produces off-spring after its own kind, Men, horses, cattle;
    birds, reptiles, fishes; insects, mollusks, worms; polyps,
    sponges, micro-organisms,—all of the million known species of
    animals and plants differ from one another because of inherited
    peculiarities, _because they have come from different kinds of
    germ cells_.” Conklin.

    “The entire organism consisting of structures and functions, body
    and mind, develops out of the germ, and the organization of the
    germ determines all the possibilities of development of the mind
    no less than of the body, though the actual realization of any
    possibility is dependent also upon environmental stimuli.”...
    Conklin.

    “The development of the mind _parallels that of the body_;
    whatever the ultimate relation of the mind and body may be, there
    can be _no_ reasonable _doubt_ that the two develop together from
    the germ. It is a curious fact that many people who are seriously
    disturbed by scientific teaching as to the evolution or gradual
    development of the human race accept with equanimity the universal
    observation as to the development of the human individual,—mind as
    well as body. The animal ancestry of the race is surely no more
    disturbing to philosophical or religious beliefs than the germinal
    origin of the individual, and yet the latter is a fact of
    universal observation which cannot be relegated to the domain of
    hypothesis or theory, and which can not be successfully denied....
    Now we know that the child comes from the germ cells which are not
    made by the bodies of the parents but have arisen by the division
    of the antecedent germ cell. _Every cell comes from a pre-existing
    cell_ by a process of division, and _every germ cell comes from a
    pre-existing germ cell_. Consequently it is not possible to hold,
    that the body generates germ cells, nor that the soul generates
    souls. The only possible scientific position is that the _mind_ or
    soul as well as the body develops from the _germ_.

    “No fact in human experience is more certain than that the mind
    develops by gradual and natural processes from a simple condition
    which can scarcely be called mind at all; no fact in human
    experience is fraught with greater practical and philosophical
    significance than this, and yet no fact is more generally
    disregarded.” Conklin.

    “Doubtless the elements of which _consciousness_ develops are
    _present in the germ cells_, in the same sense that the elements
    of the other psychic processes or of the organs of the body are
    there present; not as a miniature of the adult condition, but
    rather in the form of elements or factors, which by long series of
    combinations and transformations, due to interactions with one
    another and with the environment, give rise to the fully developed
    condition.... It is an interesting fact that in man, and in
    several other animals which may be assumed to have a sense of
    identity, the nerve cells, especially those of the _brain_, _cease
    dividing_ at an early age, and these identical cells persist
    throughout the remainder of life.”...

    “The hen does not produce the egg, but the egg produces the hen
    and also other eggs. Individual traits are not transmitted from
    the hen to the egg, but they develop out of germinal factors which
    are carried along from _cell to cell, and from generation to
    generation_....”

    “The germ is the undeveloped organism which forms the bond between
    successive generations; the person is the developed organism which
    arises from the germ under the influence of environmental
    conditions, the person develops and dies in each generation; the
    germ-plasm is the continuous stream of living substance which
    connects all generations. The person nourishes and protects the
    germ, and in this sense the person is merely the carrier of the
    germ-plasm, the _mortal trustee_ of an immortal substance.”
    Conklin.


This is what I call “time-linking.” (Author.)


    “Through intelligence and social cooperation he is able to control
    environment for particular ends, in a manner quite impossible in
    other organisms.... Other animals develop much more rapidly than
    man but that development sooner comes to an end. The children of
    lower races of man develop more rapidly than those of higher races
    but in such cases they also cease to develop at an earlier age.
    The prolongation of the period of infancy and of immaturity in the
    human race greatly increases the importance of environment and
    training as _factors of development_.” Conklin.


Another sidelight given on the “Spiral theory.” (Author.)


    “In education also we are strangely blind to proper aims and
    methods. Any education is bad which leads to the formation of
    habits of idleness, carelessness, failure, instead of habits of
    industry, thoroughness and success. Any religious or social
    institution is bad which leads to habits of pious make-believe,
    insincerity, slavish regard for authority and disregard for
    evidence, instead of habits of sincerity, open-mindedness and
    independence....”

    “All that man now is he has come to be without conscious human
    guidance. If evolution has progressed from the am[oe]ba to man
    without human interference, if the great progress from ape-like
    men to the most highly civilized races has taken place without
    conscious human control, the question may well be asked: Is it
    possible to improve on the natural method of evolution? It may not
    be possible to improve on the method of evolution and yet by
    intelligent action it may be possible to facilitate that method.
    _Man can not change a single law of nature but he can put himself
    into such relations to natural laws that he can profit by them._”
    Conklin.


This proves the great importance of KNOWING THE NATURAL LAWS for the human
class of life, and making natural time-binding impulses conscious, for
then only will the spiral give a logarithmical accumulation of the right
kind, otherwise the biolyte will be “animal” in substance as well as in
effect. Here it is immaterial how the first “time-binder” was produced;
the fact that he is of another dimension is of the greatest importance.


    “From sands to stars, from the immensity of the universe to the
    minuteness of the electron, in living things no less than in
    lifeless ones, science recognizes everywhere the inevitable
    sequence of cause and effect, the universality of natural
    processes, the reign of natural law. _Man also is a part of
    Nature, a part of the great mechanism of the_ universe, and all
    that he is and _does is limited and prescribed by laws of nature_.
    Every human being comes into existence by a process of
    development, every step of which is determined by antecedent
    causes.... Our anatomical, physiological, psychological
    possibilities were predetermined in the _germ cells_ from which we
    came....” Conklin.


This shows the importance of keeping the study of humans in their own
dimensionality, and also the importance of finding the IMPERSONAL NATURAL
LAWS for the human class of life. Now it can be realized that all the
so-called human ideals are none else than the ever growing fulfillment of
the NATURAL “TIME-BINDING” LAWS. This understanding will enable man to
discover new “time-binding” laws for their conduct, their business
relations, their state, which will not be a contradiction of the real,
NATURAL LAWS but will be in accord with them; then and only then human
progress will have a chance to develop peacefully.


    “Adult characteristics are potential and not actual in the germ,
    and their actual appearance depends upon many complicated
    reactions of the germinal units with one another and with the
    environment. In short, our actual personalities are not
    predetermined in the germ cells, but our possible personalities
    are.... The influence of environment upon the minds and morals of
    men is especially great. To a large extent our habits, words,
    thoughts; our aspirations, ideals, satisfactions; our
    responsibility, morality, religion are the results of the
    environment and education of our early years....”

    “Owing to this vastly greater power of memory, reflection and
    inhibition man is much freer than any other animal. Animals which
    learn little from experience have little freedom and the more they
    learn the freer they become....” Conklin.


It may be added here that the “spiral theory” explains how our reactions
can be accelerated and elaborated by ourselves, and how truly we are the
masters of our destinies.


    “Because we can find no place in our philosophy and logic for self
    determination shall we cease to be scientists and close our eyes
    to the evidence? The first duty of science is to appeal to fact
    and to settle later with logic and philosophy....” Conklin.


There will be no difficulty in the settlement of facts with the new
philosophy of “Human Engineering.”


    “The analysis of instinct from a purely physiological point of
    view ultimately furnishes the data for a scientific ethics. Human
    happiness is based upon the possibility of a natural and
    harmonious satisfaction of the instincts.... It is rather
    remarkable that we should still be under the influence of an
    ethics which considers the human instincts in themselves low and
    their gratification vicious. That such an ethics must have had a
    comforting effect upon the orientals, whose instincts were
    inhibited or warped through the combined effects of an enervating
    climate, despotism and miserable economic conditions is
    intelligible, and it is perhaps due to a continuation of the
    unsatisfactory economic conditions that this ethics still prevails
    to some extent.... Lawyers, criminologists and philosophers
    frequently imagine that only want makes man work. This is an
    erroneous view. We are instinctively forced to be active in the
    same way as ants or bees. The instinct of workmanship would be the
    greatest source of happiness if it were not for the fact that our
    present social and economic organization allows only a few to
    satisfy this instinct. Robert Mayer has pointed out that any
    successful display or setting free of energy is a source of
    pleasure to us. This is the reason why the satisfaction of the
    instinct of workmanship is of such importance in the economy of
    life, for the play and learning of the child, as well as for the
    scientists or commercial work of the man.... We can vary at will
    the instincts of animals. A number of marine animals ... go away
    from the light, can be forced to go to light in two ways, first by
    lowering the temperature and second by increasing the
    concentration of the sea water, whereby the cells of the animals
    lose water. This instinct can be again reversed by raising the
    temperature or by lowering the concentration of the sea water. I
    have found repeatedly that by the same conditions by which
    phenomena of growth and organization can be controlled the
    instincts are controlled also. This indicates that there is a
    common basis for both classes of life phenomena. This common base
    is the physical and chemical character of the mixture of
    substances which we call protoplasm.... _The greatest happiness in
    life_ can be obtained only if _all instincts_, that of workmanship
    included, can be maintained at a certain _optimal intensity_. But
    while it is certain that the individual can ruin or diminish the
    value of its life by a onesided development of its instincts,
    e.g., dissipation, it is at the same time true that the _economic
    and social conditions can ruin or diminish the value of life for a
    great number of individuals_. It is no doubt true that in our
    present social and economic conditions more than ninety per cent
    of human beings lead an existence whose value is far below what it
    should be. They are compelled by want to sacrifice a number of
    instincts especially the most valuable among them, that of
    workmanship, in order to save the lowest and most imperative, that
    of eating. If those who amass immense fortunes could possibly
    intensify their lives with their abundance, it might perhaps be
    rational to let many suffer in order to have a few cases of true
    happiness. But for an increase of happiness only that amount of
    money is of service which can be used for the harmonious
    development and satisfaction of inherited instincts. For this,
    comparatively little is necessary. The rest is of no more use to a
    man than the surplus of oxygen in the atmosphere. As a matter of
    fact, the only true satisfaction a multimillionaire can possibly
    get from increasing his fortunes, is the satisfaction of the
    instinct of workmanship or the pleasure that is connected with a
    successful display of energy. The scientist gets this satisfaction
    without diminishing the value of life of his fellow being, and the
    same should be true for the business man.... Although we recognize
    no metaphysical free-will, we do not deny personal responsibility.
    We can fill the memory of the young generation with such
    associations as will prevent wrong doing or dissipation....
    Cruelty in the penal code and the tendency to exaggerate
    punishment are sure signs of a low civilization and of an
    imperfect educational system.... It seems to me that we can no
    more expect to unravel the mechanism of associative memory by
    histological or morphological methods than we can expect to
    unravel the dynamics of electrical phenomena by microscopic study
    of cross-sections through a telegraph wire or by counting and
    locating the telephone connections in a big city. If we are
    anxious to develop a dynamic of the various life-phenomena, we
    must remember that the colloidal substances are the machines which
    produce the life phenomena, but the physics of these substances is
    still a science of the future.... Physiology gives us no answer to
    the latter question. The idea of specific energy has always been
    regarded as the terminus for the investigation of the sense
    organs. Mach expressed the opinion that chemical conditions lie at
    the foundation of sensation in general....” _Comparative
    Physiology of the Brain_, by Jacques Loeb.


Here it may be added that the “Instinct of Workmanship” in the animal
class, becomes in the time-binding class of life the instinct of
_creation_, and is nothing else than the expression of the natural impulse
of the “Time-binding” energy. In the present social and economic system
very few have a possibility to satisfy this instinct; scientific
management is or may be satisfying the animal instinct of workmanship, but
it is not satisfactory to the instinct of creation. “Time-binding” in its
last analysis is creation and only such a social and economic system as
will satisfy this want—this natural impulse—will satisfy Humans—the
“Time-binders”—and will bring about their fullest growth in work and
happiness.

“LAWS OF GROWTH” (from _Unified Mathematics_, by Louis C. Karpinski,
Ph.D.). “_Compound interest function_.—The function _S_ = _P_(1 + _i_)_n_
is of fundamental importance in other fields than in finance. Thus the
growth of timber of a large forest tract may be expressed as a function of
this kind, the assumption being that in a large tract the rate of growth
may be taken as uniform from year to year. In the case of bacteria growing
under ideal conditions in a culture, _i.e._ with unlimited food supplied,
the increase in the number of bacteria per second is proportional to the
number of bacteria present at the beginning of that second. Any function
in which the rate of change or rate of growth at any instant _t_ is
directly proportional to the value of the function at the instant _t_
obeys what has been termed the ‘law of organic growth,’ and may be
expressed by the equation,

_y = ce__kt_,

wherein _c_ and _k_ are constants determined by the physical facts
involved, and _e_ is a constant of nature analogous to π. The constant _k_
is the proportionality constant and is negative when the quantity in
question decreases; _c_ is commonly positive;

_e_ = 2.178....

“The values of the function of _x, ce__kx__, increase according to the
terms of a geometrical progression as the variable x increases in
arithmetical progression_....

“The most immediate application of a function in which the growth is
proportional to the function itself is to the air. The decrease in the
pressure of the air at the distance _h_ above the earth’s surface is
proportional to _h_.

“The expression _P = 760 e__-h/7990_ gives the numerical value of the
pressure in millimeters of mercury for _h_ measured in meters. The
negative exponent indicates that the pressure decreases as _h_ increases.
In inches as units of length of the mercury column, _h_ in feet,

_P = 29.92e__-h/26200_

This is known as Halley’s law.

“The growth of bean plants within limited intervals and the growth of
children, again between quite restricted limits, follow approximately the
law of organic growth. Radium in decomposing follows the same law; the
rate of decrease at any instant being proportional to the quantity. In the
case of vibrating bodies, like a pendulum, the rate of decrease of the
amplitude follows this law; similarly in the case of a noise dying down
and in certain electrical phenomena, the rate of decrease is proportional
at any instant to the value of the function at the instant....

“_The Curve of Healing of a Wound._—Closely allied to the formulas
expressing the law of organic growth, _y = e__kt_, and the law of ‘organic
decay,’ _y = e__-kt_, is a recently discovered law which connects
algebraically by an equation and graphically by a curve, the surface-area
of a wound, with time expressed in days, measured from the time when the
wound is aseptic or sterile. When this aseptic condition is reached, by
washing and flushing continually with antiseptic solutions, two
observations at an interval commonly of four days give the ‘index of the
individual,’ and this index, and the two measurements of area of the
wound-surface, enable the physician-scientist to determine the normal
progress of the wound-surface, the expected decrease in area, for this
wound-surface of this individual. The area of the wound is traced
carefully on transparent paper, and then computed by using a mathematical
machine, called a planimeter, which measures areas.

“The areas of the wound are plotted as ordinates with the respective times
of observation measured in days as abscissas. After each observation and
computation of area the point so obtained is plotted to the same axes as
the graph which gives the ideal or prophetic curve of healing.

“When the observed area is found markedly greater than that determined by
the ideal curve, the indication is that there is still infection in the
wound.... A rather surprising and unexplained situation occurs frequently
when the wound-surface heals more rapidly than the ideal curve would
indicate; in this event secondary ulcers develop which bring the curve
back to normal....

“This application of mathematics to medicine is largely due to Dr. Alexis
Carrel of the Rockefeller Institute of Medical Research. He noted that the
larger the wound-surface, the more rapidly it healed, and that the rate of
healing seemed to be proportional to the area. This proportionality
constant is not the same for all values of the surface or we would have an
equation of the form,

_S = S__1__e__-kt_

in which _S_, is the area at the time that the wound is rendered sterile
and observations to be plotted really begin....

“The data given are taken from the Journal of Experimental Medicine,
reprints kindly furnished by Major George A. Stewart of the Rockefeller
Institute. The diagrams are reproduced from the issue of Feb. 1, 1918, pp.
171 and 172, article by Dr. T. Tuffier and R. Desmarres, Auxiliary
Hospital 75, Paris....

[ A graph, showing the progress of healing of a surface wound of the right
leg of a 31-year-old patient. It shows that as time passes, the wounded
area decreases. ]

Progress of healing of a surface wound of the right leg, patient’s age 31
years.


“WAVE MOTION. General.—In nature there are two types of recurrent motion,
somewhat closely connected mathematically, in which repetition of motion
occurs at regular intervals.

“One type of this motion, in cycles as we may say, repeats the motion in
one place, and is in a sense stationary. The tuning fork in motion moves
through the same space again and again; a similar movement is the motion
of a vibrating string. Of this stationary type may be mentioned the
heartbeats, the pulse, the respiration, the tides, and the rotation of a
wheel about its axis.

“The second type of recurrent motion transmits or carries the vibratory
impulse over an extent of space as well as time. The waves of the sea are
of this character. Sound waves, electrical vibrations or waves, and
radiant energy vibrations are transmitted by a process similar to that by
which the waves of the sea are carried.

“Both of these types of motion are representable mathematically by
equations involving a sequence of trigonometric functions. To the
fundamental and basic function involved, _y_ = sin _x_, we will direct our
attention in the next section and to simple applications in other sections
of this chapter....

“Sound Waves.—If a tuning fork for note lower C is set to vibrating, the
free bar makes 129 complete, back-and-forth, vibrations in one second. By
attaching a fine point to the end of the bar and moving under this bar at
a uniform rate, as it vibrates, a smoke-blackened paper, a sinusoidal
curve is traced on the paper. Our curve is traced by a bar vibrating 50
times in 1 second.

[ A graph, showing a wavy line. “Tuning fork vibrations recorded on smoked
paper.” ]

Tuning fork vibrations recorded on smoked paper.


“Corresponding to each movement of the vibrating rod there is a movement
of the air. As the bar moves to the right it compresses the layer of air
to its right and that _compression_ is immediately communicated to the
layer of air to the right; as the bar moves back and to the left, the
pressure on the adjacent air is released and a _rarefaction_ takes place.
In 1/50 of 1 second you have the air adjacent to the rod _compressed_,
back to normal, and _rarefied_; during this time the neighboring air is
affected and the compression is communicated a distance which is the _wave
length_ of this given sound wave. In 1 second this disturbance is
transmitted 1100 feet at 44° Fahrenheit. The wave length for this sound
wave then is 1100/50 = 22 feet.

“The wave length is commonly designated by λ. If _V_ is the velocity, and
_t_ the time of one vibration, λ = _Vt_.”

[ A graph, showing five wavy lines, labeled “a”, “ou”, “r”, “E”, and “a”.
“Vibration records produced by the voice: ‘a’ as in ‘ate’; ‘ou’ as in
‘about’; ‘r’ in ‘relay’; ‘e’ in ‘be’; and ‘a’ in ‘father’. The tuning fork
record, frequency 50 per second, gives the vibration frequencies.” ]

“Vibration records produced by the voice: ‘a’ as in ‘ate’; ‘ou’ as in
‘about’; ‘r’ in ‘relay’; ‘e’ in ‘be’; and ‘a’ in ‘father’. The tuning fork
record, frequency 50 per second, gives the vibration frequencies.”


This last drawing may help to visualize the fact in what manner wrong
expressions and untrue teachings hamper the true progress of humanity.
Every word has its energy and produces some physico-chemical effects in
the time-binding apparatus in accord with the idea which we associate with
the sound of the word. If we teach ideas which are untrue, then the
physico-chemical effects produced are not proper—in other words the human
mind does NOT WORK PROPERLY, that is, it does not work _naturally_ or
_normally_ or true to the human dimension. There is every reason why the
standards in our civilization are so low, because we have “poisoned,” in a
literal sense of the word, our minds with the physico-chemical effects of
wrong ideas. This correct NATURAL APPROACH to the “Time-binding” energies
will make it obvious how unmeasured is the importance of the manner in
which we handle this subtle mechanism, as the poisoning with wrong ideas
or with careless or incorrect words does not in any way differ in
consequences from poisoning with any other stupor-producing or wrongly
stimulating poison.

Monographs on Experimental Biology and Physiology

LOEB, J.: “Comparative Physiology of the Brain and Comparative
Psychology.” New York, 1900.

LOEB, J.: “Studies in General Physiology.” Chicago, 1905.

LOEB, J.: “The Dynamics of Living Matter.” New York, 1906.

LOEB, J.: “The Mechanistic Conception of Life.” Chicago, 1912.

Selection from contents: I. The Mechanistic Conception of Life. II. The
Significance of Tropisms for Psychology. III. Some Fundamental Facts and
Conceptions concerning the Comparative Physiology of the Central Nervous
System. IV. Pattern Adaptation of Fishes and the Mechanism of Vision. V.
On Some Facts and Principles of Physiological Morphology. VI. On the
Nature of the Process of Fertilization. VII. On the Nature of Formative
Stipulation (Artificial Parthenogenesis). VIII. The Prevention of the
Death of the Egg through the Act of Fertilization. IX. The Rôle of Salts
in the Preservation of Life. X. Experimental Study of the Influence of
Environment on Animals.

LOEB, J.: The Organism as a Whole. G. P. Putnam’s Sons. New York, 1916.

Selection from contents: I. Introductory Remarks. II. The Specific
Difference between Living and Dead Matter and the Question of the Origin
of Life. III. The Chemical Basis of Genus and Species: 1. The
Incompatibility of Species not Closely Related. 2. The Chemical basis of
Genus and Species and of Species Specificity. IV. Specificity in
Fertilization. V. Artificial Parthenogenesis. VI. Determinism in the
Formation of an Organism from an Egg. VII. Regeneration. VIII.
Determination of Sex, Secondary Sexual Characters and Sexual Instincts: 1.
The Cytological Basis of Sex Determination. 2. The Physiological Basis of
Sex Determination. IX. Mendelian Heredity and its Mechanism. X. Animal
Instincts and Tropisms. XI. The Influence of Environment. XII. Adaptation
to Environment. XIII. Evolution. XIV. Death and Dissolution of the
Organism.

LOEB, J.: “Forced Movements, Tropisms, and Animal Conduct.” J. B.
Lippincott, Philadelphia, 1918.

Selection from contents: I. Introduction. II. The Symmetry Relations of
the Animal Body as the Starting Point for the Theory of Animal Conduct.
III. Forced Movements. IV. Galvanotropism. V. Heliotropism. The Influence
of One Source of Light. 1. General Facts. 2. Direct Proof of the Muscle
Tension Theory of Heliotropism in Motile Animals. 3. Heliotropism of
Unicellular Organisms. 4. Heliotropism of Sessile Animals. VI. An
Artificial Heliotropic Machine. VII. Asymmetrical Animals. VIII. Two
Sources of Light of Different Intensity. IX. The Validity of the
Bunsen-Roscoe Law for the Heliotropic Reactions of Animals and Plants. X.
The Effect of Rapid Changes in Intensity of Light. XI. The Relative
Heliotropic Efficiency of Light of Different Wave Lengths. XII. Change in
the Sense of Heliotropism. XIII. Geotropism. XIV. Forced Movements Caused
by Moving Retina Images: Rheotropism: Anemotropism. XV. Stereotropism.
XVI. Chemotropism. XVII. Thermotropism. XVIII. Instincts. XIX. Memory
Images and Tropisms.

A list of _554 books on this subject_, in which any reader interested will
find a vast storehouse of exact knowledge in this line. Author.

CONKLIN, EDWIN GRANT: “Heredity and Environment in the Development of
Men.” Princeton University Press, 1915.

Selection from contents: I. Facts and Factors of Development.
Introduction. A. Phenomena of Development. B. Factors of Development. II.
Cellular Basis of Heredity and Development. A. Introductory. B. The Germ
Cells. C. The Mechanism of Heredity. D. The Mechanism of Development. III.
Phenomena of Inheritance. A. Observations on Inheritance. B. Statistical
Study of Inheritance. C. Experimental Study of Inheritance. IV. Influence
of Environment. A. Relative Importance of Heredity and Environment. B.
Experimental Modifications of Development. C. Functional Activity as a
Factor of Development. D. Inheritance or Non-inheritance of Acquired
Characters. E. Applications to Human Development: Euthenics. V. Control of
Heredity: Eugenics. A. Domesticated Animals and Cultivated Plants. B.
Control of Human Heredity. VI. Genetics and Ethics.


    Glossary of books on this subject; for those who desire to be more
    fully acquainted with the subjects of heredity and development.
    Author.


MORGAN, T. H., “Physical Basis of Heredity.”

EAST, E. M., and JONES, D. F., “Inbreeding and Outbreeding,” etc.

PARKER, G. H., “The Elementary Nervous System.”

HARVEY, E. N., “The Nature of Animal Light.”




Appendix III. Engineering And Time-Binding


The Arts of Engineering, by their very nature, are derived from the work
of dead men and destined to serve not only the present but the future.
They are freer than any other human activity from the errors of
intermixing dimensions and from the fallacy of belief in individualistic
accomplishment and pride. The simple steel structure of a bridge, familiar
to us in every day life, is a clear reminder to us all of the arts of
Hephæstus and the bound-up knowledge of countless generations of smiths
and mechanics, metallurgists and chemists, mathematicians and builders,
teachers and engineers who toiled for many thousands of years to make
possible the riveted steel beams which are the elements of modern
structure. These structures do not collapse unless the natural laws for
their construction are transgressed; which seldom happens—for no one is
entrusted with the work unless he has bound up in his knowledge the
accumulated experience of the past; yet the transgressors of these natural
laws are punished with all the severity of the common law. When a bridge
is opened and tested, the written laws in some countries and the unwritten
in others, and the pride and the sense of responsibility of the designer
and builder of the bridge demand that he, the creator of the bridge, be
the first to enter it and the last to leave it; and should the bridge
collapse, he has to take the immediate consequences of his neglect of the
time-binding laws.

Rarely are the affairs of engineering done with the entirely selfish
motive of merely acquiring immediate selfish gain, for even when this
could be traced—this unworthy thought disappears in the halo of the glory
of the accomplishment. Mr. Eiffel did not erect his tower to haunt Paris
with the sight of a steel skeleton towering over the city of daring
thoughts. His tower stands to-day as a mechanical proof of mathematical
formulas proving the possibility of erecting tall, self-supporting
structures and thereby serving future humanity. The Time-binding capacity
of humans creates and formulates new values for the service of mankind.
Again, no student of the Arts of Engineering could ever forget himself to
the point of claiming his accomplishments, no matter how marvelous, all to
himself. No wondrous discovery of modern electricity, not even the talking
from one hemisphere to another, is rightly the accomplishment of any one
man, for the origin of the discovery can be traced at least as far back as
the days of that barefooted shepherd boy Magnus, who first observed the
phenomena of magnetism.

In an attempt to trace and evaluate the time-binding faculties manifested
in the Arts of Engineering, one is at once astonished, and bewildered, at
the confusion and contradictions unrealized in the mass of evidence, and
how pathetic and deplorable is the sight of hundreds of thousands of
workers in the field of engineering toil and creation who unconsciously
submit to the degradation, in silent consent, of seeing their marvelous
collective achievements chained to space-binding aims.

Upon the completion of this book I was astonished that there are such a
small number of engineers who have the intuitive feeling of the greatness
of the assets at their command and of the gravity of their liabilities
concerning affairs of humanity. I was eager to have my book read and
analysed by a few leading engineers. The late H. L. Gantt being no more
with us, I then turned to Walter N. Polakov, Doctor of Engineering;
Industrial Counselor; Chairman of Committee on Service and Information,
Fuels Section, A.S.M.E., and Robert B. Wolf, Vice-President of A.S.M.E. In
them I found, to the full, a very sympathetic understanding and my esteem
grew as I became more intimately acquainted with the character of their
work and their accomplishments. Both have done a most remarkable work in
their respective lines. It will not be an exaggeration to say that their
work, together with the work of the late H. L. Gantt and Charles P.
Steinmetz, may be considered as the first—to my knowledge—corner-stones of
the science and art of Human Engineering, and form the first few volumes
and writings for the New Library of the Manhood of Humanity. These books
and pamphlets are based on facts analysed scientifically, marking the
parting of the way of engineering thought from the past subjection to
speculative fetishes.

Of all the pure and applied sciences, engineering alone has the
distinction of being the first to have the _correct_ insight into the
human problem. The task of engineers was to convert knowledge—brain
work—“bound-up time”—into daily bread by means of conserving time and
effort. This concept is naught else but the working out of the imperfect
formulation of the time-binding principle. It was inevitable, therefore,
that some engineers had already beaten the path in the right direction.
How straight and how far this sense of dimensionality has led some of them
in their practical work may be seen from the work of Walter N. Polakov, in
his _Mastering Power Production_, Engineering Magazine, N. Y., 1921.


    “It was not my intention to compile a text book on power
    engineering; it was rather my care to avoid the treatment of any
    technical subject which could be found elsewhere in engineering
    literature; but I could not avoid trespassing in the adjoining
    fields of psychology and economics, for without familiarity with
    these sciences the mastery of power production is a futile
    attempt.

    “I do not hold that the principles upon which the method is laid
    out are subject to choice or opinions, for they are based on
    facts. Yet work of this character cannot be complete, or examples
    may be illy chosen, for it deals with living and constantly
    reshaping relations and applies to things in process of
    development.

    “If this work and its underlying idea will facilitate the solving
    of some of the problems now in the course of rapid evolution in
    our industrial relations, I shall feel that my own and my readers’
    time have not been altogether lost.”


Indeed the readers’ time will not be lost. This book gives an engineering,
scientific—in the meantime practical—analysis of all human problems. It is
a deep and practical treatise on all great questions concerning modern
industrialism and so-called economic problems and is a foundation for a
new scientific industrial philosophy. Another very clear outline of the
_Principles of Industrial Philosophy_ was given by Mr. Polakov in his
paper presented at the annual meeting of the American Society of
Mechanical Engineers, December 7-10, 1920. Anyone who has anything to do
with industrial or economic problems cannot afford to overlook the
important and fundamental work in this book.

It is obvious that a scientific knowledge of facts, is of the greatest
importance for anyone who cares to approach any problem in a serious way.
Statistics which are up-to-date are therefore of primary importance. I had
the privilege of reading the manuscript of _Quo Vadis America_, the
forthcoming book of Mr. Polakov, where a most valuable statistical picture
of facts in modern America is given and the astonishing conclusions which
are to be drawn therefrom. I can only regret that in Europe we have not
such a knowledge written down concerning European conditions. If more such
books had been written and _read_ by the public, many crises and
catastrophes would have been avoided.

The outstanding contribution of Mr. Robert B. Wolf to engineering was made
in his study of physiology, biology, psychology and philosophy as applied
to engineering.


    “If anyone wishes to inquire into the forces which have led up to
    the individual development of mankind, he will find himself at
    once plunged into the realm of psychology and mental philosophy. I
    can heartily recommend such a course as immensely profitable and
    of practical value.

    “The five important facts, however, that have to do with the
    subject in hand are:

    “_1st._ That the human body is such a wonderful organization
    because it is the product of the forces of creation, acting
    through millions of years of evolution.

    “_2nd._ That its capacity for progress depends upon the
    maintenance of the unity resulting from this creative evolution
    and upon a conscious recognition of this unity.

    “_3d._ That this unity would not have been possible without the
    development of the nervous system.

    “_4th._ That the conscious intelligent progress made by mankind
    could not have reached its present level until in the process of
    evolution a mechanism had been built up in the nervous system
    itself capable of recording the various impressions which the
    senses are constantly receiving.

    “_5th._ That the recording of past events, with the power of
    consciously recalling them for the solution of problems
    immediately confronting it, is absolutely essential to its
    development.

    “Now, what I want to point out is that inasmuch as man’s progress
    depends upon the perfect co-ordination of his forces to produce
    unity of action, we have no right to expect an industrial
    organization to make progress which it must do as a unit without
    the establishment of a conscious co-ordinating mechanism similar
    to the nervous system in the human body.” _Individuality in
    Industry._ By Robert B. Wolf.


Doctor Charles P. Steinmetz has given in his _America and the New Epoch_ a
most correct engineering picture of the political situation in the world,
with a fine characterization of the psychological peculiarities of the
different races. Although this book was written in 1916, that is, before
the end of the World War, it will be of permanent value; because of its
deep psychological analysis of the peoples and their institutions which
ultimately shape the development of any nation and which do not change
with victory or defeat.


    “My tribute to the memory of Gantt will be, not only the homage of
    a friend and admirer, but the proof that his philosophy is
    scientifically true. A rigorous proof is necessary, because the
    word ‘service’ belongs to that category of words, the meaning of
    which can be completely reversed by the verb, be it ‘give’ or
    ‘take.’ Gantt took ‘rendering service’ as an axiom; my
    observation, shared with many others, is that our civilization had
    quite another axiom, ‘we preach give, we practice take.’ The
    problem which interested me, was how to find a way out of this
    contradiction that would be irrefutable. If one of them is true
    and natural law for humans, then the other is not; if our words
    are true, then our deeds are not true, or if our deeds are true
    then the words are camouflage. I found the solution, by applying
    mathematically rigorous thinking. Mathematics, with its exact
    concept of dimensions, gave me the method. The method we use in
    studying phenomena is analysis, or speaking mathematically,
    differentiation. I soon found, that the methods of differentiation
    are mostly correct, but our synthesis, or process of integration
    made by the use of metaphysics was faulty. The differentiation
    correctly lowered the dimensions, but our faulty integration did
    not restore the original dimensions. The investigation had to be
    made from the beginning, by defining the phenomena of life, in a
    specific way, which would not permit of any blunders in
    dimensions.

    “I defined the classes of life by emphasizing their incontestable,
    dimensional characteristics: plants are ‘Chemistry-binding,’
    animals are ‘Space-binding,’ Humans are ‘Time-binding’ classes of
    life.

    “These definitions have the peculiarity that they make it obvious,
    that: 1. The classes of life have different dimensions, and that
    the intermixing of dimensions, as in mathematics it makes a
    correct solution impossible, so in life, the results of such
    elementary mistakes, produce tragic consequences.

    “2. The old formula on which our civilization is built, HUMAN
    equal ANIMAL plus or multiplied by SPARK OF DIVINITY is basically
    and elementarily wrong, and is mathematical nonsense, which is
    identical to such an absurdity as _x_ square inches equal _y_
    linear inches plus or multiplied by _z_ cubic inches.

    “3. A basically wrong formula on which our civilization rests, is
    the cause of all the periodical collapses, wars and revolutions.

    “4. The old system was built on animal ‘space-binding’ standards,
    and human ‘time-binding’ impulses were, all the time, in
    rebellion.

    “5. As the theory of gravitation and the calculus made engineers
    and mathematicians masters of inanimate nature, so these tangible
    and incontestable definitions give them a positive base which will
    enable them to approach and solve human living problems, by
    establishing the mathematical fact that man is man, not an animal.

    “6. All of those who are blinded by traditions and refuse to
    investigate, or to know these mathematical truths, are a danger to
    humanity in directly helping to obscure issues, and in helping to
    maintain the faulty structure which, as in the past, is bound to
    collapse again and again in the future.

    “7. The duty of mathematically thinking people is to throw such
    light on this problem as will stop the stupid, or willfully
    destructive, and show whether they are working for, or against,
    mankind.

    “8. For the ‘time-binding’ class of life, it is obvious then that
    in this dimension, ‘time-binding’ is the natural law, and, if
    understood and analysed, it is the highest human aim.

    “9. Such ‘natural laws’ as ‘survival of the fittest’ for animals,
    which is the ‘survival of the fittest in space,’ result in fight,
    or the survival of the strongest; whereas such a law to be a
    NATURAL LAW FOR HUMANS, must be in the human dimension which
    obviously would be the ‘Survival of the fittest in TIME,’
    resulting in the survival of the best.

    “10. All known facts must be brought to the light, to be summed
    up, and correlated by mathematicians and engineers with the
    strictest attention to dimensionality.

    “11. All of our ideas have to be revised; the animal
    ‘space-binding’ standards must be rejected as dangerous and
    destructive, must be replaced by ‘time-binding’ standards, which
    will correspond to the natural impulses and NATURAL LAWS for
    humans.

    “12. The minds of mathematicians and engineers are by education
    the first to see the far reaching importance of the facts
    disclosed by these definitions, and just this realization will
    bring about the readjustment of values in life to a human
    dimension, wherein pending revolutions and wars could be turned
    into evolution, destruction into construction, discord into accord
    of a common aim.

    “We are the masters of our own destinies, the responsibility is
    ours to correct the mistakes of our ancestors and to establish a
    scientific philosophy, scientifically true laws, scientifically
    true ethics, and a scientific sociology, which will form one
    unified science of man and his function in the universe, a science
    which I propose to call ‘Human Engineering.’ Gantt’s methods would
    be the first practical application toward this end.

    “Gantt’s concept of rendering service is scientifically true
    because it is ‘time-binding,’ and therefore true for the human
    class of life and in human dimension. This is why Gantt’s concepts
    have counted for so much and will survive ‘IN TIME.’ ” Discussion
    by Alfred Korzybski of Mr. W. N. Polakov’s paper “Principles of
    Industrial Philosophy” presented at the Annual Meeting of The
    American Society of Mechanical Engineers, New York, December 7-10,
    1920.


LITERATURE

GANTT, H. L.:

“Work, Wages, and Profits.” The Engineering Magazine Co., 1913. N. Y.

“Industrial Leadership.” Yale University Press. 1916.

“Organizing for Work.” Harcourt, Brace & Howe, 1919. N. Y.

Selection from Contents: The Engineer as the Industrial Leader. Economics
and Democracy. Democracy in Production. Democracy in the Shop. Democracy
in Management. “The Religion of Democracy.”

POLAKOV, WALTER N.:

“Mastering Power Production.” The Engineering Magazine Co. 1921. N. Y.

Selection from Contents: The Descent of the Principle of Production for
Use. The Power Industry as an Economic Factor. Mastering Labor Problems.
(Conditions) Autonomous Co-operation. Aims of Labor. Right to be Lazy and
the Right to a Job. Qualification of Men. The Working Day. Fatigue.
UNIVERSAL LABOR (_Corresponding exactly to Time-binding—Author_). The
Position of an Engineer. Mastering Labor Problems. Compensation. The
Social Aspect. The Economic Aspect. The Basis of Wages. Incentive
Payments. Profit Sharing. Premium Places. Rewarding Individual Efforts.
Two-rate wages. Energy as a Commodity.

“Principles of Industrial Philosophy.” Presented at the Annual Meeting of
the A. S. of M. E., December, 1920.

“Equipment and Machinery.” Y. M. C. A. Association Press. 1921. N. Y.

“Organization and Management.” Y. M. C. A. Association Press. 1921. N. Y.

“Quo Vadis America?” In preparation.

STEINMETZ, CHARLES P.:

“America and the New Epoch.” Harper & Brothers. 1916. N. Y.

Selection from Contents: The Individualistic Era: From Competition to
Co-operation. England in the Individualistic Era. Germany in the
Individualistic Era. The Other European Nations in the Individualistic
Era. America in the Individualistic Era. Evolution: Industrial Government.

“Incentive and Initiative.” Y. M. C. A. Association Press. 1921. N. Y.

WOLF, ROBERT B.: Pamphlets.

“Individuality in Industry.” Bulletin of the Society to promote the
Science of Management. Vol. I. No. 4. August, 1915.

“The Creative Workman.” Technical Association of the Pulp and Paper
Industry. 1918. N. Y.

“Non-Financial Incentives.” Presented at the Annual Meeting of the A. S.
of M. E. December, 1918. N. Y.

“Modern Industry and the Individual.” A. W. Shaw & Co. 1919. N. Y.

“Securing the Initiative of the Workman.” American Economic Association.
1919. N. Y.

“Creative Spirit in Industry.” Y. M. C. A. Association Press. 1921. N. Y.

MISCELLANEOUS LIST OF BOOKS

VON BERNHARDI, General F.: “Germany and the Next War.” E. Arnold, London.
1912.

BRANDEIS, LOUIS: “Other People’s Money and How the Bankers Use it.” F. A.
Stokes, N. Y. 1914.

THOMAS FARROW and WALTER CROTCH: “The Coming Trade War.” Chapman & Hall,
London. 1916.

HUEFFER, FORD MADDOX: “When Blood is Their Argument.” Hodder & Stoughton.
1915. N. Y.

HAUSER, HENRY: “Germany’s Commercial Grip on the World, Her Business
Methods Explained.” E. Nash Co., London. 1917.

LAUGHLIN, J. L.: “Credit of the Nations.” Scribner’s Sons, N. Y. 1918.

MAETZU, RAMIRO DE: “Authority, Liberty and Function in the Light of War.”
Geo. Allen and Unwin.

DELAISI, FRANCIS: French Opinion, “The Inevitable War.” Small, Maynard &
Co., Boston. 1915.

NEILSON, FRANCIS: English Opinion, “How Diplomats Make War.” B. W.
Huebsch. 1916.

BY A GERMAN (German Opinion). “J’Accuse!” Hodder & Stoughton, London.
1915.






FOOTNOTES


    1 To digress a bit, it may be interesting to add, that population and
      the need of people increase in a geometrical progression; and also
      that the growth of individuals is limited by the fact, that they
      have to absorb their food through surfaces which as growth goes on
      increase only as _squares_, while the bodies to be fed, being
      volumes, increase in size as _cubes_ increase, as the cubes of the
      same base grow faster than the squares,

      22 = 4, 23 = 8, 32 = 9, 33 = 27, and so on,

      it is obvious, that in the infancy of an organism only a part of the
      food goes to maintain life, the larger part goes for growth; when
      the organism becomes larger, the absorbing surfaces, growing
      proportionally to the square, the food is spent to build the mass of
      the volume of the body and is spent proportionally to the cube.
      Suppose our organism has grown to a size twice as large, its
      absorbing capacity has become four times larger, its volume eight
      times larger. In case of 3 times, the difference will be 9 and 27.
      It is obvious that at some point, all the absorbed food will be used
      to maintain life and none will be left for growth, and this last
      process will stop. This is another example which explains how the
      theory of dimensions is vitally important in life and shows why it
      is absolutely essential to take account of dimensions in the study
      of life problems.

_    2 An Outline of the History of the Western European Mind_, by James
      Harvey Robinson. The New School for Social Research, New York, 1919.
      This little volume gives condensed statements, as in a nutshell, of
      the historical developments of the human mind and contains a long
      list of the most substantial modern books on historical questions.
      All the further historical quotations will be taken from this
      exceptionally valuable little book, and for convenience they will
      simply be marked by his initials—J. H. R.

    3 (J. H. R.) “Late appearance of a definite theory of progress.
      Excessive conservatism of primitive peoples. The Greeks speculated
      on the origin of things, but they did not have a conception of the
      possibility of indefinite progress ... Progress of man from the
      earliest time till the opening of the 17th century almost altogether
      unconscious.... Fundamental weakness of Hellenic learning. It was an
      imposing collection of speculation, opinions, and guesses, which,
      however brilliant and ingenious they might be, were based on a very
      slight body of exact knowledge, and failed to recognize the
      fundamental necessity of painful scientific research, aided by
      apparatus. There was no steady accumulation of knowledge to offset
      the growing emotional distrust of reason.... Unfulfilled promise of
      Hellenistic science. Influence of slavery in checking the
      development of science.... The deficiencies of Medieval culture. All
      the weaknesses of the Hellenic reasoning, combined with those of the
      Christian Fathers, underlay what appeared to be a most logically
      elaborated and definitive system of thought. Defects of the
      university education.... Little history of Natural science, in our
      sense of the word, taught in the universities.... Copernicus, ‘De
      Revolutionibus Orbium Coelestium.’ Libri VI, 1543.... Copernicus’
      own introduction acknowledges his debt to ancient philosophers.
      Still believed in fixed Starry Sphere. His discovery had little
      immediate effect on prevailing notions. Giordano Bruno (1548-1600)
      made it his chief business to think out and set forth in Latin and
      Italian the implications of the discovery of Copernicus.... Bruno
      burned by the Inquisition at Rome.... Keppler (1571-1630) and his
      discovery of the elliptical orbits of the planets. Galileo
      (1564-1642). His telescope speedily improved so as to magnify 32
      diameters. His attitude toward the Copernican theory, which was
      condemned by Roman Inquisition 1616.... Galileo’s chief discoveries
      were in physics and mechanics. Isaac Newton (1642-1727) proved that
      the laws of falling bodies apply to the heavens. This made a deep
      impression and finally the newer conceptions of the universe began
      to be popularized.... Lord Bacon (1561-1626), the ‘Buccinator’ of
      experimental and applied modern science.... His lively appreciation
      of the existing obstacles to scientific advance; the idols of the
      tribe, cave, market-place, and theatre.... Necessity of escaping
      from the scholastic methods of ‘tumbling up and down in our reasons
      and conceits,’ and studying the world about us. Undreamed of
      achievements possible if only the right method of research be
      followed ... the distrust of ancient authority.... Descartes
      (1596-1650), ... he proposed to reach the truth through analysis and
      clear ideas, on the assumption that God will not deceive.... His
      fundamental interest in mathematics.... His claim to originality and
      his rejection of all authority.... Obstacles to scientific advance;
      the universities still dominated by Aristotle; the theological
      faculties; the censorship of the press exercised by both church and
      state; ...”

    4 (J. H. R.) “Phases of religious complex. ‘Religious,’ a vague and
      comprehensive term applied to: (1) certain classes of emotions (awe,
      dependence, self-distrust, aspirations, etc.); (2) Conduct, which
      may take the form of distinctive religious acts (ceremonies,
      sacrifices, prayers, ‘good works’) or the observance of what in
      primitive conditions are recognized as ‘taboos’; (3) Priestly, or
      ecclesiastical organizations; (4) Beliefs about supernatural beings
      and man’s relations to them: the latter may take the form of
      revelation and be reduced to creeds and become the subject of
      elaborate theological speculations.

      “Association of religion with the supernatural; religion has always
      had for its primary object the attainment of a satisfactory
      adjustment to, or a successful control over, the supernatural....
      The cultural mind viewed as the product of a long and hazardous
      process of accumulation.... Spontaneous generation of superstitions.
      Prevalence of symbolism, mana, animism, magic, fetishism, totemism;
      the taboo (cf. our modern idea of ‘principle’), the sacred, clean
      and unclean; ‘dream logic’—spontaneous rationalizing or ‘jumping at
      conclusions’;... The 16th book of the Theodosian Code contains
      edicts relating to the Church issued by the Roman Emperors during
      the 4th and 5th centuries. They make it a crime to disagree with the
      Church; they provide harsh penalties for heretical teaching and
      writing, and grant privileges to the orthodox clergy (exemptions
      from regular taxes and benefit of the clergy).... Christianity
      becomes a monopoly defended by the state.... Psychological power and
      attraction in the elaborate symbolism and ritual of the church....
      Allegory put an end to all literary criticism.... Flourishing of the
      miraculous; any unusual or startling occurrence attributed to the
      intervention of either God or the Devil.... Older conceptions of
      disease as caused by the Devil.... Our legal expression ‘act of God’
      confined to unforseeable natural disasters. How with a growing
      appreciation for natural law and a chastened taste in wonders,
      miracles have tended to become a source of intellectual distress and
      bewilderment.... Protestants shared with Roman Catholics the horror
      of ‘rationalists’ and ‘free-thinkers.’ The leaders of both parties
      agreed in hampering and denouncing scientific discoveries....
      Witchcraft in its modern form emerges clearly in the 15th
      century.... Great prevalence of witchcraft during the 16th and 17th
      centuries in Protestant and Catholic countries, alike.... Trial of
      those suspected of sorcery. Tortures to force confession. The
      witches’ mark. Penalties, burning alive, strangling, hanging. Tens
      of thousands of innocent persons perished.... Those who tried to
      discredit witchcraft denounced as ‘Sadducees’ and atheists.... The
      psychology of intolerance. Fear, vested interests, the comfortable
      nature of the traditional and the habitual. The painful
      appropriation of new ideas.... The intolerance of the Catholic
      Church: a natural result of its state-like organization and
      claims.... Its doctrine of exclusive salvation and its conception of
      heresy both sanctioned by the state. Doubt and error regarded as
      sinful.... Beginnings of censorship of the press after the invention
      of printing, licensing of ecclesiastical and civil authorities....
      Protestants of 16th century accept the theory of intolerance.”

    5 (J. H. R.) “The Socio-psychological foundations of conservatism:
      Primitive natural reverence for the familiar and habitual greatly
      reenforced by religion and law. Natural conservatism of all
      professions. Those who suffer most from existing institutions
      commonly, helplessly accept the situation as inevitable. Position of
      the conservative; he urges the impossibility of altering ‘human
      nature’ and warns against the disasters of revolution. Conservatism
      in the light of history: History would seem to discredit
      conservatism completely as a working principle in view of the past
      achievements of mankind in the recent past and the possibilities
      which opened before us.... Futility of the appeal of the
      conservative to human nature as an obstacle to progress.... Culture
      can not be transmitted hereditarily but can be accumulated through
      education and modified indefinitely.”

    6 (J. H. R.) “Formulation and establishment of the evolutionary
      hypothesis. Discovery of the great age of the earth; ... gradual
      development of the evolutionary theory.... Darwin’s ‘Origin of the
      Species,’ 1859. Herbert Spencer (1820-1903).... Haeckel (1834-1919)
      and others clarify, defend and popularize the new doctrine.
      Subsequent development of the evolutionary doctrine by Mendel,
      Weisman, DeVries and others. Weakening of the special creation
      theory by other evidence such as archeology and biblical criticism.
      The significance of the doctrine for intellectual history. Character
      of the opposition to the evolutionary theory. Popular confusion of
      ‘Darwinism’ with ‘evolution.’ Revolutionary effects of the new point
      of view. Does away with conception of fixed species (Platonic ideas)
      that had previously dominated speculation. The genetic method
      adopted in all the organic sciences, including the newer social
      sciences. Problem of adjusting history to the discoveries of the
      past 50 years. Bearing of evolution on the theory of progress.
      Organic evolution and social evolution.”

    7 (J. H. R.) “The Deists and philosophers destroy the older
      theological anthropology and reassert the dignity of man; the growth
      of criticism and liberalism has made the analysis of social
      institutions somewhat less dangerous; the general growth of
      knowledge has reacted in a stimulating way upon the sciences of
      society; the great increase in the number, complexity and intensity
      of social problems has proved a strong incentive to social science;
      The Darwinian hypothesis has rendered preposterous any conception of
      a wholly static social system. However, the modern social sciences
      in our capitalistic order meet much the same resistance from the
      ‘vested interests’ that theological radicalism encountered in the
      Middle Ages, and social science has in no way approached the
      objectivity and progressiveness of present day natural science....
      Grave effects of vested rights in hampering experiments and
      readjustments.... Obstacles to readjustment presented by consecrated
      traditions.... Influence of modern commercialism in the inordinate
      development of organization and regimentation in our present
      educational system. Psychological disadvantages of our conventional
      examination system. As yet our education has not been brought into
      close relation with prevailing conditions of our ever increasing
      knowledge.... Excellent aims and small achievements of sociology in
      practical results. (_Because of absolute lack of any scientific
      base._ Author.) General nature of the problem of social reform:
      psychological problems involved in social reform movements: violent
      resistance of the group to that criticism of the existing
      institutions, which must precede any effective social reform....”

    8 (J. H. R.) “During the past two centuries the application of the
      scientific discoveries to daily life has revolutionized our methods
      of supplying our economic needs, our social and intellectual life,
      and the whole range of the relations of mankind. The impulse of
      invention, iron, coal, and steam essential to the development of
      machinery on a large scale; machinery has in turn begotten the
      modern factory with its vast organized labor, the modern city and
      finally, our well nigh perfect means of rapid human
      inter-communication. The tremendous increase in the production of
      wealth and the growing interdependence of nations has opened up a
      vast range of speculation in regard to the betterment of mankind to
      the abolition or reduction of poverty, ignorance, disease, and
      war.... Man advances from a tool-using to a machine-controlling
      animal. The rise of the factory system; the concentration and
      localization of industry; increased division of labor and
      specialization of industrial processes. The great increase in the
      volume of capital and in the extent of investments; the separation
      of capital and labor and the growth of impersonal economic
      relationship. Problems of capital and labor; unemployment and the
      labor of women and children; labor organizations. Increased
      productivity and the expansion of commerce. Industrial processes
      become dynamic and everchanging—a complete reversal of the old
      stability, repetition and isolation.”

    9 It may be contended by some that animals have been making “progress”
      or some may say that animals also “bind-time.” This use of words
      would again become mere verbalism, a mere talking about words—mere
      speculation having nothing to do with _facts_ or with correct
      thinking, in which there is no intermixing of dimensions. The
      peculiar faculty belonging exclusively to humans which I designate
      as “time-binding” I have clearly defined as an _exponential
      function_ of _time_ in the following chapter. If people are pleased
      to talk about the “progress” of animals, they can hardly fail to see
      clearly that it differs both in function and in type or dimension
      from what is rightly meant by human progress; human time-binding
      capacity lies in an entirely different dimension from that of
      animals. So, if any persons wish to talk of animal “progress” or
      animal “time-binding,” they should invent a suitable word for it to
      save them from the blunder of confusing types or mixing dimensions.

      This mathematical discrimination between classes, types, dimensions
      is of the utmost importance in the natural sciences, because of the
      transmutation of species. To adjust the Darwin theory to
      dimensionality is a somewhat more difficult problem; it involves the
      concept of the “continuum”; but with the modern theory of de Vries,
      these things are self evident. If animals really progress, which is
      doubtful because they are an older form of life than humans and they
      have not shown any noticeable progress to the knowledge of man,
      their progress is so small in comparison with man’s that it may be
      said, in mathematical terms, to be _negligible_ as an infinitesimal
      of higher order.

   10 It must be remembered here that our world is, first of all, a
      dynamic conglomeration of matter and energy, which to-day, as well
      as in the first period of primitive organic life, took and takes
      different known and unknown forms. One of these forms of energy is
      the chemical energy, with its tendency to combinations and
      exchanges. Different elements act in different ways. The history of
      the earth and its life is simply the history of different chemical
      periods, with different transformations of energy. A strange fact is
      to be noticed about nitrogen. Nitrogen chemically has an exceptional
      inertness toward most other substances, but once it is a component
      part of a substance, almost all of these combinations are a very
      powerful source of energy, and all of them have a very strong effect
      upon organic life. Nitric acid acts through oxidation, the
      substances are burned up by the oxygen given off from the acid.
      Nitric acid occurs in nature, in a combination called nitrates. From
      the soil the nitrates pass into the plant. Nitrite of amyl acts upon
      our organs in a most violent and spasmodic way. Nitrous oxide is the
      so-called laughing gas.

      Alkaloids are compounds of a vegetable origin, generally of complex
      composition and capable of producing marked effects upon animals.
      They all contain nitrogen. Explosives which are a chemical means of
      storing tremendous amounts of energy, are mostly of some nitrogenous
      compound. Albumen is an organic compound of great importance in
      life, which, besides being the characteristic ingredient in the
      white of an egg, abounds in the serum of the blood and forms an
      important part of the muscles and brain. Albuminoids play the most
      vital rôle in plant life and are an extensive class of organic
      bodies found in plants and animals, as they are found to form the
      chief constituents of blood, nerves. All albuminoids found in
      animals are produced by the processes fulfilled in plants. Their
      exact constitution is not known; analysis shows that they contain
      approximately: Carbon 50-55%, Hydrogen 6.9-7.5%, Nitrogen 15-19%,
      Oxygen 20-24%, Sulphur 0.3-2.0%. Venous blood contains in 100
      volumes: Nitrogen, 13; Carbonic Acid, 71.6; Oxygen, 15.3. Arterial
      blood: Nitrogen, 14.5; Carbonic Acid, 62.3; Oxygen, 23.2.

      “Nitrogenous compounds in general, are extremely prone to
      decomposition; their decomposition often involving a sudden and
      great evolution of force. We see that substances classed as ferments
      ... are all nitrogenous ... and we see that even in organisms and
      parts of organisms where the activities are least, such changes as
      do take place are initiated by a substance containing nitrogen....
      We see that organic matter is so constituted that small incidental
      actions are capable of initiating great reaction and liberating
      large quantities of power.... The seed of a plant contains
      nitrogenous substances in a far higher ratio than the rest of the
      plant; and the seed differs from the rest of the plant in its
      ability to initiate ... extensive vital changes—the changes
      constituting germination. Similarly in the bodies of animals ... in
      every living vegetal cell there is a certain part that contains
      nitrogen. This part initiates these changes which constitute the
      development of the cell.... It is a curious and significant fact
      that, in technology, we not only utilize the same principle of
      initiating extensive changes among comparatively stable compounds by
      the help of compounds much less stable, but we employ for the
      purpose compounds of the same general class. Our modern method of
      firing a gun is to place in close proximity with the gunpowder which
      we choose to decompose or explode, a small portion of fulminating
      powder, which is decomposed or exploded with extreme facility, and
      which on decomposing, communicates the consequent molecular
      disturbances to the less easily decomposed gunpowder. When we ask
      what this fulminating powder is composed of, we find that it is a
      nitrogenous salt.”—Spencer.

   11 Of course, the geometric progression does not represent _precisely_
      the law of human progression; it is here employed because it is
      familiar and serves, better perhaps than any other simple
      mathematical means, to show _roughly_ how human progress goes on.
      The essential elements of a progression are the first term _P_ and
      the ratio _R_ and the number of the terms _T_; in the human
      progression _PR__1__, PR__2__, PR__3__, ... PR__T__, P_ is the
      starting status of the first generation, _R_ is the peculiar
      capacity of humans to bind time and is a _free gift_ and _law_ of
      _nature_, which it would be folly not to recognize and accept as
      such, _T_ is time, or number of generations. It is obvious that the
      magnitude, _PR__T_, is entirely dependent on the magnitudes of _PR_,
      and _T_. The existence of _R_ and _T_ is independent of humans, _R_
      being a law of nature, _T_ a gift of nature, _P_ the starting status
      of the initial generation. With _P = 0_ or _R = 0_ THERE WOULD BE NO
      PROGRESS or progression at all; each term in the case of human
      progression is mainly dependent upon the time and the work done by
      the dead. The existence of _R_ and _T_ is entirely beyond human
      control. Humans can control only the MAGNITUDE of those elements by
      education. Here comes the tremendous responsibility of education. It
      is not necessary to use much imagination to see that if humanity had
      always been rightly educated, science would have long ago discovered
      the natural forces and laws essential to human welfare, and human
      misery would to-day be relatively small.

   12 See Appendix III.





***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MANHOOD OF HUMANITY.***



CREDITS


May 13, 2008

            Project Gutenberg TEI edition 1
            Produced by Greg Weeks, La Monte H.P. Yarrol, David King, and
            the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
            <http://www.pgdp.net/>. Page-images available at
            <http://www.pgdp.net/projects/projectID44bc319688a10/>



A WORD FROM PROJECT GUTENBERG


This file should be named 25457-0.txt or 25457-0.zip.

This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:


    http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/2/5/4/5/25457/


Updated editions will replace the previous one — the old editions will be
renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no one
owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation (and
you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without permission
and without paying copyright royalties. Special rules, set forth in the
General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to copying and
distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the Project
Gutenberg™ concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered
trademark, and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you
receive specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of
this eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given away
— you may do practically _anything_ with public domain eBooks.
Redistribution is subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE


_Please read this before you distribute or use this work._

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work (or
any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project Gutenberg”),
you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project Gutenberg™
License (available with this file or online at
http://www.gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.


General Terms of Use & Redistributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works


1.A.


By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™ electronic work,
you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to and accept all the
terms of this license and intellectual property (trademark/copyright)
agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all the terms of this
agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy all copies of
Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your possession. If you paid a fee
for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project Gutenberg™ electronic work
and you do not agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement, you may
obtain a refund from the person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set
forth in paragraph 1.E.8.


1.B.


“Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be used on or
associated in any way with an electronic work by people who agree to be
bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few things that you can
do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works even without complying
with the full terms of this agreement. See paragraph 1.C below. There are
a lot of things you can do with Project Gutenberg™ electronic works if you
follow the terms of this agreement and help preserve free future access to
Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.


1.C.


The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the Foundation” or
PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States. If an individual
work is in the public domain in the United States and you are located in
the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from copying,
distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative works based on
the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of
course, we hope that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of
promoting free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project
Gutenberg™ works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for
keeping the Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can
easily comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when you
share it without charge with others.


1.D.


The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern what you
can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are in a constant
state of change. If you are outside the United States, check the laws of
your country in addition to the terms of this agreement before
downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or creating
derivative works based on this work or any other Project Gutenberg™ work.
The Foundation makes no representations concerning the copyright status of
any work in any country outside the United States.


1.E.


Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:


1.E.1.


The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate access
to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear prominently whenever
any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work on which the phrase
“Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the phrase “Project Gutenberg”
is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed, copied or
distributed:


    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
    almost no restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away
    or re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License
    included with this eBook or online at http://www.gutenberg.org


1.E.2.


If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is derived from the
public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is posted with
permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied and
distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees or
charges. If you are redistributing or providing access to a work with the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you
must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7
or obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.


1.E.3.


If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted with the
permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution must comply
with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional terms imposed
by the copyright holder. Additional terms will be linked to the Project
Gutenberg™ License for all works posted with the permission of the
copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.


1.E.4.


Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™ License
terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this work or any
other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.


1.E.5.


Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this electronic
work, or any part of this electronic work, without prominently displaying
the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with active links or immediate
access to the full terms of the Project Gutenberg™ License.


1.E.6.


You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary, compressed,
marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any word
processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format other than
“Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official version posted
on the official Project Gutenberg™ web site (http://www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other form.
Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg™ License as
specified in paragraph 1.E.1.


1.E.7.


Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying, performing,
copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works unless you comply
with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.


1.E.8.


You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing access to or
distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works provided that

    - You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
      the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method you
      already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed to
      the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has agreed to
      donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project Gutenberg
      Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid within 60
      days following each date on which you prepare (or are legally
      required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty payments
      should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project Gutenberg
      Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in Section 4,
      “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
      Archive Foundation.”

      You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
      you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
      does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™ License.
      You must require such a user to return or destroy all copies of the
      works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue all use of and
      all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™ works.

      You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
      any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
      electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
      receipt of the work.

      You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
      distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.


1.E.9.


If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg™ electronic
work or group of works on different terms than are set forth in this
agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from both the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael Hart, the owner of the
Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in
Section 3 below.


1.F.


1.F.1.


Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable effort to
identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread public domain
works in creating the Project Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these
efforts, Project Gutenberg™ electronic works, and the medium on which they
may be stored, may contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to,
incomplete, inaccurate or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright
or other intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk
or other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot
be read by your equipment.


1.F.2.


LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES — Except for the “Right of
Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project Gutenberg™
trademark, and any other party distributing a Project Gutenberg™
electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all liability to you for
damages, costs and expenses, including legal fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE
NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH
OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3. YOU AGREE THAT THE
FOUNDATION, THE TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT
WILL NOT BE LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL,
PUNITIVE OR INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY
OF SUCH DAMAGE.


1.F.3.


LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND — If you discover a defect in this
electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can receive a refund
of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a written explanation to
the person you received the work from. If you received the work on a
physical medium, you must return the medium with your written explanation.
The person or entity that provided you with the defective work may elect
to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a refund. If you received the
work electronically, the person or entity providing it to you may choose
to give you a second opportunity to receive the work electronically in
lieu of a refund. If the second copy is also defective, you may demand a
refund in writing without further opportunities to fix the problem.


1.F.4.


Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth in
paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ’AS-IS,’ WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.


1.F.5.


Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied warranties or the
exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages. If any disclaimer or
limitation set forth in this agreement violates the law of the state
applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be interpreted to make
the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by the applicable state
law. The invalidity or unenforceability of any provision of this agreement
shall not void the remaining provisions.


1.F.6.


INDEMNITY — You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the trademark
owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone providing copies of
Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in accordance with this agreement, and
any volunteers associated with the production, promotion and distribution
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs
and expenses, including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from
any of the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of
this or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any Defect
you cause.


Section  2.


           Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™


Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of electronic
works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers including
obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It exists because of the
efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from people in all walks
of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the assistance
they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s goals and ensuring
that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will remain freely available for
generations to come. In 2001, the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation was created to provide a secure and permanent future for
Project Gutenberg™ and future generations. To learn more about the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations
can help, see Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation web page at
http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.


   Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation


The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the state of
Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal Revenue Service.
The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification number is 64-6221541.
Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/pglaf. Contributions to the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full
extent permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr.
S. Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations. Its business office is located at 809 North
1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org. Email contact links and up to date contact information
can be found at the Foundation’s web site and official page at
http://www.pglaf.org

For additional contact information:


    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.


  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
                                Foundation


Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without wide spread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of increasing the
number of public domain and licensed works that can be freely distributed
in machine readable form accessible by the widest array of equipment
including outdated equipment. Many small donations ($1 to $5,000) are
particularly important to maintaining tax exempt status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United States.
Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a considerable
effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up with these
requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations where we have not
received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND DONATIONS or
determine the status of compliance for any particular state visit
http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we have
not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition against
accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who approach us
with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make any
statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from outside the
United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation methods
and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other ways including
checks, online payments and credit card donations. To donate, please
visit: http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate


Section 5.


      General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works.


Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg™
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared with
anyone. For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project Gutenberg™
eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed editions,
all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S. unless a copyright
notice is included. Thus, we do not necessarily keep eBooks in compliance
with any particular paper edition.

Each eBook is in a subdirectory of the same number as the eBook’s eBook
number, often in several formats including plain vanilla ASCII, compressed
(zipped), HTML and others.

Corrected _editions_ of our eBooks replace the old file and take over the
old filename and etext number. The replaced older file is renamed.
_Versions_ based on separate sources are treated as new eBooks receiving
new filenames and etext numbers.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:


    http://www.gutenberg.org


This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg™, including how
to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation,
how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to subscribe to our email
newsletter to hear about new eBooks.






***FINIS***

