CHAPTER I


THE PRINCIPLE OF GENUINE SCULPTURE


Sculpture, to put the matter in general terms, conceives the astounding
project of making Spirit imagine itself in an exclusively material
medium, and so shape this external medium that it is presented to
itself in such and recognizes the presentment to be the objective form
adequate to its ideal substance.

In this respect our inquiry will take the following directions.

_First_, we have the question what kind of _spiritual life_ is capable
of being reproduced in this material of a form entirely sensuous and
spatial.

_Secondly_, we have to ask in what manner the _forms_ of the spatial
condition have to be modified in order to permit us a recognition of
the spiritual in the bodily shape of beauty.

What we have generally to consider here is the unity between the _ordo
rerum extensarum_ and that of the _ordo rerum idearum_, the primal fair
union of soul and body, in so far as spiritual ideality is expressed by
sculpture exclusively in its bodily existence.

This union, _thirdly_, corresponds to what we have already found to be
the Ideal of the classical type of art; and for this reason the plastic
forms of sculpture are nothing less than the very art itself of the
classical Ideal.



1. THE ESSENTIAL CONTENT OF SCULPTURE


The elementary medium, in which sculpture realizes its creations is,
as we have seen, the elementary, still universal material subject
to spatial condition, in which no further particularization can
be utilized for an artistic purpose than the universal spatial
dimensions, and the more detailed[132] spatial forms which are
compatible with these dimensions under their most beautiful
configuration. Now what most exceptionally corresponds as content to
this more abstract aspect of the sensuous material is the _objectivity_
of Spirit which reposes on its own resources, in so far, that is, as
Spirit has neither differentiated itself in contradistinction to its
universal substance, nor to its determinate existence in its bodily
presence, and consequently is not as yet withdrawn as independent
self-subsistency into its own subjective world. There are two points we
would draw attention to here.

(_a_) Spirit as Spirit[133] is no doubt always subjectivity, that is
ideal knowledge of the Self, the Ego. This Ego can, however, separate
itself from everything that constitutes, whether in knowledge,
volition, conception, feeling, action, or achievement, the _universal_
and eternal content of Spirit, and can concentrate its hold on that
aspect of _individual_ experience which is unique and contingent. It
is then _subjectivity as such_ which we have before us, which has
let go the truly objective content of Spirit, and is self-related
formally, and without content. In the case of self-satisfaction, for
example, I can no doubt view myself from a certain standpoint in an
entirely objective way and remain satisfied with myself on account of
moral action. I do, however, as thus self-satisfied, already withdraw
myself from the content of such action. I separate myself as a distinct
person, as this particular Ego, from the universality of Spirit, in
order to compare myself with it. The sense of unison of myself with
myself through this comparison produces this self-satisfaction, in
which this determinate Ego, as this core of unity, rejoices in itself.
No doubt this personal Ego is involved in all that a man knows, wills,
or carries out; but it makes an immense difference whether, in-dealing
with knowledge and action, the matter of concern is the man's own
unique Ego, or that in which the essential content of consciousness
consists; whether, in other words, a man sinks himself and his
self-identity in this content, or lives in the unbroken seclusion of
his subjective personality.

(_α_) In this exaltation over what is substantive[134] the subjective
life passes into the abstract and disrupt world of personal
inclination, the caprice and contingency of emotions and impulses,
owing to which, in the changes to which it is subject in particular
acts and undertakings, it grows dependent upon particular circumstances
as they happen to arise, and is unable generally to dispense with this
association with something else. In such a condition of dependence the
individual life is nothing but _finite_ subjectivity as contrasted
with a real spirituality. And if this personal state essentially
persists through the volition and knowledge which characterizes it in
this contradiction of its conscious life, it can only further become
involved--to put on one side the mere emptiness of its imaginings and
self-conceits--in the deformity of character and its evil passions, in
crime and moral offence, in malice, cruelty, obstinacy, envy, pride,
insolence, and every other kind of the reverse side of human nature and
its insubstantial finiteness.

(_β_) This province of the subjective life must be excluded in its
entirety and without hesitation from the content of sculpture. The art
is exclusively co-extensive with the objectivity of Spirit. And by
the term objectivity we mean in this connection what is substantive,
genuine, not transitory, the essential nature of Spirit, apart from
its involvement in that which is accidental and evanescent, for which
the individual person is responsible simply in his unmediated state of
self-relation.

(_γ_) Spirit, however, even in its truly objective sense, can
only realize itself as Spirit when associated with _explicit
self-identity._ Spirit is only Spirit as self-consciousness[135]. The
position, however, of this aspect of individual consciousness in the
spiritual content of sculpture is of such a character that it is not
independently expressed, but displays itself as throughout interfused
with this substantive content, and not formally reflected back upon
itself apart from it. We may consequently affirm that though such a
mode of objectivity possesses a type of self-subsistency, yet it is a
self-knowledge and volition which is not released from the content it
fulfils, but forms an inseparable unity with it.

The presentment of Spirit in this complete and independent seclusion
of what is essentially substantive and true, this unperturbed and
unparticularized being of Spirit, is that which we name divinity in
its contrast to finitude, which is the process of disruption into
contingent existence, a world that is broken into complex forms and
varied movement. From this point of view the function of sculpture is
to present the Divine simply in its infinite repose and sublimity,
timeless, destitute of motion, entirely without subjective personality
in the strict sense and the conflict of action or situation. And
in proceeding to the more detailed definition of our humanity in
shape and character, it must, nevertheless, exclusively rivet its
attention on what is unalterable and permanent, in other words what
is truly substantive in its characterization, and merely select such
aspects for its content, passing over what it finds there of an
accidental or evanescent nature; and it must do so for the reason
that the objectivity which it presents does not rightly include
a differentiation of this fluctuating and fleeting kind, and one
which comes into being by virtue of a subjective consciousness whose
conception of itself is that of pure insulation. In a biography, for
instance, which gives an account of the motley incidents, events, and
exploits of some individual, we find as a rule the course of varied
developments and fortuities finally closed by a character sketch which
summarizes the entire breadth of detail in a few general qualities
such as goodness, honest dealing, courage, exceptional intelligence,
and so forth. Characteristics such as these we may term the permanent
features of a personality; the remaining peculiarities it possesses
are merely accidental features in the impersonation. It is just this
stable aspect of life which it is the part of sculpture to present
as the unique being and determinate substance of individuality. Yet
we must not suppose that it creates allegories out of such general
qualities. It rather builds up true individuals, which it conceives and
informs as essentially complete and enclosed within their objective
spiritual presence, in their self-subsistent repose, delivered thereby
from all antagonism as against external objects. In the presentment
of an individuality of this character by sculpture what is truly
substantive is throughout the essential foundation, and neither purely
subjective self-knowledge and emotion, nor a superficial and mutable
singularity[136] must be permitted in any way to be predominant, but
what is eternal in the godlike and our humanity should, divested of all
the caprice and contingency of the particular self[137], be set before
our eyes in its unimpaired clarity.

(_b_) The further point we would draw attention to consists in this,
that the content of sculpture, for the reason that its material
requires an external presentment in the complete form of the three
spatial dimensions, is also unable to be a _spiritual content_ as such,
that is, the ideality self-enclosed within and absorbed into itself,
but rather in the sense that it is only _explicit_ in its opposed
factor, in other words, the _bodily form._ The negation of what is
external is already implied in the ideal subjective consciousness,
and can therefore have no place here, where what is divine and human
is accepted as content with exclusive reference to its objective
characteristics. And it is only this self-absorbed objective aspect,
which does not comprise ideal subjectivity in the strict sense[138],
that gives free play to an externality conditioned in all its three
dimensions, and is capable of being associated with such a spatial
totality. For these reasons it is incumbent on sculpture that it only
accept out of the objective content of Spirit that which admits of the
fullest expression in external and bodily shape; if it do otherwise
it simply selects a content which its specific material is unable to
assimilate or to unite with an adequate mode of exposition.



2. THE BEAUTIFUL FORM OF SCULPTURE


We must now inquire into the nature of the bodily _forms_ which are
adapted to give an impression of a content of this kind.

Just as in classical architecture the dwelling-house is the anatomical
skeleton framework which art has to inform with its accretions, in
like manner sculpture, on its part, discovers the _human form_ as
the fundamental type for its figures. Whereas, however, the house is
already a piece of human workmanship, though not as yet elaborated
artistically, the structure of the human form, on the contrary, appears
as a product of Nature unaffected by man. The fundamental type of
sculpture is consequently _given_ to it, that is, does not hail from
human inventiveness. The expression, however, that the human form is a
part of Nature is a very indefinite one, which we must submit to closer
analysis.

In Nature it is the Idea, which is given there, as we have already
found when discussing natural beauty, its primary and immediate mode of
existence, receiving in animal life and its complete organic structure
the _natural_ existence adequate to its notion. The organization of
the animal frame is therefore a birth of the notion in its essential
totality, which exists in this corporeal mode of being as soul, yet, as
the principle of merely animal life, modifies the animal frame in the
most varied classifications, albeit too every specific type continues
to be subject to the general notion[139]. The fact that notion and
bodily form, or more accurately, soul and body, correspond to one
another--to fully understand this is the problem of natural philosophy.
We should have to demonstrate that the different systems of the animal
frame in their ideal[140] structure and conformation no less than
their association, and the more definite organs in which the bodily
existence is differentiated are in general accord with the phasal steps
of the notion's movement, so that it becomes clear, to what extent we
have here presented to us as real only the particular aspects of the
soul-life which are necessary. To develop this exposition, however,
does not lie within the scope of the present inquiry.

The human form is not, however, as the animal form, merely the
corporeal framework of the soul, but of _Spirit._ In other words,
spirit and soul are essentially to be distinguished. For the soul
is merely this ideal and simple unity of self-subsistence attaching
to the body in its _corporeal_ aspect[141], whereas Spirit is the
independent selfness of conscious and _self-conscious_ life together
with all the emotions, ideas, and aims of such a conscious existence.
In contemplating the immense difference which separates merely animal
life from spiritual consciousness, it may appear strange that the
bodily frame attaching to the _latter_, the human body, is nevertheless
so clearly homogeneous with that of animal life. It will tend, however,
to decrease such an astonishment if we recall to mind the definition,
which Spirit itself has authorized us to make in accordance with its
own notion, that it is a mode of life and essentially therefore itself
also a _living soul_ and _natural existence._ As such living soul the
life of conscious spirit, by virtue of the same notion that is inherent
in the animal soul, is entitled to accept a body, which fundamentally
in its general lines runs parallel to the organic structure of animal
life. However superior to mere animal life Spirit may be it is evolved
through[142] a corporeal frame whose visible appearance receives an
identical articulation and principle of life with that which the
notion of animal life in general underlies. Inasmuch as, however, and
furthermore Spirit is not merely the _Idea_ as _determinate existence_,
that is, the Idea as Nature and animal life, but the Idea which secures
independence in its own free medium of ideality as Idea, the spiritual
principle elaborates for itself its own specific mode of objectivity
over and beyond that of animal life, simply, in other words, science,
the reality of which is exclusively that of thought itself. Apart from
thought, however, and its philosophical and systematized activity,
Spirit is involved within an abounding life of feeling, inclination,
idea, imagination, and so forth, which is fixed in a more direct or
less immediate association with its vital being[143] and bodily
frame, and consequently possesses a reality in the human body. In this
reality, which is part of its own substance, Spirit asserts itself
also as a principle of life, shines into it, transpierces it, and is
made manifest to others by means of it. Consequently, in so far as the
human body remains no purely natural existence, but has asserted itself
also in its configuration and structure as the natural and sensuous
existence of Spirit, it is, nevertheless, regarded as the expression of
an ideality more exalted than that compatible with the purely animal
body to be distinguished from it, despite the fact that the human body
in its broad lines is in harmony with it. For this reason, however,
that Spirit is itself soul and life, that is, an animal body, it is and
can only be modifications, which the indwelling Spirit of one living
body attaches to this corporeal form. As a manifestation of Spirit
consequently the human shape is distinct from the animal by virtue of
these modifications, albeit the distinctions of the human organism
from the animal are as much the result of the unconscious creation
of spiritual activities, as the soul of the animal kingdom is the
informing though unconscious activity of the body that belongs to it.

We have thus reached the precise point of our present departure. In
other words, the human body is present to the artist as Spirit's
expression. What is more, he discovers it as such not merely in a
general way, but also in particular characteristics it is presupposed
to be the type which, in its form, its specific traits, its position
and general habit, reflects the ideality of Spirit.

We shall find it a difficult matter to fix in clear terms of thought
the precise nature of the association between spirit and body in
their relation respectively to feeling, passion, and other spiritual
conditions. It has, no doubt, been attempted to develop the same
scientifically both from the _pathognomical_[144] point of view and
the _physiognomical._ Such attempts have hitherto not met with much
success. For ourselves the science of physiognomy can only be of
importance in so far as that of pathognomy is exclusively concerned
with the mode under which definite feelings and passions are physically
located in particular organs. It has been stated, for example, that
the seat of anger is in the gall, of courage in the blood. Such
statements, we may remark incidentally, are erroneous in their manner
of expression. For even assuming the activity of particular organs
corresponds to specific passions, we cannot say that anger, for
instance, has its local position in the gall bladder, but, in so far
as anger is corporeally related, the gall is pre-eminently that in
which its active appearance asserts itself. In our present inquiry
this pathognomical aspect does not, as already stated, concern us,
because sculpture has merely to deal with that which passes over from
the ideal side of Spirit into the external aspect of _form_ permitting
Spirit thus to be visible in the physical environment. The sympathetic
interaction between the internal organism and the feeling soul is no
object of sculpture; indeed, we may add, it is unable to accept much
which appears on the external surface itself, such as the tremble of
the hand and the entire body in an outburst of anger, the movement of
the lips, and others of like nature.

With regard to physiognomical science I will limit myself to this
observation. If the work of sculpture, which has as its fundamental
basis the human form, has to exhibit the way in which the bodily
presence as such manifests not only the divine and human aspect of
Spirit in its broadest and most substantive features, but also the
particular character of a definite individuality in this divine
presence, we are no doubt compelled to discuss what parts, traits, and
conformations of the body are fully accordant with any specific mode of
ideality. We are indeed forced upon such an inquiry by the sculpture
of antiquity, which we must as a matter of fact admit includes the
expression of individual god-like characters with that of divinity
generally. Such an admission does not, however, amount to an assertion
that the association of spiritual expression with bodily form is
merely a matter of accident and caprice rather than the creation of a
figure of self-subsistent actuality. In this connection every organ
must, in a general way, be looked at from two points of view, as a
mode of expression that possesses its physical side no less than its
spiritual. We need hardly caution our readers that the method of Gall
in conducting such an inquiry is inadmissible. This writer reduces
Spirit to what is little better than a Calvary.

(_a_) The advance of sculpture, in respect to the content which its
function is to declare, is limited to the investigation how far the
substantive and at the same time individual condition of spiritual life
is made vital in bodily form, receiving therein determinate existence
and form. In other words, through the content adequate to genuine
sculpture the contingent _individualization of the external appearance_
is from one point of view excluded, and this applies both to the
spiritual and physical aspects of the presentment. Only that which
persists, and is universal and according to rule in the human form is
the object of a work of sculpture. And this is so albeit we have the
additional necessity to individualize the universal in such a way that
not only the abstract law but an individual form, which is brought into
the closest fusion with it, is placed before our eyes.

(_b_) From another point of view it is necessary that sculpture,
as we have seen, be kept unaffected by purely contingent _personal
life_[145], and all expression of such in the independent ideal mode
under which it asserts itself. For this reason an artist, in dealing
with physiognomical characteristics, is not entitled to move in the
direction of individual manner[146]. For a facial manner is simply
just this appearance on the surface of an individual idiosyncrasy and
some particular aspect of emotion, idea, and volition. A man by his
chance expressions of countenance expresses the feelings he has as
some particular person, whether it be in his exclusive relation to
his own life, or in his self-relation to exterior objects, or other
persons. One sees, for example, on the street, more particularly in
little towns, in many, or rather the majority of men, that they are
exclusively preoccupied, in their demeanour and expression of face,
with themselves, their dress and attire, in general terms, that
is, their purely personal particularity, or, at least, matters of
momentary importance, and any unforeseen or accidental features thus
presented. Countenances which express pride, envy, self-satisfaction,
depreciation, and so forth, are of this nature. Moreover, the feeling
and contrast of substantive being with my personal idiosyncrasy may be
responsible for such alterations of expression. Humility, defiance,
threats, fear, are expressed in this way. In a felt contrast of
this kind we find already a separation between the individual in
the subjective sense and the universal asserted. Reflection on what
is truly substantive continually leans in the direction of merely
personal considerations, so that it is the individual rather than the
substantive character which is predominant in the content. The form,
however, which remains severely true to the principle of sculpture
ought neither to express this severation nor the predominance of the
personal aspect above adverted to.

In addition to definite expressions of countenance[147] physiognomy
presents us with much that merely passes momentarily across the
features and indicates the human mood. A sudden smile, an instantaneous
outburst of anger, a quickly repressed expression of scorn, are a
few of many examples. In particular, the mouth and eyes possess most
mobility and resource in seizing and making apparent every shifting
mood of soul-life. Changes of this character, which are compatible
with the art of painting, the sculptor must exclude. Sculpture
must rather concentrate its attention on the permanent traits of
spiritual expression, and retain and disclose such in the posture and
configuration of the body no less than in the face.

(_c_) The task of sculpture, then, essentially consists in this, that
it implants that which is of substantive spiritual import in that form
of individuality which is not yet essentially particularized in the
narrow subjective sense within the figure of a man, and contributes to
the same such a harmony, that it is only that which is universal and
permanent in the _bodily shapes_ correspondent with the life of Spirit
which is made to appear therein, while that which is accidental or
mutable is brushed aside, albeit a certain mode of individuality is not
absent from its forms.

An accord of this complete nature between what is ideal and what
is external, the goal of sculpture, in short, offers us a point of
transition to the _third_ point which we have still to discuss.


3. SCULPTURE AS THE ART OF THE CLASSICAL IDEAL

The conclusion that most immediately follows upon the above
observations is this, that sculpture in a way, and to an extent
unrivalled by any other art, remains constant to the Ideal[148]. In
other words, from one point of view it is free of the symbolical
type both by virtue of the translucency of a content, which clearly
grasps itself as Spirit, and on account of the fact that it is able
to disclose such a content with absolute mastery. And so, too, from
another it refuses as yet to enter into the subjective aspect of the
personal life, to which the external form is indifferent. Consequently
it forms the focus of classical art. No doubt both the symbolical and
romantic types of architecture and painting were shown to be adapted
to classical ideality; but the Ideal, in its genuine sphere, is not
the supreme principle of these types of art, inasmuch as they do not,
as is the case with sculpture, take for their object self-subsistent
individuality, character, that is, throughout objective, in other
words, the beauty that is both free and inevitable[149]. The
configuration of sculpture must, however, entirely proceed from the
pure spiritual energy of an imagination and thought that denudes its
content of all the haphazard features of personal life and bodily
presence; it must have no leanings for idiosyncrasies, or any place
for the mere emotion, desire, and variety of accidental impulse and
pleasantry[150]. What the artist has at his disposal for his most
elevated creations is simply, as we have seen, the bodily presentment
of Spirit in what is exclusively the general configuration of the
organic structure of the human form. His invention is therefore
restricted to promoting on the broadest lines the harmony between
what is ideal and what is external, and partly to making, in however
an inobtrusive way, the individuality of the presentment accommodate
itself to and interfuse with the truly substantive character of his
design[151]. Sculpture must give form, just as the gods create in
their own sphere according to eternal ideas, within what is in other
respects the world of reality, but exclude as rejected residue all
licence and mere selfness from its creations. Theologians make a
distinction between the acts of God and all that man in his folly and
capriciousness accomplishes. The plastic Ideal is, however, exalted
above such questions. It stands at the very centre of this blessedness
and free necessity for which neither the abstraction of the universal
nor the caprice of the particular are valid or significant.

This insight into the consummate plastic union of the divine and human
was pre-eminently native to Greece. We fail to grasp Greece at her
heart and centre in her poets and orators, historians and philosophers,
unless, as the key to our problem, we are already possessed of an
insight into the Ideal of sculpture, and can contemplate from the
standpoint of plastic art both the figures of her epic and dramatic
heroes and her actual statesmen and philosophers. For characters in
her practical life, no less than poets and thinkers, possessed also in
the palmy days of Greece, this plastic, universal, and yet individual
character, stamped with one mint, whether we look at its external or
more personal features. They stand up big and free, a self-subsistent
growth, on the basis of their essentially substantive individuality; a
growth of their own making, built up into that which they ultimately
became and intended to be. In particular the period of Pericles was
rich in such characters. Pericles himself was one of them. We may add
Pheidias, Plato, and pre-eminently Sophocles. So, too, Thucydides,
Xenophon, and Socrates, everyone with his own type, not one of them
impairing the quality of the rest; all are out-and-out artistic
natures, ideal artists in the work of self-creation, personalities of
one mould, works of art, which stand before us like figures of immortal
gods, in whom we can detect no taint of Time and mortality. We may find
a similar plastic subsistency in the artistic perfections of the bodily
frames of the victors at the Olympic games; nay, even in the apparition
of Phryne[152] herself, who, as the fairest woman, came from the sea
naked before all the world.




