CHAPTER II


MUSIC


INTRODUCTION

If we glance back at the course the evolution of the several arts has
taken, we shall find that it began with _architecture._ It was the art
which was least complete; for, as we discovered, it was, by reason of
the purely solid material, which it attached to itself as its sensuous
medium, and made use of according to the laws of gravity, incapable
of placing before us under an adequate mode of presentation what is
spiritual; it was consequently constrained to limit itself to the
task of preparing from the resources of the mind an artistic external
environment for Spirit in its living and actual existence.

_Sculpture_, on the contrary, and in the _second_ place, was able,
it is true, to accept the spiritual itself as its object. It was,
however, neither one in the sense of a particular character, nor as the
intimate personal life of soul, but rather as a free individuality,
which is as little separate from the substantive content as it is
from the corporeal appearance of Spirit; a presentment which only
displays itself as such individuality, in so far as the same enters
into it, in the degree that the same is actually required to import
an individual vitality into a content which is itself intrinsically
essential. Moreover, it only, as such ideal spiritualization, is
fused with the bodily configuration to the extent of revealing the
essentially inviolable union of Spirit with that natural embodiment
which is consonant therewith. This necessary identity in the art of
sculpture of Spirit's independent existence wholly with its _corporeal_
organization, rather than with the medium of its own _ideal essence_,
makes it incumbent upon the art still to retain solid matter as its
material, but to transform the configuration of the same, not, as was
the case with architecture, into a purely inorganic environment, but
rather into the classical beauty adequate to Spirit and its ideal
plastic realization.

And just as sculpture in this respect proved itself to be pre-eminently
fitted to give vitality to the content and mode of expression of the
_classical_ type of art in its products, while architecture, despite
all the service it rendered in the content which belonged to it, was
unable in its manner of presentation to pass beyond the fundamental
mode of a purely _symbolical_ significance, so, too, _thirdly_, with
the art of painting, we enter the province of the _romantic._ No doubt
we find still in painting that the _external_ form is the means by
virtue of which the ideal presence is revealed. In this case, however,
this ideality is actually the ideal and particular _subjectivity_,
is, in short, the soul-life returning upon itself from its corporeal
existence, is the individual passion and emotion of character and
heart, which are no longer exclusively delivered in the external
form, but mirror in the same the very ideal substance and activity
of Spirit in the domain of its own conditions, aims, and actions. On
account of this intimate ideality of its content the art of painting
is unable to rest satisfied with a material that, in one aspect of
it, is in its shape merely solid matter, and in another as such crude
form is merely tangible and unparticularized, but is forced to select
exclusively the show and _colour semblance_ of the same as its sensuous
means of expression. The colour, however, is only present in order to
make still apparent spatial forms and shapes as we find them in the
actuality of Life, even in the case where we see the art developed
into all the magic of colouring, in which the objective fact at the
same time already begins to vanish away, and the effect is produced
by what appears to be no longer anything material at all. However
much, therefore, painting is evolved in the direction of a more ideal
independence of a kind of appearance which is no longer attached to
shape as such, but is permitted to pass spontaneously into its own
proper element, that is, into the play of visibility and reflection,
into all the mysteries of chiaroscuro, yet this magic of colour is
still throughout of a spatial mode, it is an appearance growing out of
juxtaposition on a flat surface, and consequently a _consubsistent_
one.

1. If, however, this ideal essence, as is already the case under
the principle of painting, asserts itself in fact as _subjective
soul-life_, in that case the truly adequate medium cannot remain of a
type which possesses independent subsistency. And for this reason we
get a mode of expression and communication, in the sensuous material of
which we do not find objectivity disclosed as spatial configuration,
in order that it may have consistency therein. We require a material
which is without such stability in its relation to what is outside
it, and which vanishes again in the very moment of its origin and
presence. Now the art that finally annihilates not merely _one_ form
of spatial dimension, but the conditions of Space entirely, which is
completely withdrawn into the ideality of soul-life, both in its aspect
of conscious life and in that of its external expression, is our second
romantic art--_Music._ In this respect it constitutes the genuine
centre of that kind of presentment which accepts the inner personal
life as such, both for its content and form. It no doubt manifests
as art this inner life, but in this very objectification retains its
subjective character. In other words it does not, as plastic art,
suffer the expression in which it is self-enclosed to be independently
free or to attain an essentially tranquil self-subsistency, but cancels
the same as objectivity, and will not suffer externality to secure for
itself an inviolable presence[377] over against it.

In so far, however, as this annihilation of spatial objectivity,
regarded as a means of manifestation, is an abandonment of the same
which is itself already in anticipation asserted of the sensuous
spatiality of the plastic arts themselves[378], this principle of
negation must also in a similar way have its activity conditioned by
the _materiality_, which, up to this point, we have indicated as one
of tranquil independent self-subsistency, just as the art of painting
reduces in its province the spatial dimensions of sculpture to the
simple surface. This cancelling of the spatial form therefore merely
consists in this, that a specific sensuous material surrenders its
tranquil relation of juxtaposition, is, in other words, placed in
motion but is so essentially affected by that motion that every portion
of the coherent bodily substance not merely changes its position, but
also is reacted upon and reacts upon the previous condition[379]. The
result of this oscillating vibration is _tone_, the medium of music.

In tone music forsakes the element of external form and its sensuous
_visibility_, and requires for the apprehension of its results another
organ of sense, namely hearing, which, as also the sight, does not
belong to the senses of action but those y of contemplation; and is,
in fact, still more ideal than sight. For the unruffled, aesthetic
observation of works of art no doubt permits the objects to stand
out quietly in their freedom just as they are without any desire to
impair that effect in any way; but that which it apprehends is not
that which is itself essentially ideally composed[380], but rather
on the contrary, that which receives its consistency in its sensuous
existence. The ear, on the contrary, receives the result of that ideal
vibration of material substance[381], without placing itself in a
practical relation towards the objects, a result by means of which it
is no longer the material object in its repose, but the first example
of the more ideal activity of the soul itself which is apprehended. And
for the further reason that the negativity into which the oscillating
medium here enters is from one point of view an annihilation of the
spatial condition, which is itself removed by means of the reaction
of the body[382], the expression of this twofold negation, that is
tone, is a mode of externality which, in virtue of its very mode of
existence, is in its very origination self-destructive, and there and
then itself fundamentally disappears. And it is by virtue of this
twofold negation of externality, in which the root-principle of tone
consists, that the same corresponds to the ideal personal life; this
resonance which, in its essential explicitness[383], is something more
ideal than the subsistent corporeality in its independent reality, also
discloses this more ideal existence[384], and thereby offers a mode of
expression suited to the ideality of conscious life.

2. If we now, by a reverse process, inquire of what type this inner
life must be, if we are to prove it on its own account adapted to the
expression of sound and tones, we may recall the fact already observed
that by itself, that is, accepted as a real mode of objectivity, tone,
in contrast to the material of the plastic arts, is wholly abstract.
Stone and colour receive the forms of an extensive and varied world
of objects, and place them before us in their actual existence. Tones
are unable to do this. For musical expression therefore it is only
the inner life of soul that is wholly devoid of an object which is
appropriate, in other words, the abstract personal experience simply.
This is our entirely empty ego, the self without further content. The
fundamental task of music will therefore consist in giving a resonant
reflection, not to objectivity in its ordinary material sense, but to
the mode and modifications under which the most intimate self of the
soul, from the point of view of its subjective life and ideality, is
essentially moved.

3. We may say the same of the _effect_ of music. The paramount claim
of that, too, is the direct contact with the most intimate ideality of
conscious life. It is more than any other the art of the soul, and is
immediately addressed to that. The art of painting, no doubt, as we
have observed, is able to express in physiognomy and facial traits with
other things the inner life and its activity, the moods and passions
of the heart, the situations, conflicts, and fatalities of the soul;
what, however, we have before us in pictures are objective appearances,
from which the self of contemplation, in its most ideal self-identity,
is still held distinctly apart. However much we become absorbed in or
penetrate into the object, the situation, the character, the forms
of a statue or a picture, admire a work of art, lose ourselves in or
possess ourselves with it, the fact still remains that these works of
art are and remain objects of independent subsistency, in respect to
which it is quite impossible for us to escape the relation of external
observation disappears. In music, however, this distinction disappears.
Its content is that which is itself essentially a part of our own
personal[385] life, and its expression does not result at the same
time in an objective mode of spatial _persistency_, but discloses, in
virtue of the continuity and freedom of its flight as it appears and
vanishes[386], that it is a manifestation, which, instead of possessing
itself an independent consistency, is dependent for its support on the
ideality of conscious life, and only can exist for that inward realm.
Tone is therefore no doubt a mode of both expression and externality;
but it is an expression which inevitably disappears precisely at the
point of and in virtue of becoming externality. At the very moment
that our organ of sense receives the sound it is gone. The impression
that should be given is at once transferred to the tablets of memory.
The tones merely resound in the depths of the soul, which are thereby
seized upon in their ideal substance, and suffused with emotion. This
ideality of content and mode of expression in the sense that it is
devoid of all external object defines the purely _formal_ aspect of
music. It has no doubt a content, but it is not a content such as we
mean when referring either to the plastic arts or poetry. What it
lacks is just this configuration of an objective other-to-itself,
whether we mean by such actual external phenomena, or the objectivity
of intellectual ideas and images. We may indicate the course of our
further examination as follows:

In the _first_ place we have to define more accurately the _general_
character of music and its effect in contradistinction to the other
arts, not merely from the point of view of its material, but also from
that of its form, which the spiritual content accepts.

_Secondly_, we shall have to discuss the particular _distinctions_, in
which musical tones and their modes[387] are developed and mediated
partly in respect to their temporal duration, and partly in relation to
the qualitative distinctions of their actual resonance.

_Thirdly_, and in conclusion, music possesses a relation to
the content, which it expresses, either by being associated as
an accompaniment[388] with emotions, ideas, and considerations
independently expressed by word of mouth, or by its free expansion
within its own domain in unfettered independence.

In proposing now, however, after having thus in a general way specified
the principle and division of the subject-matter of Music, to enter
into a more detailed examination of its particular aspects, we are
inevitably confronted with a peculiar difficulty. In other words, for
the reason that the musical medium of tone and ideality, in which the
content moves as a process, is of so abstract and formal a character,
it is impossible for us to attempt such a closer survey without at
the same time broaching technical formulae and definitions such as
belong to the relations of tone-measure or distinctions that apply to
different instruments, scales, or chords. I must admit to no expert
knowledge in this sphere of musical science, and can only offer my
apologies for being unable to do more than limit myself to more general
points of view and a few isolated observations.



1. THE GENERAL CHARACTER OF MUSIC


The essential points of view which are of general importance in a
survey of music we may examine under the following heads of division:

_First_, we have to compare music on the one hand with the plastic
arts, and on the other with poetry.

_Secondly_, we shall by means of the above comparison be in a better
position to understand the way in which music is able to master and
disclose a given content.

_Thirdly_, and as a result of the latter inquiry, we may with more
accuracy explain the peculiar effect which the art of music, in
contradistinction to the other arts, exercises on the soul.

(_a_) With regard to the first point we should, if we are desirous of
setting it forth clearly in its specific individuality, compare music
with the other two arts from three distinct points of view.

(_α_) And, _first_, it may be observed that it stands in a relation of
affinity to _architecture_, although it is in strong contrast with it.

(_αα_) Our meaning is this. In the art of building the content which
should be made apparent in architectonic forms, does not, as is
the case in works of sculpture and painting, wholly enter into the
configuration, but remains distinct from it as an external environment;
so, too, in music, under its aspect of the most specifically romantic
art, the classical identity of ideality and its external existence
receives its resolution in a similar, if converse, way to that in
which architecture, as the symbolical type of presentation, was not
as yet wholly able to secure such a unity. For this ideality of
Spirit proceeds from what is purely the concentration of soul-life,
to ideas and images and the forms of such, as elaborated by the
imagination, whereas the art of music is throughout more occupied in
expressing merely the element of feeling and furthermore surrounds
the independently expressed ideas of the mind with the melodic chime
of emotions, just as architecture in its province places around the
statues of the god, no doubt in an unyielding way, the reasonable forms
of its columns, walls, and entablatures[389].

(_ββ_) In this way tone and its formative combinations is for
the first time a medium _created_ by art and entirely artistic
expression of a wholly different type from that we find in painting
and sculpture acting through the material of the human body and its
pose and physiognomy. In this respect, too, music may be more nearly
compared with architecture, which does not accept its forms from what
is actually presented, but as the creation of human invention, in
order to inform them, partly according to the laws of gravity, and in
part according to the rules of symmetry and harmonious coordination.
Music does the same thing in its own sphere, in so far as it from one
point of view follows the harmonious laws of tone which depend on
quantitative relations independently of the expression of emotion,
and in another aspect of it, in the recurrence of time and rhythm
no less than in the further development of the tones themselves, in
many respects is subject to the forms of regularity and symmetry.
Consequently we find operative in music not merely the profoundest
ideality and soul, but the most rigorous, rationality. It unites, in
fact, two extremes, which readily lend themselves to emphatic contrast
in their independent self-assertion. In this aspect of independence
music more particularly assumes an architectonic character when we find
in it a coherent temple of harmony of its own creatively composed and
co-ordinated according to the laws of music, and released from the
direct expression of soul-life[390].

(_γγ_) Despite all this similarity, however, the art of tones moves
to quite as large a degree in a sphere wholly opposed to that of
architecture. We find, no doubt, in both arts as a basis quantitative
or more accurately measure relations; the material, however, which
in each case is informed, agreeably to such relations, is totally
different. Architecture attaches itself to the heavy sensuous material
in its tranquil juxtaposition and external form in Space. Music, on
the contrary, lays hold of the tone-spirit[391] as it rings freely out
of the spatial material in the qualitative distinctions of musical
sound and in the flow of a movement subject to the condition of time.
For this reason the works of both arts belong to two entirely distinct
spheres of spiritual activity. The art of building places in an
enduring form its colossal constructions for external contemplation in
symbolical forms. The swiftly evanescent world of tones, on the other
hand, directly penetrates through the ears of man to the depths of his
soul, attuning the same in concordant emotional sympathy.

(_β_) And if we, in the second place, consider the closer relation
of music to the two other plastic arts[392], we shall find that the
similarity and distinction, which attaches to such a comparison, is in
some measure founded upon the truths already enunciated.

(_αα_) Of these music is furthest removed from sculpture; and this is
not merely so in respect to material and type of configuration, but
also in that of the completed coalescence of its ideal and external
aspects. There is in short a closer affinity between painting and
music. In part this is due to the predominant ideality of expression
exemplified in both; in part it is referable to treatment of material,
in which, as we have already seen, it is permissible for the art of
painting to approach the very boundary of music itself. Painting has,
however, for its aim in common with sculpture the representation of
an objective form in Space, and is restricted in its material to the
actual form of things already present outside the sphere of art. It is
unquestionably true that neither in the case of the painter nor the
sculptor do we accept a human countenance, a position of the human
body, the outlines of a mountain, the leafage of a tree precisely in
the forms they present to us as here or there in Nature; in both cases
we are bound to justify what we have before us under the conditions of
the art in question, to adapt it to a particular situation, no less
than to employ it as a means of expressing the inevitable artistic
result of the entire content of the work. We have, therefore, in both
cases on the one hand an independently recognized content, which has
to receive artistic individualization, and, on the other, we are
confronted with the forms of Nature as they are similarly presented
in isolation; and the artist is bound, if he be truly an artist, and
seek to unite these two sources of inspiration in his composition,
to discover in both the material and support[393] for his conception
and execution. In short, he will, acting in the first instance on the
security of such general principles[394], endeavour on the one hand to
fill out with more concrete detail the generality of his imaginative
idea, and on the other to idealize and spiritualize the human or any
other of the forms of Nature, which are submitted to serve him as
particular models. The musician, on the contrary, it is true, does
not abstract from all and every content, but finds the same in a
text, which he sets to music, or with absolute freedom gives musical
utterance to some definite mood in the form of a theme, which he
proceeds to elaborate. The actual region, however, of his compositions
remains the more formal ideality, in other words pure tones, and his
absorption of content becomes rather a _retreat_ into the free life of
his own soul, a voyage of discovery into that, and in many departments
of music even a confirmation, that he as artist is free of the content.
If we are in a general way permitted to regard human activity in the
realm of the beautiful as a liberation of the soul, as a release from
constraint and restriction, in short to consider that art does actually
alleviate the most overpowering and tragic catastrophies[395] by
means of the creations it offers to our contemplation and enjoyment,
it is the art of music which conducts us to the final summit of that
ascent to freedom. Or in other language that which the plastic arts
secure through the objective fact of a plastic beauty, which displays
the entirety of human life, human nature as such, its universal and
ideal significance, in the detail of its particularity, without losing
that essential harmony, this effect music must produce in a wholly
different manner. The plastic artist need only _exhibit_, in that which
is enclosed in the conception, what _was already therein from the
first_, so that every detail in its essential determinacy is merely
a closer explication of the totality which already floats before the
mind in virtue of the content which is there to exhibit it. A figure,
for example, in a plastic work of art, requires in this or that
situation a body, hands, feet, bust, a head with a given expression,
a given pose, other figures, or other aspects to which it is related
as a whole, etc., and all these aspects presuppose the others, in
making collectively essentially complete work. The elaboration of the
theme is in such a case merely a more accurate analysis of that which
already itself essentially contains it, and the more elaborate the
picture is, which thereby confronts us, the more concentrated is the
unity, and the stronger becomes the connection of the parts. The most
consummate expression of detail must be, if the work of art is the best
class, at the same time an elucidation of the highest form of unity.
No doubt the ideal articulation and rounding off in a whole, in which
the one part follows inevitably from another, ought to be present in
a musical composition. But in some measure the execution here is of a
totally different type, and moreover we can only accept the unity in a
restricted sense.

(_ββ_) In a musical theme the significance which has to be expressed
is already exhausted[396]. If it is repeated or carried on to
further oppositions and mediations these repetitions, modulations,
and elaborations by means of other scales may very readily appear
superfluous, and rather are appertinent to the purely musical
development and the assimilation of the varied content of harmonic
progressions which are neither demanded by the content itself[397], nor
remain dependent upon it, whereas in the plastic arts the execution of
the detail and the passage to it is simply and always a more accurate
exhibition and analysis of the content itself.

But of course it is impossible to deny that another theme is actually
motived by the way a theme is developed, and each of them, then, in
their alternation or their interfusion progress, change, are at one
time suppressed, at another emphasized, and by their victory or defeat
are able to make a content explicit in its more definite features,
oppositions, transitions, developments, and resolutions. But in this
case, too, the unity is not made more profound and concentrated by
virtue of such elaboration as is the case in sculpture and painting,
but is rather an expansion, an extension, a correlative series[398],
an addition of remoteness or a return, for which the content, which is
thus expressed, remains no doubt the universal centrum, yet does not
keep the whole so securely together as we find it is possible to do in
the plastic arts, particularly where their subject-matter is confined
to the human organism.

(_γγ_) Looked at from this point of view the art of music, as
contrasted with the other arts, lies too close to the medium of that
formal freedom of soul life, and thereby cannot fail to a greater
or less degree to be diverted beyond what is actually presented, in
other words the content[399]. The recollection of a theme proposed
is likewise a self-revealment[400] of the artist, in other words is
an ideal realization, to the effect that this self is the artist, and
he may progress just as he likes, and by what by-paths he likes. But
on the other hand the free exercise of imaginative caprice of the
above description is expressly to be distinguished from a musical
composition which is essentially conclusive, that is to say, which
constitutes a fundamentally self-integrated totality. In the free
improvization[401] the absence of restrictions is itself an object, so
that the artist is able to assert his caprice in the acceptance of any
material he chooses, to interweave acknowledged melodies and motives in
his improvized productions, to emphasize some new aspect of such, to
elaborate them in a variety of modifications, or make them steps in his
progression to other material, and advance from thence in the same way
to developments of still more arresting contrasts.

In general, however, a musical composition determines the freedom of
the composer, either by limiting it to a more self-contained execution,
and the observance of what we may describe as a more plastic unity, or
by permitting him with the full force of his personality and caprice
to pass at every point into more or less important digressions, to let
spontaneous ideas travel hither and thither as they please, to lay
stress for the moment on this or that motive, and then once more to
drown it in an overwhelming torrent. While, then, the study of Nature's
forms is essential to both painter and sculptor, the art of music can
look for no such fixed body of fact outside its own prescribed forms,
with which it would be forced to comply. The extent of the regularity
and necessity of its formal character is almost wholly determined
within the sphere of tone itself, which does not come into so close an
association[402] with the definition of the content that is therein
reposed, and consequently in respect to deviations beyond the same
permits for the most part a considerable opportunity for the free play
of the characteristic impulse of the composer.

And this is the main point of view, from which we may contract music
with the strictly plastic arts.

(_γ_) Looked at from _another_ aspect music is, in the third
place[403], most nearly affiliated to _poetry_; both in fact make use
of the same sensuous medium, that is, tone. Despite this, however,
these arts are very strongly distinct from one another not only in
virtue of the mode of treating tones in each case, but also in respect
to their different modes of expression.

(_αα_) In poetry, as we have found already in our general
differentiation of the several arts, tone is not as such elicited and
artistically produced by various humanly constructed instruments,
but the articulate sound of the human organ of speech is reduced
to the mere symbol of speech, retaining thereby nothing more
than the value of a sign of ideas, which is by itself devoid of
significance. Consequently we find here that tone remains throughout a
self-subsistent sensuous entity, which, as the mere symbol of emotions,
ideas, and thoughts, possesses the externality and _objectivity_ which
is _inherent in itself_ simply in virtue of the fact that is a _sign_
and nothing more. For the true objectivity of the soul-life as such
does not consist in utterance and words, but in this fact, that I, as
subject, am aware of a thought, a feeling, and so forth, that further
I confront it as an object, and in this way have it present to the
imagination, or forthwith develop for myself what is implicit in a
thought or a conception, setting forth in a series the external and
spiritual relations of the given content, and relating the particular
features of it to one another. Unquestionably we think throughout
in language, without, however, needing actual speech as spoken.
By reason of this ability to dispense with speech-utterance in its
sensuous aspect as contrasted with the spiritual content of ideas,
etc., to elucidate which they[404] are employed, tone receives once
more self-subsistency. In the art of painting no doubt colour and its
arrangement, regarded simply as colour, is likewise by itself without
significance, and in the same way, as contrasted with the spiritual
embodied, thereby a self-substantive sensuous medium; but we get no
painting from colour simply as such: we must first attach to it form
and its expression. With these spiritually animated forms colouring is
brought into an association by many degrees more constrained than that
which pertains to uttered speech and its coalescing result of words
with ideas.

If we will now look at the distinction between the poetical and musical
use of tones we shall find that music does not depress the tone sound
to the mere speech-utterance, but creates out of tone simply its own
independent medium, so that, in so far as there is musical tone, it is
treated as the object of the art[405]. And on account of this the realm
of tone, inasmuch as it cannot serve merely as a symbol, is by virtue
of this emancipated function of its life[406] able to attain to a mode
of configuration, which makes the form that is its peculiar possession,
that is to say, the modes of tone as artistically developed, its
fundamental aim and object. In recent times especially, the art of
music, by its wresting itself from all content that is independently
lucid, has withdrawn into the depths of its own medium. But on this
very account and to this extent it has lost its compelling power[407]
over the soul, inasmuch as the enjoyment, which is thus offered, is
only applicable to one aspect of art, in other words, is only an
interest in the purely musical characteristics of the composition and
its artistic dexterity, an aspect which wholly concerns the musical
expert, and is less connected with the universal human interest in art.

(_ββ_) All that poetry loses, however, in external objectivity by
being able to place on one side its sensuous medium, in so far as
that can be wholly dispensed with by art, it secures for itself, in
the ideal objectivity of its vision and ideas, which poetical speech
presents to soul and mind. For it is the function of imagination to
clothe these concepts, emotions, and thoughts in a world that is
itself essentially complete[408] with its events, actions, moods,
and exhibitions of passion, and by this means it creates works, into
which the entire fabric of reality, both in its external aspect as
phenomena and in the ideal significance of its content, is brought
home to the emotions, vision, and imagination of spiritual life. It
is this type of objectivity which the art of music, in so far as it
asserts its independent claims in its own province, is compelled to
renounce. In other words, the realm of tone possesses, no doubt, as I
have already indicated, a relation to the soul, and an alliance which
is consonant with its spiritual movement; but it fails to pass beyond
a sympathetic relation which is always of an indefinite character,
albeit in this aspect of it a musical composition, if originating in
the soul-life itself, and permeated by genius and emotions of a rich
quality, cannot fail to react on our nature with an equivalent power
and variety. In the case of a content and the ideal and personal
creation such as poetry implies our emotions pass more completely out
of their elementary medium of undefined conscious life into the more
concrete vision and more universal[409] imagination which is embodied
in such content. This may also be the effect of a musical composition,
so soon as the emotions which it excites in ourselves by virtue of its
own nature and the artistic energy that animates it are involved more
closely in ourselves with a distinct vision and ideas, and thereby
present to consciousness the tangible definition of soul-impressions
in a more stable outlook and more universally accepted ideas. This
is, however, _our_ imagination and vision, which no doubt has been
suggested by the musical work, but which has not been itself directly
disclosed by virtue of the artistic elaboration of musical tones.
Poetry, on the contrary, expresses emotions, perceptions, and ideas as
they are[410], and is further able to delineate a picture of external
objects, although it cannot itself either attain to the plastic clarity
of sculpture and painting or the spiritual intimacy of music, and is
consequently obliged to call as auxiliary to its powers the direct
vision we otherwise receive through the senses and the speechless
apprehension of soul-life in music.

(_γγ_) _Thirdly_, however, the art of music does not confine itself
to this independent position over against that of poetry and the
spiritual content of conscious life. It allies itself with a clearly
expressed content already completely elaborated by poetry, and as the
accompaniment of emotions, opinions, events, and actions. If, however,
the musical aspect of such a work of art remains the fundamental and
predominant one, the poetry, whether in the form of poem, drama, or
any other, has no right to assert an independent claim of its own
therein. And as a general rule in this association, of music and poetry
the preponderance of one art is injurious to the other. If therefore
the text, a poetical creation, possesses a fully independent value
of its own, the support to be expected from music should be merely
an insignificant one, as we find, for example, was the case with
the dramatic choruses of the ancients where the music was nothing
more than an incidental accompaniment. If, conversely, the music is
composed with a more independent individuality of its own, then the
text in its turn should be of a more superficially poetical execution,
and should as an independent production confine itself to emotions
of a general character and ideas depicted on universal lines. The
poetical elaboration of profound thoughts is as little appropriate to
a good musical text as is the delineation of the objects of external
Nature or descriptive poetry generally. Songs, operatic arias, the
texts of oratorios, and so forth may be consequently, so far as the
detail of their execution as poetry is concerned, jejune and of a
certain degree of mediocrity. The poet must not make his merits as
poet too conspicuous if the musician is to find in his text a genuine
opportunity. In this respect it is especially the Italians, such as
Metastasio and others, who have displayed the greatest skill, while
Schiller's poems, which were never written with such an object in
view at all, have been shown to be ill adapted and indeed useless for
musical composition[411]. In cases where the music receives a more
artistic elaboration, the audience understands next to nothing of the
text, and this is more particularly so with our German speech and
pronunciation[412]. For this reason it is not in the interest of music
that the weight of interest should be reposed in the text. An Italian
audience, for example, chatters away during the unimportant scenes of
an opera, takes refreshment, plays cards, and so on; but the instant
an aria of emphatic appeal or an important musical movement begins,
every section of it is all attention. We Germans, on the contrary,
take the greatest interest in the fortunes and speeches of the princes
and princesses of opera with attendants, squires, intimates, and
waiting-maids, and we do not doubt there are many among us still
who regret the fact, when the singing begins, that the interest is
interrupted, and take their refuge in conversation.

In religious music also the text is either for the most part a
well-known _credo_, or a selection of single psalms, so that the words
are regarded as merely an incitement to a musical commentary, which
possesses an independent style peculiar to itself, that is to say one
which not merely is used to expound the text, but which for the most
part simply emphasizes the universal character of the content much in
the same way that painting selects its material from sacred history.

(_b_) The second aspect of our present inquiry is that of the
distinction that obtains between the way in which the art of music
lays hold of its subject-matter as contrasted with the other arts,
the form, that is, in which, whether it be as an accompaniment or
independently of a given text, it is able to apprehend and express a
particular content. As to this I have already observed that music is
not only more capable than the other arts of liberating itself from
an actual text, but also from the expression of a definite content,
in order that it may find its satisfaction in an essentially complete
series of combinations, modifications, contrasts, and modulations,
which are comprised within the realm of absolute music[413]. In such a
case, however, music is empty, without significance, and is, for the
reason that one fundamental aspect of art, namely spiritual content
and expression, is absent, not really genuine music at all. It is only
when that which is of spiritual import is adequately expressed in the
sensuous medium of tones and their varied configuration that music
attains entirely to its position as a true art, and irrespective of
the fact whether this content receives an independent and more direct
definition by means of words, or is perforce emotionally realized from
the tone music itself and its harmonic relations and melodic animation.

(_α_) In this respect the unique function of music consists in this,
that whatever its content may be it is not so created by the art for
human apprehension as though it either was held by consciousness as
a _general concept_ is so contained, or as definite external form is
ordinarily presented to our perception, or as such receives its more
complete reflection in the artistic counterfeit, but rather in the
way in which a content is made a living thing in the sphere of the
_personal soul._ To make this essentially veiled life and in weaved
motion ring forth through the independent texture of tones, or attach
itself to expressed words and ideas, and to steep such ideas in this
very medium, in order to re-emphasize anew the same for feeling and
sympathy, such is the difficult task assigned to the art of music.

(_αα_) The life of soul itself is consequently the form in which music
is able to grasp its content, and thereby seeks to absorb within itself
everything that can generally enter into the shrine of the soul and
above all disclose itself under the veils of emotional movement. But
from this it necessarily follows that the art of music must not attempt
to minister to sense-perception, but must restrict its effort to making
soul-life intelligible to soul, whether this is effected by its making
the substantive and ideal depth of a content as such penetrate to the
very core of soul itself, or by its preferring to disclose the life and
motion of a content in the soul of some particular person, so that this
inward life of itself becomes its actual object.

(_ββ_) This abstract inwardness of soul is in the most intimate sense
differentiated, under the mode in which music is related to it, by
_feelings_ in other words the self-expanding medium of the personal
subject, which unquestionably moves in a content, but suffers the same
to persist in this direct self-seclusion of the Ego, and in a relation
to the Ego, that is, void of externality. Consequently feeling is
throughout simply all the envelope of that content, and it is the
sphere which is claimed by music[414].

(_γγ_) It is a province which unfolds in expanse the expression of
every kind of emotion, and every shade of joyfulness, merriment, jest,
caprice, jubilation and laughter of the soul, every gradation of
anguish, trouble, melancholy, lament, sorrow, pain, longing and the
like, no less than those of reverence, adoration, and love fall within
the appropriate limits of its expression.

(_β_) Tone as interjection, as the cry of grief, as sigh and laughter,
is already, outside the province of art, the most immediately vital
expression of soul-conditions and feelings, the ah and oh of the soul.
We find in it a self-production and objectivity of soul as such, an
expression which stands intermediately between unconscious absorption
and the self-return to thoughts ideally determinate, a disclosure,
which has no relation to external fact, but is confined to the
contemplative state, just as the bird, too, in its song possesses this
enjoyment and this production of its inner self.

The purely natural expression, however, of interjections is not as
yet music, for though these outcries are no doubt no intentionally
articulate sign of ideas as speech is and consequently express no
conceived content in its generalized form as concept, but give vent to
a mood and emotion in and through tone itself, a state which is reposed
immediately in similar tones and opens the heart in the outburst of
the same, yet this emancipation is not one which is promoted by art.
The art of music must on the contrary bring the emotions into tone
relations of definite structure, and wean the expression of Nature of
its wildness, its uncouth deliverance, and ameliorate it.

We may perhaps say that interjections constitute the point of departure
of music; but it is only music when an interjection in the form of a
cadenza, and in this respect it has to elaborate its senuous material
artistically in a higher degree than either painting or poetry before
it is qualified to express the content of spirit. We shall have to
examine later on more narrowly the particular way in which the content
of music is worked up to such a pitch of adaptability; at present
I will merely repeat the observation that the tones are themselves
essentially a totality of differences, which are capable of disuniting
and uniting themselves in the most varied kinds of immediate concords,
essential discords, oppositions and transitions. To these opposed and
united tones, no less than the differentiation of their movements and
transitions, their entry, their progression, their conflict, their
self-resolution and their disappearance, the ideal character both of
this or that content and of the emotions, in the form whereof both
heart and soul obtains the mastery of such content, corresponds in
closer or more remote affinity, so that the like tone relations,
apprehended and informed conformably thereto, disclose the animated
expression of that which is present to Spirit as definable content.

The medium of tone asserts itself as more cognate with the ideally
simple essence of a content than the senuous material previously
dealt with for this reason that tone instead of making itself secure
in spatial form and coming to a halt as the varied presentment of
juxtaposition and extension, is comprised in the ideal realm of _Time_,
and for this reason does not progress to a condition under which simple
ideality and concrete bodily shape and appearance are differentiated.
And this is equally true of the form of the _feeling_ of a content
whose expression mainly falls upon the art of music. In other words in
sense-perception and conception we have already, as in self-conscious
thought, the necessary distinction between the perceiving, conceiving
and thinking Ego and the object of perception, conception, and thought.
In emotion, however, this distinction is resolved, or rather it is
never propounded, but the content is interwoven with the inner life
without such division. When consequently music is united as an art of
accompaniment with poetry, or conversely poetry is united with music
as an interpreter to its elucidation, in such a case music is unable
to render conspicuous in an external form or to reflect with intention
ideas and thoughts as they are thus apprehended by self-consciousness;
it is obliged as stated either to offer the simple character of a
content in true relations to feeling, as they are cognate with the
ideal relation of this content, or to seek more nearly to express, by
means of tones which accompany and give intensity to poetry, that
feeling itself, which the content of perceptions and ideas can arouse
in the spirit that is both sympathetic and imaginative.

(_c_) Following the course of these remarks it is possible in the
_third_ place to form an estimate of the unrivalled power which is
thereby directly exercised by music on the soul, which is neither
carried forward to the vision of reason, nor diverts consciousness in
isolated points of view, but is accustomed to live within the ideal
range and secluded depths of pure emotion. For it is precisely this
sphere, the intimacy of soul-life, the abstract appropriation of its
own realm, which is grasped by music, which thereby sets in movement
the source of these ideal changes, namely, the heart and soul, which
we may consider at this concentrated focus and centre of our entire
manhood.

(_α_) In a particular sense sculpture endows its art products with a
wholly independent subsistency, an objectivity essentially exclusive
whether we regard it from the point of view of its content, or that
of its external art-manifestation. Its content is the substantive
being of the life of Spirit possessed no doubt with individual
vitality, but along with this reposing in self-subsistent coherence
on itself; its form is the material configuration under the condition
of space. For this reason a work of sculpture retains as an object of
sense-perception the highest degree of self-subsistency. A picture,
as we have already pointed out in our consideration of the art of
painting, comes into closer contact with the spectator. In part this is
due to the essentially more subjective[415] content thereby depicted;
in part it is referable to the fact that it is merely the show of
reality which it displays, thereby making us aware that it is not a
thing independently substantive, but rather essentially something
intended for something else, and exclusively so, in other words for the
human vision and soul. Yet even in the case of a picture we have still
left us a freedom more independent it fails to absorb; even here we
have still only to do with an object externally presented, which only
reaches us through sense perception, and only thus excites our emotion
and imagination. The spectator may consequently approach the work of
art as he likes; he may observe this or that aspect of it; he may
analyse the whole, as it throughout persists confronting him, may make
it the object of various reflections, and in short remain throughout at
liberty to continue his independent review of it.

(_αα_) The musical work of art, on the contrary, no doubt, as such a
work, posits in like manner the incipiency of a distinction between
the work itself and the individual that enjoys it; that is to say in
its actually resonant tones it receives a sensuous existence that
is distinct from the soul of the listener. But on the one hand this
opposition does not proceed, as in the case of the plastic arts, to
an external subsistency in Space and the visibility of a mode of
objectivity that coheres independently, but on the contrary makes
its real existence vanish in the immediate passage through Time. On
the other hand the art of music does not make the separation of its
external material from its spiritual content in the same way that
poetry does so, in which the aspect of idea is elaborated with more
definite independence from the sound of speech[416], and more cut off
as it is than any of the arts from this aspect of externality, issues
as such in a unique progression of mental ideas constructed by the
imagination. No doubt the observation may readily be made here that,
agreeably with what I have already stated, the art of music is able
to conversely to release tones from their content and thereby give
them independent form; this liberation is, however, not that which
really falls within Art's province, which on the contrary wholly
consists in employing harmonious and melodic motion for the expression
of the content originally selected and the emotions, which the same
is qualified to excite. Inasmuch as, therefore, musical expression
has for its content the inward life itself, the ideal significance
of fact and emotion, and a tone-world which, at least in art, does
not proceed to spatial configuration, and in its sensuous existence
is wholly evanescent, it follows that music directly penetrates with
its movements to the ideal _habitat_ of all the fluctuations of
soul-life. In other words it seizes on consciousness, where it is no
longer confronted with an object, and in the loss of this freedom
from the flood of tones as it streams on is itself whirled away with
it[417]. Yet there is here, too, by reason of the divers directions
which music may separately follow, an effect of varied character. In
other words, when a more profound content, or, to put it generally, an
expression more steeped in soul, is absent, we may find as a result
that we experience on the one hand delight in the purely sensuous sound
and harmony without any further emotional movement, or, on the other
hand, we follow the course of the harmony and melody with our critical
judgment, a progression by which the inmost heart of us is no further
touched or affected. Or rather we may say that pre-eminently in the
case of music there is such a purely critical analysis, for which there
is nothing else presented in the work of art to evoke it beyond the
skill of an expert in its laboured production[418]. If we, however,
withdraw ourselves from this critical science, and give ourselves up
unreservedly, we become entirely possessed with the musical composition
and are carried with it quite independently of the power, which the art
of it simply as art exercises upon us. And the peculiar power of music
is an _elementary_ force, that is to say it lies in the element _of
tone_, in which the art here moves.

(_ββ_) The individual is not only carried away by this medium in
virtue of the character of its exposition in any particular case,
or simply drawn to it by the specific content thereof; but, viewed
simply as self-conscious subject, the core and centre of his spiritual
existence is interwoven with the work and himself placed in active
relations with it. We have, for example, in the emphasis of the music's
current rhythms, an opportunity to beat in time with it, or unite
our voices with the melody, and in the case of dance-music at least,
we may associate the movement of our legs. And, generally speaking,
the claim is made upon us as distinct _personalities._ Conversely,
in the case of purely methodical action, which, in so far as it is
subject to time relations, is compatible with a distinct beat in
virtue of its regularity and possesses no further content, we require
on the one hand an expression of this regularity as such in order
that this action shall be present to the individual under a mode that
is itself subjective; and, on the other, we require a more intimate
realization of this rhythm. Both requirements are supplied by the
musical accompaniment. This is effected, for instance, by music as
associated with the march of soldiers. Such arouses the soul to the
rhythmical beat of the march, makes the individual full of the fact of
his marching[419] and steeps him in the harmonious action of it. In
something of the same sense the unregulated bustle of a _table d'hôte_
and the unsatisfactory excitement it arouses annoys many people. Such
feel that the moving up and down, the clatter and chatter should be
subject to rule, and as we have in our eating and drinking an empty
space of time to deal with, we should have that emptiness filled up
for us. Such, therefore, is also an occasion among many others when
music will help us considerably, suggesting as it does other thoughts,
recreations, and ideas.

(_γγ_) In these instances we are made aware of the connection between
the individual soul with _Time_ simply, a condition in which the
medium of music consists. In other words the inward life regarded
as subjective unity is the active negation of the indifferent[420]
juxtaposition in Space, and thereby _negative_ unity. In the first
instance, however, this identity remains in itself entirely _abstract_
and void of content, and consists merely in this that it makes itself
an object, though it then annuls this objectivity, which is itself of
a wholly ideal type and of the same character which the subject of
consciousness is, in order thereby to enforce itself as subjective
unity. An ideal negative activity of the same kind in its sphere
of _externality_ is Time. For in the _first_ place it effaces the
indifferent _co-extension_ of the spatial condition and concentrates
the continuity of the same in the _point_ of Time, the Now. The point
of time, however, _secondly_, discloses itself at the same time as
_negation_ of itself; in other words _this_ Now no sooner is than it
annuls itself in another Now, and by doing this makes apparent its
negative activity. _Thirdly_, we no doubt do not get, on account
of externality[421], in whose element Time is in motion, the truly
_subjective_ unity of the first point of Time with the next, to which
the Now by self-effacement proceeds, but the Now remains throughout in
its change always the same[422]. For for every point of Time is a Now,
and is as undifferentiated from the other Now, taken as the bare point
of Time, as is the abstract Ego from the object, relatively to which
it annuls itself[423], and in which it falls into self-coalescence,
for the reason that this object is itself merely the empty Ego. The
actual Ego itself, too, belongs yet more closely to Time, with which
it coalesces, in so far as it is, if we abstract from the concrete
content of consciousness and self-consciousness, nothing but this empty
movement which posits itself as another and then cancels the exchange,
in other words cancels itself, in order thereby to conserve the Ego and
here only the abstract[424] Ego therein. Ego is in Time, and Time is
the being of the conscious subject itself. Inasmuch, then, as Time and
not the spatial condition as such supplies the essential element, in
which tone secures existence in respect to its validity as music, and
the time of tone is likewise that of the conscious subject, for this
reason tone, by virtue of this fundamental condition of it, penetrates
into the self of conscious life, seizes hold of the same in virtue of
the most simple aspect of its existence, and places the Ego in movement
by means of the motion in Time and its rhythm; while in addition to
this the other configuration of tones, as the expression of emotions,
brings yet further a more definite material to enrich the unity of
consciousness, a wealth by which it is at once affected and carried
forward.

We find, then, that the fundamental ground for the elementary might of
the art of music is of this nature.

(_β_) In order, however, that music may exercise its full effect we
must have something more than the purely abstract tone in its movement
in Time. The _further_ aspect we have to attach to it is a _content_,
an emotional wealth steeped in spirit presented to the soul, and the
expression, the soul of this content in tones.

We have no right, then, to entertain any exaggerated[425] opinion of
the sovereign might of music simply as music, about which ancient
writers, both sacred and profane, have told us so many fabulous tales.
If we go back to the miracles which Orpheus performed as a pioneer
of civilization we find indeed that tones and their movements spread
their influence to the wild creatures, which encircled him shorn of
their wildness, but they did not extend to humankind, who required
the content of a nobler strain. It is something of this latter kind
that we must attach to the hymns ascribed to Orpheus, which, in the
form we have received from tradition, even though it be not their
original one, support mythological and other ideas. In a similar way,
too, the warlike songs of Tyrtaeus are famous, by means of which, so
we are told, the Lacedaemonians, after long and fruitless conflicts,
were stirred up to an irresistible enthusiasm and finally were wholly
victorious over the Messenians. In this case, too, the content of
the ideas which these elegies excited was the main thing, although
pre-eminently in the case of barbaric peoples and in times of deeply
moved passions we cannot deny that the musical aspect of them exercised
a real force and effect. The pipes of the Highlanders contribute
essentially to the animation of their courage, and the power of the
Marseillaise as sung in the French Revolution is undeniable. The real
source of enthusiasm is, however, to be looked for in the definite
idea, in the true interest of the Spirit with which a nation is
steeped, and which can be exalted to a more direct and living feeling
when the notes of music, the rhythm and the melody carry along whoever
may give himself up to them. In our own days, however, we can hardly
hold that music is capable by itself of evoking such a courageous
temper and contempt of death. Almost all armies nowadays have excellent
regimental music, which calls the soldiers to their duties, releases
them from such, gives life to the march and incites them to the attack.
No one, however, dreams of beating the enemy with such means. The
courage of the field of battle does not come with the blast of trumpets
and the beat of drums, and it will indeed take a host of trombones
before a fort will tumble in ruin at their blast like the walls of a
Jericho. It is the enthusiasm born of ideas, cannon, and the genius of
generals which are the main thing now rather than music, and this can
only act as a support of the forces which have already filled and taken
hold of the soul.

(_γ_) In conclusion, we may point out in respect to the personal
effect of musical sound there is an aspect which is referable to the
particular manner in which the musical work of art approaches us in
its distinction from other works of art. In other words, inasmuch
as musical tones do not as buildings of construction, statues, and
pictures possess independently a permanent objective consistency, but
vanish in the act of passing by the musical work of art requires in
virtue of the fact of this purely momentary existence a continuously
repeated _reproduction._ And what is more, the necessity of such a
renewal of life points to a further more profound significance. For, in
so far as it is the personal soul itself, which music accepts for its
content with the object, to make manifest itself not as external form
and objectively subsistent product, to this extent the expression of
it must also assert itself immediately in the form of a communication
disclosed by a _living_ person, in which that person reposes his entire
and unique personality. This is to the fullest extent the case in the
song of the human voice, but it is relatively so in all instrumental
music, which can only be executed by means of a practised artist and
his living and spiritual no less than technical powers as such.

It is only by virtue of this personal relation in respect to the
active effect of the musical work of art that the significance of the
subjective aspect of music is substantiated, which, however, too, it is
possible in this direction to carry to the extreme length of isolation
in the case, that is, where the personal virtuosity of the reproduction
as such is made the exclusive focus and content of the enjoyment to be
derived.

With the above observations I will now close what I have to say with
regard to the general character of music.



2. THE PARTICULAR DEFINITION OF THE MEANS OF EXPRESSION IN MUSIC


We have hitherto contemplated music purely under the aspect, that
its function is to embody and give life to tone as the musical
expression of the personal life of soul; we have now to ask ourselves
the further question, by reason of what it is both possible and
necessary that tones are no purely natural outcry of emotion but
the articulate artistic expression of the same. For feeling as such
possesses a content; tone regarded as mere tone is without such. It
must consequently first be rendered capable by means of an artistic
treatment of essentially assimilating the expression of an ideal life.
Speaking generally, we may establish the following conclusions on this
head.

Every tone is a substantive, essentially accepted real thing,
which, however, is neither articulated nor consciously apprehended
in a living unity, as is the case with the animal or human form,
nor from the further point of view demonstrates in itself, as a
particular member of the bodily organism, or any isolated trait of
the animated body, whether in its spiritual or physical aspect, that
this individualization can only exist in vital association with the
other limbs and traits, and secure thus its meaning, significance, and
expression. Viewed according to external material, a picture no doubt
consists in single strokes and colours, which can also independently
exist, but the real material on the other hand, which first creates a
work of art from such strokes and colours, the lines and surfaces that
is to say of the form, have only a meaning when viewed as a concrete
totality. The _separate_ tone, on the contrary, is _independently
substantive_ and can also be animated up to a certain degree by means
of emotion and receive a definite expression.

Conversely, however, inasmuch as tone is no purely indefinite rustle
and sound, but only possesses in general musical validity by virtue
of its clear definition and pure tonality, it stands immediately, by
reason of this definite articulation, not merely according to its
actual sound, but also its temporal duration, in a relation to _other_
tones; nay, this _relation_ is that which first contributes to it its
real and actual definition and along with this its difference and
contrast as opposed to other tones or its unity with such.

In presence of the more relative self-subsistency this relation,
however, remains as something _external_ to the tones, so that the
relations into which they are brought do not appertain to the single
tones under the mode of _their notion_, as we find such in the members
of the animal and human organism, or also in the forms of natural
landscape. The coalescence of different tones in different relations is
consequently something which albeit not contradictory to the essence
of tone, is, however, in the first instance _artificial_, and not
otherwise presented in Nature. Such a relation proceeds to that extent
from a _third party_ and only exists for such, namely, for the person
who apprehends[426] it.

On account of this externality of the relation the definition of
tones and their co-ordination subsist in the relation of _quantity_,
in relations of number, which of course have their foundation in the
nature of tone itself, yet are employed by music in a system which is,
in the first instance, discovered by Art and modified[427] in the most
varied manner.

From this point of view it is not essential vitality, regarded as
organic unity, which constitutes the foundation of music, but equality,
inequality, etc., and generally the form of the understanding[428],
as it is asserted in quantitative relations. If we consequently speak
definitely of musical tones we indicate the same purely by numerical
relations as also by letters selected at will by virtue of which we are
accustomed to indicate the tones according to such relations.

In such a reference back to mere quantities and their intelligible,
external definition music possesses its most pronounced affinity with
architecture, inasmuch as it, just as this latter art does, builds up
its inventions upon the secure basis and scheme of proportions, a basis
which does not essentially expand and coalesce through vital unity in
an organically free articulation, in which the remaining differentiated
parts are given with the one aspect of definition, but only begins to
grow into free art in the further elaborations, which are enabled by it
to arise out of the aforesaid conditions.

Although architecture carries the process of liberation no further than
a harmony of forms and the characteristic animation of a mysterious
eurhythmy, music, on the contrary, for the reason that it has for
its content the most intimate, personal, and free life and essence
of the soul, strides into and emphasizes the profoundest opposition
that exists between this free life of soul and those quantitative
relations on which it is based. It is, however, unable to persist in
this opposition; rather it is its difficult function to overcome it as
essentially as it accepts it, by assigning to the free movements of the
soul, which it expresses, a more secure foundation and basis by means
of these necessary proportions, a basis on which it then, however,
gives movement to and develops the inner life in the freedom which
for the first time receives its fulness of content by virtue of such
fundamental necessity[429].

In this respect there are in the first instance two aspects of tone
we should distinguish, according to which it is artistically to be
employed. First, we have the abstract foundation, the universal but
not as yet _physically_ specified element, that is, _Time_, in the
domain of which tone falls. After that we get sound itself, the _real_
distinction of tones, not merely according to aspects referable to the
difference of the sensuous material, which sounds, but also in that
aspect of the tones themselves as they are related to one another,
whether in their singularity or as a whole. To such we must then adjoin
_thirdly_, the _soul_, which gives animation to the tones, rounds
them off in a free totality, and gives to them a spiritual expression
in their temporal movement and their real sound. By virtue of these
aspects we receive for their more definite classification a series of
stages as follows.

_First_, we have to occupy our attention with the purely temporal
duration and movement, which it is the function of art not merely to
leave to chance in their arrangement, but to determine according
to definite measures, and to render various by virtue of their
differences, and once more again to establish their unity in these
distinctions. From this we deduce the necessity for _time-measure_,
_beat_, and _rhythm._

_Secondly_, however, music has not merely to deal with abstract time
and the relations of longer or shorter duration, musical phrase and
so forth, but with the concrete time of their _sound_ according to
definite tones, which consequently are not merely distinct from one
another according to their duration. This difference reposes, in the
first place, on the specific quality of their sensuous material, by
reason of whose oscillations the tone is produced; on the other hand
it depends on the different number of such oscillations, in which the
resonant bodies oscillate in an equal measure of time. And furthermore
these differences assert themselves as essential aspects for the
relation of tones in their concord, opposition, and mediation. We may
give this portion of our subject the general designation of the theory
of _harmony._

_Thirdly_, and finally, it is the _melody_, by virtue of which on
these foundations of a beat characterized by rhythmical vitality and
of distinctions and movements of harmony itself that the realm of
tones is unitedly discharged in a spiritually free mode of expression,
and conducts us thereby to the final main section of our subject,
which will undertake to consider music in its concrete unity with the
spiritual content it is intended to express in beat, harmony, and
rhythm.


(_a_) _Time-measure, Beat, Rhythm_

So far as in the _first_ place the purely _temporal_ aspect of musical
tone is concerned, we have _first_ to discuss the necessity, which
generally in musical time is the dominant factor. _Secondly_, we shall
consider beat under the aspect of time-measure wholly regulated under
scientific rule. _Thirdly_, we shall treat of the rhythm, under which
a start is made in animating this abstract rule by the prominence or
subordination it attains to definite divisions of time.

(_α_) The figures of sculpture and painting are placed side by side
in space and present the extension of reality in actual or apparent
totality. Music, however, can only place before us tones in so far as
it makes a body under the spatial condition tremble, setting the same
in an oscillating motion. These oscillations only affect art under the
aspect, that they follow one another; and for this reason the sensuous
material generally only enters into music with the _temporal_ duration
of its movement instead of taking with it its spatial form. No doubt
that motion of a body is always present in space, so that painting and
sculpture have the right to exhibit the appearance of movement, albeit
their figures are in their reality at rest. In respect to this aspect
of Space, however, music does not accept movement, and there remains
consequently as part of its configuration only the time, into which the
oscillation of the body falls.

(_αα_) Time, however, in consequence of what we have already
above considered, is not as Space is, the positive condition of
juxtaposition, but on the contrary _negative_ externality. As
juxtaposition, which is cancelled, it is the point of passage, and
as negative activity it is the abrogation of this point of time in
another, which is itself immediately cancelled, and becomes another and
so on continuously. In the continuous series of these points of time
every single tone not merely is asserted independently as single, but
is brought from a further point of view into quantitative association
with other tones, by which process Time is referable to _number._
Conversely, however, for the reason that time is the unbroken rise and
passage of such points of time, which, regarded as mere points of time,
possess in this unparticularized abstraction no distinction one to
another, for this reason to a like extent time appears as the equable
stream, and the duration essentially undifferentiated.

(_ββ_) In this indeterminacy, however, music is unable to leave
time. Rather it is compelled to define it more narrowly, to give it
a measure, and regulate its stream according to the rules of such a
measure. By virtue of this regular treatment we get the _time-measure_
of tones. And here at once arises the question, wherefore then once and
for all music requires such measure. The necessity of definite periods
of time may be evolved from this fact, that time stands in the closest
affinity with, the self in its simplicity, which apprehends, and has
a right to apprehend, its inward life through the medium of tones;
time, in fact, regarded as externality, essentially possesses the
same principle, which is active in the Ego as the abstract foundation
of all that pertains to the soul and spirit. If, then, it is the
simple self, which as soul-life has to be made objective in music,
so, too, the universal medium of this objectivity must be treated
conformably to the principle of that subjective life. The Ego, however,
is not the indefinite continuance and the unbroken[430] duration,
but is only self-identity when we regard it as an aggregate and a
return upon itself[431]. The assertion of itself, wherein it becomes
object, is doubled back in the being thus self-for-itself; and it is
only through this relation to itself that it becomes self-feeling,
self-consciousness and so forth. In this aggregate, however, we find
essentially a _breaking off_ of the purely indefinite change, such
as we held time to be in the first instance, in which the rise and
suppression, the disappearance and renewal of the points of time were
nothing but a wholly formal passage from every now to another present
of similar character, and consequently nothing but an uninterrupted
progression. In contrast to this empty process the self is that which
itself _persists by itself_, the totality whereof essentially breaks
up the undefined series of time points, creates an infraction into the
abstract _continuity_, freeing the Ego, which recollects itself in this
process of discrete division and finds itself again therein, from what
is a purely external process of change.

(_γγ_) The duration of a tone does not, agreeably to this principle,
pass away in a process of relative indeterminacy, but emphasizes with
its beginning and end, which accordingly is a definite beginning and
cessation, the series of the time moments, which, apart from it, are
not thus distinguishable. If, however[432], many tones follow one
after another, and every one of them receives a duration which can
be separately distinguished from each other, then we must assume
that instead of having that original _indefinite_ series _devoid of
content_, we only once more get by a converse process the fortuitous,
and, along with this to a like extent, the _indefinite variety_ of
particular quantities. This unregulated rambling about contradicts
quite as much the unity of the Ego as the abstract progress forward;
and it can only find itself reflected and satisfied in such a varied
mode of definition in so far as single quantities are brought under
_one_ unifying principle, which for the reason that it subsumes the
_particular parts_ under its synthetic embrace, must itself be a
_definite unity_, yet in the first instance as merely an identity of
external application can only persist as one of an external type.

(_β_) And this carries us to the further principle of coordination
which we find in the _time-beat._

(_αα_) The first thing to be considered here consists in this, that,
as stated, distinct divisions of time are united in a unity, in which
the Ego independently creates its identity with itself. Inasmuch as the
Ego in the first instance only supplies the foundation as _abstract_
self this equability, in respect to the advance of time and its tones,
can only assert itself as operative under the mode of a uniformity that
is itself abstract, that is to say as the _uniform repetition_ of the
same unity of time. Agreeably to the same principle the beat according
to its simple definition can only consist in this, that it establishes
a definite unity of time as measure and rule not merely for the
deliberate[433] breaking up of the time-series held previously without
such distinction, but also for the equally capricious duration of
single tones, which are now apprehended together under a definite bond
of union, and that it permits this measure of time to be continuously
renewed in abstract uniformity. In this respect time-beat possesses
the same function as the principle of symmetry in architecture, as,
for instance, when this places side by side columns of similar height
and thickness at intervals of equal distance, or co-ordinates a row
of windows, which possess a definite size, under the principle of
equality. We find present in this case, too, an assured distinction
of parts and a repetition in every way complete. In this uniformity
self-consciousness discovers itself once more as unity, in so far
as it in part recognizes its own equality in the co-ordination of a
fortuitous variety; partly, too, in the return of the same unity, it is
recalled to the fact that it has already been there, and precisely by
means of its return asserts itself as the prevailing principle[434].
The satisfaction, however, which the Ego receives through the time-beat
in this rediscovery of itself is all the more complete because the
unity and regularity do neither apply to time or tones as such, but
are something which is wholly appertinent to the Ego, and is carried
into the time relation by the same as a means of self-satisfaction.
We do not find this abstract identity in what is wholly of Nature.
Even the heavenly bodies retain no regular time-measure[435] in their
motions, but accelerate or retard their course, so that they do not
pass over equal spaces in identical periods of time. The same thing
may be said of falling bodies, with the motion of projectiles, etc.,
and we may add that animal life to a still less degree regulates
its running, springing, and seizing of objects on the principle of
an exact recurrence of one definite time-measure. In this respect
the time-measure of living things proceeds far more completely from
spiritual initiative than the regular definitions of size applicable to
architecture for which we may more readily discover analogies in Nature.

(_ββ_) If, however, the Ego is to return upon itself by means of the
time-beat by thus appropriating throughout an identity which it itself
is and which proceeds from itself, we imply in this, in order that the
distinct unity may be felt as a principle, that in a similar degree
what is presented to it should be that which is _unregulated_ and _not
uniform._ It is in short only through the fact that the definite beat
of the measure prevails over and co-ordinates what is capriciously
unequal, that it asserts itself as unity and regulating principle of a
fortuitous variety. It must consequently appropriate the same within
itself, and suffer uniformity to appear in that which is not so. This
it is which first gives to the time-beat its specific and essential
definition to be asserted too in contrast to other measurements of
time, which can be repeated relatively to the same principle.

(_γγ_) By reason of this the multiplicity which is enclosed in a given
time-measure possesses its definite _standard_ according to which it is
divided and co-ordinated. From this we arrive, in the _third_ place,
at distinct _kinds_ of _time-measure._ The first thing of importance
to notice in this connection is the division of time according to
either an _even_ or an _uneven_ number of equally divided parts. Of
the first kind we have, for example, the two-four and the four-four
time. In these even number is predominant. Of the opposite kind is the
three-four time, in which the co-ordinate divisions constitute a unity
of equal parts, of course, but in a number that is uneven. Both types
are to be found united in six-eight time, to take an example, which
no doubt numerically appears to be similar to the four-four time, but
as a fact, however, does not fall into three but into two divisions,
of which, however, the one no less than the other, relatively to its
closer aspect of division, accepts three, that is an uneven number, as
its principle.

A particularization of this kind constitutes the constantly repeated
principle of every particular measure of time. However much
notwithstanding the definite time-measure is bound to control the
_variety_ of the time-duration and its longer or shorter sections, we
must not therefore extend its effective power to the length that it
places this variety in subjection in a wholly abstract way, that in
short, for example, in the four-four measure only four notes of equal
length as fourths can appear, in the three-four time only three, and so
forth. The regularity restricts itself to this, that as, for instance,
in the four-four time the sum of the separate notes are only equal
to four equal parts, which may not only be divided into eighths and
sixteenths, but conversely may again contract into less divisions, and
indeed are capable moreover of more diffuse division.

(_γ_) The further, however, this elastic mode of differentiation is
carried the more necessary it is that the essential divisions of the
time should be asserted as predominant and also should be indicated in
an effective way as an illustration of the fundamental principle of
their co-ordination. This is carried out by the _rhythm_, which first
gives vital significance to time-measure and the beat. With respect to
this vitalization[436] we may distinguish the following points.

(_αα_) In the first place we have _accent_, which to a greater or less
degree attaches in an audible way to definite divisions of time, while
others pass by on the other hand without an accent. By virtue of such
emphasis, or lack of emphasis, which is itself of various kinds, every
particular measure of time possesses its particular rhythm, which is
placed in exact association with the specific mode of division to which
its rhythm applies. The four-four time, for instance, in which an even
number is the principle of division, has a twofold arsis; on the other
hand there is that on the first note or fourth division, and then,
though in weaker power, on the third. The first is called on account of
its stronger accentuation, the _strong_ accent, the second in contrast
to it the _weak_ one. In the three-four time the accent rests entirely
on the first fourth, in six-eight time on the contrary it is on the
first of the eight divisions and the fourth, so that in this case the
twofold accent asserts a division of equal length in two halves.

(_ββ_) In so far as music is an accompaniment rhythm is brought into
essential relation with _poetry._ In the most general way I will on
this merely venture the observation that the accents of the musical
beat ought not to directly contradict those of the metre. If, for
example, one of the unaccentuated syllables, relatively to the rhythm
of the verse, is placed in a strong accent of the beat, while the
arsis, or it may be the caesura, falls in one of the weak accents of
the music, then we get a false opposition between the rhythm of the
poetry and that of the music which it is better to avoid. We may affirm
the same thing with regard to the long and short syllables. These also
ought in general to fall into harmony with the duration of the tones,
so that the longer syllables are coincident with the longer notes, the
shorter with the shorter, albeit this accordance is not to be pressed
with absolute precision, inasmuch as music is frequently permitted
greater play for the duration of its long notes, no less than for the
exuberant subdivision of the same.

(_γγ_) In the _third_ place we may at once in anticipation observe
that we have to distinguish the animated _rhythm of melody_ from the
abstractly considered and severely regular return of the beat rhythm.
In this respect music possesses a similar and, in fact, yet greater
freedom than poetry. In poetry the beginning and termination of
_words_[437] need not necessarily coincide with the beginning and end
of the verse feet; rather a thoroughgoing coincidence of this nature
gives us a verse that halts and is without caesura. And, furthermore,
the beginning and ending of the sentences and periods ought not
throughout to mark the beginning and conclusion of a verse. On the
contrary, a period will terminate more satisfactorily in the beginning
or even in the middle and near the last feet of the verse. From which
point we begin with a new one which carries the first verse into the
one that follows. The same thing holds good in the case of music
relatively to its time-beat and rhythm. The melody and its different
phrases[438] need not absolutely commence with the fall of a beat
and close with the conclusion of another: such may in a general way
move freely to this extent that the main-arsis of the melody may be
incident to that portion of a musical beat, on which, relatively to
its ordinary rhythm, no such emphasis applies; whereas, conversely,
a tone, which in the natural process of the melody would necessarily
receive no accentuated prominence, may quite conceivably be placed
in the strong accent of the time-measure, which requires an arsis,
so that consequently such a tone, relatively to the time-rhythm, has
a different effect from that which the same tone claims to assert as
distinct from that rhythm and purely in the melody. This opposition,
however, asserts itself most strongly in so-called syncopations. If,
on the other hand, the melody absolutely adheres in its rhythms and
divisions to the time rhythm it tends to drag, and lacks warmth and
invention. In short, what is required is a freedom from the pedantry
of metre and the barbarism of a uniform rhythm. A deficiency in more
free movement readily increases the limpness and sluggishness to the
point of actual gloom and depression; and in this way, too, many
of our popular melodies possess aspects of mournfulness, drag and
burden, in so far as the soul merely possesses a means of advance
as its expression more monotonous than itself, and in virtue of
such is constrained to consign to it also the doleful emotions of a
broken heart. The speech of Southern peoples, on the other hand, more
especially the Italian, offers a rich field for a rhythm and flow
of melody which is more notable for its variety and movement. And
it is precisely here that we mark an essential distinction between
German and Italian music. The uniform coldness of the Iambic mode of
scansion, which recurs in so many German songs, kills the free and
jubilant impulse of the melody, and restrains any further rise and
devolution[439]. In more recent times Reichard and others, owing to
this very fact that they have said goodbye to this iambic drone, have
imported into their lyrical compositions a new and rhythmical life,
although we still find traces of the former type in some of their
songs. However, we do not only mark the influence of the iambic rhythm
in songs, but also in many of our most important musical compositions.
Even in the Messiah of Handel the composition does not only in many
arias and choruses follow the meaning of the words with declamatory
truth, but also adheres to the fall of the iambic rhythm, partly in the
distinction simply that it makes between its long and short duration,
partly in the fact that the protraction of the iambic rhythm requires a
more elevated tone than the corresponding short syllable in the metre.
I have no doubt this is one of the characteristic features of Handelian
music, owing to which we Germans feel so much at home with the same,
quite apart from its excellences in other respects, its majestic swing,
its victorious onward movement, the wealth it discloses of profoundly
religious no less than more simple idyllic emotions. This rhythmical
substance of the melody comes more directly to our sense of hearing
than that of the Italians, who are inclined to find in it a want of
freedom, as something, too, that strikes the ear as strange and alien.

(_β_) _Harmony_

The further aspect, in virtue of which alone the abstract basis of
time-beat and rhythm receives its fulfilment, and thereby is enabled
to become actually concrete music is the kingdom of tones regarded as
such. This more essential domain of music is dominated by the laws
of _harmony._ We have here a further elementary fact to deal with.
In other words, a material substance[440] does not only through its
oscillation for art emerge from the mere visible reproduction of
its _spatial_ form, and is carried further into the elaboration of
its configuration _in Time_[441], but it produces _distinct_ sounds
according to its particular physical constitution no less than its
different length and brevity and number of vibrations through which it
passes in a given period of time, and consequently in this respect,
too, Art is compelled to take account of it and give it form agreeably
to its own nature.

With regard, then, to this second element we have to emphasize with
more accuracy three main points.

The _first_ one presented to our consideration is the difference
between the various _instruments_, whose invention and elaboration has
been found essential to create that totality of musical sound, which
in respect to musical sound constitutes a sphere of different tones
independently of all distinction of the relation of pitch whether it be
a high or a low one.

_Secondly_, however, musical tone is, quite apart from the different
peculiarities of either instruments or the human voice, itself an
articulated totality of different tones, tone-series, and scales, which
in the first instance repose on quantitative relations, and in the
determination of these relations are tones which it is the function
of every instrument and the human voice, according to its specific
quality, to produce in less or greater completeness.

_Thirdly_, music neither consists in single intervals nor in purely
abstract series of tones, that is, keys unrelated to each other,
but is a concrete interfusion of opposed or mediating sound, which
necessitates a forward progression and a passage from one point
to another. This juxtaposition and change does not depend on mere
contingency and caprice, but is subject to definite rules, which
constitute the necessary foundation of all true music.

In passing now to the more detailed consideration of these several
points of view I am forced, as already stated, to limit myself for the
most part to the most general observations.

(_α_) Sculpture and painting discover their sensuous material, such
as wood, stone, metals, and the like, or colours and other media of
that type more or less straight to hand, or, at least, they are only
compelled to elaborate the same in a subordinate degree, in order to
adapt them to the uses of art.

(_αα_) Music, on the contrary, which throughout is set in motion
through a medium artificially prepared for the purposes of art from
the first, must necessarily pass through a distinctly more difficult
preparation before the production of musical tones is secured. With the
exception of the human voice, which returns us Nature in her immediacy,
Music is compelled itself to create all its other instruments of
genuine musical tone throughout before it can exist as an art.

(_ββ_) With regard to these means as such we have already above formed
our conception of the _timbre_ proper to them in the sense that it
is the result of a vibration of the spatial medium, is the first
excitation thereof of ideal import, which enforces itself as such in
contradistinction to the purely sensuous juxtaposition, and, by virtue
of this negation of spatial reality, asserts itself as the ideal unity
of all the physical qualities of specific gravity and the purely
sensuous type of corporeal coalescence. If we inquire further as to
the qualitative peculiarities of the medium thus made to emit musical
sound we shall find that in its character as material substance no
less than as artificially constructed, it varies greatly. We may have
a longitudinal or oscillating[442] column of air, which is limited
by a fixed channel of wood or metal, or we may have a longitudinally
stretched string of gut or metal, or in other cases a stretched surface
of parchment or a bell of glass or metal. In this connection we may
draw attention to the following distinguishing features. In the _first_
place it is the _lineal_ direction[443] which is mainly predominant,
and produces the instruments most effective in musical employment;
and this is so whether, as in the case of wind-instruments, the main
principle is represented by a column of air which is relatively more
deficient in cohesion or by a material line adapted to tension, but
of sufficient elasticity to be made to vibrate, as is the case with
stringed instruments.

_Secondly_, we have the principle of surface rather than line
represented in instruments of inferior significance, such as the
kettle-drum, bell, and harmonica. There is, in fact, a subtle sympathy
between the self-audible principle of ideality and that type of
rectilinear tone[444], which, by virtue of its essentially simple
subjectivity, demands the resonant vibration of simple line extension
rather than that of the broad and round surface. In other words,
ideality is as subject this spiritual point, which is made audible
in tone as its _mode of expression._ But the closest approach to the
exposition and expression of the mere _punctum_ is not the surface, but
the simple linear direction. From this point of view broad or round
surfaces are not adapted to the requirements and enforcement of such
audibility. In the case of the kettle-drum we have a skin stretched
over a kettle or basin, which by being struck at a single point sets
the entire surface vibrating with a muffled sound. Though a musical
sound, it is one which from its very nature, as belonging to such an
instrument, it is impossible to bring either to clear definition or any
considerable degree of variety. We find a difficulty of an opposite
type in the case of the harmonica and the bells of glass which are set
in vibration in it. In this case it is the concentrated intensity of
tone which fails to project itself, and which is of such an affecting
character that not a few, when hearing it, receive actual nervous
pain. But, despite this specific effect, this instrument is unable to
give permanent pleasure and is with difficulty combined with other
instruments on the rare occasions such an attempt is made. We find the
same defect on the side of differentiation of tone in the bell and a
similar punctually repeated stroke as in the case of the kettle-drum.
The ring of a bell, however, is not so muffled as in the latter; it
rings out clearly, although its persistent reverberation is more the
mere echo of the single beat as struck at regular intervals.

_Thirdly_, the human voice may be regarded in respect to the tones
emitted as the most complete instrument of all. It unites in itself
the characteristics of both the wind instrument and the string. That
is to say we have here in one aspect of it a column of air which
vibrates, and, further, by virtue of the muscles, the principle of a
string under tension. Just as we saw in the case of the colour inherent
in the human skin, we had what was in its aspect of ideal unity, the
most essentially perfect presentment of colour, so, too, we may affirm
of the human voice that it contains the ideal compass of sound, all
that in other instruments is differentiated in its several composite
parts. We have here the perfect tone, which is capable of blending
in the most facile and beautiful way with all other instruments. Add
to this that the human voice is to be apprehended as the essential
tone of the soul itself, as the concordant sound which by virtue
of its nature expresses the ideal character of the inner life, and
most immediately directs such expression. In the case of all other
instruments on the contrary we find that a material thing is set
in vibration, which, in the use that is made of it, is placed in a
relation of indifference to and outside of the soul and its emotion.
In the human song, however, it is the human body itself from which
the soul breaks into utterance. For this reason, too, the human voice
is unfolded, in accord with the subjective temperament and emotion,
in a vast manifold of particularity. And this variety, if we consider
its distinguishing features sufficiently generalized, is based on
national or other natural relations. Thus, for example, we find that
the Italians are pre-eminently the people among whom we meet with
the most beautiful voices. An important feature of this beauty is
to start with the content of the sound simply as sound, its pure
metallic quality, which neither fines away in mere keenness or vitreous
attenuation, nor maintains a persistent muffled and hollow character,
but, at the same time, though never carried to the point of tremolo
in its tone, preserves in the compact body of its tone something of
the vital vibration of the soul itself. Above all else the purity of
voice-production is most essential, or in other words we must have no
foreign element of sound asserted alongside of the freest expression of
essential tone.

(_γγ_) Such a totality of instruments the art of music can employ,
either in separation or complete combination. In the latter case
of late years we may note an exceptional artistic development. The
difficulty of such artistic collaboration is enormous. Every instrument
possesses a character of its own, which is not directly congenial to
the peculiarity of some other instrument. It follows from this that
whether we are considering the harmonious co-operation of various
instruments of different type, or the effective production of some
particular quality of sound such as that of wind or strings, or the
sudden blast of trombones, or the successive alternations of change
that are inseparable from the music of a large choir, in all such cases
knowledge, circumspection, experience, and imaginative endowment are
indispensable, in order that, in every example of the kind, whether
of tonal quality, transition, opposition, progression, or mediation,
we do not lose sight of an ideal significance, the soul and emotional
value of the music. For example, I find in the symphonies of Mozart,
who was a great master of instrumentation and its sense-appealing,
that is its vital no less than luminous variety, a sort of alternation
between the different instruments which frequently resembles in its
dramatic interplay a kind of dialogue. In one aspect of this the
character of some particular type of instrument is carried to a point,
which anticipates and prepares the way for that of another; looked at
in another way, one kind of instrument replies to another; or asserts
some typical mode of expression which is denied to the instrument it
follows, so that in the most graceful fashion we thus get a kind of
conversation of appeal and response, which has its beginning, advance
and consummation.

(_β_) The _second_ material which enlists our attention is no longer
the physical quality asserted in the sound, but the essential
definition of the tone itself, and its relation to other tones. This
objective relation, whereby musical tone in the first instance, not
merely in its essential and emphatically defined singularity, but
also in its fundamental relation to simultaneously persistent tones,
expatiates, constitutes the actual _harmonious_ element of music,
and is based, regarded under its own original physical conditions,
upon _quantitative differences_ and numerical proportions. A closer
examination of the contents of this system of harmony presents, as
understood to-day, the following points of importance.

_First_, we have _separate_ tones in their definite metrical relation,
and associated with other tones. This is the theory of particular
_intervals._

_Secondly_, there is the connected series of tones or notes in their
simplest form of succession, in which one tone immediately leads up to
another; such are the _scales._

_Thirdly_, we have the distinctive characteristics of these scales,
which, in so far as each starts from a different tone, as its
fundamental tone, is thereby differentiated into the particular _keys_
distinct from each other, and into the system of keys which they
constitute.

(_αα_) The particular notes do not only receive their tone, but also
the more inclusively positive[445] determination of such sound by
virtue of a corporeal substance in vibration. In order to get at this
determinacy we have to define the type of vibration itself not in
any chance or capricious manner, but once for all as it essentially
is. The column of air, for example, or the string or surface under
tension, which produces sound possesses invariably a certain length or
extension. If we take a string, for instance, and fasten it between two
points, and set the part of it thus stretched in vibration, the points
of initial importance to discover are the thickness of the string, and
the degree of tension. If we have these two aspects identical in the
case of two strings then the all-important question follows, as was
first noticed by Pythagoras, what is the string's length, the reason
being that strings, in other respects identical, if of different
lengths give a different number of vibrations in the same interval
of time. The difference of one of these numbers from another and the
relation of any one to another constitutes the fundamental ground for
the distinction and relation between different tones in their degrees
of pitch as high or low. Doubtless when we listen to notes thus
related our perception carries little resemblance to one of numerical
relations. It is not necessary for us to know anything of numbers and
arithmetical proportions; and indeed when we do actually perceive a
string vibrating, such vibration passes away without our being able
to apprehend the numerical relation, while of course it is equally
unnecessary for us to glance at the body in vibration at all, in order
to receive the impression of its tone. An association, therefore,
between the tone and its numerical relations may very possibly at first
sight strike us, not merely as incredible, but we may receive the
impression that its acceptance implies that our sense of hearing and
ideal apprehension of harmonies suffer even depreciation when we look
for their cause in that which is purely quantitative. However this may
be, it is an undoubted fact that the numerical relation of vibrations
in identical periods of time is the foundation of the specific
definition of tones. The fact that our sense of hearing is essentially
simple is no valid objection. The apparently simple impression, no
less than the complex may, in respect to its essential character
and existence, carry within its compass other aspects essentially
multifold and related fundamentally to something different. When we
perceive, for example, blue or yellow, green or red, in the specific
purity of these colours, we receive in like manner the appearance of
a perfectly simple determinacy, whereas violet readily is decomposed
into its constituent colours of blue and red. Despite this fact the
pure blue is not a simple fact, but a distinct correlation and fusion
of light and shadow[446]. Religious emotions, a sense of right in any
particular case, appear to us in the same way as simple; nevertheless
all religious feeling, every impression that partakes of this sense
of right, is related to ourselves in entirely different ways, though
producing this simple feeling as its point of unity.

In just such a manner, then, tone is based upon a manifold, however
much we hear and perceive it as something entirely ultimate; a varied
nature, which, for the reason that musical tone comes into being
by means of the vibration of a body, and thereby together with its
vibrations is subject to temporal condition, is deducible from the
numerical relation of this oscillation in _time_, in other words from
the _determinate number_ of vibrations in a given period. I propose
to draw attention merely to the following points in respect to this
deduction.

_Tones that accord_ in the fullest sense, and on hearing which a
distinction is not perceptible as opposition, are those in the case of
which the numerical relation of their vibrations is of the _simplest_
character; those on the contrary which are not so out and out accordant
possess proportionate numbers more _complex._ As an example of the
first kind we have _octaves._ In other words, if we tune a string,
where we shall have the keynote given us by a definite number of
vibrations, and then halve the same; in that case this second half will
give us in the same time precisely the same number of vibrations as
the previous entire string[447]. Similarly in the case of _fifths_ we
have _three_ vibrations to two of the keynote; in the case of _thirds_
we have _five_ to _four_ of the keynote. In the case of seconds and
sevenths we have a different kind of proportion; here to _eight_
vibrations of the keynote we have in the former case _nine_ and in the
latter _fifteen._

(_ββ_) Inasmuch then--we have already referred to this--as these
relations cannot be posited as we like, but disclose an ideal necessity
for their particular aspects[448], no less than the totality they
together constitute, for the like reason the particular intervals,
which are fixed by such numerical relations, do not persist in their
relation of indifference to each other, but are inevitably comprised
together in and as a whole. The first form of this totality of notes
thus created is, however, as yet no _concrete_ concord of different
notes, but an entirely abstract series of a system, a series of notes
related under the most elementary mode to each other, and their
position within the totality thus comprised. This is no other than
the simple series of notes known as scales. The fundamental basis of
this is the tonic, which repeats itself in its octave, and is extended
through the remaining six notes placed between these limits, which by
virtue of the fact that the keynote directly falls into unison with its
octave makes a return upon itself. The remaining notes of the scale
either harmonize completely[449] with the keynote, as is the case with
the fifth and the third, or possess a more fundamental distinction of
sound in conflict with it, as is the case with seconds and sevenths,
and take their place consequently in a definite series, which, however,
I do not now propose to discuss or explain further.

(_γγ_) _Thirdly_, in these scales we find the source of different
_keys._ In other words, every note of the scale can, in its turn,
be posited as the keynote of a fresh series of notes, which is
co-ordinated precisely as the first is. With the development of
the scale through an increase of notes the number of keys has
correspondingly increased. Modern music avails itself of a larger
variety of keys than that of the ancients. Further, inasmuch as
generally the different notes of the scales, as already observed,
are related to one another in unobstructed harmony, or a relation
that deviates from such immediacy in a more fundamental way, it
follows that the different series which arise from these notes, taken
severally as keynotes, either display a closer relation of affinity,
and consequently permit of a passage readily from one to another, or,
on account of their alien character, do not so admit of this. Add to
this that the keys are divided from each other by the distinction
of hardness and softness, that is, as major or minor tonality; in
conclusion they possess, in virtue of their key-note, from which
they are generated, a definite character, which of itself responds
to a particular kind of emotion, such as lamentation, joy, mourning,
and so forth. In this particular even writers in ancient times have
anticipated much on the subject of distinction between the keys, and
applied their theory in many ways to actual composition.

(_γ_) The _third_ important matter, with the discussion of which we may
conclude our brief remarks upon the theory of harmony, is concerned
with the simultaneous concord of the notes themselves, in other words,
the _system of chords._

(_αα_) We have no doubt already seen that the intervals constitute a
whole; this totality, however, is in the first instance comprised in
the scales and the keys merely in the form of an associated series, in
the succession whereof each note is asserted separately in isolation.
In consequence the tonal sound remained abstract, because we find here
that it is only one particular and determinate tone that is asserted.
In so far, however, as the notes in fact are what they are[450] merely
in virtue of their relation to one another, it follows necessarily that
their tonal modality should attain also an existence as this concrete
body of tone itself, in other words different notes will have to
coalesce in one and the same body of tone. In this conjoint fusion, in
the composition of which, however, the mere number of notes capable of
such coalescence is not the essential point, for we may have a unity of
this kind with merely two[451], we possess our definition of _chords._
For inasmuch as the different notes are not definable for what they
are as a result of caprice or chance, but are necessarily regulated
by virtue of an ideal principle and co-ordinated in their actual
succession, it follows that a regularity of similar character will have
to declare itself in the chords, in order that we may determine what
kind of associations will be adapted to musical composition, and what
on the contrary must be excluded. It is these rules which first give us
the theory of harmony in the full sense; and it is according to this
we find again that the chords are embraced in an essentially regulated
system.

(_ββ_) In this system chords are particularized and distinguished in
their passage from one to another, inasmuch as it is clearly _defined_
notes which thus sound together. We have consequently to consider as
an immediate fact a totality of separately distinguishable chords. In
attempting the most general classification of these we shall find that
the original distinctions we cursorily alluded to in our discussion of
intervals, scales, and keys will once again serve us.

In other words the _first_ kind of chords are those in which notes
come together, which are completely consonant. In the musical effect
of these consequently there is no opposition, no contradiction
perceptible; the consonance remains completely undisturbed. Such is
the case in the so-called _consonant_ chords, the foundation of which
is supplied by the _triad._ This confessedly is generated from the
key-note, the third, the mediant[452] and the fifth or dominant. In
these we find the notion of harmony expressed in its simplest form, or
rather the intrinsic idea of harmony generally. For we have a totality
of distinct notes under consideration, which assert this distinction
while they also declare an undisturbed unity.

We have here an immediate identity, which moreover is not without the
element of separation and mediation, albeit this mediation is not at
the same time limited by the self-subsistency of different tones[453],
satisfied with the mere transitional passage from one note to another
in the relation of a series, but the unity is here an actual one and a
return in immediacy upon itself.

But in the _second_ place we may observe as a further incident of
distinct types of the triad, which I cannot now examine in more detail,
the deliberate appearance of a deeper mode of opposition. We have,
however, already at an earlier stage seen that the scales contain
over and above those notes, which coalesce without opposition, others
which annul such consonance. Examples of these are the diminished
and augmented seventh. Inasmuch as these notes equally belong to the
totality of tones, they too will necessarily find an entrance into the
triad form. And when this happens it follows that the immediate unity
and consonance above mentioned is disturbed, to the extent that we
have added a tone essentially of another character, by means of which
for the first time we meet with a _genuine difference_ which actually
asserts itself as contradiction. In this way we have the true depth of
musical tone really asserted. It proceeds to contradictions that are
fundamental and does not flinch from the acerbity[454] or fracture they
involve. And, in fact, the notion in its truth is no doubt essential
unity; but it is not only immediate unity, but one which ideally is
disrupt, which falls into contradictions. In this sense I have for
example in my Logic developed the notion as subjectivity, but at
the same time disclosed how this subjectivity, as ideal transparent
unity, is resolved in that which confronts it in opposition, namely,
objectivity. And further such subjectivity regarded as itself wholly
ideal is nothing more than a one-sided and abstract presentment of
it, which as such retains a something else, an opposed other over
against it, namely, objectivity, and only becomes subjectivity in the
profounder significance of its truth, in so far as it enters into this
opposing other-than-itself, overcomes it and resolves it. And for
this reason in the world of reality it is to the higher natures that
power is given to endure the pain of that fundamental contradiction of
conscious life and to overcome it. In order that music therefore may as
an art express the ideal significance no less than purely subjective
emotion of the profoundest content, that of religion for example, and
above all that of the Christian religion, in which the profoundest
depth of suffering is an essential constituent, it must possess the
means within its empire of tone to depict such a conflict of opposing
forces. And a means of this kind it does possess in the so-called
dissonant chords of the seventh and ninth[455]. The function of these,
however, I cannot venture further to discuss here.

Looking, however, from a general point of view at the nature of these
chords I would draw attention to the _further_ important point, that
they hold what is contradictory, under the mode of contradiction
already explained, in one and the same unity. That, however, what is
contradictory as such should remain in unity is a contradiction in
terms and unintelligible. The very nature and notion of a contradiction
assumes that assured repose in it and what it implies is impossible.
On the contrary it is as such self-destructive. Harmony is therefore
unable to remain in chords of this character; our ear and feeling, in
order to obtain satisfaction, imperatively demands their resolution.
To the extent of this contradiction we are inevitably impelled to seek
a _resolution_ of dissonance and a return to the consonant triad. And
this motion, as the return of the principle of identity upon itself,
is the movement of truth in the widest sense. In the art of music,
however, this completed identity is only possible as a succession
of its moments in time, which appears consequently as a series, but
declares its collective dependence in this that a necessary movement of
an advance, which is essentially self-caused and a movement of change
belonging to its very nature, is thereby asserted.

(_γγ_) And this suggests a _third_ point it may be as well to draw
attention to. In other words just as the scale was an essentially
co-ordinate, albeit in the first instance still abstract series
of tones, so too the chords do not persist in their isolation and
self-consistency, but possess an ideal relation to one another, and a
necessary impulse to change and progress. In this advance, although
the same can be changed and extended to a far more considerable extent
than in the scales, yet again mere caprice is not more possible in the
one case than the other. The transition of chord to chord is effected
in part by the nature of the chords themselves, and in part by the
keys, to which these chords lead us. It is in virtue of this that the
theory of music has established many rules, to enumerate and adequately
explain which would, however, extend our survey into much too difficult
and discursive matters. I must therefore rest content with having
confined myself to a few observations of most general interest.

(_c_) _Melody_

Taking now a glance in retrospect on that which, as connected with the
means of musical expression, has already engaged our attention, it will
be seen that first in order came the mode of configuration appropriate
to the _temporal_ duration of tones considered as time-measure, beat,
and rhythm. We then proceeded to discuss the _actual tones_ of musical
sound themselves; _first_, that is to say, in the sound produced by
musical instruments and the human voice; _secondly_, in the fixed and
determinate measure of the intervals, and the abstract succession of
notes that are subject to them in the scale and the various keys;
_thirdly_, in the rules which appertain to the different chords and
their conjoint progression. The concluding subject, which still remains
for us to consider, and in which those previous to it discover their
synthetic unity, and disclose in the same the fundamental form by
virtue of which tones are for the first time in veritable freedom and
union unfolded and coordinated, is _melody._

In other words, harmony possesses merely the essential relations,
which establish the law of necessity in the world of tone; but these
are not in themselves, any more than beat and rhythm are, actually
music: they are rather the substantive basis, the foundation of rule
and principle, upon which the soul in its freedom expatiates. The
poetry of music, that speech of human souls, which pours forth the
ideal atmosphere and the pain of emotional life, and in this overflow
is raised with a sense of alleviation above the natural constraint of
feeling, by making present to the soul that which actually affects it
strongly; by enabling it freely to dally round its essential being, and
by liberating it by this very means from the oppression of joys and
sufferings--well, this power of soul-expression in the domain of music
is in the first instance melody[456]. It is this concluding section
of our inquiry, in so far as it constitutes the more supremely poetic
aspect of music, the realm of its really artistic creations, while
availing itself of the elements previously discussed, which obviously
possesses an exceptional claim to our attention. Unfortunately it is
just in this direction that we find ourselves confronted with the
difficulties already adverted to. In other words, to mention one of
them, a detailed and scientific treatment of the subject implies a more
accurate knowledge of the laws of composition, and a totally different
sort of acquaintance with the masterpieces of musical composition to
any I possess or indeed am able to secure, for we seldom hear anything
of a definite or conclusive character on this head either from musical
experts or practical musicians, from the latter, only too frequently
men of very average intelligence, least of all. And we may further
observe that it is a characteristic of the art of music itself, that we
should find the task of presenting and expounding particular detail in
general terms a less easy matter than in the case of the other arts.
It is true enough that music, as other arts, deals essentially with a
spiritual content, and propounds the ideality of this subject-matter,
or the ideal movements of emotional life, as the object of its
expression: yet for all that this content remains more indefinite
in outline and more vague, for just this very reason that it is
apprehended with exclusive regard to its ideality, or is reflected in
sound as subjective feeling; and the transitional states of music are
not in each case at the same time the change of a particular emotion
or idea, a thought or an individual form, but are merely a musical
progression, which consists in self-exposition or play, and avails
itself of artistic method for this purpose. I will consequently limit
myself merely to the following general observations, which have fallen
in my way and strike me as of interest.

(_α_) From a certain point of view, no doubt, melody, in its free
disclosure of musical tone, floats independent of beat, rhythm, and
harmony; but none the less the only means employed in its realization
are just these rhythmical and metrically constructed movements of tone
in their essentially necessary relations. The movement of melody,
therefore, is inseparable from the means employed to create it, and, if
merely opposed to the practical necessity of the subjection of these
means to rule, is unable to exist at all. In this intimate association
between melody and harmony, however, no real surrender of freedom is
involved: what melody is thus emancipated from is a purely capricious
fancy of the composer exercised in odd or eccentric progressions and
transitions. It is united by this very association to a stable and
self-consistent art. Genuine liberty is not opposed to the principle
of necessity as a foreign and therefore oppressive and suppressive
power; rather it possesses in the substantive character of the same
what is a constituent of and identical with the core of its being; in
following the demands of it it therefore is only conforming to its own
laws, acting in accordance with its own nature. And in fact it is by
the rejection of such proscriptions and only then that it proves an
alien to its nature, untrue to itself. Conversely, it is sufficiently
obvious that beat, rhythm, and harmony are, taken independently, merely
abstractions, which as thus isolated have no musical[457] significance,
and are able only to acquire real existence as music in virtue of
melody, and as within the domain of this, supplying moments to or
aspects in its realization. It is precisely in the manner that the
distinction between melody and harmony is thus effectively mediated and
resolved that the secret power of great compositions is disclosed.

(_β_)_Secondly_, in this question of the _individual_ character of
melody the following points appear to me of importance.

(_αα_) In the _first_ place, melody may be restricted, if we consider
its harmonious progression, to a very simple compass of chords and
keys, extended within the embrace of tone-relations destitute of all
opposition in their harmonious fusion, which it employs merely as the
fundamental ground on which to develop its more appropriate form and
movement. Song melodies, for instance, which be it understood are not
on that account in the least superficial, but may express the depths
of soul-life, as a rule are motived by constructive harmony of this
most simple character. They do not propound the more difficult problems
of chords and keys in so far as they deal with such things and their
modulation at all. They are mainly satisfied with obtaining a simple
harmonious accompaniment, which is not carried to the point of serious
opposition, and consequently requires few resolutions in order to
recover the final impression of unity. Such a mode of composition no
doubt may lead to superficial results, such as we find in a great many
modern Italian and French melodies. In such cases the development
of the harmony is entirely superficial. The composer endeavours to
substitute for the genuine demand of his work in this aspect of it
a merely piquant charm of rhythm or flavour of some kind. Generally
speaking, none the less the emptiness of a melody is not the inevitable
result of a simple harmonic basis.

(_ββ_) A further distinction consists in this that melody in the case
supposed is no longer developed, as in our previous example, merely in
the exposition of separate notes composed upon a relatively independent
harmonic progression, regarded simply as the base of it: in the
melody now under consideration every separate note of the melody is
substantially complete as a concrete whole In a chord. In this manner
it, on the one hand, includes a world of tones, and from another it
is so closely interwoven with the movement of the harmony, that it is
now impossible to retain the distinction previously accepted between a
melody unfolded in relative independence, and a harmony which supplies
the emphatic pauses of the accompaniment and its more fixed and
determinate musical basis. Harmony and melody are here one and the same
compact whole, and a modification of the one implies a correspondent
and necessary alteration of the other[458]. This may be pre-eminently
illustrated by chorales written in four parts. In like manner the
same melody can be so interwoven in the varied vocal expression of its
parts, that this interlacery itself creates a harmonic progression; or
we may have different melodies in a similar way elaborated harmonically
in association, so that the union of particular notes of these melodies
produces musical harmony. We often, for example, meet with this in the
compositions of Sebastian Bach. In such cases the music progresses by
means of parts that vary greatly from one another in their character
and movement, which appear to associate or inter-thread with each other
on independent lines, yet retain at the same time an essential harmonic
relation to each other. A necessary and coherent union is thereby
asserted.

(_γγ_) In composition of this kind it is not merely necessary for music
which has any claim to profundity to be developed to the bare limits
of undisturbed consonance, nay, even first to pass beyond it in order
that it may return thereto: rather the first simple mode of concord
will have to be rent asunder in dissonances. It is only through such
conflict that the profounder combinations and mysteries of music in
which an independent necessity reposes, discovers their source and
ground; and for the same reason it is only in such profounder harmonic
progressions that the arresting moments of melody originate. A bold
style of musical composition will consequently part company with a
purely consonant progression. It will pass into the sphere of opposing
forces, will summon to its aid the most discordant contrasts, and
disclose its unique power amid the tumult of all the resources of
harmony, the conflicts of which it is equally able to calm, wholly
confident in its ability to celebrate finally the grateful triumph of
melodic tranquillity. We have in short here a battle waged between
freedom and necessity; a conflict between the freedom of inventive
genius, seeking to yield itself to its upward flight, and the
necessary constraint of those harmonic conditions, which it is forced
to acknowledge as the means of its expression, and in which its own
ideal significance is reflected. On the other hand if the harmony, the
employment, that is, of all its resources, the unrelenting nature
of its conflict in the disposal of them and in its attitude to them
is the main interest, the composition may very easily become heavy
and overweighted with science, in so far at least as the freedom of
movement is really impaired, or at least we are not allowed to feel the
complete effect of its triumph.

(_γ_) To put the matter in other words, in every genuine melody a truly
melodic, songful impulse, which is its essential type as music, must
declare itself as predominant and independent, as something which it
neither forgets nor loses in the plenitude of its expression. Thus
regarded melody presents, no doubt, an infinite power of adaptation
and coordination in the progressive motion of tones, but the mode or
form of this must be such that throughout we are made aware of an
essentially complete and self-subsistent whole. This totality contains,
it is true, a varied complexity, and implies in itself a forward
advance; but it must for all that, regarded as a whole, be beyond
all doubt rounded off and secure. It must therefore have a distinct
beginning and termination to the extent at least that the intermediate
part of it may be simply presented as the mediating link between that
beginning and end. Only as such a movement, asserted with unmistakable
emphasis, itself self-differentiated and returning on its own unity,
does the melody of music reflect the free self-consciousness[459] of
soul-life, whose expression it ought to be; only as thus perfected can
music, in its own peculiar medium of ideality, enforce expression in
its pure immediacy, or avail itself of the ideal freedom of that mode
of expression which is the untarnished reflection of the inner life, an
expression which, despite its subordination to the necessary laws of
harmony, enables the soul to perceive a more exalted vision.



3. THE RELATION BETWEEN MEANS OF EXPRESSION IN MUSIC AND ITS CONTENT


After passing in review the general nature of musical art we considered
the particular aspects according to which notes and their duration in
time secured their necessary form. Having now arrived in our discussion
of melody at the confines of a world of free artistic invention and
actual musical composition, what we have now to deal with is a
_content_, which, under its rhythm, harmony, and melody, is capable of
receiving an expression conformable to art's requirements. After fixing
clearly in our minds general modes of this expression we shall as our
conclusion be in an advantageous position to review the different
provinces of musical composition. With these objects before us we may
in the first instance advert to the following important distinction.

On the one side music may be, as already observed, in the nature of
an _accompaniment._ This is the case where its spiritual content is
not merely seized in the abstract ideality of its significance, or
as individual emotion, but enters into the movement of the music
subordinate to the significance it has already received from idea and
words. As a type of music opposed to this we have the composition which
is disconnected with any such content already prepared for it; music
in this case establishes itself in its own proper sphere, so that
it either, if it still is forced to deal with a definitely received
content, resolves the same wholly in melodies and their harmonic
development, or asserts its _absolute independence_ in the medium
of musical tone simply and its harmonic or melodic configuration.
We have already seen that a similar distinction is apparent in a
wholly different section of our inquiry. I refer to the case of
architecture considered either as an independent art, or in the service
it renders to that of building generally. But in music the mode of
its accompaniment is of an essentially freer type than that of our
illustration; it is far more intimately united with its content than is
ever possible in the case of architecture.

In the actual domain of art this distinction marks the difference
between _vocal_ and _instrumental_ music. We are not, however, entitled
to accept it in the purely external interpretation of it, as though
in vocal music it was merely the sound of the human voice, while in
instrumental music it was the more varied tones of the many distinct
instruments which were made serviceable. We must not in other words
overlook the fact that the voice expresses at the same time in its song
deliberate speech, presenting us the ideas of a specific content, so
that music, regarded as the _word that is sung_, if the twofold aspect
of the same in tone and human speech is not to fall into a condition
of indifference or absence of relation, is obviously bound, so far as
the art enables it to do so, to supply its musical expression to this
_content_, which as such _content_ is brought before the receptive
faculties in its nearest approach to definition, and no longer is
left unrelated in more indefinite feeling. In so far, however, as
the presented content, as libretto, is, despite of the above union,
independently ascertainable in legible form, and is also consequently
distinguishable in the mind itself from its musical expression, to this
extent the music attached to a libretto is an _accompaniment_, whereas
in sculpture and painting the unfolded content does not already attain
to any presentment independently of its artistic form. At the same time
we must be careful not to go to the other extreme and entertain an idea
of such accompaniment, as though its entire purpose were one solely
of subordination; the truth is precisely the reverse. The libretto is
written in the interest of the music, and has no further importance
save in so far as it brings home to the mind a more intimate knowledge
of the actual subject the artist has selected for his work. Music
maintains this freedom pre-eminently by virtue of the fact that it does
not apprehend the content in the manner the libretto may be assumed to
make it intelligible. Rather it exhibits its mastery of a medium, to
which sense-perception and imaginative idea do not belong[460]. In this
respect I have already, when discussing the general characteristics
of music, pointed out that music expresses the principle of ideality
in its intrinsic quality. The ideality of soul-life, however, may
be of a _twofold_ type. That is to say, to accept an object in its
_ideal presentation_[461] may, in the first place, mean that we do
not conceive it in its actual appearance in the phenomenal world,
but relatively to its _ideal significance._ We may, however, mean by
this, secondly, that a content is expressed as we find it realized in
the experience of personal _emotion._ Both forms of idealization are
represented in the art of music. I will therefore endeavour to explain
in more detail how this comes about.

In old church music, take the movement of a _crucifixus est_ for
example, we find that the profound meanings unfolded in the central
idea of the Passion regarded as Christ's suffering, death, and burial,
are severally so conceived, that it is not simply one merely _personal_
feeling of sympathy or individual pain over these facts that is
expressed, but along with this the very facts themselves, or in other
words the depth of their significance is motived by the harmony of the
music and its melodic progression. It is, of course, true that even
here the impression is one which acts upon the emotion of those who
hear it. We do not actually _perceive_ the pain of the crucified, we do
not merely receive a general _idea_ of it; the aim is throughout that
we experience in the depths of our being the ideal substance of this
death and this divine suffering, that we absorb with heart and soul its
reality, so that it becomes as it were a part of ourselves, permeating
our entire conscious life to the exclusion of everything else. And in
like manner must the soul of the composer, if his work is to disclose
such a power of impress upon others, entirely lose itself in these
facts and only in them. It must not merely have experienced a personal
emotion of them. It must accept as its aim the task of making in its
music the facts themselves live again for the ideal sense.

Conversely, I may read a text, a libretto, which narrates an event,
places before me an action, gives to feelings the impress of speech,
and thereby become moved even to tears in my profoundest being. This
effect of _personal_ emotion, which may attend all human action and
conduct, every expression of inner life, and further may be excited
by the perception of every such event and by participation in the
presentment of such, the art of music is able to regulate; by so
doing it ameliorates, tranquilizes and idealizes by its influence the
fellow-feeling in the listener who finds himself attuned to it. In both
cases, therefore, the content rings through the inner life, in which
music, for the very reason that it subdues consciousness in the simple
attitude of rapt attention[462], is able to restrain the unfettered
range of thought, imagination, sensation, and passage beyond the true
boundary-line of the subject on hand. Music, in short, keeps the soul
absorbed in a particular content, fructifies its energy therein, and
moves and fills the life of feeling up to the brim within these limits.

Such is our conception and description, so far as the present occasion
permits, of the manner of which music, as an accompaniment, when
dealing with a definite content which is, as previously explained, set
before it by means of a libretto, elaborates that aspect of it we have
termed ideality. Inasmuch, however, as music is pre-eminently called
up to do this in vocal music, and the human voice is added to this
associated with instruments, it is customary to speak of instrumental
music in a special sense as the music of accompaniment. It is no doubt
true that it accompanies the voice, and should not either assert
unqualified independence or claim an unqualified precedency. But for
all that vocal music is placed, as thus associated, in a more direct
relation still under the definition previously given of an accompanying
tone. The voice expresses words articulate to the mind; and song is
merely a fresh or additional modification of the content of these
words, or in other words it is the explication of them in the language
of the emotions. In the case of instrumental music, if taken by itself,
the expression of imaged idea vanishes, and such music must necessarily
confine itself to the means and modes of purely musical expression[463].

The discussion of these points suggests a _third_ one, which, in
conclusion, it is well not to overlook. I have previously drawn
attention to the fact that the reality of a musical composition, in
its full and vital embodiment, depends on a continually repeated
reproduction. In this respect it is at a disadvantage as compared
with sculpture and painting. The sculptor, no less than the painter,
conceives a given work and executes it throughout. The entire artistic
activity implied therein is centred in one single individual, and
by this means absolute reciprocity between the creative idea and
its execution is secured. The architect, on the contrary, is in a
less favourable position, who, in carrying through all the variety
of structure in a building, has to entrust such work to other hands
than his own. The composer in a similar way, must leave the execution
of his work to other hands and voices. But in his case there is
this difference, that the execution, from the point of view of mere
technique, no less than that of the vital spirit of his work, itself
demands an artistic activity, not one of mere craftsmanship. In this
respect we may in our own time, no less than previously in that of
the older Italian opera, whereas in other arts there has been little
or nothing fresh of the kind, point to a marvellous advance in two
respects in music. The first is to be noted in the conception, the
second in the increased virtuosity of execution. It is due to these
results the very notion of what music implies and is able to perform
has, even in the case of acknowledged experts, been increasingly
enlarged[464].

We may now briefly summarize the heads of the concluding sections of
this portion of our work.

_First_, we shall investigate more carefully music regarded as
_accompaniment_, and raise the question with what modes of expression
in a given content it is as a rule most compatible.

_Secondly_, it will be necessary to consider this question more closely
as viewed in relation to musical composition that is _exclusively
independent._

_Thirdly_, our conclusion will be reached with a few observations upon
artistic _execution._


(_a_) _Music as Accompaniment_

It follows, as a necessary result of what I have already described
as being the relative position of libretto and music, that, in this
sphere of its activity, musical expression is compelled to concern
itself far more exclusively with a defined content than in the
alternative case where it is able to surrender itself without restraint
to its own movement and inspiration. A libretto offers us to start
with definite ideas, and compels the attention to forsake that field
of more visionary emotion destitute of distinct idea, in which we are
permitted to range without interruption, and are not forced to abandon
our licence to receive from pure music whatever chance impression or
wave of emotion it may arouse. In this act of artistic interlacery
with words, however, it is not right that music should carry its
loyalty so far as to impair the free course of its progressions, even
though it do so with the object of emphasizing the full character of
what is contained in the libretto. To do this is to employ the mere
pedantry of learning, to adapt means of musical expression for the most
faithful presentment possible of a content which is not in the first
instance its own, but supplied it externally. It is to accept this
artificial result rather than the creation of a real self-subsistent
work of art. And to that extent we have here evidenced a definite check
and hindrance to free artistic activity. It is equally wrong in the
opposite extreme that music should, as is almost invariably the fashion
with modern Italian composers, wholly emancipate itself from the
contents of the libretto, as though its specific character were only a
bond, and with no other aim than that of approaching independent music
as closely as possible. The true function of such music is this. It
ought to steep itself in the meaning of the expressed words, situation,
or action, and by virtue of such impregnation, ideally conceived,
discover therefrom a vitally arresting expression, and elaborate
the same in terms congenial to art. That is the course followed by
all great masters. They appropriate everything of vital interest in
the words; but the stream of their music, the tranquil flow of the
composition, remains for all that as free as ever. We acknowledge the
natural growth of the music no less than its affinity to the text it
illustrates. We would draw attention to _three_ distinct types of
expression all illustrative of this free spirit.

(_α_) To start with, there is that aspect of musical expression which
we may describe as the truly _melodic._ We have here simply emotion,
the utterance of soul itself, which, apart from anything else, finds
self-enjoyment in such expression.

(_αα_) The domain here, in which the composer moves, is coincident with
the human heart and the moods of the soul; and melody, which is the
pure musical utterance of this inward world, is in the most profound
sense the soul of music. Musical tone only attains to expression
that is really vital when emotion is embodied in it or reflected in
sound from it. Connected with this the purely natural cry of feeling,
whatever it may be, of horror, for example, or the sobbing of grief, or
the exclamation or outburst of uncontrolled jubilation, are themselves
highly expressive; and indeed I have already referred to them as the
starting-point of music, subject of course to the statement that art
is unable to accept them under the mode of purely natural utterance.
Here, too, we find a distinction between music and painting. The art of
painting is frequently able to produce the most beautiful and artistic
effect by its realization in every respect of the actual form, the
colour and animation of a particular human being in some definite
situation and environment, and its complete reflection of all that it
has thus assimilated and received in its bare vitality. The truth of
Nature, if presented conformably to artistic truth, is here entirely
justified. But the art of music ought not thus to repeat emotional
expression in the form it assumes as a purely natural utterance of
passion; what it should do is to vitalize with the emotional forces
musical sound elaborated under the definite conditions of its tonal
progression, and to this extent resolve the expression in a medium of
sound wholly created by art and inseparable from the artistic purpose,
a medium in which the mere cry becomes a series of musical tones with a
definite progression, the transitions and course of which are subject
to the laws of harmony and unfolded in the completeness of a melodic
phrase.

(_ββ_) The essential significance of this melodic quality and its
bearing on the human spirit is best apprehended if we view the latter
as a whole. The fine arts of sculpture and painting give an objective
existence to the ideality of soul-life; moreover, they liberate
the mind from this externality of their presentation in so far as,
from a certain point of view, it discovers itself therein as an
ideal, spiritual work, and from another everything which partakes
of adventitious singularity[465], of capricious idea, opinion, and
reflection, is rejected, the content thereof being placed before us
in its entirely appropriate individuality. The art of music, on the
contrary, as we have repeatedly pointed out, possesses as a means to
such objectivity merely the element of the soul-life itself, by means
of which that which purely belongs to this enters into conversation
with itself, and as expressed in the utterance of emotion itself
returns, as it were, upon itself. Music is spirit or soul, which ring
forth in their untrammelled immediacy, and derive satisfaction in this
record of their self-knowledge. As a fine art, however, it is its
necessary function to regulate the expression of such life no less
than its effects. It ought not to permit that expression to be whirled
away in bacchantic thunder and tumult, or be left in the distraction
of despair, but retain the blessed freedom of its deliverance in the
extremity of sorrow no less than the jubilant outburst of delight.
And this is the character of truly ideal music, the utterance of
melody such as we find it in Palestrina, Durante, Lotti, Pergolese,
Glück, Haydn, and Mozart. Tranquillity of soul is never lost in the
compositions of these masters. Grief is no doubt often expressed, but
the resolution is always there; the luminous sense of proportion never
breaks down in extremes: everything finds its due place knit together
in the whole; joy is never suffered to degenerate into unseemly uproar
and even lamentation carries with it the most benign repose. I have
already, when discussing Italian painting, emphasized the fact, that
a spirit of reconciliation is not wanting even in extreme examples
of sorrow and distraction of soul; by virtue of this, even where we
have tears and suffering, some trait of tranquillity and assurance is
preserved; the tenderness and grace which assert themselves in the
harlequin's rôle illustrates the same truth. In like manner a feeling
for nature and the endowment of musical expression is preeminently
a characteristic of the Italians. In their earlier church music we
find that, along with the deepest devotional feeling, the sense of
reconciliation is expressed in its purity; and though grief may stir
the soul most profoundly, yet beauty and rapturous joy, the simple
greatness and impress of an imagination which discovers delight in
its own varied expatiation, is equally present. It is a beauty of
an apparently sensuous type, so that it is not unusual to refer to
such melodious contentment as a purely sensuous enjoyment. But it is
sometimes overlooked that it is precisely in this realm of the senses
that art discovers its life and movement, and thereby transfers Spirit
to a sphere in which, as in the world of Nature, this essential wave of
self-satisfaction is throughout the fundamental tone.

(_γγ_) Albeit, therefore, _particularity_ of emotional content must
be duly represented, yet it is right that music, while permitting
passion and imagination to stream forth in its harmonies, should at
the same time lift the soul that is absorbed in such emotion over the
same, enable it to hover around such content, and in short create an
atmosphere wherein the recovery from such an absorption, and the pure
reflection of itself is possible. This it is which gives us in fact
the really melodious character to song-music. The important feature
of it is not merely the progression of determinate emotion such as we
indicate by the words love, yearning, jollity, and so forth; it is
rather that inward sense, which presides over it, which expatiates
in its suffering no less than its delight, and finds satisfaction in
doing so. Precisely as the bird in the brake, the lark on high sings
its glad and touching song for the mere sake of singing, an outburst
of Nature herself, having no further thought or intention whatever,
it is just the same with human song and the expression of its melody.
Consistently with this not infrequently Italian music, in which this
truth is pre-eminently emphasized, will, just as poetry will, pass into
mere melodious sound simply, and can readily appear to part company
with the emotional stimulus and its particular mode of expression, or
even in fact do so, for the very good reason that its object is the
enjoyment of art by itself, and the contentment of all who thus are
able to enjoy themselves. And apart from the Italians this is more or
less the characteristic of all right melody. The specific nature of the
expression, albeit present also, passes away, in so far as our hearts
are absorbed in what we appropriate rather as our own, than in that
which belongs to another, a something beyond us. By reason of this and
this alone--it is much as we receive the impression of pure light--we
are admitted to the most intimate conception of ideal blessedness and
attuned spirits.

(_β_) In the art of sculpture the predominant impression is ideal
beauty or self-repose. Painting, on the other hand, already presents
a movement in the direction of specific characterization, and the
emphasis it attaches to articulate expression is an essential feature
of its executive purpose. In a similar fashion the art of music is
unable to rest satisfied with melodious expression as above indicated.
The purely emotional grasp by the soul of its intrinsic nature, and the
play in musical sound of this apprehension is, regarded as the mere
atonement of mood, when we take it strictly, too general and abstract.
It is inseparable from the danger not merely of an alienation from the
more careful interpretation of the content expressed in the libretto,
but of that of becoming generally empty and trivial. If sorrow, joy,
yearning, and so forth are to find adequate reflection in melody, the
soul that is actual and concrete only comes by such emotions in the
downright reality of the same as involved in a veritable content,
that is, in particular situations, events, actions, and so on. If,
for example, a song arouses the emotion of mourning, the lament at a
loss, we inevitably ask ourselves, what is the nature of that loss.
Is it, shall we say, the loss of life with all its many interests?
Is it a loss of youth, happiness, wife, beloved, children, friends,
or anything else? For this reason it is further incumbent upon music
that it should of itself differentiate in like manner its mode of
expression when dealing with a _specific_ content and the _various
relations_ and situations, which the soul has experienced, and the
more ideal or intimate life of which it seeks to reflect in its
harmonies. Music in short is not primarily concerned with the bare form
of the inward soul, but with that innermost life as replenished, the
specific content of which is most closely related to the particular
character of the emotion roused, so that the mode of the expression
will, or should, inevitably assert itself with essential differences,
according to the varied nature of the content. In a similar way the
soul, precisely in the degree that it takes a headlong plunge into
any distracting experience, proceeds through an accumulating series of
effects, and, in opposition to our previously described state of benign
self-contentment, passes through conflicts and distraction, wrestlings
with passions, and in short reaches an extreme of division, for which
the mode of expression hitherto observed is no longer adequate.

Now what we mean by the detail of the content is just that which is
supplied by the _libretto_ or words. In the case of a simple melody,
which is less concerned with this specific character, the more defined
characteristics of the _libretto_ are appreciably of less importance.
A song, for instance, although it essentially implies as a poem and
text a whole of variedly motived moods, perceptions, and ideas, none
the less as a rule asserts throughout one fundamental progression of
emotion; it is primarily one chord of the soul that it emphasizes. To
grasp this, and to reflect the same in the language of music, this
is what such song-melody is mainly called upon to do. Consequently
we may have identically the same music through all the verses of our
poem, although the meaning they carry admits of much variety; and
what is more, this very repetition, so far from proving injurious to
the effect, may serve to enforce and enhance it. We may see the same
thing in a landscape, where, too, the most varied objects confront
the vision, and yet for all that the prevailing mood and aspect of
Nature, which animates the whole, is one and the same. It is just such
a prevailing tone that ought to assert itself in the song, and this,
though it only applies strictly to some of the verses, but does not so
apply to others; and the reason of this is that here the specific sense
of the words is not to be taken as of most importance. What comes first
is the simple melody that floats freely over all variety of content. In
the case of many compositions which infringe this principle, and which
start every fresh verse with a novel melody, which not unfrequently
varies from the preceding one in beat, rhythm, and even scale, it is
quite impossible to understand why, if such essential modifications
were really inevitable, the poem itself ought not to have been altered
in metre, rhythm, and rhyme, through all its verses.

(_αα_) What is, however, appropriate for the song, which is a genuine
melodious utterance of the soul, is not applicable to every kind of
musical expression. It is necessary, therefore, to draw attention to
a _further_ aspect in contrast to pure melody as such, one of equal
importance, and by virtue of which alone song is really brought into
line with accompanying music. We find this in that mode of expression
which is dominant in the _recitative._ Here we have no independently
exclusive melody, which at the same time reflects the fundamental mood
of the content, in the elaboration of which soul-life, as at home
with itself, receives back in musical sound some portion of its ideal
activity; rather in the case before us the content of the words, to the
full compass of its specific character, is imprinted upon the musical
expression, the import of which no less than the course it determines;
and this is so whether we regard it from the point of view of the
elevation or profundity which distinguishes it, or the prominence
or subordination of its particular features. By such means music,
as contrasted with melodic expression, approximates to an emphatic
declamation, one accurately corresponding with the movement of the
words, whether the view we take of them be that of their meaning, or
that of their syntactical arrangement. And in so far as it adds also,
as a novel element, the aspect of a more exalted emotion, it stands
midway between the pure melody and poetical speech. Conformably to
such a station, therefore, we have a free accentuation, which adheres
strenuously to the specific sense of particular words. Moreover it
is not necessary for the libretto in this case to be written in
any particular metre, nor need the musical exposition, as the pure
melody does in a like case, follow beat and rhythm with absolute
precision; rather the music under this condition of it, that is in its
acceleration, suspension, or pause in particular progressions, or rapid
passage over such, is entitled to adapt itself freely to the emotion
aroused by the meaning of the words. For the same reason the modulation
is not so restricted as in the case of melody. Precisely as the text
which it attempts to express may suggest, it may begin, proceed, pause,
break off, begin again, or stop with absolute licence. Unexpected
accents, progressions only partially mediated, sudden transitions
and resolutions are equally permissible; and, in direct contrast to
the continuous stream of melodious music, provided always that the
libretto's content requires it, this latter mode of expression is
equally in its place, though delivered in fragments, and torn asunder
by passionate emotion.

(_ββ_) Being of this character this form of declamatory expression,
known as recitative, is suitable for tranquil statement of situation,
or facts, no less than the presentment of the entire compass of the
emotions, under which the distraction of the soul in exceptional
circumstances is depicted, and which in its soul-full harmonies stirs
the heart sympathetically with its every movement. The recitative
is first mainly applicable to the oratorio, either as the declamed
narration, or the more vivacious presentment of instantaneous
occurrence; or, secondly, we find it in dramatic song, in which case
it can appropriately express every shade of parenthetical statement,
no less than every sort of passion, it matters not whether the result
be expressed in abrupt, curtailed, or fragmentary variation, or with
aphoristic violence, or in a dialogue of rapid lightning flashes
and counter flashes, or in a more continuous stream. In both these
provinces of epic or dramatic poetry, we may add that instrumental
music is a possible accompaniment. Its function in either case
is either quite simply to emphasize the pauses in the harmonic
progression, or to interrupt the course of melody with incidental
music, which, agreeably to the general import of the former, depicts in
musical language other aspects and movements of the situation.

(_γγ_) What, however, we find defective in this declamatory recitative
is just the qualities which are essentially characteristic of the pure
melody; these are the definite articulation and unification of its
parts, the expression of that spiritual homogeneity or unity of which
we have spoken, that which, it is true, is confined in a particular
content, but at the same time asserts its own sense of unity in that
content, being enabled to do this through its refusal to be distracted
or broken up by its absorption in particular aspects of it, or rather,
instead of this, still retaining in them as predominant its ideal
coalescence. For this reason the art of music cannot rest satisfied,
even where we are dealing with the more sharply defined features
of the libretto proposed, with such recitative of declamation; nor
in general can it remain content with the unmediated _difference_
between the pure melody, which, in comparison with it and as above
explained, floats over the particularity of the words, and the
recitative, whose task it is so far as possible to identify itself
with it. On the contrary we must look for some mode of _mediation_
between these extremes. We may compare with this new type of unity a
constituent which entered into our consideration of the distinction
between harmony and melody. This harmony was acknowledged as being not
merely the general, but to a like extent the essentially specific and
particularized foundation of melody; and far from the latter being
thereby deprived of its freedom of movement, we found that it only
thus secured for the same a power and definition comparable to that
the human organism secures by virtue of its consistent bone-structure,
which only impedes inappropriate postures and movements, while it adds
stability and security to the right ones.

This brings us to the final point of view of our discussion of music as
an accompaniment.

(_γ_) This _third_ mode of expression consists in this that the melodic
song, which accompanies words, is also involved in their particularized
substance, and thereby is not permitted to remain wholly indifferent
to the principle of most force in recitative; rather it appropriates
this with the result that while it repairs its own defects in clear
definition, it confers on the characteristic recitative an organic
articulation and a unified self-consistency. For, as already observed,
even that which is throughout melody is impossible without a certain
defined content. When, therefore, I mainly emphasized the fact that in
all and every mode of it the tranquil self-reflection of the soul's
own essential substance and ideal unity is the mode of expression
peculiarly that of simple melody, inasmuch as, musically considered, it
presents a similar unity and a similarly complete return upon itself, I
did so because I then had in view this aspect as the distinctive point
of contrast between the pure melody and the recitative. It is, however,
further incumbent on the melodic phrase to bring it about that its
mode come into actual possession of that which in the first instance
appears necessarily to have its movement outside it, and by means of
this replenishment, in so far as it then is equally of a declamatory
or a melodic character, for the first time attain to a truly concrete
expression. It follows also from the converse point of view that the
declamatory part of it is no longer independently aloof from it,
but finds its own one-sidedness supplemented in like manner by the
accretion of melodic expression. This is what constitutes the necessary
condition of such concrete unity. In order to examine this more closely
we had better keep distinct the following points of view.

_First_, it will be as well to glance at the kind of _libretto_, or
text, which is adapted to musical composition, and for this reason that
it has been now proved that clear definition in the content of words
adapted to music and its expression is of essential importance.

_Secondly_, we have now introduced as a fresh constituent of
_composition_ declamatory characterization; it will therefore be
necessary to consider this in its relation to the principle, which we,
in the first instance, identified as that of melody.

_Thirdly_, we must endeavour to specify the more prominent _modes_
under which we may review this type of musical expression.

(_αα_) Music[466] is not merely in a general way an accompaniment of
the content of a work in a sphere which already engages our attention,
but it is part of its function, as already observed, to define still
further the characterization of such a work. It is consequently an
injurious assumption that the construction of the libretto is a matter
of indifference to the musical composition. We find, on the contrary,
that really distinguished musical compositions presuppose an excellent
libretto, carefully selected by the composers or actually written by
them. It is impossible that an artist should treat with indifference
the material with which he is dealing and a musician least of all,
precisely in the degree that poetry has already worked out and settled
for him the epic, lyrical, or dramatic configuration of the content in
question.

What is of first importance in the construction of a good
text is this that its content should be stamped by essential
_self-consistency._[467] It is impossible that music should conjure
forth an artistic product of real strength and penetration from what
is commonplace, trivial, barren, or absurd. With all the spices and
seasonings in the world your musical chef will never make a hare
pie out of a roasted cat. In the case of song compositions no doubt
the nature of the words is less decisive, yet even here we require
words with a really genuine content. From a further point of view,
however, it is equally necessary that such a content should not tax
our reflection too much, or aspire to philosophical profundity, as is
rather the case with the lyrics of Schiller. In such an example the
extraordinary range of pathos exceeds the musical expression of lyrical
emotion. The same thing may be said of the choruses of Aeschylus
and Sophocles. The penetrative power here displayed in imaginative
conception is so exceptional, they are so elaborate in their detail
whether regarded in their scenic or ideal presentment, they are already
so absolutely complete as poetry that we have nothing left for music
to add to them[468]. We have literally no room left us for any further
play or exposition of ideal significance or movement beyond that
already presented. The more modern material and mode of treatment we
find in the so-called romantic poetry are in their type the strongest
contrast to these. Their pretension, as a rule, is that of being naive
and popular; but we only too frequently find a _naïveté_ which is
finical, artificial, and stilted. Instead of pure and genuine emotions
we get a _simplicitas_ that is nothing but feeling worked upon and
acting under the constraint of reflection; a false kind of yearning
and affectation, which is far too complaisant with dulness, stupidity,
and vulgarity, and is equally blind to the defects of passions, envy,
licence, and even devilish wickedness wholly without ideal content;
which is, moreover, as self-satisfied with its assumed excellence in
the one case as it is with the dissolution and baseness of the other.
Emotion that is spontaneous, simple, thorough, penetrative, is here
entirely absent, and music, in any attempt to reproduce it, can suffer
no greater injury. We may therefore accept the fact that neither mere
depth of thought, nor the vanity or worthlessness of mere emotion can
give us a satisfactory content. On the contrary what is most adapted
for music is a certain intermediate type of poetry, which we Germans
are loth even to admit as poetry, and the true feeling and talent for
which is more largely possessed by Italians and Frenchmen. It is a
poetry of a genuine lyrical quality, extremely simple, which indicates
situations and emotions in a few words. Where it is more dramatic it
remains luminous and vital without too involved a development; detail
is not so much elaborated, but it is rather, as a rule, concerned to
supply general effects, than the completely articulate results of a
poet's activity. We find here that the composer receives, in accordance
with his demand, merely the general foundation, upon which he can,
in subordination to his own invention, and his own threshing out of
motives of every kind, erect his building, treating many aspects of the
subject as part of his own life and movement. For inasmuch as music
has to adapt itself to words, these words should not particularize
the picture too closely; if they do the musical declamation becomes
absorbed in trifles, lacking in a common impulse, too contracted in
the direction of particular features, and the unity and general effect
is impaired. In this direction people are only too frequently at fault
when expressing an opinion upon the excellence or insufficiency of a
libretto. It is one of the most common verdicts, for example, that
the libretto of the Magic Flute is hopelessly bad, though this piece
of manufacture is nevertheless among the best of opera librettos.
Among the many wildly fantastic and commonplace productions of his
pen Schickaneder has in this for once hit the right track. The empire
of Night, with its queen, the empire of the Sun, these mysteries,
these initiations, this Wisdom, Love, these ordeals, and with it all
this typically world-wise ethic, excellent in the breadth of its
applicability--all this when combined with the depth, the bewitching
loveliness and soul of the music expands and floods our imagination,
and warms the heart.

To mention further examples, the old Latin texts of great masses and
other services are unrivalled for religious music. This is in part
due to the fact that they set before us in the greatest simplicity
and brevity the most general content of religious faith, in part also
to this that they present in the same spirit the varied stages of
emotion that accompany the substance of this in the consciousness of
the community of the faithful, and by doing both offer the musician a
wide field for his own particular development. The great Requiem and
many selections from the Psalms are equally serviceable. In a similar
way Handel welded his texts, partly from religious dogmas themselves,
but, above all, from scriptural passages and situations of symbolical
import, into a completely consistent whole.

In the field of lyrical poetry the more suitable for this purpose are
the emotional and shorter poems, in particular the simple ones, in
content no less than speech, steeped in emotion, which penetrate into
one prevailing mood or affection, or those too of lighter and more gay
character. There is hardly a nation that does not possess such. In the
sphere of drama I will only mention Metastasio, and with him Marmontel
the Frenchman, who, himself richly emotional, cultured, and lovable,
instructed Piccini in French, and knew so wisely how to combine in the
drama grace and vivacity with the skill and interest of the action and
development. But before all else we shall do well to emphasize the
libretti of the famous operas of Glück. Without exception we shall
find their motives simple. The content they offer to the emotions is
in a sphere the most sterling of all, depicting as they do the love of
mother, wife, sister, friendship, honour, and so forth, and permitting
these simple motives and the form of their essential collisions to
unfold in an atmosphere of tranquillity. And for this reason the
passion they disclose is throughout pure, great, noble, and of plastic
simplicity.

(_ββ_) It is, then, the function of music, by the characterization of
its expression no less than its wealth of pure melody, fittingly to
reproduce a content of the above nature. And that we may obtain such
a result it is not merely necessary that the text contain in itself
earnestness of heart, the comic and tragic greatness of human passion,
the depth of religious idea and emotion, the powers and fatalities
that the human breast discloses, the composer also on his part must be
absorbed wholly in the composition, and must have lived in and through
it heart and soul.

What is equally important is the relation under which what is
characteristic and melodious in such music is on either hand
associated. The main point appears to be, that as between them it
is the melodic expression which without exception, as the factor of
synthetic unity, which gains the day, rather than that which tends
to distract and break up the whole into particular characterization.
To take an example of the latter case from modern dramatic music,
the effect often sought for here is one of powerful contrasts, and
this is brought about by forcing into one continuous stream of music,
under the conditions of conflict permitted to the art, contrasted
passions. We have, it may be, expressed for us jollity, marriage,
and festive associations, intermingled with which we may have hate,
revenge, hostility, so that for result we are presented a fine uproar
in which joviality, delight, dance-music, passionate scolding, and
the very extremes of distraction are all involved. But contrasts of
interrupted life such as these are, and which tumble us from one side
to another, without any principle of union, are opposed to harmonious
beauty precisely in the degree that the point of opposition in such
characterization is acutely emphasized, and any return of the melody
to a real self-repose and self-enjoyment is out of the question. And
in general the union of the melodic and characteristic features of
such music readily incurs the risk of overstepping the finely drawn
boundaries of musical beauty, more especially when the intention is
to express force, selfishness, evil, impetuosity, and other extremes
of exclusive passion of a similar nature. The moment that music is
involved in its abstract task of such characteristic limitation it can
hardly avoid making for chaos, becoming, that is to say, more acute,
unpliable, and, in fact, thoroughly unmelodious and unmusical, to the
extent even of sheer misuse of discord.

A similar result will be found if we look at the _different_ features
of characterization generally. I mean that if these are strongly
emphasized in their independent form the connection between themselves
and other traits is readily weakened and their self-subsistency in
repose is at once evident: but in musical exposition our difficulty is,
we have an essential movement throughout, and it is in this progression
that we are forced to look for the relation of stability; this being so
the isolation of effect cannot fail to act injuriously on the flow and
unity of the music.

Genuine beauty in music consists, under the aspect now being
discussed, in this, that while there is no doubt a movement towards
characterization out of that which is simply melodic, yet within the
sphere of this more defined articulation[469], the melodic aspect
is still maintained as the sustaining soul and unity, much as we
find in what is most characteristic in the paintings of Raphael the
fundamental tone of beauty is throughout conserved. Melody is then not
without definite significance, but in all such definition betrays a
coalescing and suffusing principle of life, and more characteristic
detail presents itself merely as the emphasized prominence of certain
aspects, which are none the less always and essentially fused again
in this medium of unity and animation. To hit off the just mean in
this respect is, however, a more difficult task for music than the
other arts, for the reason that music surrenders itself more readily
to such antagonistic modes of expression. For this reason criticism
over musical composition is almost always divided into two camps.
The one attaches most importance to the melodic structure, the other
prefers further advance in characterization. Handel, for example, who
frequently in his operas insisted on having certain lyrical episodes
emphasized acutely, had to face many a tussle on this head with Italian
singers, and was finally compelled, when the public ranged itself on
the side of the Italians, to confine himself wholly to the composition
of oratorios, in which field his genius pre-eminently asserted itself.
In the time of Glück also the long and vehement controversy between
the supporters of Glück and Piccini is famous. Rousseau also in his
turn insisted on the superiority of the more melodious Italian music
as compared with the deficiency in this respect of the earlier French
composers. We have in our own days the same old controversy waged for
or against Rossini and the more modern Italian school. The opponents of
the former condemn his music as if it were so much empty ear-tickling;
if we, however, assimilate his melodies more generously we shall find
that there is much in this music of real feeling and genius; it is not
without a real message to our faculties, although it does not make any
claim to the characteristic effects, which are more especially dear
to our severe German musical sense. And indeed it must be admitted
that only too often Rossini says good-bye to his libretto, and gives
free vent to his melodies, precisely as his mood dictates, so that
we have nothing left us but the alternative either to stick to the
subject-matter and grumble over the music that is indifferent to it,
or abandon the former and take our hearty delight in the inspired
irrelevances of the composer and the soul which they reveal[470].

(_γγ_) I will now in conclusion briefly summarize the most notable
_forms_ of music regarded as accompaniment.

_First_, in the order of our classification we may mention
_ecclesiastical_ music. Music of this type, in so far as it is not
concerned with the personal emotion of individuals, but with the
substantive content of emotion in its widest compass, or shall we say
the universal emotion of the community viewed collectively, is in
a large measure throughout of _epical_ consistency, even though it
instructs us in no events in so many words. How an artistic conception
is able to be epical in significance, though we have in it no narrative
of event, we shall endeavour to explain at a later stage when we come
to deal more closely with epic poetry. This fundamentally religious
music is among the profoundest and most impressive creations that Art
can bring into being in any sphere whatever. Its true position, in so
far, that is, as it is associated with the sacerdotal petition for the
community, we find in the cult of _Roman Catholicism_, conjoint with
the Mass, and more generally as a means of musical devotion attendant
to the most varied ecclesiastical functions and festivals. Protestants
can also boast of musicians of the profoundest gifts not merely as
religious men, but also in the sterling character and opulence of
their imaginative resource or executive ability. Sebastian Bach here
stands before us as the master of masters. For the first time in our
own day we have been taught to appreciate at something like its value
the great genius of this man, his truly protestant, robust temper, and
withal his profound erudition. Of first importance we may observe in
this connection, and in contrast to the direction followed by the music
of Catholicism, the emergence in complete form of the oratorio, in the
first instance out of the Passion music. Nowadays, of course, music
for Protestantism is no longer so closely associated with the cult of
religion, nor so essentially a part of its services; and indeed it is
often more a matter of exercise in musical scholarship than a really
vital creation.

_Second_ in order we have _lyrical_ music, which expresses in melody
isolated moods, and for the most part should be disjoined from the
wholly characteristic or declamatory mode, although it may rightly
undertake to combine with its expression the specific content of the
words illustrated, whether their import be religious or otherwise.

Tempestuous passions, however, which neither issue in repose or
finality, the unresolved division of the heart, emotional distraction
destitute of all relief, such experiences are more suitably reproduced
as an integral part of _dramatic_ music; they are out of place in the
harmonious consistency of the lyrical mode.

This _dramatic_ form is then our _third_ and final division. The
tragedy of the ancients was associated with music; but this aspect
was not emphasized, and for this reason that in truly poetical works
precedence must necessarily be given to human speech and the poet's
own exposition of ideas and emotion; the only way music could in these
times assist--which in its harmonic and melodic expression had not as
yet reached that of a subsequent Christian era--was mainly from the
rhythmical point of view by heightening with increased animation the
musical sound of the poetical language, and thereby bringing the same
more home to the heart.

Dramatic music, however, receives a really independent position when
once the form of church music is essentially complete, and in lyrical
expression some degree of perfection has been attained. We find this
in our modern operas and operettas. It must be admitted that from
the point of view of song the _operetta_ is a half-way house of less
importance, one which mixes together with no vital connection speech
and song, what is musical and unmusical, the language of prose and that
of melody. It is a common objection no doubt that song in the drama is
without exception unnatural. Such an objection cannot be pressed, and
would be far less open to argument as against the opera, in which from
the first line to the last every idea, emotion, passion, and resolve is
accompanied by and expressed in song. On the contrary, it is rather the
operetta which still requires justification in so far as it introduces
music in which we have a more animated presentment of the emotions and
passions, or the latter are adapted for such presentment, while in
the juxtaposition of a confused melody of prosaic dialogue with these
artistically treated interludes of song we have what is a perpetual
embarrassment. In other words, the emancipation of art is incomplete.
In genuine _opera_, however, in which the action throughout receives
its musical analogue, we are once and for all transported into an ideal
world of art, the atmosphere of which is throughout the work maintained
in so far as the music accepts for its fundamental content the ideal
aspects of emotional stress, the particular phases of such in specific
situations, and the conflicts of passion, that it may, by virtue of
the more complete effects of its expression, add the final emphasis
they would otherwise have lost. Conversely in the _vaudeville_, where
airs already popular and well known are set to the more pointed and
arresting rhymes, singing is merely a self-imposed kind of irony. The
fact that there is singing at all is intended to be taken rather as
parody or amusement: here the main point is the meaning of the text and
its fun, and the singing has no sooner ceased than we laugh that it
should ever have commenced.

(_b_) _Independent Music_

We may compare melody, as an essentially self-contained and
self-supported whole, to plastic sculpture; in the more detailed
characterization of painting we shall find an analogous type to
that of musical declamation. And inasmuch as in the latter case we
have an aggregate of specific differentia unfolded such as the more
simple movement of the human voice is unable in all its variety
to express, the more all these many aspects of life enter into the
movement of the music, to that extent instrumental music is a necessary
accompaniment. In addition to this, as a _farther_ point of view,
whether in its relation to the music that accompanies a libretto, or
the characteristic expression of the words, we have to recognize in its
freedom a content of definite ideas, which is, as transmitted, wholly
independent of musical sound.

Now what constitutes the essential principle of music is the ideality
of the soul-life. But this innermost, or ideality of the concrete self
is the subjective state in its bare simplicity, that is, as defined by
no assured content, and for this reason not forced into motion either
one way or another, but reposing on its unity in unfettered freedom.
And if this subjective principle is to come entirely to its own in
music also it must rid itself of a traditional text, and in all purity,
out of its own resources, master its content, the movement and the kind
of expression, the unity and development of its creation, the carrying
out of a main conception, no less than all episodical or incidental
matter; and in doing this, for the reason that the significance of the
whole is not expressed in language, it must restrict its means to those
exclusively of musical value. And this is what does take place in the
sphere I have already described as _independent_ music. Music, as an
accompaniment, possesses that which it undertakes to express outside
its own domain; to this extent it is associated in its expression
with that which does not belong to it as music, but to an alien art,
poetry. If music is to be nothing but music simply, it must disengage
itself from this factor, which it has only borrowed elsewhere, detach
itself absolutely from the definite substance of language. Thus alone
it becomes entirely free. And this is the point we have now to examine
more closely.

We have already noticed the beginnings of such an emancipation within
the limits of music as an accompaniment. For though it is true that
in part here music was compelled by the force of poetical language
to be subservient, yet also in part it either moved in benign repose
over the more _limited_ characterization of the words or removed
itself entirely from the significance of ideas therein expressed, to
expatiate of its free will in the musical language of joy or sorrow.
The same result is apparent in its effect on an audience, the public
as we say, and more especially in its attitude to the music of drama.
In other words, an opera has many constituents. We have the local
condition, landscape and the rest, or the movement of the action, or
incidental episodes and pageants. From another point of view we are
confronted with human passions and their expression. In short, there
is a twofold content--namely, the external action and the soul-emotion
that corresponds. If we take the action simply we shall find that,
though it is that in which all the parts cohere, yet regarded merely
in its movement forward it is less adapted to musical expression and
mainly elaborated in recitative. With a content of this nature an
audience is not so arrested; its attention is particularly liable to
wander off from the dialogue of recitation, and to fix itself upon
the portion of the work that is really musical and melodious. We have
an exceptional illustration of this--I have already adverted to the
fact--in our modern Italian opera, which is from the first made to
fall in with the custom of the audience to engage in conversation, or
other ways of enjoying itself, during the chatter or trivialities of
the musical dialogue, and which only returns to that part of the music
which is truly music, with the full measure of sympathetic attention,
enjoyment, and delight. In this case we find, then, that composer,
no less than audience, barely fall short of bidding good-bye to the
libretto's substance altogether, and of treating music for the purposes
of enjoyment as an absolutely independent art.

(_α_) The true province of such independence is, however, not the
accompaniment of vocal music undeniably conditioned by a text, but
instrumental music simply. As already observed, the human voice is the
appropriate musical expression of man's inner life in its entirety, a
life also expressed in ideas and words, which therefore discovers in
its own voice and song its distinctive organ, so often as it seeks to
express and recover this inner world of its ideas permeated throughout
with the concentrated intensity of emotion. In the case of instruments
taken by themselves, however, this basis of an associated text of words
disappears; here we find an opening for the empire of a music that is
confined strictly to its own unassisted powers.

(_β_) Such a music of particular instruments presented us in quartets,
quintets, sextets, symphonies and the like, without text or vocal
music, remains unrelated to any movement of ideas independently
asserted, and is for this very reason compelled to have recourse to
emotions of a more indefinite character, emotions which in such music
can only be expressed in general terms. The aspect of importance
here, in short, is the varied motion of the music simply, the ups
and downs of the harmony or melody, the stream of sound through
its degrees of opposition, preponderance, emphasis, acuteness or
vivacity, the elaboration of a melodic phrase in every respect that
is suitable to the means of musical art, the musician-like fusion of
all the instruments as one _ensemble_ of tone, or in their succession,
alternation, and emphatic display of themselves and each other. It is
in this sphere pre-eminently that the distinction between the _ordinary
person_ and the _expert_ of music asserts itself. The ordinary man
likes best in music an expression of emotion and ideas that is at once
intelligible, that whereof the content is obvious; his predilection
is consequently for music under the mode of an accompaniment. The
connoisseur, on the contrary, who is able to follow the relation of
musical sounds and instruments as composition, enjoys the artistic
result of harmonious modulation, and its interwoven melodies and
transitions on its own merits. He is entirely absorbed by this alone,
and is interested in comparing the detail to which he listens with the
rules and principles he is fully able to apply to it, in order thus
to follow the performance with judgment and delight, although even in
his case it frequently happens that our modern type of virtuosity,
with variations in tempo or other nuances for which our connoisseur
is unprepared, will perplex him not a little. A complete satisfaction
of this kind comes rarely to the mere amateur. He is seized with the
vain desire to master this apparently phantomnal process of music, to
discover arresting points for his attention in the musical development,
and generally more definite ideas and a more detailed content in the
volume of sound that invades him. In this respect he seeks to attach to
music a symbolical significance, yet can find in the same little beyond
mysterious problems that vanish in the moment they are propounded,
which baffle his powers of solution and in general are capable of a
variety of interpretations.

The _composer_ is able, it is true, on his part to associate with
his work a definite significance, a content of specific ideas and
emotions, which are expressed articulately in movement that excludes
all else; conversely he can, in complete indifference to such a scheme,
devote himself to musical structure simply and the assertion of his
genius in such architectonic. Composition, however, of this character
readily tends to become defective both in the range of its conception
and emotional quality, and as a rule does not imply any profound
cultivation of mind or taste in other respects. And by reason of the
fact that such a content is not necessary, it frequently happens that
the gift of musical composition not merely will show considerable
development in very early age, but composers of eminence remain their
life long men of the poorest and most impoverished intellectual faculty
in other directions. More penetration of character may be assumed where
the composer even in instrumental music is equally attentive to both
aspects of composition; in other words, the expression of a content,
if necessarily less defined than in our previous mode, no less than
its musical structure, by which means it will be in his power at one
time to emphasize the melody, at another the depth and colour of the
harmony, or finally to fuse each with the other.

(_γ_) We have throughout posited subjectivity in its unconstrained
presentment within the limits of music as the general principle of this
type of composition. This independence of a content already proposed
to it from an alien source will, however, more or less assert itself
in opposition to mere caprice, though the restrictions under which
it admits it are not defined rigorously. For, albeit this type of
composition has its own rules and modes, the authority of which no
mere whim or fancy can reject, yet they are regulations which only
affect the broader aspects of music; in actual detail there is no end
to the opportunity which the inner content of soul-life[471], provided
it once accepts the boundaries fixed by the essential conditions of
musical composition, may discover for its otherwise free expatiation
and exposition. And, in fact, as a result of the elaboration of modes
congenial to this type, the caprice of individual composers asserts,
in contrast to the steady advance of purely melodic expression and
music in association with a definite text, a practically unrestrained
mastery in every sort of conceit, caprice, interlude, inspiriting
drollery, startling suspension, rapid transition, lightning flashes,
extraordinary surprises and effects.

(_c_) _The Artist as Executant_

In sculpture and painting we have a work of art presented us as an
external and independent _result_ of artistic activity; we do not
regard this activity itself as the actual creation of life[472]. It is,
however, necessary to the presentation of a musical work of art that we
should have an executant musician in co-operation, just as in dramatic
poetry we have the representative presence of living manhood as an
essential factor in this type of art's realization.

We have, then, reviewed musical composition under the two aspects, that
is to say, in so far as it sought to conform with a specific content,
or struck out on its own free path of independence. We may now in the
same way distinguish between two main types of purely executive art.
The one is wholly absorbed in the work of art on hand, and makes no
attempt to reproduce anything over and beyond this. The other, on the
contrary, is not simply reproductive; it actually creates expression,
delivery, in short the essential animation of the work, not merely from
the composition as composed, but predominantly from its own resources.

(_α_) In the case of the epic poem, wherein the poet seeks to unfold
an objective world of event and modes of action, the rhapsodist, who
recites it, has no occasion to do anything further than wholly withdraw
the expression of his own personality in the presence of the exploits
and events he brings home to us. The more reserved he is in this
respect the better; indeed such recitation is not incompatible with a
monotoned and unemphasized delivery. What is effective here is the fact
of the poem, the poetical execution, the narrative itself, not its
realization in voice and speech. This illustration will suggest to us
the _rationale_ for our first type of musical reproduction. In other
words, if the composition is in a similar way of a genuine objective
quality, in the sense that the composer has simply translated his
subject-matter, or the emotion that is absorbed with it, into musical
language, the artistic reproduction should retain the same objective
character. It is not merely true that here there is no reason for
the executant to import into it his idiosyncrasies; by doing so he
necessarily impairs the true artistic effect. He must subordinate
himself entirely to the character of the work, and prescribe to himself
simply this attitude of attention. On the other hand, he must not,
as is too frequently the case, confuse such an attitude with that
of the purely servile artisan, and lower himself to the level of an
organ-grinder. If such execution is to retain any artistic claim the
artist is bound to avoid leaving the impression of a musical automaton,
which merely repeats its prescribed lesson mechanically, and instead
to animate the entire work with the heart and soul of the composer
himself. The virtuosity of such a vital reproduction is restricted,
however, to the just elucidation of the technical difficulties
presented by the work, and in doing so the object will be not merely to
cover any appearance of triumph over an exacting task, but to portray
the freest movement under such conditions, and, in so far as superior
artistic endowment and experience can in the particular case manage
to do so, attain in the reproduction to the spiritual altitude of the
composer and reflect the same in actual performance.

(_β_) It is another matter when we come to deal with works of art,
in which personal idiosyncrasy and caprice are even by the composer
himself features brought into prominence, and where generally we
find the traces of such a clearly objective quality in expression,
the treatment of the harmonic or characteristic development less
pronounced. In such a case the _bravura_ of virtuosity is, it is our
first distinction, quite admissible; and over and above this executive
ability is not only limited to the reproduction of the actual score,
but may considerably amplify; an artist will _himself_ add to the
composition in his delivery, supplement defects, add substance to what
is comparatively superficial, import into parts a new life, and in
doing so assert independent judgment and invention. In the Italian
opera, for example, much is always left to the singer's discretion; in
particular where we have embellishments a more liberal opportunity of
display is granted, and in so far as the exposition of sound is further
removed from the mere interpretation of the libretto, the execution in
its independence becomes a more spontaneous flow of melody, in which
the soul of the singer is permitted to enjoy itself and exult in its
own free rapture. When therefore it is objected that Rossini for one
has made the singer's task too easy, the stricture is only in part
justified. The difficulty is none the less there, only he frequently
leaves it to the trained intelligence of the executant to work it out
for himself. If in the result we are conscious of the cooperation of
genius, the work as thus reproduced makes an exceptionally favourable
impression. We have not merely a _work of art_ reproduced, but we
are conscious at the same time of actual _musical creation._ In
this very present realization of life the external conditions of
artistic reproduction disappear, such as place, opportunity, the
local associations of a divine service, the content and intent of a
dramatical situation; we have no further need for, nor do we desire
any text, we have left us simply the unspecialized impulse of emotion,
in the element of which the soul of the artist can surrender itself
without let or hindrance to its own rapture, displaying thereby
inventive genius, the finest qualities of emotion, and a mastery of
technique; and in fact, provided we find the right spirit, ability, and
personal charm to justify it, it may venture to interrupt the flow of
melody itself with humour, caprice and virtuosity, and accept for once
the moods and suggestions of the moment.

(_γ_) This kind of virtuosity is yet more remarkable in cases where
the instrument is not the human voice, but one of _human invention._
By this I mean to say that such naturally in the kind of sound they
produce are further removed from the soul's direct expression;
they are in relation to that of an external object, apiece of dead
mechanism, and music is essentially a spiritual movement and activity.
When we find, therefore, this externality of the instrument vanishes
altogether, in the case, that is, where the music of the soul breaks
right through this alien crust of mechanism, by means of such
virtuosity, even an instrument of this character is transformed
into one as fully adapted to express the soul of the artist as it
is possible to conceive. Among the memories of my youth I can still
recall the case of an astonishing executant on the guitar, who in
his own eccentric fashion had composed huge battle-pieces for this
comparatively insignificant instrument. By profession, if I remember
rightly, he was a weaver, and in conversation he had little enough
to say for himself. But no sooner did he begin to play than one
wholly forgot the absurd pretensions of his composition, forgot these
precisely as he forgot all else but the music, and the marvellous
result he made of it by being totally absorbed body and soul in his
instrument, entirely witless of any form of nobler execution than that
expressed in the tones of a guitar[473].

A virtuosity of this type, in so far as it asserts such a unique
superiority, is not only a proof of extraordinary mastery over
material forces, but we receive from it as it strides victoriously
over difficulties apparently unplayable, even turns aside to add to
them, or in wayward mood breaks in upon us jestingly with I know not
what interruptions and surprises, and by original invention even
makes us enjoy what would otherwise be vulgar, is a direct reflection
of absolutely free soul-life[474]. It is quite true that a mere
charlatan[475] of this type is unable to produce original works of
art; but where real genius is part of the endowment we can have
extraordinary mastery in composition no less than over a particular
instrument, the limitations of which this virtuosity lays itself
out to overcome, and in audacious vindication of its triumph will
reproduce the artistic effects of other instruments entirely remote
in other hands from its own. It is an accomplishment of this kind
which delights us with our acutest sense of the life of music. And
this riddle of riddles we discover in the fact that a mere piece of
mechanical craft can become an instrument one with our life, which
enables us to follow, as through a flash of lightning, a power of ideal
conception no less than execution, by virtue of which the imagination
of genius penetrates to the core of life as instantaneously as it
vanishes therefrom.

Such, then, are the most essential features, which I have selected from
my own experience of music, the more general points of view which I
have detached from the subject and concentrated attention upon in the
present discussion.


[Footnote 377: _Ein festes Daseyn_, lit., an assured existence.]

[Footnote 378: We should not expect the plural. Hegel apparently
includes the transitional relief of sculpture.]

[Footnote 379: Lit., "But also strives to set itself back into the
previous condition." He refers to the mutual relation of tones.]

[Footnote 380: _In sich selbst Ideellgezetzte._ That is, posited as
ideal in the way music does with its object, as to which further
explanation is given below.]

[Footnote 381: It is difficult to follow closely this very technical
interpretation of musical sound, and a doubt may be perhaps permitted
as to whether it corresponds to the scientific facts. I mean it does
not appear fully to do justice to the reaction of the organ of human
hearing itself and the intelligence with which it is related upon
the sound waves that through such mediation are cognized as musical
sound. The ideality appears to me to be more complete than even Hegel's
theory would suggest, or, at any rate, some of his expressions. And
surely, too, in sight, though it may be true we see independent
objects, we only do so, in so far as their secondary qualities
are concerned, by virtue of a considerable action of what he here
calls _Seelenhaftigkeit._ But this is not the place for more than a
suggestion. The main points of contrast are in Hegel's interpretation
sufficiently obvious.]

[Footnote 382: _Des Körpers._ I am not sure that I quite follow the
meaning of this second moment of negation. If it means the reaction
or synthetic process of human hearing it removes in great measure the
objection above. We then have as the twofold negation the negation
by the ideality of sound and that through the human sense. But owing
to Hegel's use of _Material_ to indicate the medium which is subject
to oscillation, it would rather appear to mean that one vibration is
cancelled by another.]

[Footnote 383: _Das an und für sich schon etwas Ideelleres ist._ This
would correspond to the ideality of the first negation of spatial
condition.]

[Footnote 384: He means its own ideal existence. _Aufgeben_ must here
be used in the primary sense of "delivers." He does not mean that it
gives expression to the ideality of spirit; this is added by the next
clause.]

[Footnote 385: This is, I think, Hegel's meaning for _das an sich
selbst Subjektive._ Its content is also formally ideal or abstract as
above explained, but to express this he would rather have used the word
_ideell_ or _innerlich._ It is also, as I have pointed out, in great
measure ideal in the sense that as musical tone it is not natural even
in the qualified sense that colour is. It is even more dependent on the
human organism for its quality and synthesis. But I do not think Hegel
means subjective in this sense, but that it directly expresses human
emotion.]

[Footnote 386: Both ideas are contained in the word _Verschweben_,
which means to hover and slowly vanish away.]

[Footnote 387: _Figurationen._ Their modal combinations.]

[Footnote 388: It is obvious that in this respect music to some extent
infringes on the distinction Hegel has already pointed out between its
content and that of poetry.]

[Footnote 389: By _verständige Formen_ Hegel means, of course, forms
that express an artistic, that is, an intelligible purpose. The whole
passage is not very clearly expressed. The general meaning is, however,
that as architecture surrounds its statues with a medium of material
environment co-ordinated by artistic design and invention, so, too,
music in its medium of emotional content is equally indefinite and may
be used as an accompaniment (as architecture is a kind of accompaniment
to statuary) in the melodic play of its harmonies to definite ideas
in uttered speech. The reader of Browning will doubtless recollect
the fine use made of architecture as metaphorical illustration in the
poem "Abt Vogler." I think it was Schopenhauer who first spoke of
architecture as frozen music. But Schelling speaks of it in the same
way.]

[Footnote 390: I presume Hegel here refers primarily to scholastic
music, musical exercises intended to exhibit the structure of music.
The exercises, for example, of Cramer or Fuchs. Bach's forty-eight
fugues would occupy a transitional place.]

[Footnote 391: _Tonseele._ There is, of course, something almost mystic
in Hegel's conception of musical sound as the ideality issuing from the
material world.]

[Footnote 392: That is, sculpture and painting.]

[Footnote 393: By _Haltpunkte_ Hegel appears to mean material that will
act as stays and supports in contrast to those which are indifferent.]

[Footnote 394: I presume by _solchen festen Bestimmungen_ Hegel refers
to the general definition of artistic function just enunciated. But
the sense may possibly be, "while the point of departure is the stable
determinations of natural form."]

[Footnote 395: We are inevitably reminded of the release which Art was
to such men as Beethoven, Dante, Milton, and Blake.]

[Footnote 396: In the theme.]

[Footnote 397: It seems doubtful how how far a musician would accept
this at least in so far as it applies to classical music of the formal
type. The development, for instance, on the repetition of a theme in a
sonata is at least part of the formal content of the sonata movement as
a whole.]

[Footnote 398: _Ein Auseinandergehen._ Variations on a theme would be
a good example. But surely the development of a theme may do precisely
this in great measure, I mean disclose both the depth of it and its
concentration.]

[Footnote 399: No doubt this is so if we assume the content to be
mainly a theme, a motive. But the content of a movement includes the
development. The main difference after all is the fundamental one that
in music the content is unfolded in a time series and in the plastic
arts instantaneously in spatial form. And in poetry the apprehension is
also in a temporal series.]

[Footnote 400: It is impossible in English to reflect the play of words
between _Erinnerung_ (memory) and _Er-innerung_ (self-penetration or
ideal realization).]

[Footnote 401: I am not sure whether Hegel exactly means by
_Phantasiren_ what we understand as Improvization. But it is the
only form of music that strictly applies to his definition. Even the
rhapsodies of Liszt are controlled by the form, as in a sense all music
is.]

[Footnote 402: As the plastic arts. It certainly is not so closely
associated with a definition given outside it by Nature, that is, but
it is obviously very closely associated to the formal modes of music,
such as the laws of counterpoint, fugue, sonata, etc.]

[Footnote 403: The first is its relation to architecture, the second
that to the plastic arts.]

[Footnote 404: That is, the ideas. By "receiving self-subsistency"
Hegel means it maybe regarded independent of the art, something
essentially outside it.]

[Footnote 405: By _Ton_ Hegel means, of course, musical sound. The
object of music is music and ideas only in so far as they are expressed
in music.]

[Footnote 406: _In diesem Freiwerden._ In this free medium of its
existence.]

[Footnote 407: How far would Hegel have applied this criticism to the
great symphonies of his compatriots? I think it is obvious, at any
rate, that his criticism of pure music is somewhat lacking in sympathy.
Nowadays it is not even a wholly obvious fact that the song or the
opera are the most popular. The truth is that musical education, and
that is what the appreciation of programme or symphonic music implies,
has made enormous strides since his day. But his criticism will still
hold for many in regard to more modern developments in Strauss and his
school.]

[Footnote 408: By _fertig_ Hegel must mean here that the world of
poetry is one whose claims to independent coherence is generally
acknowledged.]

[Footnote 409: By "universal" Hegel appears to mean more universally
intelligible, He uses the same word in a like sense just below.]

[Footnote 410: If Hegel means to imply that pure music, in so far
as it presents ideas by suggestion, has any advantage over music
the effect of which is entirely a musical effect he is on dangerous
ground. The Pastoral Symphony of Beethoven may or may not be more
popular than Beethoven's other symphonies, but it is unquestionable
that its artistic merit depends exclusively on its claims as musical
composition. And indeed its worth as music suggestive of ideas is
mainly so great because, as Beethoven himself claimed, it is rather a
suggestion of emotional mood than the imitation of natural sounds or
the suggestion of distinct ideas. So far as popularity or universality
of appeal is concerned, he may be right. But this is obviously no
final test of the significance of music as compared with other arts,
though it may mark a distinguishing feature. And surely music expresses
emotions at least "as they are" (_selber_) more directly than poetry.
Poetry no doubt gives them as we express them in ordinary life. But
music makes us feel them as they are unexpressed in our souls, a still
higher grade of reality.]

[Footnote 411: Hegel probably never heard Beethoven's ninth symphony
with its "Song of Joy." As to its success as set to music there may be
two opinions, but the fact that it is the culmination of so celebrated
a composition is in itself a qualification of Hegel's statement.]

[Footnote 412: Both Mendelssohn and Schumann deplored the fact that
they could get no really good libretto and would unquestionably
not have received all the statements here without considerable
qualification. Hegel appears to be too dominated by the character of
Italian opera. German opera as further developed by Wagner and even
in the hands of Beethoven and Glück and Weber makes a very different
demand. It is unquestionably true that there must be a certain
reciprocity of quality between the two. But some of the finest music
has been written for some of the finest poetical language, namely that
of our Bible. Composers like Bach, Handel, and S. S. Wesley insisted on
having the very best form of their religious ideas they could obtain.]

[Footnote 413: Lit., "Within the purely musical realm of tones."
Hegel's strictures would only apply to the most formal kind of
exercises or studies. It would really be a misnomer to say that
Chopin's studies for the piano or Spohr's or even Kreutzer's exercises
for the violin wholly come under it.]

[Footnote 414: It is on this ground that Aristotle calls music the most
imitative art. They represent emotions directly without the mediatory
office of Nature's objectivity (_vide_ "Three Lectures on Aesthetic,"
by Bernard Bosanquet, p. 53).]

[Footnote 415: It is more subjective because the content is more ideal,
and more closely related to the artist's personal qualities.]

[Footnote 416: More definite than feeling and soul-life is from tone.]

[Footnote 417: That is, vanishes with the evanescence of the music.]

[Footnote 418: _Die Geschicklichkeit eines virtuosen Machwerks.
Machwerk_ is used, of course, in a depreciating sense. The contrast is
between it and a truly inspired composition.]

[Footnote 419: Lit., "Of the business on hand."]

[Footnote 420: _Gleichgültig._ I am not sure whether Hegel means
fortuitous in the sense that Nature in its abstraction is such, or
purely objective, _i.e._, no self-reflection, probably the latter. They
are "dead elements."]

[Footnote 421: That is, spatial externality.]

[Footnote 422: The meaning appears to me that apart from conscious life
which can contrast the fleeting moments of Time with its permanent
self-identity the process is without meaning--there is no process, it
is a παντά ρεῖ with no differentiation.]

[Footnote 423: It cancels itself in so far as it makes itself an
object. The dialectical movement of self-consciousness is here viewed
in the bare form of its original abstraction.]

[Footnote 424: _Das Ich als solches._]

[Footnote 425: _Abgeschmackte._ Not so much bad taste here as false
judgment.]

[Footnote 426: _Auffasst._ Hegel would appear to mean the intelligent
hearer rather than the composer, though the word would refer to either.
Even then it is not clear why music should not be said to exist by its
mere performance. But, of course, such presupposes the human executant,
and this is possibly what Hegel intends to imply.]

[Footnote 427: _Nüancirt._ Made subject to the nuances or modifications
introduced into such relations.]

[Footnote 428: _Verstand_ as contrasted with _Vernunft._ The analytical
faculty of science.]

[Footnote 429: That is, the quantitative basis.]

[Footnote 430: _Die haltungslose Dauer._ That is, a duration that is
unbroken by arresting points in its progress.]

[Footnote 431: That is, self-conscious, synthetic unity holding the
temporal process in relation to itself. It thus becomes not merely a
_werden_ but a _für sich seyn._ In contrast to the purely abstract
process the self is _das Bei sich selbstseyende_ _i.e._, that which
persists along with itself. This totality or aggregate of particulars
Hegel calls _Sammlung._ The analysis is really an analysis of the form
of conscious experience.]

[Footnote 432: This is the converse case of a series of definite points
of contrast, but unrelated by any integrating principle. I admit
frankly that I am not sure I have wholly seized the meaning in these
difficult paragraphs. I have adhered in my translation, therefore, as
closely as possible to the original.]

[Footnote 433: _Markirte._]

[Footnote 434: _Herrschende Regel._]

[Footnote 435: Because their orbits are elliptical and motion is
accelerated as they approach the focus.]

[Footnote 436: _Verlebendigung._]

[Footnote 437: He means of a specific collection of words, sentences.]

[Footnote 438: _Perioden._]

[Footnote 439: _Umschwung._ Perhaps all that is meant is the return to
the previous level, as we should speak of the rise and fall of voices.]

[Footnote 440: _Ein Körper._]

[Footnote 441: _Seiner zeitlichen Gestalt._]

[Footnote 442: _Gezwungene._ I presume the meaning is that the
oscillations are effected by a curved form of musical instrument.]

[Footnote 443: I am not sure there is not a certain confusion here.
Our text, at any rate, when speaking of wind instruments, refers to
the column of air as the medium of sound, but in the case of stringed
instruments draws attention rather to the thing which creates the
waves of vibration, the string itself. The nature of the timbre of
an instrument is no doubt an important one, but it may be questioned
whether this distinction between line or column and surface is very
satisfactory or sufficient.]

[Footnote 444: _Jenem linearen Tönen._ The expression appears to
me not very easy to interpret even from Hegel's own point of view.
In what sense can you call a musical tone linear? The theory here
stated, though ingenious enough, appears to me to miss the fundamental
question, what actually constitutes the timbre of an instrument,
in its assertion, for instance, of distantly related harmonies or
non-assertion of such. Even assuming that the form of the instrument,
or the part of it set into vibration, may partially explain this, it
is obvious, I think, that Hegel's manner of stating it is open to
considerable criticism.]

[Footnote 445: _Die näher abgeschlossene Bestimmtheit._ The meaning
seems to be that definition of them in which they stand out with most
distinctness from others.]

[Footnote 446: The comparison is unfortunate--in two respects. Violet
is a cardinal colour, and the theory of Goethe to which it refers is,
of course, untenable.]

[Footnote 447: The true scientific reason why octaves resemble each
other so much more closely than two notes at any other interval is
that the upper of two notes at an octave's distance is the first
"upper-partial" tone of the lower, and all its harmonies are also
harmonies of the lower note; the compound tone, for there is no
entirely simple tone, of the higher note contains no new sound, which
is not in the compound tone of the lower. This is not the case with two
notes at any other interval.]

[Footnote 448: _Ihre besonderen Seiten._ I presume this means what is
immediately called below the several intervals between note and note.]

[Footnote 449: There is really a distinction between the consonance of
the dominant and a major or minor third.]

[Footnote 450: That is, the third is only third in relation to the
key-note, or the leading-note only as the note previous to the octave.]

[Footnote 451: Three notes are really essential to any true chord.]

[Footnote 452: The mediant lies about midway between the tonic and
dominant as the third of the scale. The researches of Helmholtz
prove that the distinction between consonant or semi-consonant and
dissonant intervals is not arbitrary, but the result of the nature
of the intervals themselves. A musical tone is mostly a compound
one, containing, besides its principal tone, other tones with fixed
relations to the lowest note, called harmonics, or "upper partials."
Helmholtz has shown that when two of the earlier-produced and stronger
of these upper partial tones coincide in two notes sounded together,
the resulting tone is pure, free, that is, from the inequalities known
as "beats" (Prout, "Harmony," 10th ed., pp. 21, 22).]

[Footnote 453: As, of course, in the scale, notes independent of each
other.]

[Footnote 454: _Schärfe._]

[Footnote 455: The reader of Browning will recall how the poet in his
"Abt Vogler" exclaims "Why rushed the discords in, but that harmony
should be prized?" or speaks of blunting the minor into the ninth where
the musician "stands on alien ground, surveying awhile the heights."]

[Footnote 456: This extreme emphasis on melody must be read as further
explained lower down of melody in the wider sense. Even as thus
qualified it is rather an overstatement. It may be questioned whether
in the mind of a musician of genius the freedom of harmonic progression
is of a different quality to that of melodic. It may _appear_ no doubt
less spontaneous. But it is the task of the great artist to overcome
that appearance in one case as much as in the other.]

[Footnote 457: It may be doubted how far such a statement is true of
many chord progressions in modern music. It seems to me that this
notion of harmony as _für sich_ having no musical significance is, to
say the least, very misleading.]

[Footnote 458: This really is the point. Inspired harmony in its
progression unfolds what is really a tissue of melodic threads. The
complex musical structure of a Brahms symphony is a good example.]

[Footnote 459: Lit., "the free self-subsistency (_Beisichseyn_) of
subjective life."]

[Footnote 460: Hegel puts it the other way. What he means is that in
the medium of music we neither apprehend objects of sense nor ideas as
we receive them in imagination or thought.]

[Footnote 461: Hegel throughout uses the term _Innerlichkeit._ That
which is the Inmost is, in fact, the ideal. It is the _raison d'être_
and the notion itself.]

[Footnote 462: He means at the point proposed by the dramatic theme.
Hegel's words are literally "it subdues the subject (_i.e._, of
consciousness) referably to its simple concentration (_i.e._, on the
subject at hand)."]

[Footnote 463: The above distinction is hardly consonant with that
of customary parlance. We should rather say that the melody of the
song gave an utterance to the words, and the instrumentation was,
for the very reason that it was more independent, more directly an
accompaniment. But the point emphasized here seems to be the closeness
of the association. In this aspect, no doubt, the music actually
sung is more an accompaniment to the intelligible content. As a rule
accompaniment is generally used as the accompaniment of a song or
choral writing, and Hegel himself uses it in this sense previously.]

[Footnote 464: A general truth, no doubt. But not without qualification
if we consider the works and indeed the execution of such giants as
Bach and Handel.]

[Footnote 465: That is, particularity due to the idiosyncrasies of
the artist, and merely personal to him. But the statement applies to
classic art more strictly than modern.]

[Footnote 466: That is, music as an accompaniment.]

[Footnote 467: _Gediegenheit._ Something that rings true as a whole,
not a thing of patches.]

[Footnote 468: The music of Mendelssohn and others in this direction
will raise a doubt in some whether Hegel does not rather overstate his
case here.]

[Footnote 469: _Besonderung._ The relative isolation that is effected
by marked assertion.]

[Footnote 470: Throughout this discussion the personal bias of Hegel
for the Italian opera is obvious. In the light of the actual knowledge
of his day the wonder is that his own tastes permitted his being even
as fair as he is. It may be doubted whether he had any strong sense
for orchestral or chamber music at all. His reflections must be read
throughout with this reservation.]

[Footnote 471: Or, as Hegel more technically calls it, and I have above
translated it, "subjectivity."]

[Footnote 472: That is, dependent on living beings for its presentation
in every case.]

[Footnote 473: The execution of Paganini is, of course, the classic
example. But all cadenzas executed by a great artist, even though
carefully studied, express something of the spirit.]

[Footnote 474: Hegel means that such music expresses not so much
rational freedom as the fundamental independence of the self-conscious
principle.]

[Footnote 475: By _dürftiger Kopf_ I understand Hegel to mean the
headstrong charlatan as contrasted with the virtuoso who is also a
trained musician. Paganini had a vein of both in his composition. The
epithet _dürftig_, lit., thirsty, is, however, not very clear, and
in so far as it is, the emphasis would not be so much on quackery as
absence of all training.]



END OF VOL. III





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Philosophy of Fine Art, volume 3
(of 4), by G. W. F. Hegel

