CHAPTER II


THE IDEAL OF SCULPTURE


Now that we pass on to consider the really ideal style of sculpture we
must once again recall the fact that the perfected type necessarily
presupposes the imperfect as its predecessor; and it does so not merely
in relation to its technique, which, in the first instance, does not
concern us here, but in respect to the general notion, in other words
the mode of its conception and the particular way in which it sets
forth the same ideally. We have in general terms called the symbolical
type that of inquiry; consequently pure sculpture, too, has for its
presupposition a certain stage of the symbolical type, and by this we
do not merely mean a stage of the symbolic form as generally conceived,
in other words of architecture, but a form of sculpture which is itself
characterized by the symbolical principle. We shall find an opportunity
of supporting this assertion with the example of Egyptian sculpture in
the third chapter.

We may in this place and from the point of view of the Ideal
generally, and for the present wholly in an abstract and formal
manner, assume that which we term symbolical in a specific art is
its _incompleteness_; as, for example, we may so apply this term to
an attempt of children to draw the human figure, or mould it from
wax and clay. What they execute is to this extent merely a symbol,
as it only _suggests_ the living reality it purports to exhibit,
remaining, however, wholly unfaithful to the actual object and its
significance. Art is consequently in the first instance hieroglyphical,
no mere accidental and capricious mark, but a haphazard delineation
of an object for the imagination. For this purpose a badly drawn
figure suffices if it recalls that object it is intended to suggest.
In a similar way piety is content with badly executed images, and
still worships Christ, the Virgin, and any other saint in the most
bungling counterfeit, although such images may merely derive such
individualization purely from particular attributes conveyed by such
means as a lantern or a mill-stone. For piety refuses to be reminded
of aught save the object; the soul adds all else thereto, which
will be filled up with an image of the object, however untrue the
counterfeit may be. It is not the living expression of the present
which is required; it is not that which is presented which is intended
to enkindle us by itself. Rather a work of art of this kind already
brings satisfaction if it excites the general concept of the objects
by virtue of its images, however insufficient they be. A concept of
this kind, however, already abstracts from the given content. I can
readily imagine some known thing, such as a house, a tree, a man;
but even in such a case, where the reference is to something quite
determinate, the concept merely includes wholly general traits, and is
in fact only a _true concept_[153] in so far as it has effaced from the
concrete presentment the wholly immediate singularity of the objects
and simplified the same. If the imaged concept, which the work of art
has to arouse in us, is that of the divine nature, and if this has to
receive recognition from an entire people, this object is especially
attainable when no _alteration_ is allowed in the mode of presentation.
For this reason art is on the one hand conventional, and on the other
scholastic[154]; and this is so not merely in the case of the more
ancient Egyptians, but also in that of more ancient Greek and Christian
art. The artist in such case was bound to restrict himself to definite
forms and to repeat their type.

The crucial point of transition, where fine art wakes from its sleep,
must consequently be sought there, where at last the artist is creative
by virtue of his own free conception, where the flash of genius
strikes into the material presented, and communicates freshness and
vitality to the presentment. Then for the first time the atmosphere
of mind[155] enfolds the work of art, which is no longer restricted
to merely calling up in a general way some idea before the mind, and
recalling to it some deeper significance which the spectator already
is essentially possessed of, but which proceeds to make visible this
significance as throughout made vitally present in some individualized
creation, and which consequently neither makes no further advance
beyond the purely superficial generality of its forms, nor binds itself
on the other hand, in respect to the detail of its delineation, to the
characteristics of all that common reality offers it.

In the rise of ideal sculpture we presuppose perforce a complete
passage to such a sphere of creation. In establishing the facts of this
appearance we may emphasize the following points of view.

_First_, we have to address ourselves to the general character of the
ideal form in its contrast to the stages previously discussed.

_Secondly_, we shall have to adduce specific aspects of it, the
importance of which is most obvious, such as the way in which facial
characteristics, drapery, and pose are modelled or treated.

_Thirdly_, we have to enforce the position that the ideal figure is
not merely a general type of beauty in the formal sense of type,
but includes, by virtue of its principle of individuality, which
belongs to the really living Ideal, essentially, too, the aspect of
differentiation and specific definition within its own sphere, and
by this means the province of sculpture is expanded in a cycle of
particularized images of gods and heroes.



1. THE GENERAL CHARACTERIZATION OF THE IDEAL FIGURE OF SCULPTURE


We have already examined at length what the general principle of
the classical ideal is. Our present inquiry is therefore limited to
the particular mode under which this principle is realized through
the medium of sculpture in the human form. In this connection the
lines of difference between the human physiognomy, expressive as it
is of spiritual life and the general build of the animal organism,
which is unable to pass beyond the mere expression of natural life
in its unbroken association with natural wants and an organism that
is exclusively adapted to their satisfaction, will supply us with a
standard of comparison which carries us considerably further. Yet
even such a standard is still somewhat indefinite for the reason
that the human form alone neither is as bodily form, or as an
expression of Spirit, wholly and as we find it first of ideal type.
On the contrary we may observe with more closeness from the fine
masterpieces of Greek sculpture what the ideal of sculpture in the
spiritually fine expression of its creations has to bring before us.
It was pre-eminently Winckelmann who, with this intimate knowledge
of and devotion for art of this kind, and by means of his receptive
enthusiasm, no less than his intelligence and critical faculty, made
an end of indefinite statements over the Ideal of Greek beauty by
leaving the characterization of detail in the form at once distinct
and precise, an endeavour which by itself is full of instruction. No
doubt the results he obtained supply abundant opportunity for further
criticism, exceptions, and the like; but we should be careful, before
attempting to criticize details and errors in his work, not to obscure
the main result which he established. However far aesthetic science
may extend its borders that at least must be presupposed as essential.
Assuming this, it cannot, however, be denied that since Winckelmann's
death our knowledge of the antique has not only been essentially
enlarged in the number of examples submitted to criticism, but also has
been placed on a securer basis in its relation to the style of these
works and the true appreciation of their beauty.

Winckelmann, no doubt, passed under review a great number of Egyptian
and Greek statues; we have, however, added in more recent times the
closer acquaintance of the Aeginetan sculptures, no less than those
masterworks which in part are ascribed to Pheidias and in part we must
recognize as creations of his age and under his supervision. In a word
we have secured a more intimate knowledge of a number of sculptures,
whether single statues or reliefs, which, in their relation to the
severity of the ideal style, are referable to the age in which Greek
art was at its fullest bloom. For these astonishing monuments of Greek
sculpture, as is well known, we are indebted to the efforts of Lord
Elgin, who, as English ambassador to Turkey, had a number of statues
and reliefs of the greatest beauty taken from the Parthenon at Athens
and other towns to England. People have blamed such acquisitions and
called them temple robbery. Lord Elgin has, however, as a matter of
fact, really rescued these works of art for Europe and preserved
them from complete destruction. Such an enterprise deserves its true
recognition. Moreover, it is due to this circumstance that the interest
of all connoisseurs and friends of art have been directed to an epoch
and a mode of presentation, which, in the exceptionally consistent
severity of its style, constitutes the true greatness and height of
the Ideal. What the general verdict has highly estimated in the works
of this epoch is not the charm and grace of form and pose, not the
elegance of expression which already, as in the times subsequent to
Pheidias, makes an external appeal and distinctly aims at pleasing
the spectator, nor yet the delicacy and boldness of the elaboration;
rather the general chorus of praise is concentrated upon the expression
of self-subsistency and essential repose in these figures, and more
especially has this note of admiration been most emphatic by virtue
of the free vitality, the absolute transfusion of and command over
the purely natural and material aspect, a command by which the artist
moulds the marble, makes it alive and endows it with a soul. And we
may add that when all has been said that can be said in such praise
the figure of the reclining river-god remains as most emphatically its
object, which is one of the finest examples of antique art we have
recovered.

(_a_) The vitality of these works consists in this, that they are the
free product of the genius of the artist. The artist at this stage
is neither satisfied with giving, by means of general and haphazard
contours, suggestions and expressions, a general conception of that
which he desires to reproduce, nor does he, on the other hand, in
respect to what is individual and singular, accept the forms as he has
received them by chance from the external world. For this reason also
he does not present them again with loyalty to this accidental aspect,
but he is concerned to place within his own free creation what is
empirically particularized in isolated aspects that thus appear in a
further individual accord with the universal types of the human form,
an accord which is made to appear as throughout transpierced with the
spiritual configuration of that which he is called to make apparent,
when he suffers us to see his own vitality, conception and animation in
the work regarded on the side of the artist's activity. The universal
aspect of the content of his work is not due to his creation. It is
presented him by means of mythology and saga precisely in the way that
he finds the general effect and details of the human form; but the
free and living individualization, which permeates all portions on his
work, is the result of his own personal point of view, his efforts and
services.

(_b_) The effect and charm of this vitality and freedom is only
produced by means of the sufficiency, the honest candour of the
elaboration of all the particular parts to which the most definite
knowledge and review of the construction of these parts belongs, no
less in their position of repose than also in that of their motion. The
way in which the different members are disposed and moulded with regard
to rondure and smoothness, in every condition of rest and movement,
must be expressed in the most satisfactory way. This fundamental
elaboration and placing in relief of all the separate parts we find in
all products of antique art, and the animation thus produced is only
the effect of infinite pains and truth. When the eye contemplates works
of this kind it is, in the first instance, unable clearly to recognize
a mass of distinction; and it is only by virtue of a particular manner
of lighting that we can appreciate the same by means of a stronger
contrast between light and shadow. But though these fine nuances are
imperceptible at first glance, the general impression they produce is
not for that reason lost. In part they appear as the spectator varies
his point of view, and in part we derive from them what is essentially
the impression of the organic continuity of all the members and their
forms. This spirit of vitality, this soul of material configuration,
is due wholly to the fact that, though every part is entirely complete
in its separable independence, yet it is to a like extent throughout,
by virtue of the wealth of its modes of transition, associated not
merely with the part that is immediately its neighbour, but with the
entire work. For this reason the form is vital in every part of it;
the least detail of it is stamped with purpose; every part of it is
differentiated from the rest, possesses that which distinguishes it
and makes it distinct, and yet is affected by the same fluidity of
treatment, is only what it is vitally as a part of the whole, so that
we are able to recognize the whole in the very fragments of it, and a
part that is broken off enables us not merely to see but to enjoy a
totality that is not thus mutilated. The material surface, although for
the most part statues are now seriously impaired by the weather and
other causes in this respect, presents a soft and malleable appearance;
and in one particular example of the head of a horse I have in mind
it literally glows with the ardour of life on the face of the marble
itself. This scarce perceptible undercurrent of fluidity in all organic
parts, united to the most conscientious elaboration which avoids
purely regular surfaces and anything approaching the bare convexity of
circular shape, supplies that softness and ideality of all parts, that
harmonious unity, which extends throughout the whole as the spiritual
breath of one animating presence.

(_c_) However true, notwithstanding, expression of detailed or
general configuration may be, this truth is no mere imitation of
Nature simply. Sculpture is always occupied with the abstraction of
form, and is consequently obliged, on the one hand, to omit from
the bodily presentment what is most essentially the natural aspect,
in other words, what is exclusively indicative of natural function.
From a further point of view it is unable to carry to extremes its
particularization of detail, but rather as, for example, in its
treatment of hair, must restrict its attention and reproduction to the
more general of its forms. In this way, apart from any other, the human
figure, when properly treated by sculpture, is at once declared as the
form and expression of Spirit, rather than of a purely natural form.
Closely connected with this consideration is the fact that, though a
spiritual content is expressed by means of sculpture in the _bodily_
form, yet in the genuine Ideal it is not asserted so _prominently_ in
the exterior form to the extent of making that which is simply external
in its charm and grace either the exclusive or predominant attraction
to the spectator. On the contrary, though the genuine and more severe
Ideal of Spirituality is here presented in bodily shape, and is
exclusively thus presented by means of such shape and its expression,
yet this configuration must equally appear to be without exception
unified, supported and transfused by this ideal content. The swell of
life, the malleability and bodily presence, or sensuous fulness and
beauty of the bodily organism, must as little supply independently the
object of the presentation, as what is individual in the spiritual
presence can be carried to the length of expressing the more intimate
and more closely related inner life of the spectator, when we consider
his own particularity.


2. THE PARTICULAR ASPECTS OF THE IDEAL FORM OF SCULPTURE AS SUCH

If we direct our attention now to the more specific consideration of
the fundamental phases, on which the ideal form of sculpture reposes,
we shall do well to follow Winckelmann in essentials, who has laid
stress on the several types with the finest intuitive sense, and with
the most fortunate results, as well as on the way in which the same
have been treated and shaped by Greek artists, with the result that
they finally present to us the Ideal of sculpture. The vitality,
this floating emanation no doubt evades the definitions of the
understanding, which in the present case is unable to hold fast and
transpierce the particular as in architecture, which, however, asserts
itself in the entire work, as we have already seen, as the coalescence
of free spirituality and bodily forms.

The first general feature of distinction which arrests us concerns
the determination of works of sculpture in a general way, by virtue
of which the human form has to express that which is spiritual. The
spiritual expression, albeit it has to be poured forth over the entire
bodily presence reaches its highest degree of concentration in the
_facial form_, whereas the remaining members are merely able to reflect
what is spiritual by means of their _position_, in so far, that is, as
the same proceeds from Spirit in its essential freedom.

In our examination of these ideal forms we will make a beginning in
the _first_ place with the head; we will, then, in the _second_ place
enlarge upon the position of the body, after which we shall _conclude_
with the principle of the drapery.

(_a_) In the ideal configuration of the human head we are first and
foremost confronted with the so-called Greek profile.

(_α_) This profile consists in the peculiar union of the forehead
and nose; in the almost straight or merely slightly crooked line in
which the forehead unites without interruption with the nose, as also,
to speak more accurately, in the vertical direction of this line to
another which, extending it from the root of the nose to the orifice
of the ear, forms a right angle with the line of the forehead and
nose above mentioned. In a line of this sort nose and forehead stand
throughout to one another in the ideal and fine art of sculpture, and
the question presents itself whether this is a merely national and
artistic contingency or a physiological necessity.

Camper, the famous Dutch physiologist, has, with more exactness and
in an exceptional way, characterized this line as the line of facial
beauty; he in fact discovers therein the main distinction between the
form of the human visage and the profile of animal life; and on account
of this follows up the modifications of this feature throughout the
various human races. In this respect his researches are no doubt in
conflict with those of Blumenbach[156]. Speaking generally, however,
the line adverted to is in fact a most marked means of distinction
between the outward form of man and animal. Among animals, it is
true, muzzle and nasal bone also form a more or less straight line,
but the specific projection of the animal's snout, which is forced to
the front, as being in the nearest practical relation to objects, is
essentially determined through its connection with the skull, united to
which the ear is moreover placed above or below, so that in the present
instance the line that is carried forward from the skull to the root of
the nose or the upper jaw, where the teeth are in position, forms an
acute angle instead of a right angle as is found in the case of man.
Everybody can independently feel in a general way the strength of this
distinction, which no doubt opens the path to more definite thinking on
the subject.

(_αα_) In the formation of the head of animals the most insistent
feature is the mouth as the organ by means of which it feeds in
co-operation with the upper and lower jaws, the teeth, and the muscles
of mastication. All the other organs are subordinate and in a position
of subservience to this principal feature. Notably the snout as a
means of scenting food, the eyes being to a lesser degree instrumental
in spying it out. The express insistence on these animal features as
exclusively devoted to the natural wants and their satisfaction gives
to the head of the animal the appearance as though intended merely to
satisfy natural functions without any trace of spiritual ideality. For
this reason the entire animal organism is rendered intelligible from
the mouth as a point of departure. A specific mode of nourishment, that
is to say, requires a specific structure of the muzzle, a particular
formation of the teeth, together with which the structure of the jaw
bones, the muscles of mastication, cheek-bones, and, moreover, the
vertebrae, the thighbones, claws, and so forth all stand in the closest
relation. The body of the animal merely subserves natural ends and on
account of this dependence on the purely material aspect of nourishment
gives the impression of absence of spirit. If, then, the human
countenance is, even in its bodily conformation, to possess a spiritual
stamp, those organs which in the animal form are so predominant must
in the case of man, retire from such a pre-eminence and give way to
those which do not so much suggest a practical relation as one that is
referable to the ideality of mind.

(_ββ_) The human countenance has consequently a _second_ central point,
in which that attitude to facts, which indicates the relation of the
soul or spirit, is declared. We find this in the _upper_ portion of
the face, in the thoughtful brow and the eye, through which we face
the soul, which looms out beneath it, together with its environment.
Thought, reflection--that is, the introspection of the spiritual
identity--is necessarily connected with the forehead, whose internal
life in concentrated clarity looks forth from the eye. Through
the prominence of the forehead and the correspondingly retreating
appearance of the mouth and the cheek-bones the human countenance
derives its _spiritual_ character. This projection of the brow is
therefore necessarily that which determines the entire formation of the
skull, which no longer falls back, forming the side of an acute angle
as its extreme point the mouth is pressed to the front[157], but rather
permits of a line being drawn from the forehead through the nose to
the point of the chin, which, with a second drawn over the rear of the
skull to the apex of the forehead, form a right angle, or one at least
which approximates to it.

(_γγ_) _Thirdly_, we may say that the _nose_ forms the passage and
connection between the lower and upper portion of the face, that is
to say, between the purely contemplative and spiritual forehead and
the practical organ of nutrition; and if we take into consideration
its natural function as the organ of smell it is rightly placed in
this intermediate position between an attitude to the external world
which is either wholly practical or ideal. No doubt the sense of smell
in such a position is still associated with an animal want; it is
intimately connected with the taste; and for this reason, in the case
of the mere animal, the snout is at the service of the mouth and the
organ of nourishment. But the sense of smell is by itself as a fact no
actual consumption of objects, as eating and tasting are; it merely
accepts the result of the process in which the objects pass into the
atmosphere and its invisible and mysterious medium of dissolution.
Assuming, then, that the passage from forehead and nose is of such a
formation that the forehead viewed independently arches forward, and
yet in relation to the nose retreats, whereas this latter organ on its
part, in proximity to the forehead, is withdrawn back and only projects
beyond this point, we see that both these portions of the face--that
is, the contemplative part, the forehead, and that which suggests a
practical use, with which we may associate the mouth, form an emphatic
contrast, in virtue of which the nose, as belonging in a sense to
both extremes, appertains equally to the practical aims[158] of the
mouth. Furthermore, the forehead, in its isolated position, receives
the appearance of severity and exclusive spiritual concentration in
its contrast to the eloquent sympathy of the mouth, which is primarily
the organ of nutritive support, and at the same time accepts the nasal
organ into its service as its instrument in creating the natural want
by virtue of its smell, and thereby declares its direct relation to the
material side. And in close connection with this reciprocity is the
contingent character of the form to the indeterminable modifications
of which both nose and forehead may be carried. The particular type of
the forehead's arch, the nature of its projection or retreat, loses its
secure lines of definition, and the nose can be fiat or fine, drooping,
arched, more acutely flattened and a snub.

By virtue of amelioration[159] and accommodation, however, that
beautiful harmony, which the Greek profile asserts in the gentle and
uninterrupted communication between the spiritual forehead and the
nose, that is, between the upper and lower portions of the face, the
nose appears on this very account of closer affinity to the forehead,
and consequently receives itself a spiritual expression and character
as though drawn up into the spiritual system. The sense of smell
becomes at the same time a sense independent of purely practical ends,
a nose refined for spiritual purpose; just as in fact also the nose by
its sneer and similar movements, however unimportant by themselves they
may be, is nevertheless shown to be in the highest degree pliable as
a mode of expressing the judgments and emotions of soul-life. So, for
example, we say of a proud man that he holds his nose high, or ascribe
sauciness to a young girl who tosses up her bit of a nose.

And the same thing may be said of the _mouth._ No doubt it is on the
one hand referable as an instrument to the satisfaction of hunger
and thirst; it expresses, however, in addition to this conditions of
the soul, opinions, and passions. Even among animals it is used in
this relation as the organ of animal cries, and by man as that of
speech, laughter, sighs, and so forth, by which means the lineaments
of the mouth are themselves associated with the facts of eloquent
soul-sympathy, or of joy, sorrow, and similar conditions.

It is no doubt asserted that, though for the Greeks, such a
configuration of the human countenance is presented as the true
presentation of beauty, the Chinese, Jews, and Egyptians, regarded on
the contrary an entirely different type, or rather forms absolutely in
conflict with such, as equally beautiful, or yet more beautiful, and
the conclusion is made that, cancelling one example by another, we have
not proved that the Greek profile is the type of genuine beauty. Such
a statement, however, is wholly superficial. The Greek profile must
in fact not be regarded as any mere external and accidental form, but
approximates to the ideal of beauty by its independent claims, namely,
first, because it is the type of countenance in which the expression of
soul-life forces into the background all that is purely material, and,
secondly, because it to the fullest extent detaches itself from all
that is contingent in the form, without, however, displaying thereby
mere subservience to rule, and leaving no place for every kind of
individuality.

(_β_) With respect to specific types and their closer consideration I
will merely touch upon certain fundamental aspects selected from the
abundant material which otherwise invites attention. In this respect
we may in the _first_ instance refer to the forehead, the eye, and the
ear, as those parts of the face which are most nearly related to the
contemplative, or at least spiritual aspect, and, _secondly_, to the
nose, mouth, and chin, as those relatively speaking more connected with
the organs of practical import.

_Thirdly_, we shall have somewhat to say of the _hair_ as the external
setting, by virtue of which the head is rounded off in an oval shape of
beauty.

(_αα_) The _forehead_ is in the ideal form of classical sculpture,
neither fully arched forward, nor as a rule lofty; for, although the
spiritual aspect has to be prominently emphasized in its configuration
of the visual features, yet it is not as yet spirituality simply
as such, which sculpture has to present before us, but rather
individuality as still exclusively expressed in bodily form.

In heads of Hercules, for example, the forehead is preferably low,
for the reason that Hercules possesses rather the muscular vigour of
the body directed towards external objects than the introspective
energy of mind. And for the rest we find the forehead subject to
many modifications, lower in the case of charming and youthful
feminine forms, and more lofty in the case of figures that represent
substantial character and serious reflection.

In speaking of the _eye_ it is important at once to make it clear that
in the figure of ideal sculpture, in addition to the absence of any
true colour such as is found in painting, the _glance_ of the eye is
also absent. It is possible no doubt to show on historical evidence
that the ancients, in the case of particular images of Minerva and
other gods placed in temples, have painted the eye, since we find
actual traces of colour in certain statues; in the case of images
dedicated to a sacred purpose, however, artists have frequently held
fast so far as possible to traditional usage in the face of good taste.
In the case of other examples it is clear that they must have possessed
eyes in the shape of precious stones inserted. This practice, however,
is the result of a desire already adverted to of adorning the images
of gods in as rich and lavish a manner as possible. And we may affirm
generally that such either mark the beginnings of the art, or are due,
as exceptions, to the traditions of religion. Moreover, apart from
this, mere colour is still far from giving to the eye the essentially
concentrated look, which alone communicates to it an expression that
is wholly complete. We may therefore here assume it as a fact that in
the case of statues and busts of a truly classical type, unaffected by
such exceptional conditions which have come down to us from antiquity,
the light focus of the eye, no less than the spiritual expression
of its glance, is absent. For although not unfrequently the focus
is inserted in the apple of the eye, or at least is indicated by a
conical depression, and a modification which expresses the light point
of this focus and by this means a kind of visual glance, such remains
nevertheless the purely external configuration of the eye-ball, and is
no presentation of its vitality; in other words it is not the glance of
it simply, the inward glance, that is, of the soul.

We can readily imagine that it must cost the artist a great deal to
sacrifice the eye in its simple aspect of animation. We have only to
look a man in the eyes to discover a point of arrest, a centre that
explains and is basic to his entire presentment, which we may grasp in
its simplest terms from the unifying declaration of its bare look. The
eye-glance is in fact that aspect which is most steeped in soul; it is
the concentration of the inward life and its subjective emotion. Just
as a man by means of a handshake, so, too, with yet more rapidity he
is brought into unity with his fellow by virtue of the eye-glance he
faces. And it is this pre-eminently spiritual mode of revelation which
sculpture is forced to dispense with. In painting, on the contrary,
this outward expression of soul-life makes its appearance by means
of the subtle gradations of colouring either in its entire spiritual
effect, or in a manifest association with external facts and the
particular interests, feelings, and passions, which are called up by
their presence. But the province of the sculptor in his art is neither
the essential inwardness of soul-life, the concentration of the entire
man in the simple centre of self-identity, which gleams out in the
human glance as its ultimate point of illumination, nor the developed
subjectivity as we find it diffused amid the surrounding world. The
end of sculpture is the totality of the external form, into which the
soul must disintegrate itself, and present itself by means of the
manifold of the medium thus utilized, so that the recourse to one
simple soul-focus, in other word the immediacy of the spirit-glance,
is not here permitted. The work of sculpture possesses no such ideal
intimacy in its simplest terms which is allowed to assert itself, as
the human look does assert itself in contrast to other parts of the
human body, thereby unfolding a contrast between the eye and the body;
rather in sculpture what the individual is in his ideal and spiritual
significance remains wholly fused in the total aspect of form, which
the spirit that contemplates it, the spectator, can alone grasp in its
unity. And in the _second_ place, and with equal truth the eye peers
into the world that surrounds it; it necessarily looks at something
positive, and thereby is witness to man in his relation to a manifold
world of objects, just as in the sphere of feeling he is united to his
environment and general experience. It is, however, precisely this
union with external objects from which the true figure of sculpture
is withdrawn, being rather absorbed in what is substantive in its own
spiritual content, essentially self-subsistent, that is without further
diffusion or development. _Thirdly_, the glance of the eye receives
its fully evolved significance by virtue of the expression of the rest
of the bodily presentment, such as in its general mien and speech,
albeit as the purely formal point of subjective life, in which the
entire manifold of the form and its environment is concentrated to a
focus, it holds itself aloof and contrasted with this development. A
breadth of vision of this specific kind is, however, foreign to the
plastic art. For this reason the more specialized mode of expression in
the human vision, which did not at the same time immediately discover
its further reciprocal response of effect in the entire compass of
its configuration, could only be an accidental particularity, which
the sculptured figure must dispense with. For reasons such as these,
sculpture does not merely deprive itself of nothing when it leaves
its figures bare of the eye's full glance; but we may affirm that it
is only true to its fundamental principle when it totally disregards
this mode of the soul's expression. Consequently it is merely one
more example of the fine insight of antiquity, that it recognized
firmly this limitation and restriction of sculpture, and remained
loyal to the abstract view it implied. It is an evidence of the lofty
intelligence of the ancients, based on the fulness of their reasoning
faculties, and the comprehensive grasp of their outlook. No doubt we
do meet with cases in antique sculpture, in which the eyes gaze upon
some definite point, as for example in the case of the faun we have
alluded to several times who glances at the young Bacchus. This smile
of recognition is expressed in a moving way; but even here the eye is
itself visionless, and the real statues of the gods in their simple
situations are not presented to us in relations of this specific
character so far as the direction of eye and glance is concerned.

With regard to the _form_ of the eye in ideal sculpture it is large
of size, widely extended, oval and in respect to position placed
at right angles toward the line of the forehead and nose, and in
considerable depression. As far back as Winckelmann[160] the large
size of the eye was accounted significant of beauty, just as a great
light is more beautiful than a small one. "The size, however," his
description continues, "is relative to the bone of the eye or its
cavity, and is expressed in the mode of incision[161] and in the
opening of the eyelids, of which in beautiful eyes the upper describes
a more circular arch toward the angle within than the lower one." In
the case of profile heads of superior workmanship the apple of the eye
itself possesses a profile and receives precisely by virtue of this
opening thus cut away a nobility and a free glance, whose very light,
according to Winckelmann's observation, is rendered visible on coins
through an exalted point or focus on the apple of the eye. At the same
time mere size does not make all eyes beautiful; they are this in the
first place by virtue of the cast of the eyelids, and in the second
through being themselves deepset. In other words the eye ought not to
press forward, and by so doing be thrust on the external world, for
it is just this close relation to the external world which is removed
from the ideal, exchanging for this the self-retirement of personality
upon its own resources, that is, upon what is ideally substantive in
the individuality. The projection of the eye, however, also suggests
the thought that the apple of the eye is at one time pushed to the
fore and at another withdrawn, and, particularly in the case of the
staring gaze, only testifies to the fact that the individual is beside
himself, either staring in total absence of thought, or in an equally
soulless way absorbed in the gaze upon some material object. In the
Ideal of antique sculpture the eye is placed in even more pronounced
retreat than we actually find it in Nature. Winckelmann suggests as
a reason for this that in the case of statues of larger size which
are placed more remote from the vision of the spectator, without
this more receding position, on account of the fact that apart from
this the apple of the eye was for the most part flat, the eye itself
would have been without meaning and practically lifeless, if by just
this more emphatic projection of the bone of the eye-socket, the
thereby accentuated play of light and shadow had not made the eye more
apparently active. Yet this deepening of the eye has a yet further
significance. In other words, if the forehead is thereby suffered to
receive a prominence superior to that of Nature the contemplative
portion of the face is the predominant factor, and we receive a keener
sense of spiritual expression, while also the emphasized shadow in
the eye-sockets on its own account enables us to feel a depth and
unimpaired inwardness, a look that is shut off from external objects,
and retires on the essential presence of individuality, whose depths
are suffused over the entire presentment. In the case of coins, too, of
the best period the eyes are deep-set, and the enclosing bones of the
eye are projected. The eyebrows on the contrary are not expressed by
a more extended arch of tiny hairs, but merely suggested by means of
the acute sharpness of the eye-bone ridge, which, without interrupting
the forehead in its form of continuity as eyebrows actually do through
their colour and relative elevation, surround the eyes as with an
elliptical garland. The more elevated and consequently more independent
arch of the eye-brows has never been regarded as beautiful.

Winckelmann[162] further observes with regard to the _ears_ that the
ancients devoted the greatest care to their elaboration, so that in the
case of cut stones indifferent attention to the execution of the ear
is an infallible sign of the spuriousness of the work in question. In
particular he insists that statues which are portraits often reproduced
the characteristic and individual type of the ear. It is consequently
possible in many cases to ascertain the very personality represented
from the ear, if the same happens to be known, and to take one example,
from a single ear with an exceptionally large opening into it, to
deduce the presence of a Marcus Aurelius. Indeed, the ancients have
not failed to indicate in this respect what is actually misshapen.
As examples of a peculiar type of ear to be found in ideal heads,
Winckelmann draws attention to certain ears given to Hercules, which
are beaten out flat, and others which bulge out in their cartilaginous
folds. They indicate wrestlers and pancratiasts, just as Hercules
himself carried off the prize at Elis as a pancratiast in the games of
Pelops.

(_ββ_) We have still to add some remarks with reference to that part
of the countenance which is more nearly related to the practical or
sensuous side of natural function, in other words the specific form
of the nose, the mouth, and the chin. The distinction in the form of
the nose gives to the face a variety of configuration and many various
kinds of expression. A keenly cut nose with thin folds[163] at the
apertures we are accustomed to associate with an acute understanding,
whereas a broad and drooping one, or a snub nose that is somewhat
brutish, suggests as a rule sensuality, folly, and bestiality. It is,
however, the function of sculpture to hold itself aloof, not merely
from such extremes, but also the intermediate stages of design and
expression, and refuse consequently to accept, as we have already seen
is the case with the Greek profile, not simply the separation from the
forehead, but also the extreme curve, whether upwards or downwards, the
acute point and the more extended rounding off, the elevation in the
middle and the depression towards the forehead and the mouth, generally
speaking the extreme acuteness and thickness of the nose, setting in
the place of these varied modifications a comparatively indifferent
type, if at the same time one which in a quiet way is throughout
vitalized by individuality.

Second only to the eye the _month_ belongs to the most beautiful
portion of the face, provided that it is formed not so much in express
relation to its natural function as an organ for eating and drinking
as in accommodation to its spiritual significance. In this respect it
only gives place to the eye in the variety and wealth of its means
of expression, and this though it is enabled to express with vital
force the finest nuances of scorn, disdain, envy, the entire gamut of
sorrows and joy through the slightest of movements and the fullest
play of such, and to a similar degree to express the charm of love,
earnestness, sensuous feeling, obstinacy, attraction, and other such
emotions by its state of repose. Sculpture, however, makes less use
of it to express the nuances of particular expression, and, above
all, is bound to keep what is entirely sensuous, and suggests natural
wants away from the form and delineation of the lips. For the most
part, therefore, it models the mouth neither over-full-shaped nor too
spare, for extremely thin lips also suggest a parsimony of emotional
life; makes the underlip more full than the upper, which was also the
case with Schiller, upon the modelling of whose mouth was inscribed
every kind of significance and fulness of temperament. This more ideal
type of the lips in its contrast to the animal snout presents the
appearance of a certain absence of desire, whereas in the case of the
beast, if the upper portion projects, we are at once reminded of the
headlong devouring of food and the grasp for it. Among human beings the
mouth is, when we have regard for its spiritual relation, primarily
the seat of human speech, the organ for the free communication of
self-conscious life, just as the eye is that of the emotional spirit.
Moreover, according to the ideals of sculpture, the lips are not
tightly closed; rather in the works of art in its blooming season the
mouth is set slightly open without suffering the teeth, however, to be
visible, which have nothing to do with the expression of a spiritual
significance. This attitude is so far supported by the fact that when
the organs of sense are strongly active, as, for example, when we gaze
intently at an object, the mouth is closed; when, on the contrary, we
are absorbed in visionless thought it opens slightly and the angles of
the mouth are to an appreciable extent inclined downwards.

Last in our review of the objects above named, the _chin_, in its
ideal form, completes the spiritual expression of the mouth, that is,
assuming it is not wholly absent, as in the case of animals, or only
retained in a retreating and meagre condition as in works of Egyptian
sculpture, but as rather lengthened out even beyond the degree which is
usual, receiving thus in the rounded fulness of its arched curve, more
particularly where we have shorter underlips, yet further increase of
size. To sum up in fact a full chin conveys the impression of a certain
satiety and repose. Odd fussy wenches wag with their withered-up chins
and meagre muscles. Goethe, for example, likens their chops to a pair
of tongs that will be snatching at something. All restlessness of this
kind disappears with a full chin. The dimple, however, which nowadays
is held to have some claim to beauty is, as an accidental grace itself,
no essential accompaniment of beauty. In its place, however, a rounded
chin of considerable proportions is an infallible sign of antique
heads. In the case of the Medicean Venus it is not so noticeable, but
it is proved on good evidence that the statue has suffered a loss in
this respect.

(_γγ_) We have only now in conclusion to refer to the _hair._ Generally
speaking the hair has rather the character of a vegetable than an
animal formation; it testifies less to the strength of the organism
than it is indicative of weakness. Barbarians allow the hair to hang
in straight lines, or cut it off close to the head rather than in
undulating line or locks. The ancients, on the contrary, devoted
excessive attention to the elaboration of the hair in their ideal works
of sculpture, a direction in which more modern artists devote less
trouble and skill. No doubt the ancients also, when the stone on which
they worked was extremely hard, did not suffer the hair of the head to
flow in freely hanging locks, but arranged as though it was cropped
short[164] and, in that form, finely combed out. In the case of marble
sculpture of the better time the hair is in locks and of great vigour
both in the case of male and female heads, where we find it presented
in upward rolls and bound together on the crown of the head; one finds
it at least, as Winckelmann points out, drawn out in winding rolls and
with express depressions the better to indicate its various folds in
light and shadow, which is impossible if the drills are shallow. Add
to this in the case of particular gods the line of direction and the
arrangement of the hair is different In a similar way in Christian
painting Christ is made recognizable by a definite type of the crown of
the head and the locks of hair, following which type in our own time
there are not a few who deliberately imitate such an appearance.

(_γ_) The parts above described in their form sum up collectively the
head as a whole. The beautiful form is here determined by a line which
most nearly approaches the oval of an egg, and thereby resolves every
indication of sharpness, pointedness, and angularity in harmonious
form and a gently progressive association, without, however, being
exclusively regular and abstractly symmetrical, or issuing in multifold
variety of lines and their direction and inclination as is the case
with other portions of the body. In order to form this self-collected
oval shape, the beautiful and free inclination from the chin to the ear
contributes, particularly if we look at the face from the front, no
less than the line already indicated, which describes the termination
of the forehead, the bones of the eye-socket. And the arch over the
profile from forehead over the point of the nose to the chin is
equally noticeable, and the beautiful arching of the back of the head
to the nape of the neck. So much I have permitted myself, without
entering on further detail, to observe on the ideal shape of the head.

(_b_) In respect to the other organic members such as neck, breast,
back, belly, arms, hands, thighs, and feet, we find here another type
of co-ordination. They can no doubt possess a beautiful form, but the
beauty is sensuous, vital, without expressing by virtue of their form
as such a spiritual significance as the countenance expresses it. The
ancients have shown for the form of these parts of the body the highest
sense of beauty; but in genuine sculpture they must not merely pass as
the beauty of a living organism, but as members of the _human_ form
it is their further function to present the appearance of a spiritual
effect, so far as this is compatible with what is purely bodily
presence. Otherwise the expression of the soul would be concentrated
wholly in the face, whereas in plastic sculpture what is spiritual must
appear as permeating nothing less than the entire configuration, and
must not be permitted to isolate itself independently and in contrast
to what is corporeal.

If we now inquire what are the means which enable the breast, the
torso, the back, and the extremities to contribute to the expression of
spirit and thereby to receive over and beyond a beautiful vitality, the
breath of a spiritual life, we shall find the following:

In the _first_ place there is the relation in which the limbs, in so
far as that relation proceeds from the ideality of Spirit, and is
freely determined by that ideality, are brought into juxtaposition.

_Secondly_, there is the motion and repose in their complete freedom
and beauty of form.

_Thirdly_, this type of position and motion in their definite
affiliation[165] and expression supplies the situation more closely,
in which the Ideal, which can never consist purely in the Ideal of
abstraction, is comprehended.

I will add yet further some general remarks on the above points.

(_α_) With regard to _position_ of first importance is that aspect
we have had already occasion to notice in a superficial way, namely,
the _upright_ position of man. The body of animals moves in a parallel
line with the ground; mouth and eye follow the same direction, and the
animal is unable independently to raise himself from this relation
to gravity. The opposite is the case with mankind; the eye looking
straight forward is placed in its natural direction, that is, in a
right angle with the line of gravity and the body. Man is no doubt able
to go on all fours just as animals do, and children do so in fact;
but as soon as consciousness begins to awaken, man wrests himself
from the animal chains of the earth, and stands up straight in free
independence. This stansion is an act of will, for if we cease to try
to stand our body collapses and falls to the ground. In this way the
upright position possesses a spiritual significance, in so far as the
self-elevation from the ground remains linked with the volition and
thus with that which is spiritual and ideal; just as we are accustomed
to say of an essentially free and independent man, who keeps his
opinions, view's, principles, and aims unaffected by others, that he
stands on his own feet.

The upright position is, however, not yet merely as such beautiful;
it is only so by virtue of the freedom of its form. In other words if
a man stands up only straight in an abstract way, letting his hands
fall glued to his side with no interval of separation, his legs in the
same way being close to each other, we receive an untoward expression
of stiffness, even although in the first instance this is due to no
compulsion. From this stiff effect we deduce on the one hand the
abstract and likewise architectonic principle of uniformity, under
which the limbs adhere together in the like position, and on the other
hand we do not discover in it any determination derived from what is
spiritual and the ideal principle. In such a case arms, legs, breast,
body, all the members stand and hang just as though they had from the
first grown there on man, without being brought by means of his spirit,
his volition and emotions into a change of position. The same thing
may be said of the sitting posture. Conversely also the squatting or
perching on the ground is destitute of freedom for the reason that it
suggests an attitude of subordination, dependence, and serfdom. The
free position, on the contrary, avoids in a measure this abstract
uniformity and angularity, and places the position under lines which
approximate to the organic form; and to a further extent it suffers
spiritual relations to shine through, so that by virtue of such a
position the conditions and passions of the soul are cognizable. Only
in this manner can the position pass as a genuine exhibition of Spirit.

In the application of positions as significant pose[166], it is
necessary, however, that sculpture proceed with great circumspection,
and it has thereby many a difficulty to overcome. On the one hand,
no doubt, the reciprocal relation of the members is to be derived
from the ideal principle of Spirit; on the other hand, however, this
determination from the ideal side ought not to place the particular
parts under a mode which contradicts the corporeal structure and the
laws of the same, and thereby produce the impression of a constraint
imposed on the members, or come into collision with the material of
substance, in which sculpture is set the task to execute the artist's
conceptions. And, in the third place, the pose must appear wholly
spontaneous, as though the body received it of its own initiative,
otherwise body and spirit have the appearance of being distinct and
separable from each other, and are involved in the relative position
of mere direction from one side and purely abstract obedience from the
other, whereas both in sculpture ought rightly to constitute one and
the same immediately congruent totality. This absence of constraint
is here of the first importance. Spirit, as the ideal principle, must
throughout transfuse the members, and these latter must in like degree
essentially accept spirit and its determination as to the content of
its own soul. As to the pose itself and its character, which we may
empower to express the just attitude in ideal sculpture, we can readily
infer from our previous exposition that it ought not be one wholly
referable to change or instantaneous action. The representation of
sculpture must produce no effect such as is seen in the case where men,
while in the art of motion and action, were turned to stone or frozen
by means of Hüon's horn. On the contrary, it is necessary that the
posture, although it may without question point to some characteristic
action, express for all that merely a beginning and preparation, an
intention, or it must indicate the close of an action and a return from
the same to the state of repose. The repose and self-subsistency of a
spiritual life, which potentially encloses in itself an entire world,
is the most suitable aspect for the ideal form of sculpture.

(_β_) And, in the _second_ place, what we have observed of posture is
equally applicable to _motion._ There is in sculpture as such less room
for motion in the full sense of the term than other arts[167], just in
so far as the same does not as yet advance to the mode of presentation
which is more nearly related to an art whose sphere of effect is more
extensive. The tranquil image of the god in his blessed self-seclusion
is the presentment which it is its task mainly to set before us in
all its essential freedom from conflict. A variety of movement is
necessarily excluded from such. What we ought to have is rather a
stansion or reclining posture of essential self-absorption[168].
This attitude of self wholly referable to self it is which does not
proceed to a definite action, and by doing so does not contract
its entire energy to the space of a single moment, making such of
first importance, but rather persists in the continued equilibrium
of tranquillity. We ought to be able to imagine that the figure of
the gods will remain for ever in the same posture. The escape from
self-subsistency, the plunging of individual life within the vortex of
a particular action that implies conflict, the strain of the moment,
which is unable to continue as such--such relations are foreign to
the ideality of sculpture. We cross them rather where, in the case of
groups and reliefs, the particular moments of an action are presented
with a distinct inclination to the principle of painting. A result
brought about by powerful effects, and their passing exhibition,
no doubt exercises upon us an immediate impression; but after once
having received it we do not readily return to it. For that which is
so prominent in the presentation is the affair of a moment's passage,
which we both observe and recognize in that moment, whereas the ideal
fulness and freedom, what is infinite in its significance, in other
words that which holds our attention permanently, is relegated to the
background.

(_γ_) In asserting this, however, we do not maintain that sculpture,
where, in the case where it adheres to its principle in all its
severity and attains its highest point, must necessarily exclude
entirely the attitude of movement. If it did so it would merely
present to us the divine in its indeterminacy and indifference. On the
contrary, in so far as it is its function to comprehend the substantive
as individuality, and to present it to our vision in bodily form, both
the ideal and external condition, in accordance with which it brings
its content and form to an impression, is necessarily individual. And
it is this individuality of a definite situation which is pre-eminently
expressed by means of the pose and movement of the body. Inasmuch
as, however, the substantive in sculpture is of most importance, and
individuality is not as yet itself extricated from the same to the
point of particular self-subsistency, the specific determinacy of the
situation must not be of a kind that it impairs or annuls the simple
sterling character[169] of that substantiveness, by either making
it one-sided or drawing it into the conflict of collisions, or in a
general way by placing it without reserve under the overmastering
importance and variety of what is particular. It must rather remain,
independently regarded, a determinacy less essential in its result, or
rather we may say a vivacious play of vital force, harmless in effect
over the superficial features of individuality, whose substantive
character in no respect suffers loss thereby in depth, subsistency, and
repose. This is, however, a point which I have at an earlier stage of
this investigation already[170] discussed at length in relation to the
Ideal of sculpture when the situation itself was under review, in which
the Ideal ought to appear in definite relation to the presentation:
further discussion may here be consequently dispensed with.

(_c_) The last point of importance we have now to consider is the
question of _drapery_ in sculpture. At first sight it may appear as
though the nude form and its corporeal beauty permeated by spiritual
significance, in the manner of its pose and movement, were the most
appropriate form for the Ideal of sculpture, and drapery were simply
a hindrance. In accordance with such a view we hear the complaint
raised, more particularly in our own time, that modern sculpture is
so frequently forced to drape its figures, whereas no drapery should
touch the beauty of human organic forms. And we have finally the wail
added that our artists should have so little opportunity of studying
the nude which was ever before the eyes of the ancients. In general we
may simply reply to this that though without question, from the point
of view of sensuous beauty, the preference must be given to the nude
form, yet merely sensuous beauty is not the ultimate aim of sculpture,
so that the Greeks do not give the lead to a false path when they
presented the larger number of their male figures no doubt in the nude,
but by far the greater number of female figures draped.

(_α_) And generally we may add that, apart from artistic purpose,
drapery is justified in real measure in the necessity of providing a
protection from climatic changes, Nature having failed to provide man
with any covering of hide, feathers, hair, such as animals possess.
And from another point of view it is the sense of modesty which
compels man to cover himself with raiment. Now this shame, regarded
in a general way, is a beginning of indignation over that which is
coarse or crude. Man in fact, who is conscious of his more elevated
calling to be Spirit, must necessarily regard what is purely animal
as an incompatibility with that, and pre-eminently seek to cover, as
that which is not consonant with the Ideal of his soul[171], those
parts of his body, such as the belly, breast, back, and legs, which
are subservient to animal functions, or only are directed to external
uses, and possess directly no spiritual determinacy, and no spiritual
expression. We therefore find among every people, who have entered
upon the life of reflection, this sense of shame and the necessity of
clothing in some degree, whether great or small. As far back as the
narrative of Genesis we have this transition expressed in the shrewdest
way. Before Adam and Eve have eaten of the tree of knowledge they walk
in Paradise in the nakedness of innocence; but no sooner is their
consciousness as spiritual beings[172] aroused than they are ashamed
of their nakedness. The same sense is prevalent among all other
Asiatic nations. So, for example, Herodotus asserts in narrating[173]
how Gyges came to the throne, that it was regarded even in a man as a
matter of shame among the Lydians, and almost all barbarians, to be
seen naked; and as a proof of this we have the tale of the wife of
Candaules, king of the Lydians. The tale runs that Candaules exposed
his wife in nudity to the gaze of Gyges, his satellite and favourite,
in order to convince him that her beauty as a woman was beyond compare.
She, however, discovered the outrage, which it was intended to conceal
from her, by chance seeing Gyges, who had been hidden in her sleeping
chamber, slip out of the door. Indignant at the outrage, she received
Gyges in audience the following day, and declared to him that, inasmuch
as the king had taken this step and permitted Gyges to see what he
ought not to have seen, he might select one of two courses, either
kill the king as his punishment, and possess himself both of her and
the kingdom, or himself die. Gyges selected the first alternative, and
after assassinating the king mounted the throne and married the widow.
On the other hand the Egyptians represented frequently, or, indeed,
for the most part, their statues in the nude to the extent that the
male figures merely carried an apron; and in the case of Isis the
drapery was indicated by nothing more than a barely perceptible fringe
round the legs. This, however, was neither due to a defective sense of
shame, nor in virtue of their instinct for the beauty of organic forms.
For if we consider their symbolic point of view we can only maintain
that what concerned them was not the configuration of a presentment
consonant with a spiritual significance, but rather the meaning, the
essence and conception of that which the form was intended to present
to intelligence; and they permitted the human form to be thus, without
reflection upon the further and more remote adequacy of the same to
Spirit, in its natural state, which they moreover copied with great
closeness to life.

(_β_) Finally, among the Greeks, we meet with both aspects, both nude
and draped figures. And in actual life also they were equally clothed,
albeit from other considerations they held it a point of honour to
have first contested in the games nude. To an exceptional degree the
Lacedaemonians were the first to wrestle naked. But this was with them
not due so much to a sense of beauty as to their general indifference
to what savoured of refinement and spiritual purport in the sense of
modesty. In the national character of the Greek people, among whom the
feeling for personal individuality in all its immediacy, and as it is
the spiritual animation of their existence, is so strongly developed,
taking this as the instinct for free and beautiful forms, it was also
inevitable that what was human in its immediacy, the bodily presence,
that is, as it belongs to man and is suffused with his spirit, should
be elaborated in independent form, and that the human form should be
revered above all others for the reason that it is the freest and the
most beautiful. In this sense, no doubt, they threw aside that instinct
of shame, which will not suffer us to look at what is purely corporeal
in' man, not out of indifference to what was spiritual, but with an
indifference to what is purely sensuous in desire, for the sake of
beauty; and this intention is manifest in full play throughout a great
number of their nude figures.

This entire absence of drapery, however, it was impossible wholly
to justify on principle. For, as I have already indicated when
distinguishing the head from other parts of the body, it is undeniable
that the spiritual expression of the form is restricted to the face
and the pose and movement of the whole, to the general mien, which is
preeminently eloquent by virtue of the arms, hands, and position of
the legs. For these organs, whose activity is in an outward direction,
have still, and precisely by the nature of their pose and movement,
for the most part the expression of a spiritual deliverance. The other
members of the body, on the contrary, are and remain solely productive
of a sensuous beauty; and the distinguishing features which are visible
on them can only be bodily vigour, development of muscle, or degrees
of delicacy and softness, such as characterize respectively the two
sexes, age, youth, and childhood. As a means, therefore, of expressing
what is spiritual in the form, the nudity of these parts is also
from the standpoint of beauty indifferent; and it is only due to our
moral sense, when, that is to say, the main thing looked for is the
paramount presentation of the spiritual in man, that such parts should
be veiled. What in general ideal art does in the case of every separate
part of the body is to remove the necessary limitations of animal life
in its detailed particularities, such as little veins, wrinkles, hairs
of the skin, and so forth, and simply to enforce and emphasize the
spiritual impression of the form in its vital outlines, and this is
precisely what drapery effects. It covers up the superfluity of the
organs, which are no doubt necessary for the body's self-support, but
are in other respects superfluous as an expression of the spirit's
import. We are, therefore, not entitled to assert without condition
that the nudity of figures of sculpture in every respect betrays a
higher sense of beauty, and a greater ethical freedom and emaculacy. It
was in this respect, as in others, that a just and spiritual instinct
dominated the Greek.

Children, Cupid for example, where we find the bodily presentment one
of unreserved innocence, and the spiritual beauty consisting just in
this; or, to take other examples, youths, youthful gods, heroic gods,
and heroes, such as Perseus, Hercules, Theseus, Jason, in which cases
heroic courage, and the use and elaboration of the bodily frame in
works of bodily strength and permanence is of most importance; or
wrestlers in the national games, where it is not so much the content
of the action, the spirit and individuality of character, as the
physical aspect of the exploit, the vigour, suppleness, and free play
of the muscles and limbs, which is the source of exclusive interest;
or finally fauns and satyrs, Bacchantes in the frenzy of the dance,
no less than Aphrodite, in so far as the sensuous charm of her beauty
is emphasized--such are the kind of examples which were rendered
in the nude by antique sculpture. Where, on the contrary, a more
lofty significance and reflection, a more ideal earnestness is made
prominent, where in general the natural features are not superlatively
emphasized, there we get drapery. So Winckelmann adduces a case where
among ten statues of the female form only one is wholly undraped.
Among the goddesses Pallas, Juno, Vesta, Diana, Ceres and the Muses
are pre-eminently those which are veiled in drapery, while among the
gods such a treatment particularly applies to Jupiter, and the bearded
Indian Bacchus, with some others.

(_γ_) And finally with regard to the principle of drapery, it is
unquestionable that we have here a subject that critics are very fond
of discussing, and which has consequently to some extent been already
well thrashed out. I will, therefore, limit myself to the few following
remarks.

Generally we have no reason to lament the fact that our modern feeling
of what is respectable is somewhat averse to setting up totally nude
figures. For if the drapery merely permits the pose in question to be
entirely transpicuous instead of covering it up, we lose nothing at
all; rather the drapery is just that which rightly fixes the emphasis,
and is in this respect even an advantage, in so far as it draws us
aside from the direct view of that which as merely sensuous is without
true significance, and simply shows us what is there in relation to the
situation expressed by means of pose and movement.

(_αα_) Once accept this principle, and it may at first sight appear
that such covering is of most signal advantage for the artistic
treatment, which conceals the contour of the limbs, and consequently
also the pose as little as possible, precisely in fact as this is the
case with our sufficiently enclosing _modern_ garments. Our closely
fitting sleeves and trousers follow the outlines of the form, and
stand in the way of the motion and mien least of all by their making
the entire form of the limbs visible. The long white garments and
bulging-out hoses of the Orientals, on the contrary, are intolerable to
our sense of vivacity and multifarious activities, and are only fitting
for folk who, like the Turks, sit the whole day long in one place with
legs crossed, or only perambulate slowly and with great gravity. And
yet we are conscious at the same time--indeed the very first glance
at either modern statues or pictures will establish the truth for
us--that our modern clothing is entirely unartistic. In other words
what we behold in it really is, as I have already in another passage,
insisted, not the fine, free, and vital outlines of the body in their
tender and flowing elaboration, but stretched out sacks with stiff
folds. For albeit we do obtain the most generalized form, yet the
beauty of the organic undulations is lost; and what we really look at
is a contrivance of exterior aim, a matter of tailor's work, which in
one place is stitched together, in another folded back over, and yet in
another made tightly fitting--in other words, as a whole, forms that
are not free, folds and surfaces which are fastened together by stitch,
buttons and button holes. To all intents and purposes such a clothing
as this is simply a cover and veil, which, while devoid of any real
form of its own, yet in its other aspect, though in a general sort of
way following the organic contour of limbs, hides from the view just
that sensuous beauty and vital rondour and undulation which belongs to
them, merely to replace it with the material aspect of the mechanically
elaborated stuff of which it is composed. And thus we get what is so
entirely inartistic in our modern form of garments.

(_ββ_) The principle for an artistic type of clothing, then, consists
in this that it is at the same time treated as a work of architectonic
design. Such a work is simply an environment, in which a man can
likewise move in freedom, and which must essentially possess and
declare on its part a determinate shape of its own as its mode of
covering quite apart from the form which it encloses. Add to this
such a work, in its aspect of a thing which is worn and carried, must
freely follow its own mechanical texture. A principle of this type
follows in the track of the kind of draping which we find adopted in
the ideal sculpture of the ancients. Particularly here do we find that
the mantle is as it were a house in which free motion is possible. It
is no doubt carried, but is only made fast at one point, namely, on the
shoulder. For the rest it evolves its particular form according to the
modifications brought about by its own weight; it hangs, falls along
the ground, and casts folds spontaneously, and only receives through
the pose the varied changes of this free kind of configuration. In like
manner there is little to impair essentially, if in varied degree, the
freedom of disposition in other parts of antique drapery. This it is
which constitutes its artistic quality. It is only in drapery such as
this that we do not face something which is a burden, and something
artificial, whose shape merely displays an external constraint and
necessity, which is rather something itself independent in its form,
and which, however, accepts from a spiritual source, that is the pose
of the figure, its point of departure. For this reason the garments
of the ancients are only fastened to the body so far as is actually
unavoidable, that is, to prevent their collapse, and are modified by
the pose of it. In all other respects they hang freely about it, and
themselves in their power of movement through the motion of the body
give yet further support to the same principle. And this is wholly as
it should be; for the body is one thing and its drapery another, and
the latter ought thereby to receive its full due and be displayed in
its freedom. Modern clothing on the contrary is either wholly carried
by the body and purely in subjection to it, so that even the pose
itself is too emphatically repeated, and it merely follows the forms
of the limbs, or, in cases where it is able to secure an independent
form in the formation of folds, it is after all merely the tailor's
work who makes this form according to the exigences of fashion. The
material is, on the one hand, dragged up and down by the various parts
of the body and their movements, and, on the other, by its stitches and
seams. On grounds of this description the antique form of drapery is by
a long way to be preferred to our modern style as the ideal standard
for works of sculpture. No end has been written with every resource of
antiquarian research over the form and details of the ancient ways of
draping, for although men as a rule do not permit themselves to chatter
much over fashion in their clothes, the kind of cloth, border, cut,
and every other such detail, yet they find ample justification from
the antiquarian standpoint for treating these trifling matters also as
important, and of talking about them with even greater prolixity than
is permitted to woman herself in her unchallenged field of supremacy.

(_γγ_) It is, however, a totally different problem we have to consider
when the question is asked whether modern clothing, that is, the kind
so greatly to be contrasted with the antique, is in all cases to be
rejected. This question is of particular importance when we examine the
case of portrait statues; and inasmuch as its main interest closely
touches a principle of importance to art as we have it now, we will
consider it at rather greater length. When nowadays we have to create
a portrait of some contemporary it becomes necessarily a part of it
that the drapery and the environment are both accepted from the actual
facts of their individual existence, for, inasmuch as it is just this
actual person which is here made the object of art, this external
framework, to which the clothing essentially belongs, is in its reality
and truth precisely that which is most important. And this is more
especially to be observed when what is aimed at is the presentment
before our vision in our individuality of well-defined characters whose
greatness and activity in any _particular_ sphere have been remarkable.
Whether it be in a picture, or in the marble, an individual is, in
fact, exhibited to our immediate vision in a bodily mode, in other
words under external conditions, and to seek to carry the portrait
beyond such a restriction would virtually imply the self-contradiction
that the individual was associated with that which was essentially
untrue, and this for the reason that the service, what is peculiar
and distinguished in actual men, consists precisely in their active
relations to the real, that is in their life and action in definite
professional spheres. And if this individual activity is to be made
clear to us the environment must exhibit nothing that is foreign to or
tends to impair the effect. A famous general, for example, has lived
in respect to his professional surroundings with cannon, rifles, and
powder before his eyes. If we intend to depict him in his professional
activity we recur most naturally to the way he gives orders to his
adjutants, commands the line of battle, and advances against the enemy.
And with yet more detail such a general is not merely one of a class,
but is distinguished by the particular style of his uniform. He is
either a leader of infantry or a stalwart hussar, and so forth. In
every example of this kind we have some exceptional form of habiliment
which is appropriate to the circumstances. Moreover a famous general
is simply a famous general, not necessarily a law-giver, poet, or
even very possibly a religious man; he commands in all respects as
a soldier; he is just that; he is, in a word, no complete totality,
and this alone gives us the ideal and divine type. For the divinity
of the ideal figures of sculpture is to be sought in nothing so much
as this that their character and individuality are appertinent to no
particular relations and professed callings, but are rather removed
from such division, or, in the case that the idea of such relations is
mooted, it is so placed before us that we are forced to believe about
such individuals that their powers of performance are unlimited. For
reasons such as the above a demand to represent the heroes of our time
or the more recent Past, when their heroism is of a restricted nature,
in ideal drapery is very superficial. Such a demand testifies no doubt
to a zeal for artistic beauty, but a zeal which is unintelligent, and
in its devotion to the antique overlooks the fact that the greatness of
the ancients likewise reposes essentially in the lofty comprehension
of all that they accomplished. In other words, they have, no doubt,
represented what is essentially ideal, but they have not sought to
enforce a form that is opposed to reality. If the entire content of
the individuals in question is not of an ideal character, then their
draping ought not to be such; and if a powerful, determined, and
resolute general does not already possess a countenance indicative of
the lineaments of Mars, then to drape him with Greek drapery would
be as much a folly as though we popped a bearded man in a maiden's
petticoats. Despite this truth, however, modern clothing does involve
us in considerable difficulty because it is subject to fashion, and
consequently subject to change. For the rational principle of fashion
consists in this that it exercises over Time the claim to be always
subject to modification. A robe, according to some particular cut, soon
passes out of fashion, and it is only in fashion so long as it pleases.
But when the fashion is over, we cease to be used to it, and what
pleased us a few years back now appears suddenly ridiculous. For this
reason only those forms of garments are appropriate for statues which
carry the specific character of a period in a more permanent type; but,
in general, it may be advisable to find a middle way, as our artists
attempt to do. Yet, despite of the rule, it is generally a mistake
to clothe portrait statues in modern clothing when they are either
small, or the object sought after is simply a familiar presentation.
In such cases mere busts are best, which are the more easily lifted to
an ideal elevation, simply neck and breast being retained, inasmuch
as the head and the physiognomy thus remain of most importance, and
everything else is relegated to incidental insignificance. Where we
have large-sized statues on the contrary, more particularly where
the pose is one of tranquillity, we see at once, because they are in
repose, how they are draped; and large-sized male figures, even in
the painted portrait, when clothed after modern wont can only with
difficulty be raised over what is insignificant. As instances we may
mention the full-figure seated portraits by old Tischbein of Herder and
Wieland, of which we have excellent engravings on copper. One feels
at once, when looking at them, that it is a somewhat stale, flat, and
unprofitable business to gaze at their breeches, stockings, and shoes,
and absolutely so to see their cosy, self-contented posture on a sofa,
where they have their hands lying happily together over their paunches.

It is another matter with portrait statues of individuals where,
either in respect to the period of their activity they are far removed
from our own, or are themselves essentially of an ideal greatness. In
such cases what is old is already divested of the temporal aspect and
has passed into the more indefinite background of the general idea,
so that in this release from its particular form of actuality it is
also in the mode of its drapery capable of an ideal presentation. And
this is still more true in the case of individuals, who by virtue of
their self-subsistency and the ideal fulness of what are otherwise
the mere limitations of their particular profession, and detached
from what is merely the activity of a definite period of time, create
independently for themselves a free totality, a world of relations
and activities, and consequently should appear, even in the aspect of
their habiliments, as exalted above the familiar guise of everyday life
in their ordinary temporal costume. As far back as the Greeks we find
statues of Achilles and Alexander, on which the more individual traits
of portraiture are of so fine a quality that we should rather imagine
them to be sons of gods than human beings. In the case of the genial
and greathearted youth Alexander this is quite as it should be. And in
much the same way, moreover, Napoleon himself has been lifted to such
a fame, and is a genius of so comprehensive a grasp, that there is no
reason why he should not be depicted in ideal drapery, which indeed
would not be unfitting for Frederick the Great, when the object is to
celebrate him in all his greatness of soul. No doubt the size of the
statues is here, too, of importance. In the case of small figures,
which carry an air of familiarity, the three-cornered little hat of
Napoleon is out of place no less than the famous uniform and the arms
crossed over breast, and, if we desire to have before us the great
Frederick as "old Fritz," we may have him pictured for us with hat and
stick as we find him on tobacco boxes.



3. THE INDIVIDUALITY OF IDEAL FIGURES OF SCULPTURE


Hitherto we have considered the Ideal of sculpture in its general
character and in the further aspect of the more detailed forms which
distinguish it. We have _thirdly_ only left us to emphasize the fact
that the Ideals of sculpture, in so far as, in respect to their
content, they have to manifest what is substantive in individualities,
and in respect to their external form the human bodily shape, are
also under the necessity of an advance in which the _particularity_
of their presentation is differentiated, and an aggregate of specific
individuals is thereby created, just as we already, in the classical
type of art, recognize the embracing circle of the Greek gods. We
may, no doubt, very possibly imagine to ourselves there can only be
one _exemplum_ of the finest beauty and perfection, which may be,
moreover, concentrated in its absolute completeness in one statue.
Such a conception of one Ideal in its purity is deficient in insight
and indeed ridiculous. For the beauty of the Ideal consists just in
this, that it is no purely general form or standard, but essentially
individuality, and consequently possesses both particularity and
character. It is simply owing to this that vitality is imported into
works of sculpture, and it is this[174] which expands the one abstract
beauty, in a totality of essentially definite creations. Taken as a
whole, however, this aggregate is, if we regard its content, one with
marked limits; and the reason is that a number of categories, which
we are, for example, accustomed to employ in our Christian outlook,
fall absolutely away in the case of the genuine Ideal of sculpture. The
ethical points of view and virtues, for example, such as were brought
together by the Middle Ages and our modern world in a synthetical nexus
of duties which yields to some modification, moreover, in every epoch,
has no meaning at all when applied to the ideal gods of sculpture; it
is simply absent from such a circle altogether. Consequently we can as
little expect to find here the presentation of sacrifice, of egotism
overcome, of the conflict, against what is sensuous, of the victory of
chastity and so forth, as that of incommutable fidelity, of the honour
and honesty of either man or woman, or of the expression of religious
meekness, subjection, and blessedness in God. All these virtues,
qualities, and conditions repose in part on the breach between what is
spiritual and what is corporeal; and in part they retire altogether
beyond what is of the body within, the intimate shrine of the soul, or
betray the individual personal life in its separation from its entirely
concrete and explicit substance, as also in its struggle to find again
mediation in the same. Moreover, the circle of these veritable gods of
sculpture is no doubt a totality, but, as we already discovered in our
consideration of the classical type of art, it is, when we examine the
distinguishing differences of its notion, no stringently articulated
and unified system. Moreover, the particular examples are every one
of them to be distinguished from all the others in their essentially
definite and self-exclusive individuality, albeit they are not thus set
apart by virtue of the characteristics of a purely abstract mintage,
but rather, on the contrary, include much which they share in common
relatively to their ideal and divine substance.

We will now pass in review the distinctions above indicated under the
following aspects:

_First_, we have to examine purely external marks, incidental
attributes, style of drapery, style of armour, and such like,
indications with the detail of which Winckelmann deals at exceptional
length.

_Secondly_, we shall see how the most important differences do not
merely consist in external marks and traits of this kind, but rather
in the individual configuration and _habitus_ of the entire figure.
What is most important in this respect is the distinction of _age_,
_sex_, no less than that of the _different sphere_, from which the
works receive their content and form, whether they are the impressions
of gods, heroes, satyrs, fawns, or such representations as reach their
final dissolution in the attempt to render animal images.

And, _thirdly_, we propose to direct the attention on a _particular_
example of each class, in the individual form of which sculpture
elaborates these general differences. Here, no doubt, we are faced with
a multiplicity of material, and can only permit ourselves to deduce
parts of it by way of example, a province, too, as it moreover is which
implies a large experience.

(_a_) In considering these _first_ mere attributes and all such
external accessories, the kind of ornament, armour, tools, vessels,
and in general all that is associated with mere environment, we find
that such things are of a very simple character in superior works of
sculpture, and retained only in a temperate and restricted degree, so
that we see little of them beyond what is suggestive or sufficient
to appeal to our minds. It is the independent figure, that is its
expression and not outside accessories, which has to give us the
spiritual significance and its manifestation. Conversely, however,
marks of this kind are nevertheless necessary, in order to enable
us to recognize the particular gods. In other words divinity in its
universal guise, which is the source of the substantive part of the
presentment in the case of each individual, asserts, by virtue of this
very equality of ground-basis, close affinity between the expression
of each example and also between the individual figures, so that every
god is to this extent withdrawn from the aspect of his particularity,
and can indeed further pass through other conditions and modes of
expression, than would otherwise belong to them. For this reason we do
not as a rule have set before us the particular characterization with
complete seriousness; and it is frequently these external additions
which exclusively make the particular god intelligible. Among these
indicating marks I will allude briefly to the following.

(_α_) I have already discussed the real _attributes_ when the classical
type of art and its gods presented an opportunity. In sculpture the
same lose yet more their self-subsistent, symbolical character, and
merely retain the right to appear as the external presentation and
form which is referable to simply one aspect of the specific gods, a
presentment which is true to this extent or approximately so. Such
marks are frequently borrowed from animal life, as for example when
Zeus is represented with the eagle, Juno with the peacock, Bacchus
with the tiger and panther, who are harnessed to his car, because, as
Winckelmann observes[175], this animal is an exceptionally thirsty
one, and, moreover, fond of wine; and in the like manner we have Venus
with her hare. Other attributes are tools or utensils of some kind,
which are related to activities and actions, which may be ascribed to
any particular god by virtue of his or her specific individuality. So
we have Bacchus depicted with the thyrsus wand, in order to entwine
thereon the ivy-leaves and garlands; or he receives a wreath of laurel
leaves, to indicate him as victorious in his expedition to India, or a
torch, with which he lighted Ceres home.

Accessories such as these, among which I have here, of course, only
adduced the most famous examples, are an exceptional stimulus to the
acuteness and learning of our professors, and carry them into a kind of
commerce in trifles, which too frequently leads them out of bounds, and
finds significance in things where there is really none. As an example
we are assured that two famous sleeping female figures in the Vatican
and the Villa Medici are representations of Cleopatra, simply because
they have a bracelet in the shape of a viper, and to the vision of
such archaeologists a serpent at once suggests the death of Cleopatra,
much as it would suggest to a pious father of the church the original
serpent who seduced Eve in Paradise. It was, however, a prevailing
custom for Greek women to wear bracelets in serpent coils, and such
bracelets in fact were called by that name. Consequently the just
sense of Winckelmann[176] has long ago rejected this interpretation,
and Visconti has finally recognized[177] them as figures of Ariadne,
as she at lasts sinks to sleep after her sorrow at the departure of
Theseus. Although in uncounted cases acuteness of this quality shows
itself at fault in dealing with detail of this kind, and makes itself
appear contemptible in its departure from such insignificant facts, yet
unquestionably both research and criticism of apparently unimportant
facts are necessary, because it is only thereby that we can arrive at
the closer determination of a figure. Yet even here the difficulty
crops up, that attributes no less than form, do not in all cases point
our conclusions to one god, but may be shared in common by several.
We have the vase, for example, not only associated with Jupiter,
Apollo, Mercury, Aesculapius, but also with Ceres and Hygiaea. Several
goddesses receive the ear of corn; we find the lily in the hand of
Juno, Venus, and Hope; and even the lightning is not the exclusive
possession of Zeus, for it is shared by Pallas, who on her part again
does not alone carry; the Aegis, but on equal terms with Zeus, Juno,
and Apollo[178]. The source of the individual deities from a general
significance of less determinate character which, they share itself is
associated with ancient symbols, which were appertinent to this more
general and consequently more widely shared nature.

(_β_) Accessories of this incidental nature are more in place with
works which, already departing from the simple repose of the gods,
represent actions, groups, or the series of figures such as we find on
reliefs, and for this reason are able to make more extensive use of
a variety of external indications and suggestions. On gifts dedicate
to a devout purpose, which are frequent in all kinds of works of art
and nowhere more frequent than, in the case of statuary, on statues of
Olympic victors, but more particularly on coins and cut stones, the
rich and prolific invention of the Greek found ample scope for the
presence of symbolical references of this type, such as that to his
city's locality and others like it.

(_γ_) Other signs are more removed from purely external significance,
and penetrate deeper within the individuality of such deities. These
themselves are a part of the particular type in question, and are
an integrating factor in it. Among such we may mention the specific
type of the drapery, armour, adornment of the hair, and other attire
of a similar nature, in respect of which I must here content myself
in elucidation with a few examples borrowed from Winckelmann, who
exercised great acuteness in such matters. Among the several gods Zeus
was pre-eminently recognizable by the general treatment of his hair,
and our authority maintains[179], that any particular head can at once
be determined as one intended for this deity or no by the hair over his
forehead, or his beard, even though there be nothing else significant
to arrest us. In other words he asserts that, "the hair is elevated
in an outward curve on the brow, and its different divisions fall
in a narrow curve with broken lines[180] down again." This type of
hair-treatment was so rigorous, that we even find it persisted in among
the sons and grandchildren of Zeus. So, for example, the head of Zeus
is barely to be distinguished from that of Aesculapius in this respect,
who consequently receives another kind of beard, more particularly
over the upper lip, where the same is more depressed in its curve,
whereas that of Zeus is rather folded over the angle of the mouth and
intermingled with the beard on the chin. Winckelmann further recognizes
the fine head of a statue in the Villa Medici, later in Florence, by
means of the more curled beard, which, moreover, folds over the upper
lip, and is of greater thickness, and must be distinguished from the
heads of Zeus with their greater tendency to curled locks. Pallas,
in direct contrast to Diana, wears her hair long, bound together in
its downward fall from the head, and then beneath the fillet flowing
in a series of locks. Diana, on the contrary, wears hers thrown up
from all sides, and fastened in a knot on the crown of the head. The
head of Ceres is up to the back portion covered with her veil. Add to
this, in addition to the corn she carries, she holds a diadem as Juno
does, in front of which, to quote our authority once more[181], the
scattered hairs are thrown into a charming confusion, as though to
suggest possibly her sorrow at the robbing of her daughter Proserpine.
Individuality of the same kind is emphasized by other exterior means,
as for example, when we recognize Pallas by her helmet and its
particular shape, in her type of drapery and various other things.

(_b_) The truly vital individuality, however, in so far as it should
find its mintage in sculpture by means of the spontaneous and beautiful
bodily form, ought not to be asserted merely by such accessories as
the external attributes or modes of things we have cited, but should
be displayed no less in the form itself than in its expression. In
attempting such an individualization the fine insight and creative
power of the Greek artist increased in proportion as the figures of
their deities possessed a substantive basis of essentially the same
kind, from which, without wholly departing from it, it was their task
so to elaborate the characteristic individuality that this ground-root
of their conception was still maintained as a wholly vital and present
fact. Nothing invites our admiration so much in the best works of
antique sculpture than the exquisite attention the artist directed
to the task of bringing the smallest traits of the presentment and
expression into harmony with the entire figure, an attention which is,
in fact, the source of such a harmony.

(_α_) If we inquire further after general distinctions of main
importance which assert themselves as the substantive bases in most
direct relation to the more individual severation of the bodily forms
and their expression we may note, _first_, the distinction of more
youthful figures in contrast to those of more mature age. In the
genuine Ideal, as I have already stated, every trait, every particular
part of the figure is expressed; and, moreover, the direct line,
which is taken straight forward, avoids the abstractly level surface
precisely as the circular form avoids the geometrical circle; and
instead of this the vital variety of lines and shapes is elaborated
in the finest way throughout by the nuances of their transitional
forms which unite them. In juvenile and youthful age the boundaries of
forms are less noticeably fluent, and pass into each other so finely,
that we may compare them, I borrow the simile from Winckelmann[182],
with the surface of a sea unruffled by the wind, of which we may say
that, although in continuous motion, it is still. In the case of
more advanced age, however, such distinguishing features are more
definitely emphasized, and have to be elaborated with more pronounced
characterization. Consummate male figures consequently are more
likely to please us at the first glance, because the expression is
throughout more distinct, and we wonder more readily at the knowledge
and ability of the artist. Youthful examples appear more easy in their
accomplishment because of their softness, and the smaller number of
their distinguishing features. As a matter of fact, however, the
opposite is the case. That is to say, in so far as "the forming of
their parts in the interval between their first growth and their
completion is permitted to be indefinite[183]," the joints, bones,
sinews, muscles, are necessarily more delicate and tender, yet are none
the less suggested. Antique art celebrates its triumph in just this
fact, that even in its most delicate figures all parts throughout and
their appropriate organization are somehow made perceptible in barely
visible nuances of elevation and depression, by means of which the
science and virtuosity of an artist is only followed by an observer
whose research and attention is equally thorough. If, for example, to
take the case of a delicate human figure, such as the youthful Apollo,
the entire structure of the human body were not reproduced actually,
and in all its essentials with consummate, if half veiled insight, the
members might indeed appear well and fully rounded off, but they would
be at the same time flaccid, without expression and variety, so that
the entire effect could hardly satisfy. As a striking example of the
distinction between the youthful body and a man's in mature age, we may
adduce the sons and father in the Laocoon group.

Speaking generally the Greeks, in the representation of their deities,
preferred the still youthful age, and even in heads and statues of Zeus
and Neptune do not indicate old age.

(_β_) In the case of the _sex_, in which the figure is portrayed, the
difference, that is, between male and female figures, we meet with a
distinctive mark of still more importance. In general we may affirm of
the latter what I have already briefly stated in the contrast drawn
between the more youthful and more advanced age. The female figures
are more tender and soft, the sinews and muscles, albeit they must be
there, are less pronounced, the transitional lines are more flowing
and malleable, yet in the wide interval of expression from the point of
quiet earnestness, greater severity of power and dignity to that of the
most delicate charm and grace of the love attraction, there is room for
the richest gradations and variety. We find a wealth of form equally
great in the male figures, in the treatment of which we have, moreover,
the expression of elaborate bodily strength and courage. The cheerful
tone of delight, however, is shared by all, a blithesomeness and
blessed indifference, which soars above all particularity, associated
not unfrequently with a trait of tranquil sorrow, a kind of smile
through tears, in which we neither have wholly smile nor tears.

There is not a marked line of distinction here between the masculine
and feminine character, for the more youthful figures of Bacchus and
Apollo frequently are fined out to the point of feminine delicacy and
softness, nay, we even find representations of Hercules in which there
is so much the appearance of a young woman's form that critics have
confused him with Iole, his sweetheart. And it is not merely this point
of transition but even the combination of the male and female figure,
which the ancients have expressly represented in their hermaphrodites.

(_γ_) _Thirdly_, and in conclusion, there is the question as to the
main distinctions which the figure of sculpture receives in order
that it may be classed within one of the specific divisions of
subject-matter which constitute the content of the ideal outlook on the
world appropriate to this art.

The organic forms which sculpture can utilize generally in its plastic
effort are on the one hand the forms of humanity, on the other those
of _animal_ life. In respect to the animal forms we have already seen
that in the case of the more severe type of the art at its culminating
perfection they will only be found as attributes associated with
the divine form, as when we find a hind with the hunting Diana, or
Zeus with an eagle. And the same thing may be said of the panther,
griffin, and similar figures. Apart from the genuine attributes animal
forms are, however, accepted partly in combination with human shapes,
and in part entirely by themselves. The extent, however, of such
representations is of a limited character. Apart from figures of the
roebuck it is above all the horse whose beauty and fiery animation
obtains a recognition in plastic art, whether it be in union with
the human form, or in its own free and independent shape. In fact,
we find that the horse stands generally in a close relation to the
courage, bravery, and dexterity of human heroism and heroic beauty,
whereas other animals, such as the lion, which Hercules overcomes,
and the wild boar, which Meleager kills, are objects of heroic deeds
themselves, and consequently are entitled to a place within the circle
of representation, when such are expanded in groups and reliefs where a
freer field is admissible for situations of movement and action.

The _human_ figure on its part, in so far as it is conceived in form
and expression as pure Ideal, supplies the adequate form for the
divine, which, being still in union with the sensuous material, is not
capable of being concentrated in the simple unity of _one_ God, and can
merely embrace a _collective_ whole of divine figures. And similarly,
to put the matter conversely, the human, whether we regard it according
to its form or its expression, cannot pass out of the province of human
individuality, albeit the same is at one time brought into intimacy and
union with the divine, and at another with the animal nature.

For these reasons sculpture is faced with various sources out of
which it can select and elaborate its subject-matter, and which I
will now review. The essentially central source is, as I have already
several times indicated, the sphere of the _particular gods._ Their
distinction from humanity preeminently consists in this, that as they,
in respect to that which they express, appear essentially gathered
up over and beyond the finitude of care and mortal passion within a
blessed repose and everlasting youth, so, too, their bodily shapes are
not merely purified from the finite particularity of mankind, but they
are further detached from everything which would suggest the needs
and necessary limitations of sensuous life, without, however, losing
their vitality. We have, for example, an object of human interest in
the way a mother pacifies her child. The Greek goddesses, however,
are always represented as childless. Juno, according to the myth,
tosses the young Hercules from her, and the Milky Way is the result.
To associate a son with the majestic spouse of Zeus was beneath the
dignity of the antique point of view. Even Aphrodite does not appear in
sculpture as mother. Cupid is no doubt very near to her, but scarcely
in the sense of her child. In the same way Jupiter is nursed by a
goat, and Romulus and Remus are suckled by a wolf. Among Egyptian and
Hindoo representations, on the contrary, we find many, in which deities
receive mother's milk from goddesses. Among Greek goddesses the maiden
form is that which is pre-eminent, this being that which to the least
extent asserts the purely natural functions of the wife.

The above constitutes an important contrast between classical art and
romantic, in the latter of which maternal love is a leading subject.
After the gods we find that sculpture deals with heroes and those
figures which have both the human and animal form in their composition,
such as centaurs, fauns, and satyrs.

The line of distinction between _heroes_ and gods is a very fine one;
and much the same interval separates them from ordinary human life.
Winckelmann observes with regard to a Battus on a coin of Cyrene, "With
a single glance of tender jollity we could make a Bacchus of it, and
one trait of godlike greatness would leave us an Apollo." And yet even
in such cases human forms, where the object is to envisage the force
of the will and bodily strength, tend in certain directions to make
for greatness; the artist gave to the muscular development a vital
activity and movement, and in violent actions set in motion all the
springs of Nature's workmanship. Inasmuch as, however, we find the same
hero subject to an entire series of conditions not merely distinct,
but opposed to each other, the masculine forms here also frequently
approximate to the feminine. This is, for example, the case where
Achilles first appears among the maidens of Lycomedes. Here we do not
find him in his full heroic strength such as he displays before Troy,
but in drapery resembling that of a woman and a fascination of figure
which almost conceals his sex. Hercules, too, is not always depicted
in the gravity and power suggestive of the tedious labours which he
performed, but in the milder impersonation of his service to Omphale,
as also in the repose of his deification, and generally in a variety of
situations. In other relations heroes possess the closest affinity for
the figures of the deities themselves, Achilles for that of Mars, for
instance; it is consequently only after the most profound study that we
can recognize the specific meaning of a piece of statuary merely from
the characterization without further suggestion from attributes. Really
expert connoisseurs can, however, deduce the character and shape of the
entire figure from isolated pieces and supply what is missing; from
which fact we again are instructed to admire the fine insight and the
consequential character the individualization of Greek art displays to
us, whose masters knew how to preserve and execute even the smallest
detail in consonance with the entire effect.

Coming now to _satyrs_ and _fauns_ we find in them made visible what
is throughout excluded from the lofty Ideal of the gods, the needs
of mankind, the jollity of life, sensuous pleasure, satisfaction of
excessive desire, and the like. Yet we find in particular young satyrs
and fauns so remarkable for the beauty in which they are represented
by the ancients that, to adopt a phrase of Winckelmann[184], "Every
example of such figures may be exchanged, if we except the head, for a
statue of Apollo, I refer to that one which is styled Sauroktonos, and
possesses the same stansion of the legs." The heads of fauns and satyrs
may be known by their pointed ears, their stiffly erected hair, and
their little horns.

A _second_ province of sculpture is occupied by what is _human simply._
In this we have above all else the beauty of human form as we find it
set before us in its elaborate power and dexterity in the sacred games.
Wrestlers, discoboli, and the like are its main subject-matter. In such
productions sculpture proceeds in a way that is somewhat opposed to the
mere portrait, in which department the ancients, even in cases where
they actually copied _real_ personages, still understood how to hold
fast throughout to the principle of sculpture as we have come to know
it.

The _last_ field that sculpture makes its own is that of independent
_animal_ figures, more particularly lions, hounds, and some others.
Here, too, the ancients did not fail to grasp, make vital in its
individuality, and enforce the principle of sculpture, the substantive
significance of form, and indeed attained to such a perfection that,
to take one example, the cow of Myron has become more famous than all
his other works. Goethe, in "Kunst und Alterthum[185]," has described
it with great charm of style, and pre-eminently drawn attention to the
fact that, as we have already seen, such as animal function as suckling
is only presented by Greek art in the entirely animal world. He
entirely sets on one side poetical conceits such as we find in ancient
epigrams, and with acuteness confines his attention to the _naïveté_
of the conception out of which this most familiar of artistic themes
arises.

(_c_) In concluding this chapter we have now to refer a little more
closely to the _particular_ individuals, in the characterization and
vitality of which the distinctions above mentioned are elaborated, that
is to say, for the most part to the presentment of gods.

(_α_) However much, speaking generally--and we may no doubt seek to
enforce our conviction in reference also to the spiritual deities of
sculpture--this spiritual significance is at bottom the emancipation of
individuality--and the remark applies to Ideals also according to the
degree of their ideality and nobility--to that extent as individuals
their distinction from one another is less marked. And the astonishing
thing in the problem of sculpture, as solved by the Greeks, consisted
just in this, that despite of the universality and ideality of their
gods they have none the less preserved their individuality and lines
of distinction; they have done so despite the fact that in certain
directions we are conscious of the endeavour to eliminate hard-and-fast
boundaries and to depict particular forms in their transitional state.
If, moreover, we are inclined to regard individuality in a way that
suggests definite traits as being appropriate to definite deities,
much as the traits of a portrait are so, a fixed type will thereby
necessarily appear to be substituted for a vital creation and art
will suffer accordingly. But this is quite as little in accordance
with the facts. On the contrary we find that their invention in
such individualization and vitalization gained in subtlety just in
proportion as a substantive type lay at the roots of the same.

(_β_) Again, in considering the particular deities, we are inevitably
led to the conviction that one individual is of commanding influence
in determining all these ideal figures. This supreme value and dignity
Pheidias attached in an unrivalled degree to the form and expression of
his Zeus, albeit the father of the gods and mankind, is set before us
at the same time with a blithe and benignant look throned in serenity
of mature age, that is not in the first flush of youth, without,
however, on the other hand emphasizing in the least any harshness of
form or suggesting the feebleness of age. The most obvious parallels in
form and gesture with Zeus are his brothers Neptune and Pluto, whose
interesting statues in Dresden, for example, despite all that they
share with him, nevertheless retain a clear line of distinction--Zeus
himself, by virtue of the benignity of his lofty presence, Neptune, by
virtue of his greater ruggedness, Pluto, who is a kindred type to the
Egyptian Serapis, by virtue of his profounder gloom and melancholy.

Essentially more apart from Zeus are Bacchus and Apollo, Mars and
Mercury, the first pair in their more youthful beauty and the greater
delicacy of their figures, the second more masculine albeit beardless.
Mercury, too, is more robust, more slender in shape, with exceptional
fineness noticeable in the facial traits. Mars is not so much marked
out from the others as Hercules might be in the strength of his muscles
and other parts of his figure, but rather as a more youthful and
beautiful hero of an ideal form.

Among the goddesses I will only refer to Juno, Pallas, Diana, and
Aphrodite.

Just as Zeus among the masculine deities, so, too, Juno among the
feminine displays in her figure and its expression the greatest
dignity. The large circular-arched eyes are proud and commanding, in
like manner, too, the mouth by which she is at once recognized more
particularly in profile. Generally she presents the appearance of "a
queen, who will rule, is to be revered and must awaken devotion[186]."
Pallas, on the contrary, receives the expression of more austere
maidenhood and chastity. Tenderness, love, and every kind of womanly
weakness are kept away from her; her eyes are less expanded than
those of Here, less emphatically arched and somewhat downcast in the
tranquillity of reflection, just as her head is, which is not proudly
erect as in the case of the spouse of Zeus, although it is armed with
a helmet. A very similar type of maidenhood characterizes the figure of
Diana. She is, however, endowed with a more fascinating quality, more
lightly poised, more slender, albeit there is no self-conscious delight
in her charm. She is not given the pose of tranquil observation, but
is generally in motion, pressing forward as toward some object in her
vision.

Finally we have Aphrodite, the goddess of beauty as such, who is, along
with the Graces and the Hours, alone depicted by the Greek artists as
undraped and even here subject to exceptions. In her case nudity is
justified on the good ground that she expresses, above all, sensuous
beauty and its conquest, grace, attractiveness, tenderness, elevated
and tempered by spiritual qualities. Her eye, even in cases where a
more grave and lofty expression is emphasized, is smaller than that of
Pallas and Juno, not so much in length, but narrower by reason of the
lower eyelid being slightly raised, by which means Love's yearning look
is admirably expressed. She varies, however, very considerably in the
type expressed. In some cases her pose is more serious and powerful; in
others delicacy and tenderness are most insisted upon; her age, too,
is sometimes that of maidenhood, at other of riper years. Winckelmann
compares the Medicean Venus to a rose which blossoms in the fair light
of its own colour at daybreak. Uranian Aphrodite is, on the contrary,
indicated by a diadem which resembles that worn by Juno, and which
Venus victrix also wears.

(_γ_) The discovery of this plastic individuality, whose entire
expression is wholly elaborated through abstract form and nothing
further, was in a like degree of consummate perfection peculiar to
the Greeks and is due to religion itself. A more spiritual religion
can rest satisfied with the contemplation and devotion of the soul,
so that works of sculpture pass for it simply as so much luxury and
superfluity. A religion so dependent on the sense vision as the Greek
was must necessarily continue to create, inasmuch as for it this
artistic production and invention is itself a religious activity and
satisfaction, and for the people the sight of such works is not merely
so much sight-seeing, but is part of their religion and soul-life.
And in general the Greeks did everything with a public and universal
aim in view, in which every man discovered his enjoyment, pride, and
honour. In this public aspect the art of the Greeks is not merely an
ornamental object, but a vital thing that meets a really felt want,
in much the same sort of way as that of painting in its most glorious
season responded to the life of Venice. Only on grounds such as
these can we find a rational explanation, if we consider the great
difficulties which the technique of sculpture implies, for the host
of sculptured figures, this forest of statues of every kind, which
in their thousand and indeed thousands, were to be met with in _one_
single city, in Elis, in Athens, in Corinth, and even in towns of
lesser importance, and in the same way in the greater Greece beyond and
the islands of the Cyclades.




