CHAPTER I


THE ART OF PAINTING


The most adequate object of sculpture is the tranquil self-absorption
of personality in its essential substance, the character whose
spiritual individuality is in the fullest degree displayed on the face
of its corporeal presentment, making the sensuous frame, which reveals
this incorporation of spirit, adequate to such an embodiment of mind
wholly in its aspects of external form. The sightless look has as yet
failed to concentrate at one point the supreme focus of ideal life,
the vital breath of soul, the heart of most intimate feeling, and is
as yet without spiritual movement, without the deliberate distinction
between a world without it and a life within. It is on account of this
that the sculpture of the ancients leaves us in some degree unmoved.
We either do not remain long before it, or our delay is rather due
to a scientific investigation of the fine modifications of form and
detail which it displays. We cannot blame mankind if they are unable
to take the profound interest in fine works of sculpture which such
works deserve. To know how to value them is a study in itself. At
first glance we either experience no attraction, or are immediately
conscious of the general character of the whole. To come to closer
quarters we have first to discover what it is that continues to supply
such an interest. An enjoyment, however, which is only the possible
result of study, thought, learning, and a wide experience is not the
immediate object of art. And, moreover, the essential demand we make
that a character should develop, should pass into the field of action
and affairs, and that the soul should thereby meet with divisions
and-grow deeper, this, after all our journey in search of the delight
which this study of the works of antique sculpture may bring to us,
remains unsatisfied. For this reason we inevitably feel more at home
in painting. In other words we are at once and for the first time
conscious in it of the principle of our finite and yet essentially
infinite spiritual substance, the life and breath of our own existence;
we contemplate in its pictures the very spark which works and is active
in ourselves. The god of sculpture remains for sense-perception an
object simply; in painting, on the contrary, the Divine appears as
itself essentially the living subject of spiritual life, which comes
into direct relations with the community, and makes it possible for
each individual thereof to place himself in spiritual communion and
reconcilement with Him. The substantive character of such a Divinity
is not, as in sculpture, an individual that persists in the inflexible
bond of its own limitations[220], but is one which expands into and is
differentiated within the community itself.

The same principle generally differentiates the individual from his
own bodily frame and external environment to quite as considerable an
extent as it brings the soul into mediated relation with the same.
Within the compass of this subjective differentiation--regarded as the
independent assertion of human individuality as opposed to God, Nature,
and the inward and external life of other persons, regarded also
conversely as the most intimate relation, the most secure communion of
God with the community, and of individual men with God, the environment
of Nature and the infinite variety of the wants, purposes, passions,
and activities of human existence--falls the entire movement and
vitality, which sculpture, both in respect to its content and its
means of contributing expression, suffers to escape; and it adds an
immeasurable wealth of new material and a novel breadth and variety
of artistic treatment which hitherto was absent. Briefly, then, this
principle of subjectivity is on the one hand the basis of division,
on the other a principle of mediation and synthesis, so that painting
unites in one and the same art what hitherto formed the subject-matter
of two different arts, namely, the external environment, which
architecture treated artistically, and the essentially spiritual form,
which was elaborated by sculpture. Painting places its figures on the
background of a Nature or an architectural environment, both of which
are the products of its own invention in precisely the same sense,
and is able to make this external material in both of these aspects
by virtue of its emotional powers and soul a counterfeit within its
ideal realm, in the degree that it understands how best to place it in
relation and harmony with the spirit of the figures that live and move
therein.

Such is the principle of the new advance that painting contributes to
the representative powers of art.

If we inquire now the course which the more detailed examination of our
subject necessitates the following division will serve us.

In the _first_ place we shall have yet further to consider the _general
character_ which the art of painting must necessarily receive in
accordance with its notion and relatively both to its specific content,
the material that is made consonant with this content and finally the
artistic treatment which is thereby involved.

_Secondly_, we have to develop the _separate_ modes of definition,
which are contained in the principle of such a content and manner
of presentation, and more succinctly fix the boundaries of the
subject-matter which is adapted to painting no less than the modes of
its conception, composition, and technical qualities as painting.

_Thirdly_, painting is itself _broken up_ into _distinct schools_ of
painting by reason of the above divisions of matter, technique, and so
forth, which, as in the other arts, have their own phases of historical
development.



1. GENERAL CHARACTER OF THE ART OF PAINTING


After having thus emphasized as the essential principle of painting
that world of the soul in its vitality of feeling, conception, and
action cast in embrace round heaven and earth, in the variety of its
manifestations and external disclosures within the bodily frame, and
affirmed on this account that the focus, and centre of this art is to
be sought for in romantic and Christian art, it may immediately occur
to the reader that not only do we find excellent artists among the
ancients, who are as distinguished in this art as others of their
age in sculpture--and we cannot praise them more highly--but also
that other peoples, notably the Chinese, Hindoos, and Egyptians, have
secured distinction in the direction of painting. Without question the
art of painting is, by virtue of the variety of the objects treated and
the particular type of its manner of execution, less[221] restricted
in the range of nations that exemplify its pursuit. This, however, is
not the point at issue. If our question is simply that of the historian
doubtless we find single examples of one type[222] of painting or
another have been produced at the most varied epochs by the nations
already mentioned and others. It is, however, a profounder question
altogether when we ask ourselves what is the _principle_ of painting,
examine the means of its exposition and in doing so seek to establish
that content, which by virtue of its _own nature_ is emphatically
consonant with the _painter's art_ as such and its mode of presentment,
so that we can affirm the form thus selected to be wholly adequate to
the content in question. We have but little left us of the painting of
the ancient world, examples, in fact, which we see can neither have
formed part of the most consummate work of antiquity in this respect,
nor have been the product of its most famous masters. At least all that
has been discovered through excavation in private houses is of this
character. It is impossible, however, not to admire the delicacy of
taste, the suitability of the objects, selected, the clearness of the
grouping, and, we may add, the lightness of the handling and freshness
of the colouring, excellences which without doubt were present in the
originals of such pictures in a far higher degree, in imitation of
which, for example, the wall paintings in the so-called house of the
tragedian at Pompeii have been executed. We have, unfortunately, no
examples of the works of famous masters. Whatever degree of excellence,
however, these more original productions attained, we may none the
less affirm that the ancients could not, alongside of the unmatchable
beauty of their sculptures, have lifted the art of painting to the
level of artistic elaboration as painting which we find secured in the
Christian era of the Middle Ages, and pre-eminently in the sixteenth
and seventeenth centuries. And we may assume this to be so on the
philosophical ground that the most genuine heart of the Greek outlook
is, in a degree which is inapplicable to the other arts, concordant
with the root and fragrance of that which sculpture and sculpture
alone can supply. And in art we are not entitled to separate spiritual
content from its mode of presentation. If, having this clear to our
minds, we inquire how it is that painting only reached its most
characteristic consummation through the content of the romantic type of
art, we can but reply that it is precisely the intimacy of feeling, the
blessedness[223] and pain that give to us the soul of this profounder
content, whose demand is for such a vital infusion, which has paved the
way to and in fact been the cause of this higher perfection of painting.

As an example of what I mean I will but recall to recollection one
particular instance already cited, namely, that we borrow from
Raoul-Rochette of the treatment of Isis carrying Horns on her knees. In
general the subject is identical with the Madonna pictures, a Divine
mother and her child. The difference of handling and conception in the
two cases, however, is immeasurable. The Egyptian Isis, as we find
her thus situated on bas-reliefs, has nothing maternal about her, no
tenderness, no trait of soul or emotion, such as is not even wholly
absent in the stiffer Byzantine pictures of the Madonna. And if we
think of Raphael, or any other great Italian master, what results have
they not achieved from this subject of the Mother and Christ-babe!
What depth of emotion, what spiritual life, what intimacy and wealth
of heart, what exaltation and endearment, how human and yet how
entirely filled with divine spirit is the soul which speaks to us
from every line and feature. And under what infinite variety of forms
and situations is this one subject presented to us even by particular
masters taken singly and still more by different artists. The mother,
the pure Virgin, the physical, the spiritual beauty, loftiness and
devotion of love, all this and countless other features are emphasized
in their turn as the main significance of the expression. But chief
of all we find throughout that it is not the sensuous beauty of mere
form, but the animate life of Spirit, by virtue of which artistic
genius no less than mastery of execution is asserted and secured. Now
it is quite true that Greek art has passed a long way beyond Egyptian
art, and we may add that it has made the expression of man's soul an
object aimed for. But it was not capable of grasping that intimacy
and depth of emotion which is discovered to us in the Christian type
of expression, and indeed was careful, in accordance with its entire
character, not to attach itself to such intensity of feeling. Take, for
instance, the case I have more than once already cited of the faun, who
carries the youthful Bacchus in his arms; it is, no doubt, expressive
of extremely tender and amiable qualities. The nymphs are equally so
who tend upon Bacchus, a situation which is depicted by a gem in a
very beautiful group of figures. In such cases we have an analogous
sentiment of unconstrained love for a child, equally free from passion
and yearning; but, even putting on one side the maternal relation[224],
the expression possesses in no respect the intimacy, the depth of soul,
which confront us in Christian paintings. The ancients may very well
have painted excellent portraits, but neither their way of conceiving
natural fact, nor the point of view from which they regarded human and
divine conditions was of the kind that, in the case of painting, an
infusion of soul-life could be expressed with such intimate intensity
as was possible in Christian painting.

The demand of painting, however, for this more personal type of
inspiration is a result of its very material. In other words, the
sensuous medium in which it moves is an extension on pure surface, and
the display of form by means of the use of _diversified_ colours, by
virtue of which process the objective shape, as we have it presented
to the vision, is converted to an artificial illusion adopted by a
spiritual agency[225] in the place of the actual form of fact. It is
part of the principle of such a treatment of material that which is
external should not ultimately retain its validity in its independent
native existence, even in the modified form it takes as a vital
product of human hands, but should in this form of realization be
lowered as reality to a purely phenomenal reflex of the _inward_
soul-life itself, which seeks to contemplate itself independently as
such. When we look into the heart of the matter we shall find that
the advance from the rounded form of sculpture amounts to nothing
less than the above statement. It is the soul-life, the ideality
of Spirit which undertakes to express itself in an intimate way
through the counterfeit of the objective world. Add to this, in the
second place, that the surface on which the art of painting makes
its objects visible, opens independently the path to the employment
of a surrounding background and other complex relations; and colour
too, regarded as the articulation of that which appears, requires
a correspondent differentiation of soul-life, which can only be
rendered clearly through the definition of expression, situation,
and action, and consequently makes necessary variety, movement, and
the detailed exposition of both the inward and external life. This
principle of inwardness[226] taken alone, which at the same time in
its actual manifestation is associated with the variety of external
existence and is cognizable on the face of such particular existence
as an essentially complete and independent complex of conditions, we
have already seen to be the principle of the romantic type of art, in
whose configuration and mode of presentation consequently the medium
of painting discovers in a unique way its _wholly adequate object._
Conversely we may affirm at the same time that romantic art, when
the question is actually one of definite works of art, must seek for
material which is consonant with its content, and in the first instance
it finds such in painting, which consequently remains more or less of
a formal character when dealing with all objects and compositions not
of this type[227]. Granting, then, the fact that we find outside the
Christian paintings an Oriental, Greek, and Roman school of painting,
yet the real centre and focus of all is none the less the elaboration
which this art secured within the boundaries of romantic art. We can
only speak of Oriental and Greek painting in the same kind of way
as we did when, despite our main thesis that sculpture attained its
highest crown of perfection in the classical Ideal, we referred to a
subordinate Christian type of sculpture. In other words we are forced
to admit that the art of painting first apprehends its content in the
material of the romantic type of art, which completely corresponds to
its instruments and its modes, and consequently that it was only after
the treatment of such material that it discovered how best to use and
elaborate in every direction all the means at its disposal.

Following now the course of the above remarks in a wholly general
way we have to observe as follows in connection with the _content_,
_material_, and _artistic mode_ of treatment of painting.

(_a_) The fundamental definition of the _content_ of painting is, as we
have seen, subjectivity as an independent process[228].

(_α_) In this process, looking at it from the point of view of a
_reflex of soul-life_, individuality must not wholly pass into the
universality its substance, but must on the contrary disclose how
it retains that content as a distinctive personality[229], and
possesses and expresses its inward life, that is the vitality of its
own conception and feeling in the same; neither should the external
form be wholly dominated by the ideal individuality as is the case
in sculpture. For the principle of subjectivity, albeit that it
permeates the external material as the mode of objectivity adequate to
express it, is notwithstanding likewise an identity which withdraws
itself into itself out of that objective domain, and by virtue of
this self-seclusion is relatively to that objective aspect neutral,
leaving it quite untrammelled. Just as therefore, on the spiritual
side of the content, the particularity of the personal life is not
set forth in direct union with its substance and universality, but is
essentially reflected as the culminating feature of its independent
embodiment[230], so, too, in the objective envisagement of form, the
particularity and universality of the same are carried from their
previous plastic union[231] to a predominance of the individual aspect,
and indeed of comparatively accidental and indifferent features, and
in a manner much the same as that which, in the reality of sense
experience, is the prevailing character of all phenomena.

(_β_) A _further_ important point is that connected with the range
of _scope_ that is permitted to the art of painting in virtue of its
principle with regard to the objects to be thus presented.

The free principle of subjectivity suffers on the one hand the entire
field of natural objects, and every department of human activity to
remain in its substantive mode of existence; on the other, it is
capable of entering into fusion with all possible detail, and creating
therefrom a content of its own ideal life, of rather we should say that
only in this interfusion with concrete actuality does it assert itself
as concrete and vital in its products. Consequently it is possible for
the painter to import a wealth of material into the realm occupied by
his artistic works, which remains outside, the reach of the sculptor.
The entire world of the religious idea, conceptions of heaven and hell,
the history of Christ, his disciples and saints, external Nature, all
that concerns humanity down to the most fugitive of situations and
characters, all this material and more can find a place here. For as
we have seen all that pertains to the detail, caprice, and accidental
features of human need and interest is affected by this principle,
which at once strives to comprehend and compose it.

(_γ_) And along with this fact we have as its _corollary_ that painting
makes the _soul_ of man itself the subject of its creative work. All
that is alive within the soul is present in ideal form, if it is,
when we consider its content, at once objective and absolute in the
abstract sense[232]. For the emotional life of soul can without
question carry the universal within its content, a content, however,
which, as feeling, does not retain the form of this universality,
but appears under the mode as I, this individual person--I know my
identity therein and feel the same. In order to educe and set forth
this objective content as objective, I must forget myself. In this way
the painter no doubt reveals to our sight the ideal substance of soul
in the form of external objects, but the truly real content which it
expresses is the personal soul that feels. For which reason painting,
from the point of view of form, is unable to offer such distinctive
envisagements of the Divine as sculpture, but only ideas of less
defined character such as belong to the emotions. It may appear as a
contradiction to this position that we find again and again selected
as subjects of the paintings of masters, who stand without question
in the highest rank, the external environment of mankind, mountains,
valleys, meadows, brooks, trees, ships, buildings, their interiors,
in short earth, sea, and sky. What, however, constitutes the core in
the content of such works of art is not the objects themselves, but
the _vitality_ and soul imported into them by the artist's conception
and execution, his emotional life in fact, which is reflected in his
work, and gives us not merely a counterfeit of external objects, but
therewith his own personality and temperament[233]. And it is precisely
by his doing this that the objects of Nature, as reflected by painting,
even from this realistic point of view, are relatively insignificant,
because the influence of soul-life begins to assert itself in them as
the main significance. In this tendency towards temperament, which, in
the case of objects borrowed from external Nature, may frequently only
amount to a general response emphasized between the two sides, we find
the most important distinction between painting on the one hand and
sculpture and architecture on the other. Painting indeed approximates
in this respect more closely to music and emphasizes here the point of
transition from the plastic arts to that of tone.

(_b_) To proceed to our _second_ main division I have already several
times referred, if only in respect to features of fundamental
importance, to the difference we discover between the sensuous
_material_ of painting and that of sculpture. I will therefore in this
place only touch upon the closer connection which obtains between this
material and the spiritual content which it most notably has to display
to us.

(_α_) The first fact we have to consider in this connection is this
that painting compresses the _three_ dimensions, of Space. Absolute
concentration would be carried to the point, as elimination of
all juxtaposition, and as unrest essentially predicable of such
concentration, as we find it in the point of Time. Such a mode of
negation carried out in its entire result, however, we only meet
with in the art of music. Painting, on the contrary, permits the
spatial relation still to subsist, and only effaces _one_ of the three
dimensions; superficies is made the element of its representations.
This reduction of the three dimensions to level surface is implied
in principle of increasing reality, which is only capable thereby of
asserting itself in spatial relation as such ideal transmutation, owing
to the fact that it does not suffer the complete totality of objective
fact to persist as such, but restricts the same. Ordinarily we are
accustomed to view this reduction as a caprice of the art which amounts
to a defect. What is here sought for, it appears, is that natural
objects in all their naked reality, or spiritual ideas and feelings, by
means of the human body and its postures should be made visible to our
senses for such an aim it is obvious that the surface is insufficient
and inferior to Nature, which appears before us with a completeness
wholly different.

(_αα_) Painting is unquestionably yet more abstract than sculpture in
respect to material conditioned in Space; but this abstraction, remote
as it is from being a purely capricious limitation, or an indication of
human incapacity, is just that which brings about the necessary advance
from sculpture. Even sculpture is not simply an imitation of natural
or physical existence, but a creation of intelligence, which removes
from form all aspects of natural existence which are not in accord
with the definite content it undertakes to present. This elimination
was carried out by sculpture in the case of all colour detail, so that
what remained to it was only the abstraction of material form. In
painting we have the opposite process, its content being the ideality
of soul-life, which can only appear on the face of objective reality,
by a process of self-absorption from that very material[234]. The art
of painting, therefore, no doubt, works for the sense-perception,
but in a way, through which the object which it displays remains no
longer an actual natural existence wholly in Space, but is changed to a
counterfeit creation of intelligence, in which it only so far reveals
its spiritual source as it annuls the actual existence of its object,
recreating it for itself in a purely phenomenal semblance within its
own spiritual realm--for Spirit.

(_ββ_) And to this intent painting must necessarily effect a breach
with the totality of the spatial condition, and there is no reason
for charging to human incapacity this loss of Nature's completeness.
In other words, inasmuch as the object of painting from the point of
view of its spatial existence, is merely a semblance, reflective of
the soul of man, exhibited by art for his spirit, the self-subsistency
of the object as we find it actually in Space is dissolved, and the
object is related in a far more restricted way to the spectator than
is the case in sculpture. A statue is by itself wholly an isolated
object, independent of the spectator, who may place himself where
he pleases; his point of view, his movements, his walking round it,
not one of them affect the work of art as a whole[235]. If this
self-subsistency is to be preserved the sculptured figure must also
have some definite impression to offer each and every point of view.
And this independence of the work must be retained in sculpture for
the reason that its content is the tranquillity, self-seclusion, and
objective presence which, in both an external and ideal sense, reposes
on their own substance. In painting, on the contrary, whose content is
conditioned by an ideal atmosphere, and in fact is composed of ideal
relations essentially particularized, it is precisely this aspect of
discord in a work of art between object and spectator which has to be
emphasized, and yet with a like directness to be resolved in the fact,
that the work, as depicting the ideality of intelligence in its entire
mode of presentation, can be only defined under the assumption that it
stands there related to an individual mind, that is a spectator, and
apart from the same has no self-subsistency. The spectator is assumed
and reckoned to be there from the first, and the work of art is only
intelligible as related to this point of personal contemplation[236].
For such a relation to mere _visibility_ and its reflection upon
an individual consciousness, however, the mere show of reality is
sufficient; or rather the actual totality of the spatial condition is
a defect, because in that case the objects seen retain an independent
existence, and do not appear to be created by Spirit for its own
contemplation. Nature consequently is not entitled to reduce its images
to the plain surface; its objects possess and claim to possess a real
and independent existence. The satisfaction, however, we derive from
painting is not in actual existence, but in the contemplative interest
we receive from the external reproduction of ideal truths, things born
of the soul, and its art therefore dispenses wholly with the need and
apparatus of spatial reality in its complete organization.

(_γγ_) And together with this reduction to the level surface we may
_thirdly_ associate the fact that painting is placed in a still more
remote position to architecture than that occupied by sculpture.
Works of sculpture even where exhibited independently for themselves
in public places or gardens, require some kind of pedestal treated
architectonically, and, in the case of apartments, forecourts, and
halls, either the art of building merely assists in presenting the
statue's fitting environment, or conversely the sculptured figure is
used as the decoration of the building, and between these two thus
related objects we find a close association. Painting, on the contrary,
whether placed in the enclosed apartment, or in public halls, or under
the open sky, is limited to the wall. Originally its function is
simply to fill up empty wall spaces. Among the ancients this original
destination is mainly sufficient, and they decorated in this way the
walls of their temples, and in more recent times also their private
chambers. Gothic architecture, whose main task is the enclosure
under the most grandiose conditions, supplies no doubt still larger
surfaces, or rather the largest possible, yet it is only in the most
ancient mosaics that we find painting is employed as a decoration of
empty spaces, whether in the case of the outside or the interior. The
more recent architecture of the fourteenth century, on the contrary,
fills up its enormous wall surfaces in an architectural manner,
the most imposing example I know of which is the main _façade_ of
Strasbourg cathedral. Here we find that the empty surfaces, excluding
the entrance doors, the rose and other windows, are filled in by the
ornamental work analogous to that of windows traced over the walls,
and decorated by figures of considerable delicacy and variety of form,
so that we have no need here for painting. In the case of religious
architecture, therefore, painting mainly appears in buildings which
begin to approximate to the ancient type of architecture. As a rule,
however, Christian painting is to be distinguished from the arts of
building, and presents its works in independent form, as for example in
large pictures, whether placed in chapels or on high altars. It is true
that here, too, the picture must retain some relation to the character
of the place, which it is destined to fill; for the rest, however, it
is not merely intended to fill up wall spaces, but to hang them as
a work of art independently just as a work of sculpture may do. In
conclusion painting has its use as a decoration of halls and apartments
in public buildings, town halls, palaces, and private houses, in which
respect its association with architecture is once more closely marked,
an association, however, in which its independence as a free art ought
not to be lost.

(_β_) A further necessary ground for the contraction of the spatial
dimensions in painting to bare surface is due to the fact that the art
of painting is concerned to express ideal conditions essentially in
their separation[237], and thereby rich in every kind of particular
character. A mere restriction to the shapes of _spatial_ form, with
which sculpture is able to rest satisfied, vanishes therefore in the
more luxuriant art; for the forms of spatial dimension are the most
abstract in Nature, and an attempt must now be made to seize particular
distinctions, in so far as the demand is now for an essentially more
multifold material. The matter specifically defined in the _physical_
sense is attached to the very principle of presentation in Space,
the differences of which[238], if they are to appear as essential
in the work of art, themselves disclose this fact[239] in the total
configuration of spatial form, which no longer remains the final
mode of presentation, and they are compelled to make a breach in the
complete form of spatial dimensions, in order to cancel the exclusive
appearance of the physical medium. For the dimensions in painting are
not presented by themselves in their actual reality, but are merely by
means of this physical aspect made to appear and be visible as such.

(_αα_) If we further inquire what is the nature of the _physical_
element which the art of painting makes use of we shall find this to be
_Light_, regarding it as that medium which renders all objects whatever
visible.

Previously the sensuous, concrete material of architecture was the
resisting matter of gravity, which more particularly in the art of
building asserted this character of heavy material in its features of
burden, constraint, power to support and be supported, and even in
sculpture still retained such characteristics. Heavy material encumbers
because it does not possess its centre of material unity in itself, but
in something else; and it seeks for this centre and strives towards it,
though it retains its position through the resistance of other bodies,
which become by doing so bodies of support. The principle of light is
an opposite, or extreme, of that material of weight which is not as
yet enclosed within its unity. Whatever else we may predicate of light
it is obvious that it is absolutely devoid of weight and offers no
resistance; rather it is pure identity with itself, and thereby simple
self-relation, the primordial ideality, the original self of Nature. In
light Nature make its start on the path of ideality or inwardness[240],
and is the universal physical ego, which of course is not carried
here to the point of particularity[241], nor has as yet concentrated
itself within the unit of individuality and self-seclusion, yet is
thereby enabled to cancel the bare objectivity and external show of
heavy matter and abstract from the sensuous and spatial totality of the
same[242]. From this aspect of the more _ideal_ quality of light it
becomes the physical principle of the art of painting.

(_ββ_) Light regarded simply as such, however, only exists as _one_
aspect contained in the principle of subjectivity, that is, as this
more ideal identity. In this respect light is manifestation, just that,
which, however, in Nature is only asserted _generally_ as the power of
making objects visible, holding the particular content of that which
it reveals outside itself as an objective world, which is not light,
but rather that which confronts it and consequently is dark. These
objects light renders cognizable under their distinctions of form by
irradiating them, that is, illuminating to a greater or less degree
their obscurity and invisibility, and permitting certain parts to be
more visible, namely, as they approach the spectator, and others, on
the contrary, more obscure as they withdraw from him. For light and
darkness, putting for the present on one side the particular colour of
an object, is generally speaking due to the relative remoteness of the
illuminated objects from us in their specific degree of illumination.
In this direct relation to objectivity light is no longer asserted
simply as light, but as essentially particularized brightness and
obscurity, light and shadow, whose varied manifestations render the
shape and distance of objects from one another intelligible to the
spectator. This is the principle which painting makes use of, because
from the first differentiation is implied in its notion. If we compare
this art in this respect with sculpture and architecture we shall
see that in these latter arts the actual distinctions of spatial
configuration are set forth in their nakedness, and light and shadow
are suffered to retain the ordinary effect which light produces in
Nature relatively to the position of the spectator, so that the rondure
of form is here already independently[243] present and light and
shade, whereby they are rendered visible, are merely a result of that
which was already actually on the spot independently of this further
aspect of their becoming visible. In the art of painting, however,
brightness and darkness together with all their gradations and finest
transitions are themselves part of the fundamental _artistic material_,
and it is a purely _intentional appearance_ they produce of that
medium, which sculpture gives form to in its _native_ state. Light and
shade, in short, the appearance of objects under this illumination, is
effected by art rather than the mere natural light, which consequently
only makes that kind of brightness, darkness, and lighting _visible_,
which are the products of painting. And this it is which constitutes
the positive rationale deduced from the material of the art itself, why
painting does not require three dimensions. Form is the creation of
light and shadow simply, and that form which exists in spatial reality
is superfluous.

(_γγ_) Bright and dark, shadow and light, no less than their interplay
are, however, merely an abstraction, which do not exist in Nature as
such abstraction, and consequently cannot be utilized as sensuous
material. In other words Light, as we have already seen, is related
to its opposite Dark. In this relation both principles have no
self-subsistency apart from each other, but can only be asserted in
their unity, that is, as the interplay of light and dark. The light,
which is in this way essentially impaired and obscured, which, however,
to a like extent transpierces and illumines darkness[244], supplies us
with the principle of _colour_ as the genuine material of painting.
Light in its purity is devoid of colour, it is the pure indeterminacy
of essential identity. Distinction from bare light, a lowering of its
value, is the characteristic of colour, which in contrast to light is
already in some degree obscurity, and together with which the principle
of light is asserted in union. It is consequently an incorrect and
false idea to hold that light is the aggregate result of different
colours, or in other words different degrees of obscuration[245].

Form, distance, limitation, rounded shape, in short, all spatial
relations and distinctions visible in the phenomena of Space are
unfolded in the art of painting entirely by means of colour, the
more ideal principle of which is capable of presenting a more ideal
content and by virtue of its profounder oppositions, the infinite
variety of its transitional gradations and the delicacy of its softest
modulations relatively to the fulness and detail of the objects it
accepts as subject-matter, is possessed of a field for its activity
of the widest range. It is beyond belief what mere colour is able to
accomplish in this art. Two human beings are, for example, something
totally distinct. Either is in his self-conscious identity no less than
his bodily organism an independent and exclusive spiritual and bodily
totality, yet the entire result of this difference is in a picture
reduced to a distinction of colours. In one place some particular
shade of colour ceases, in another a particular one starts up, and by
such means we get everything set before us, shape, distance, play of
posture, expression, what is nearest to sense and what is most akin to
intelligence. And we are not to regard this reduction as a make-shift
and defect. Quite the reverse is the fact; the art of painting
dispensing with the third dimension in no such way, but deliberately
rejecting it in order to set in the place of purely spatial reality the
higher and richer principle of colour.

(_γ_) This wealth enables painting to elaborate in its reproductions
the entire extent of the phenomenal world. Sculpture is more or less
restricted to the stable self-seclusion of individuality. In painting,
however, the individual cannot remain in such limitations of stability
whether regarded in his ideal aspect or relatively to the external
world, but is placed in every kind of varied definition. For on the one
hand, as already pointed out, he is placed in a far closer relation to
the spectator, and on the other he receives a more varied connection
with other individuals and the environment of Nature. A process,
therefore, which merely illuminates semblance of objective fact makes
possible the widest expansion of distances and spaces and the present
of such and all the varied objects that appear in them in one and the
same work of art. Yet it must no less, as a work of art, prove itself
to be a self-contained and unified whole, and exhibit itself in this
synthesis, not simply as an aggregate whose limits and boundaries
are defined by no principle, but rather as a totality whose unified
consistency is due to its own subject-matter.

(_c_) In the _third_ place we have, after this general consideration
of the content and sensuous material of painting, briefly to adduce in
general terms the principle of the _artistic mode_ of treatment adopted
by it.

The art of painting more so than either sculpture or architecture
admits of the two extremes. In the first case prominence is given
to the religious and ethical severity of the conception and
presentation of the ideal beauty of form, and in the second, where the
subject-matter is, taken by itself, insignificant, to the detail of
what it contains and the personal aspect of the creative art. We may
therefore not unfrequently hear two extreme kinds of criticism. Our
critic in the one case apostrophizes the nobility of the object, the
depth and astonishing sufficiency of the conception, the greatness of
the expression, and the boldness of the delineation[246]. And in the
other equal praise is given to the fine and unexampled character of
the painter's treatment of his colour. This contrast is implied in the
very notion of the art; indeed, we may affirm that it is impossible
to unite both aspects on one plane of elaboration. Each must remain
inevitably independent of the other. For painting has shape simply as
such, that is, the forms of spatial limitation, no less than colour
as means contributive to its artistic result, and is placed thereby
midway between the Ideal of the plastic arts and the extreme form of
the direct detail of Nature's reality; by reason of which we get two
distinct types of painting. One, that is the ideal, whose essential
basis is universality; and the other, that which presents particular
objects in all their closeness of detail.

(_α_) In this respect painting must accept, in the first instance, as
sculpture, that which is substantive in the sense that the objects of
religious belief are such, no less than the great events of history,
and its pre-eminent individual characters, albeit it renders visible
this substance in a form wherein the ideal and personal aspect is
emphasized. It is the imposing character, the serious significance
of the action portrayed, or the depth of the soul expressed which is
here of most importance, so that the elaboration and employment of all
the rich artistic means which are within the reach of painting, and
the dexterity, which the wholly consummate use of these means demands
regarded as a _tour de force_ of technique, cannot here be entirely
indicated. In cases of this kind it is the force of the content to be
presented and the absorption in what is essential and substantive in
the same, which tend to drive into the background the overwhelming
facility in the art of painting as that aspect which is less essential.
In this sense, for instance, the Cartoons of Raphael are of invaluable
merit, and fully display the entire excellence of their composition,
although Raphael, even in the case of particular pictures, despite all
his mastery in drawing, and the purity of his ideal, and at the same
time wholly vital personal figures, and the composition he may have
arrived at, most certainly in colour, and all that concerns landscape
and other aspects, is excelled by the Dutch masters. This is yet more
the case with the earlier Italian heroes of art, in contrast to whom
Raphael is to a somewhat similar degree inferior in depth, power, and
ideality of expression, as he surpasses such in the technique of his
craft, in the beauty of vital grouping, in draughtsmanship and the
like[247].

(_β_) Conversely, however, the art of painting, as we have seen, ought
to advance further than this exclusive absorption in the ideal and
infinite content of man's soul-life; its function is equally to assert
the subsistency and freedom of detail, which however incidental it may
be, contributes to the environment and background of the work. In this
advance from the profoundest seriousness to the objective features
of independent detail it is bound to force its way to the extreme
articulation of the purely phenomenal, where any and every content is
a matter of indifference, and artistic illusion in a realistic sense
is the main interest. In such a type of art we find depicted for us
the most fugitive aspect of the sky, the time of day, the lighting up
of the woods, the gleam and reflection of the clouds, waves, lakes,
streams, the shimmer and glitter of wine in the glass, the glance of
the eye, and every conceivable look and smile of the human countenance.
Painting in such cases moves from the idealistic standpoint to that of
living reality, whose phenomenal effect it mainly seeks to reproduce
by means of accuracy in the execution of every bit of detail[248]. Yet
this effort is no mere assiduity of elaboration, but a real exercise of
genuine talent, which strives to present every kind of detail in its
independent perfection, and yet retain the whole composition in unity
and fusion, and this can only be done by the finest art. In such work
the vital force of the realistic appearance thus secured tends to be
more near to the artist's aim than the Ideal; and it is precisely this
kind of art, as I have already found occasion to remark, which raises,
as no other, controversial points over the significance of the Ideal
and Nature. No doubt it is very possible to blame the use of the most
elaborate technique in subjects of little importance by themselves
as mere extravagance; yet there is no real reason for rejecting such
material, and it is precisely of that kind which ought to be treated in
this way by art, and be permitted to keep every conceivable subtlety
and refinement of surface appearance that it possesses.

(_γ_) The artistic treatment does not, however, stop at this more
general kind of opposition, but, inasmuch as painting reposes on the
principle of soul-expression and particularity, proceeds yet further
in the direction of differentiation in its results. Both architecture
and sculpture, it is true, assert differences of national type, and in
particular we are made aware in sculpture of a closer individuality
typical of certain schools and masters. In the art of painting this
distinction and personal aspect in the modes of representation expands
to an incalculable degree in proportion as the objects, which it may
accept, are taken from a field without definable limitations. In
this art to a pre-eminent extent the genius of particular peoples,
provinces, epochs and individuals asserts its claims and affects not
merely the choice of subjects and the spirit of their conception, but
also the character of drawing, grouping, colouring, handling of the dry
point no less than that of particular colours down to characteristics
of personal style and wont.

Inasmuch as the function of painting is so without restriction
concerned with the ideal aspect and the details of its subject-matter,
it follows of course that it gives us quite as little opportunity to
make definite statements of universal validity as to adduce specific
facts which can always without exception be accepted as true of it. We
must, however, not rest satisfied with what I have already discussed in
respect of the principle of the content, the material and the artistic
treatment, but make a further effort, however much we leave on one
side all that confronts us in its multifold variety, still to subject
certain aspects, that most emphatically enlist our attention, to
further examination.



2. PARTICULAR MODES OF THE DEFINITION OF PAINTING


The different points of view, according to which we have to undertake
this closer characterization, may be already anticipated from our
previous discussion. They refer once more to the content, the material
and the artistic treatment.

_First_, as to _content_, we have no doubt found the content of the
romantic type of art offer the most adequate subject-matter; we must,
however, inquire further what specific portions we should select from
the entire wealth within this type as pre-eminently adapted to the art
of painting.

_Secondly_, we have already made ourselves fairly cognisant with the
_principle_ of the sensuous material. We have now to define more
narrowly the forms, which may be expressed on the level surface by
means of colouring, in so far as the human form and other facts of
Nature have to be made visible in order that the ideality of Spirit may
be thereby disclosed.

_Thirdly_, we have a similar question with regard to the definite
character of the artistic conception and presentation, which
corresponds to the different character of the content thus itself
similarly differentiated, producing thereby different _types_ or
schools of painting.

(_a_) I have already at an earlier stage recalled the fact that the
ancients have had excellent painters, but added thereto the statement
that the function of painting is only completely satisfied by the way
of looking at things and the type of art which is referable to the
emotional life and which is actively asserted in the romantic type of
art. What appears, however, to contradict this from the point of view
of content is the fact that at the very culminating point of Christian
painting, during the age of Raphael, Rubens, Correggio, and others,
we find that mythological subjects are used and portrayed in part on
their own merits, and in part for the decoration and allegorization of
great exploits, triumphs, royal weddings, and so forth. In this sense
Goethe, for example, has once more borrowed from the descriptions
of Philostratus of the pictures of Polygnotus, and, assisted by his
imaginative powers as a poet, has added a novel freshness to such
subjects for the painter's benefit. If, however, such contributions
further imply the demand that subjects of Greek mythology and saga, or
scenes, too, from the Roman world, for which the French at a certain
period of their painting have evinced a great inclination, should
be conceived and portrayed in the definitive mood and significance
attached to them by the ancient world we can only object generally
that it is impossible to recall to life this past history, and what is
peculiarly appropriate to the antique is not wholly compatible with
the art of painting. The painter must consequently create from such
material an entirely different result, must import therein a totally
different spirit, other emotions and modes of seeing things than those
present to the ancients, in order to bring such a content into accord
with the real problems and aims of painting. For this reason also the
circle of antique material and situations is not that which painting
has elaborated in a consequential process; rather it is an aspect of
it which has been passed over as alien to its material, and which has
first to be essentially remodelled. I have several times insisted that
painting has before all to seize that, the presentment of which it can,
in deliberate contrast to sculpture, music, and poetry, master by means
of external form. And this is preeminently the self-concentration of
Spirit, which is denied to sculpture, while music again is unable to
make the passage to the external appearance of ideality, and poetry
itself can merely render visible the bodily presence in an incomplete
way. Painting, on the contrary, is still in a position to unite both
aspects. It can express the entire content of soul-life in an external
form, and is consequently bound to accept for its essential content
the emotional depth of the soul no less than the particular type of
character and its specific traits in its deepest impression--in other
words intensity of feeling and ideality in its differentiation, for the
expression of which definite events, conditions, and situations not
only must appear as the explanatory source of individual character,
but the specific individuality must disclose itself as a part of the
moulded form of the soul and physiognomy, rooted therein, and entirely
taken up into the external embodiment.

In order to express generally this ideality of soul we do not require
that ideal self-subsistency and largeness[249] of the classical
type we have previously dealt with, in which individuality persists
in immediate accord with the substantive core of its spiritual
essence and the physical characteristics of its bodily presentment;
to quite as little extent will suffice to the manifestation of
this soul-life Nature's ordinary hilarity, that Greek geniality of
enjoyment and blissful absorption in its object; rather true depth
and self-revelation of spiritual life presupposes that the soul has
worked its way through its emotions, its forces, its whole inward life,
has overcome much, has suffered and endured much anguish or misery
of spirit, and yet in all these divisions has retained its sense of
unity and come back to the same out of them. The ancients no doubt
also place before us in the mythos of Hercules a hero, who after many
troubles receives his apotheosis, and enjoys among the gods the repose
of blessedness; but the labours which Hercules accomplishes are purely
external, and the bliss, which he obtains as a reward, is merely a
tranquil cessation from labour; and the ancient rune, that Zeus will
have brought his empire to its consummation by his efforts, he, that
is the greatest hero of Greece, has not accomplished. Rather the end
of the rule of these self-subsistent gods then commences for the first
time, where we find man overcomes the dragons and serpents of his own
breast, the obstinacy and stubbornness of the soul's native realm
rather than the living dragons and serpents of Nature. Only thereby
will Nature's gladsomeness attain to that loftier cheerfulness of the
spirit, which is perfected in its passage through the negative phase
of division, and finally secures an infinite satisfaction through such
travail. The feeling of blitheness and happiness must be glorified and
expanded in real blessedness. For happiness and content still retain
an association with external conditions which partake of Nature's
contingency. In blessedness, however, that happiness, which is still
related to immediate existence, is left behind, and the entire content
is made one with the inner life of soul. Blessedness is a satisfaction
which is an attained result, and is thereby justified; it is the
gladness of a victory, the emotion of a soul which has essentially
set at nought what is sensuous and finite, and thereby thrust from
itself the care which lurks for ever in ambush. Blessed is the soul,
which has, it is true, experienced both conflict and pain, but come
victorious through its troubles.

(_α_) If we now inquire what is the nature of the actual _Ideal_
in this content we shall find it to be the _reconciliation_ of the
individual soul with God, who in His human manifestation has Himself
traversed this passage of sorrows. The substantive ideality[250] can
only be that of _religion_, the peace of self-consciousness, which
only feels itself truly satisfied, in so far as it is concentrated
in its own substance, has broken its earthly heart, has raised itself
above the purely natural conditions of finite existence, and in this
exaltation has secured an inward life of universal significance,
an ideal union in and with God Himself. The soul wills itself, but
it finds the object of its will in something other than itself, in
its particularity; it thereby gives itself up in its opposition to
God, in order to find itself again and its joy in Him. This is the
vital character of Love, the soul's function in its truth, that is
religious love purged of mere desire, which communicates to Spirit
reconciliation, peace, and blessedness. It is not the enjoyment and
delight of the actual love of living nature, but rather one that is
devoid of passion, nay, one that is without inclination, a tendency
of the soul, a love in fact which on the side of Nature is identical
with death, and is such a state, so that the actual relation as earthly
bond and relation of man to man floats before us as a thing of the
Past, which essentially has no consummation in its usual existing form,
but carries within itself the defect of its temporality, and as such
prepares the way for an exaltation to something beyond it, which is
found to be at the same time a conscious state and enjoyment of a love
that is without yearning and sensuous desire.

It is this character which gives to us the soulful, intimate, and
more elevated Ideal, which we find now in the place of the tranquil
greatness and self-subsistency of the antique. No doubt the divinities
of the classical Ideal were not without a trait of sombre grief, a
negative replete with fateful import, which is as it were the shadow of
a cold Necessity passing over these blithesome figures, which remain,
however, secure in their substantive divinity and freedom, their simple
greatness and might. The freedom of Love, however, is not a freedom
of this kind, being more instinct with soul-life, for the reason
that it subsists in a relation between soul and soul, and spirit to
spirit. This inward glow enkindles the ray of bliss made actual in the
soul, a love, which in suffering, and the extremest loss not merely
can discover comfort or independence therefrom, but in proportion to
the depth of its suffering can feel the more profoundly therein the
reality and assuredness of its love, making clear the mastery of
its own essential substance in that suffering. In the Ideal of the
ancients on the contrary we find no doubt, independently of that trait
of a tranquil sorrow already indicated, the expression of the pain
of noble natures, as for instance in the case of Niobe and Laocoon.
They do not betake themselves to lamentation and despair, but adhere
to their greatness and loftiness of spirit; but this self-continency
remains empty; their suffering, their pain is likewise the conclusion
of the matter. In the place of reconcilement and satisfaction we can
only have an austere resignation, which, without suffering entire
collapse, surrenders that upon which it had previously laid hold. It
is not the base that is crushed[251]; no rage, no contempt or vexation
is expressed; but despite of it all the loftiness of this type of
individuality is nought but an inflexible self-continency[252], an
endurance of destiny that is without relief, in which the nobility and
pain of the soul do not appear as reconciled in fulfilment. In the
romantic love of religion we find for the first time the expression
of blessedness and freedom. This union and satisfaction is by nature
concrete in a spiritual sense, for it is the feeling of Spirit which
is made cognizant of its unity in something other than itself. And for
this reason we find necessary here, if the content presented is to be
complete, two aspects, in so far as the reduplication of spiritual
personality is necessary to love's appearance. It reposes upon two
independent individuals who possess, however, the sense of their
intrinsic union. With this union, however, the negative condition is
always at the same time connected. In other words Love belongs to the
soul's condition; the subject of such a conscious state is, however,
this independently self-stable[253] heart, which to experience love
must bid goodbye to itself, surrender itself and sacrifice the
unyielding focus of its individual isolation. It is this sacrifice
which constitutes the _motive_ principle of Love, the life and emotion
of which is bound up wholly in a self-surrender. In consequence of
this, if notwithstanding a man retains his consciousness of self in
an act of such surrender, and just in this very annihilation of his
personal independence attains to a truly positive self-subsistency,
in that case he has left him at least in the feeling of this unity
and its supreme happiness the negative aspect, the movement of Love's
principle, not so much in a sense of sacrifice, as of a blessedness
undeserved, which in despite of himself permits him still to feel his
assured identity at unity with itself. The movement is the feeling of
the dialectical contradiction, namely, to have surrendered personality
and yet to remain in self-subsistent unity, a contradiction which is
present in Love and eternally resolved in it.

In so far, then, as the aspect of an individual _human_ state of
soul-life is concerned in this universal condition we find that the
unique Love, which blesses and discovers its heaven within it, tends
to rise over all that is finite and the specific individuality of
character, which lapses into a position of insignificance. Already
we have observed that the divine ideals of sculpture pass into one
another, always provided, however, that they are not wrested from
the content and province of that original and immediate type of
individuality; and yet it must be admitted that this individuality
remains the essential form of the mode of presentment. In this later
pure gleam of blessedness, however, particularity is on the contrary
cancelled. Before God all men are equal, or rather piety makes them
actually equal, so that the sole point of importance is the expression
of love in the concentrated focus above depicted, and which has no
further need of happiness, or this or that particular object. No doubt
religious Love, too, requires definite individuals as a condition of
its existence, which possess also, apart from this experience, other
spheres of existence; for the reason, however, that this soul-possessed
state of intimate life supplies the really ideal content, the
expression and reality of such are not to be found in the isolated
distinctions of character, its talents, conditions, and fortunes, but
are rather lifted above the same. When consequently nowadays we hear
people make a regard for distinctions in the soul-life of different
persons a matter of first importance in education, and in that which
is the essential requirement of each man individually, from which we
deduce the fundamental thesis that every one will and indeed inevitably
must act differently in a given case, such a position directly clashes
with the fact of the love of religion, in which all such diversities
of individual life fall into the background. Conversely, however,
individual characterization now, precisely for the reason that it
is the unessential, which refuses wholly to fuse with the spiritual
realm of celestial Love, receives a more emphatic definition. In
other words, agreeably to the romantic type of art, it is free, and
is written in character all the more distinct in proportion as it
refuses to accept as its supreme principle classical beauty, that is
the entire transfusion of immediate vitality, and the particularity of
finite existence, with a spiritual or religious content. In despite of
this fact, however, there is no absolute reason that this individual
characterization should impair this inward intensity of Love, which,
as such on its own account, is not shackled to such features, but has
become free, and constitutes independently the truly self-substantive
Ideal of Spirit.

What, then, constitutes the ideal centre and main content of the
religious field is, as we have already indicated in our examination of
the romantic type of art, the essentially _reconciled_ and satisfied
Love, whose object should appear in the art of painting, whose function
it is to exhibit the most spiritual content under the mode of human
and corporeal actuality, as no mere "beyond" of Spirit, but in its
veritable presence. In conformity with such a result we may adduce the
Holy Family, and above all the love of the Madonna to her child as the
ideal content pre-eminently fitted to this sphere. On either side of
this centre, however, a mass of additional material extends which is
in varying degree less adapted in this sense to the art in question.
I will now attempt to differentiate the whole of this material on the
following lines.

(_αα_) The first objectification is the object of Love itself in its
pure universality and unimpaired unity with itself--God Himself in
His unphenomenal essence--or God the Father. In this case, however,
painting has great difficulties to overcome, when it attempts to
depict God the Father as the religious imagination of Christendom seeks
to grasp Him. The Father of gods and men regarded as a particular
personality is exhaustively dealt with by art in Zeus. What on the
contrary falls away from the Christian conception of God the Father
is the human individuality, in which painting is alone in a position
to reproduce the spiritual aspect. For taken in His independent
self-exclusion God the Father is no doubt spiritual personality and
supreme Power, Wisdom and so forth, but only retained as such without
defined form and as an abstraction of thought. The art of painting is,
however, unable to avoid anthropomorphization, and must perforce assign
to Him the figure of man. However broad in its generalization, however
lofty, ideal, and masterful the presentment of such a figure may be,
we fail to get beyond the fact that it is entirely a human individual
of more or less grave aspect, which fails entirely to coalesce with
the conception of God the Father. Among the early Flemish painters Van
Eyck in his God the Father of the altar picture at Ghent has attained
the greatest success that we can conceive as possible in this sphere.
It is a creation that may well match our conception of the Olympian
Zeus. But however consummate it may be also in its expression of
eternal repose, loftiness, power, worth, and other qualities--and it
is quite impossible to overstate the depth and imposing character of
its conception no less than its execution--yet our imagination cannot
fail to find something in it which does not satisfy. For what is here
set before us as God the Father, that is to say a creation that is
likewise human personality, is just what we first meet with in Christ
the Son. It is in Him that we contemplate for the first time this
decisive moment in which individuality and human existence combine as a
moment in the Divine Life[254], and moreover combine in such a way that
the same is not disclosed as an ingenious creature of the phantasy,
as was the case with the Greek divinities, but as essential and very
revelation, the fact of all importance and fundamental significance.

(_ββ_) The more essential object, therefore, of Love in the creation
of painting will be _Christ._ In other words, with this object Art at
once finds itself in the sphere of humanity, a sphere which along with
Christ embraces further material in its presentations of the Virgin
Mary, Joseph, John the Baptist, the disciples, and so forth, and
ultimately the common folk who in part are followers of the Gospel, and
in part cry out for the crucifixion of its Master and mock Him in His
sufferings.

And here once more the already mentioned difficulty confronts us how
we are to conceive and depict Christ in his _universality_, when he is
presented in the ordinary way of half-length figures or portraits. I
must admit that for myself at any rate, the heads of Christ I have seen
by Caracci and others and, to take two famous examples, that of Van
Eyck, formerly in the Sully Collection and now in the Berlin Museum,
and that of Von Hemling, now in Munich, do not give me the entire
satisfaction which they ought to do. That of Van Eyck, no doubt, is
very imposing in figure, forehead, colour, and general conception, but
the mouth and eye wholly fail to express anything that transcends our
humanity. The expression is rather that of an inflexible seriousness,
which is emphasized by the general type of the form, the parting of the
hair, and other traits. And when such heads incline still further in
expression and shape towards the specifically human type, and a milder,
more yielding and tender aspect is thereby imported, much of their
depth and power of impression is very readily lost; and least of all
suited to such, as I have already observed, is the beauty of Greek form.

For this reason Christ, as depicted in the experiences of His actual
life, is a more suitable subject for pictorial effort. Yet in this
connection an essential distinction must not be overlooked. It is
quite true that in the biographies of Christ we have from one point
of view the human consciousness of God presented us as a fundamental
aspect. Christ is one of the gods, but under the guise of an actual
man, and takes His place among men as one of them, in whose phenomenal
appearance He can consequently be depicted in so far as such expresses
the life of Spirit. From another point of view, however, he is not
merely an individual man, but entirely God. In such situations,
therefore, in which this supreme Divinity forces its way beyond the
limits of human soul-life, the art of painting is met with a fresh
source of difficulty. The very depth of the content begins to be too
overpowering. For in the majority of cases in which we find Christ
presented for example merely as a teacher, art will not pass much
beyond the point in which He is depicted as the noblest, most worthy,
and wisest of men, much as Pythagoras or any other wise man, is
presented to us in such a picture as Raphael's "School of Athens." The
most important way in which painting can overcome such a difficulty
is to bring the Divinity of Christ mainly into direct contrast with
His surroundings, and above all, to contrast it with the sins, the
repentance and penance, or the meanness and evil of our humanity, or
again conversely through His worshippers, who, by their adoration of
Him remove Him as one of themselves and a man, existing in a particular
place, from such immediate conditions, so that we behold Him exalted
to the heaven of Spirit, and at the same time get a glimpse of the
fact that His appearance has not merely been that of God, but also
that of the human form under its ordinary and natural, in other words,
not wholly ideal conditions, who as Spirit essentially possesses his
existence in our humanity and the human community, and expresses
His divinity as reflected in the same. But we must not understand
this reflection as though God is present in humanity as in a purely
accidental or external mode of form and expression; rather we ought
to regard the Spirit manifested in the consciousness of mankind as
the essential spiritual existence of God Himself[255]. Such a mode of
presentation will be exceptionally appropriate where Christ is to be
represented as man, teacher, as the risen and glorified person who
ascends up to heaven before our eyes. To speak plainly, in situations
such as these the means of expression in painting such as the human
form and its colour, the countenance, the glance of eye, are not wholly
sufficient to express all that is implied in the Christ. And least
of all will the antique beauty of forms suffice. In particular the
resurrection and ascension, and generally, all scenes in the life
of Christ, in which He, the individual man, is already divested of
immediate existence as such on His return to His Father, require a more
elevated expression of Divinity than the art of painting is able to
supply, for the reason that it ought to cancel the very means it uses
in its representation, that is, the expression of human soul-life in
its external form, and glorify the same in a light of purer quality.

Consequently, we shall find those scenes of Christ's life treated
with greater advantage and more fitting effect in which He Himself
has not yet arrived at the full consummation, or where His Divinity
appears to be obstructed and depressed in the moment of negation. And
this we find is the case in His _childhood_ and the _Passion._ That
Christ as a child expresses definitely from a certain point of view the
significance which attaches to Him in religion. He is God Who becomes
man, and Who consequently passes through the stages of man's natural
life. In another aspect of the same fact that He is presented to our
minds as a child we are led to feel the practical impossibility of
disclosing entirely to us all that He essentially is. And it is just
here that the art of painting possesses the incalculable advantage
of being able to show how the loftiness and dignity of Spirit can
shine forth from the _naïveté_ and innocence of the child, which in
some measure derives actual force from such a contrast, and in part,
for the very reason that it is predicated of an infant, is to an
infinitely less extent required by us in comparison with that we look
for in Christ as man, teacher, and judge of the world. In this way the
examples of Christ the babe which we find in Raphael's pictures, and
above all, that in the Sistine Madonna picture at Dresden, offer us the
most beautiful presentment of childhood. We are, however, aware in them
also of a tendency to pass beyond merely childlike innocence, a passage
which discloses quite as much the Divine already present in the opening
sheath, as it enables us to surmise the expansion of such Divinity to
an infinite fulness of revelation, a revelation the incompleteness
of which in the child carries with it its own justification. In the
Madonna pictures of Van Eyck, on the contrary, the Divine babe is the
least successful feature, for they are in general stiff and emphasize
the defective form of a newly-born child. It has been attempted to
regard this as allegorical and intentional. They are not to be fair in
aspect because it is not the beauty of the Christ babe which is that
which is adorable, but the Christ as Christ. Such a mode of thought
is not consonant with the true aim of Art, and the babes of Raphael
regarded as works of art are in this respect of far higher rank.

In the same way the history of _Christ's passion_, such as the
scenes where He is mocked and crowned with thorns, that of the Ecce
Homo carrying the cross, deposition, and burial, are exceptionally
appropriate to pictorial presentment. For in these it is precisely
the Divinity, in its contrast to its triumph and in the depression of
its unlimited power and wisdom, which supplies the content. Art is
not merely able to present this, but there is ample room for the play
of originality in the composition of such scenes without falling into
purely fantastical imagery. God is here set before us as suffering, in
so far as He is man and under certain determinate bounds. Such pain
is not merely disclosed as human pain over human calamity, but it is
an awful suffering, the feeling of an infinite negativity, albeit in
human form, as the conscious life of one individual. And withal there
is added, for the reason that it is God who suffers, a certain sense of
alleviation, a reduction of such anguish which is thus unable to break
forth in actual despair, distortion, and horror. This expression of
_soul-suffering_ is, more particularly in the works of several Italian
masters, an original creation. The pain is in the lower portions of
the countenance, a gravity of mien, and nothing more, not as in the
Laocoon a contraction of the muscles, which can be interpreted as
an actual cry; but in the eyes and on the forehead the billows of
soul-anguish are, so to speak, allowed to roll over one another. The
sweat drops that bespeak the heart's agony stand forth; and with true
instinct on the brow, in which the immovable bone constitutes the
determining feature, precisely at the point where nose, eyes, and
forehead coalesce, and the life of mind and heart is concentrated and
emphasized, we find that just one or two indications of skin-folds
and muscles, unable to be distorted to any great extent, are suffered
pre-eminently to bear and express in tension this accumulated weight
of agony. In particular I can recall a certain head in the gallery
of Schleisheim, in which the master--I fancy Guido Reni[256]--and
doubtless others in a similar way, have discovered a distinct colour
tone for the flesh, which is quite unlike that of human flesh. They had
to disclose the night of the Spirit and created for the same a dowry
of colour, most admirably adapted to express this tempest, these black
clouds of Spirit which are likewise encompassed by the brazen forehead
of the Divine Nature[257].

As the most perfect subject of such painting, however, I have already
affirmed that Love, which is essentially _satisfied_, whose object is
no purely spiritual Beyond, but one actually present, so that we can
behold Love itself in its object. The highest and most unique form of
such a Love is that of the Virgin Mother for her Christ child, the
love of the one mother who has brought forth the Saviour of the world
and carries Him in her arms. This is the content of most loveliness
to which we may say Christian art generally and pre-eminently the
painter's art in the religious sphere has been exalted.

The love of God, and more expressly[258] that of which Christ is the
object, is of an entirely spiritual type. Its object is only visible to
the eyes of the soul, so that in these cases we do not in the strict
sense get the reciprocity which is bound with the notion of Love, and
moreover there is no natural tie which secures the lovers and from
its origin binds them to each other. Every other type of love, to
put the matter conversely, remains in some measure accidental in its
incidence, and in another aspect of it the lovers possess, as, for
instance, sisters, or the father's love for his children, yet further
relations outside this particular one, which assert an essential claim
upon them. A father or brothers are compelled to direct their attention
to the world, the State, affairs or war, in one word universal ends;
the sister becomes wife, mother, and so forth. In the case of a
mother's love of her child, on the contrary, the love is from its
very nature neither something that is contingent, nor is it merely a
single phase[259]. It is its highest earthly type, in which its natural
character and its most sacred function immediately coalesce. From
the point of view, however, in which as a rule in maternal love the
mother sees and feels at the same time her husband in her child, we may
observe that this aspect, too, in the Virgin Mary's case disappears.
Her feeling has nothing in common with a wife's love for her wedded
husband; on the contrary her relation to Joseph is rather that of a
sister, and on the side of Joseph a feeling of respectful reverence for
the Child that is God's and Mary's. We therefore find that religious
love is set forth in its fullest and most ideal[260] human form, not in
that for Christ amid His sufferings, nor in His resurrection, nor as He
delays His departure among His friends, but in the emotional nature of
a woman, in Mary. Her entire soul and life is human love for the Child,
which she calls her own, and along with it adoration, and love of God
with whom she feels herself thus united[261]. She is humble before God,
and yet is steeped in the infinite exaltation that she is the single
one among maidens who is above all blessed. Not alone and apart, but
only in her Child is she made perfect in God, but in that, whether it
be by the cradle or as queen of heaven, she is entirely content and
blessed, without passion and yearning, with no other want, with no
other aim to have or possess anything but that which she possesses.

The manifestation of this love under the aspect of its religious
content expands in many directions, such as the annunciation,
the visitation, the birth, the flight into Egypt, and other such
incidents. We may also associate with it, during the later course of
the Christ-life, the disciples and women, who follow Him, and in whom
the love of God is more or less a personal relation of their love to
the living, present Saviour, Who, as actual man, pursues His course
among them, and in like manner also the love of those angels who, on
the occasion of His birth and at other times, hover around in grave
adoration or simple joy. In treating all such figures the art of
painting in particular discloses the complete peace and content of such
a love.

But this peace, furthermore, is dissolved in the most heartfelt
anguish. Mary the mother beholds Christ carrying the cross. She sees
Him suffer on the cross and die; she sees Him taken from the cross and
buried, and no grief is more poignant than her own. And yet we may
observe that it is neither the irreparableness[262] of such a grief, or
rather of such a loss, nor the weight of the calamity, nor the lament
over the injustice of destiny, which constitutes the real content in
such anguish, so that a contrast between it and the sorrow of Niobe is
particularly instructive. Niobe, too, has lost all her children, and
is set before us in severe loftiness and unperturbed beauty. The main
content here is the aspect of the natural life of this ill-starred
sufferer, the beauty in which Nature has robed her and which embraces
the entire presentment of her actual existence. She, this actual
personality, is beauty personified, and therein she persists. But her
soul-life, her heart, has lost the entire content of its love, its
soul, and her individuality and beauty can only turn into stone. The
grief of Mary is of a wholly different type. She feels intimately the
dagger which cuts through her soul's very centre, her heart breaks, but
she does not become stone. She did not merely possess love, but her
soul-life throughout is nothing but love, that is, free and concrete
ideality, which retains the absolute content of that which it loses,
and in the loss itself of the beloved persists in the peace of love.
Her heart indeed breaks, but the substantive principle of her heart,
the content of its life[263], which is disclosed through her anguish
of soul with a vital strength that can never be lost, is something
infinitely more exalted, namely, the living beauty of the human soul,
as contrasted with its abstract substance, whose ideal existence
as presented in _bodily shape_, when it is lost remains indeed
indestructible, but is turned to stone.

There is one further subject for painting in connection with Mary the
mother of Jesus, and that is her death and assumption. Schoreel has
with exceptional beauty depicted a death of Mary in which we find the
charm of her youth once more restored[264]. This master has united
in his picture the expression of somnambulism, presence of death,
rigidity, and blindness towards the exterior world with one which seems
to suggest that the spirit, which seems somehow to penetrate through
their general aspect, has found a home elsewhere and is blessed therein.

(_γγ_)_Thirdly_, we must include within the sphere of the actual
presence of God in the life, sufferings, and glorification of
Himself, _mankind at large_[265], that is to say the consciousness of
_individual human life_, which God, or more accurately the events of
His history, constitutes as itself an object of His love, communicating
to it a content which is not merely finite but absolute in its
significance. Here, too, we may emphasize the three aspects of tranquil
_devotion_, _repentance_, and _conversion_, which both from the
point of view of the soul and that of external condition the history
of the Divine Passion repeats to mankind, no less than the ideal
_consummation_ in glory and the blessedness of pure attainment.

In respect to the _first_ of these, namely, devotion, we have here
what is primarily the content of _prayer._ This relation is in one
aspect of it a humbling, surrender of the self, the seeking of peace
in another; from another point of view it is not a _petition_ but
rather a _prayer_[266]. Petition and prayer are no doubt closely
connected in so far, that is, as a prayer can be a petition. And yet
the genuine petition seeks after something _for itself._ It importunes
the man who possesses something of importance to myself, that he may
feel inclined to do me a favour in virtue of the request, that his
heart may yield, or his love may be roused toward me, in one word that
his feeling of identity with myself may be awakened. What I, however,
feel in making a petition is the desire for something, which the other
person must lose if I am to secure it. The other person is to love me
in order that my self-love may be satisfied, and my weal and necessity
be promoted. I on the contrary give nothing further in the transaction
unless it be contained in an admission that the person thus opportuned
may ask for similar favours from myself. Prayer is not a petition of
this type. It is an exaltation of the heart to the Absolute, which
is assumed to be essentially Love, and as such possesses nothing
independently[267]. The devotion itself is the gift, the petition
itself is the blessedness. For although prayer may contain a petition
for some particular thing, yet it is not this particular thing which
is the true purport of the prayer; rather the essential truth of it is
the conviction that the petition will be heard, and not heard in its
relation to the particular request so much as to the absolute trust
that God will apportion that which is best for me to receive. And thus
even in such a connection prayer is itself its own satisfaction, the
enjoyment, the express feeling and consciousness of eternal Love, which
not only with its ray of illumination shines through the object[268]
of prayer and its situation, but in fact constitutes the situation and
what is there actually or is thereby manifested. It is this type of
supplication which we find exemplified by Pope Sixtus in the picture
of Raphael already mentioned[269], no less than by Santa Barbara in
the same picture, and by many other representations of the prayers of
apostles and saints, of Saint Francis[270] and the like at the foot of
the Cross, where we find in the place of the suffering of Christ, or
the dismay, doubt, and despair of the disciples the love and adoration
of God, and the prayer that loses itself in Him is selected as the
significant content. We find such rendered with particular force for
the most part on the countenances of aged men marked strongly with the
sufferings and experience of life in the earlier period of painting,
faces that appear to be portraits, souls permeated with devotional
feeling to such an extent that this attitude of prayer does not merely
appear to be experienced at this particular moment, but rather they
are presented us as pious and saintlike persons whose entire life,
thought, instinct, and volition is one prayer, and whose expression
despite of all the truth of their portraiture may be summed up wholly
in this assurance and peace of Love. It is otherwise, however, among
many of the earlier German and Flemish masters. The subject of the
altar picture in Cologne Cathedral is the adoring kings and patrons of
Cologne. We find this subject too frequently selected by the school of
Van Eyck. In such examples the persons who adore are frequently famous
individuals, princes, as, for instance, in a well-known adoration
picture, which has been taken for the work of Van Eyck, critics have
identified two of the kings with portraits of Philip of Burgundy and
Charles the Bold. In the case of personages of this type we see that
they are something more than saints, have affairs in the world, and
only go to mass on Sunday or in the early morning, but during the rest
of the week or for the rest of the day have other business to look
after. And more particularly in our Flemish or German pictures the
patrons are pious knights, God-fearing housewives with their sons and
daughters. They resemble Martha who fares hither and thither and is
concerned with matters of external or mundane significance, rather than
Mary who has selected once and for all the best part. Their piety is
not deficient, it is true, in intensity and soul; but we do not find
here the song of Love which is at once the beginning and end of it,
and which is perforce not merely an exaltation, a prayer, or thanks
for a gift received, but is as much its unique life as that of the
nightingale.

We may summarize the distinction which can be drawn generally in
pictures of this kind between saints and worshippers on the one hand,
and pious members of the Christian community as they actually appeared
on the other, in the statement that the worshippers, more especially in
Italian pictures, disclose in the expression of their piety a complete
harmony of external and spiritual condition. It is their very soul
which we find written for the most part on their countenances, which
are not permitted to express anything opposed to the emotions of their
heart. In the actual conditions of life this is not always the case. An
infant, for example, when it weeps, more particularly when beginning to
do so, quite apart from the fact that we know its grief is not worth
the trouble of crying over, often makes us smile with its ugly faces.
And in the same way old folk pucker up their face when they laugh,
because the lines of their features are too pronounced, cold, and stiff
to accommodate themselves readily to an unreserved and natural laugh
or a friendly smile. The art of painting should endeavour to avoid
this incompatibility between the emotions of piety expressed and the
sensuous forms which have to express them, and, so far as possible,
produce a harmony between the soul and its external mode of expression.
And this in the highest degree was effected by the Italians; the
Germans and Flemish were less successful, because the main object in
their work was living portraiture.

I will add one further remark, that this devotion of the soul ought
not to reach the point of the actual cry of anxiety, that cry of
tribulation and desire, such as the Psalms and many Lutheran hymns
express, and we may illustrate it with the old words: "As the hart
crieth for the water-brooks, so crieth my soul for Thee." We may
rather indicate it as a gradual melting away, not to that attenuation
of sweetness perhaps we associate with the nun, but at any rate a
surrender of the soul, and an enjoyment and satisfaction in such
surrender. For that travail of faith, that anxious troubling of soul,
that doubt and desperation which persists in disunion, such a type of
hypochondriacal piety which never is certain whether it is still sin,
whether there has been repentance and pardon is complete, a surrender,
in which the soul can never advance a step, and is always betraying the
fact by his anxiety, such a state is not compatible with the beauty
of the romantic Ideal. We much prefer that the eye of devotion should
raise its look of yearning heavenwards, although it is both more
artistic and gives us yet more satisfaction when it is centred on some
present object of adoration, whether it be the Virgin Mother, Christ,
or saint. It is a facile thing, only too facile, to attach to a picture
a spiritual interest, by making its central figure gaze heavenwards,
anywhere beyond the world, just as we find that nowadays people are
only too ready to make use of an equally facile way of proving God
and religion to be the foundation of society by quoting texts of the
Bible rather than establishing such a basis on the reason of actual
reality. Such a gaze of countenance upwards becomes in the pictures of
Guido Reni[271], for example, a pure mannerism. The Assumption of the
Virgin, too, which we find at Munich, has been much eulogized by its
admirers and critics, and we may admit that the exalted character of
its transfiguration, the absorption and surrender of the soul in the
heavenly vision, and indeed the entire pose of the ascending figure,
to say nothing of the brilliance and beauty of the colouring, is most
impressive. But for myself I find such representations which depict
the Virgin Mother in her own daydream of love and blessedness with her
glance centred on her babe still more appropriate to her truth. The
other type of yearning and strain, with its upward gaze heavenwards, is
somewhat too near to our modern sentimentalism.

A _further_ aspect of importance is concerned with the entrance of
the principle of negation into the spiritual devotion of Love. The
disciples, saints, and martyrs, have to pass through, in some measure
as an experience of their souls, and in part, too, as one of their
external life, that way of suffering along which the Christ in the
history of His Passion passed before them.

This suffering lies to some extent on the confines of art. Painting can
very easily overstep this boundary, in so far, that is, as it accepts
for its subject-matter the horrors and terrors of the _bodily_ torture,
whether it be in flaying, or burning, or crucifixion, and its pains.
This it is not permitted to do, if it is not to forsake the spiritual
Ideal. This is not solely due to the fact that to present martyrs
under such conditions to our sight is not beautiful to the sense, nor
because our nerves nowadays are too keenly strung, but on the better
ground that this material aspect is not the really important one.
The true content we have to follow with sympathy and which should be
depicted is the _spiritual_ experience, the soul in all that it suffers
through Love, and not the direct bodily pain of a certain individual,
the grief for the sufferings of another, or the anguish felt personally
for personal demerit. The endurance of martyrs in physical tortures
is an endurance which carries with it merely physical pain: what the
spiritual Ideal looks for is the trial of the soul in its own domain,
its own peculiar suffering, the wounds of its love, the repentance,
mourning, anguish, and penance of its heart.

But we must add that in depicting this pain of soul the _positive_
aspect must not wholly be absent. The soul must be assured of the
actual and essentially consummated reconciliation between mankind
and God, and only experience anxiety that this eternal salvation be
realized as a truth in itself. In this connection we not unfrequently
meet with repentant people, martyrs, and monks, who, despite of their
assuredness of an objective atonement, partly are overwhelmed with
sorrow for a heart whose entire surrender they deem to be right, and
partly have already made such complete surrender, and yet are always
for realizing such reconciliation anew, and consequently for ever
imposing on themselves the burden of penances. And we find, therefore,
in the artistic treatment of such situations a twofold point of
departure. In other words, the artist may, to start with, presuppose in
his subject an open disposition, freedom, cheerfulness, and decision
of spirit, such as carries with ease life and the yoke of the actual
world and knows how to readily deal with the same, then he may fitly
associate with such painful experiences a native nobility, grace,
freshness, freedom, and beauty of form. When, on the contrary, his
work is based upon a natural sense that is more refractory, defiant,
savage, and limited, the conflict of the spirit in overcoming the flesh
and the world, and securing to itself the religion of salvation will
necessarily imply more severe travail. In cases of such obstinacy of
soul, therefore, the harsher reflections of force and stability are
more apparent, the scars of the wounds which have been inflicted on an
obstinacy of this type are more visible and enduring, and the beauty
of the physical result tends to vanish[272].

_Thirdly_, that positive aspect of atonement, the _transfigurement_
that results from grief's travail, the blessedness that comes of
repentance may be independently accepted as the subject of artistic
presentment though it may readily pass into false conceptions.

Such, then, are the main distinguishing characteristics of the absolute
spiritual Ideal regarded as the essential content of romantic painting.
It forms the material of its most successful and solemn creations,
works that are immortal by virtue of the depth of their contemplation;
and when the representation of essential truth is thereby expressed
they are nothing less than the most exalted expansion of the soul to
its heaven of bliss, the most intimate and complete revelation of ideal
life that an artist can bring before our vision.

Following this pre-eminently religious sphere of artistic production we
have still to investigate two further fields of its activity.

(_β_) In direct contrast to the province of religion we have that
which, if we consider it in its isolated abstraction, is equally
destitute of the life of soul and God, Nature in its simplest terms,
and regarded more definitely in its connection with painting, Nature's
_landscape._ We have stated the character of the object of religion to
be such that in it the _substantive_ ideality of the soul expresses
therein the indwelling sense of Love as united to the Absolute[273].
This inward ideality has, however, a further content. It is able to
discover in that which is wholly external an accord with soul-life,
and can recognize in the objective world as such traits which have
an affinity with what is spiritual. Regarded in their immediacy, no
doubt, hills, mountains, woods, valleys, streams, meadows, sunlight,
moon, and the starry heavens, are simply perceived to be the natural
objects they are. But, in the _first_ place, these objects have to
start with an _independent_ interest, in so far as it is the free
life of Nature, which appears in them, and produces a sense of fellow
feeling in the individual as one who shares that life himself; and,
_secondly_, the particular changes of Nature's moods bring about states
in the soul which correspond to such moods. It is possible for man
to follow with his own life this animation of Nature and partake in
this harmony of soul with its environment, and feel thereby at home in
Nature. Just as the Arcadians spoke of a Pan, who made them shudder
and frightened in the gloaming of the forest, in the same way the
varied conditions of Nature's landscape in its gentle blithesomeness,
its balmy repose, its spring-freshness, its wintry chill, its morning
awakening and evening rest find their counterfeits in states of the
soul. The tranquil depth of the ocean, the possibility that its depths
may break forth with infinite power is akin to soul movements, just as
conversely the roaring, upwelling, foaming, and break of storm-tossed
waves stir the soul with concordant music. It is an ideal significance
of this kind that the art of painting accepts as its object. And for
this reason it is not natural objects merely as such in their external
form and association which ought to constitute its true content, so
that painting is nothing more than a mere imitation, but rather the
animation of Nature's life, which interfuses it throughout and which
is able to bring into prominence and assert with more vividness in the
scenes of Nature reproduced the characteristic affinity of specific
conditions of this life with particular spiritual states--it is a vital
participation in Nature of this kind which gives us the meeting-point,
steeped as it is in the soul-life and temperament of the artist, by
means of which Nature may become the content of painting not merely as
environment, but as possessing a distinct individuality[274].

(_γ_) There is yet further a _third_ type of idealization which we find
partly in the case where objects wholly insignificant are detached from
the position they occupy in the landscape, and, partly, in scenes of
human life, which may appear to us not merely as wholly accidental as
thus selected, but even of a kind that is both mean and commonplace.
I have already found an opportunity for an attempt to justify the
artistic selection of such subjects[275]. I will in connection with
painting merely add the following remarks to our former discussion.

The art of painting is not merely concerned with the inward life
of the soul, but with that ideal element that is essentially
_particularized_[276]. This latter type of ideality for the reason
that particularity is its principle is not content to rest satisfied
with the absolute object of religion, and as little will merely accept
from the external world Nature's vitality and its defined character
as landscape; rather it insists on partaking of everything, in which
man as an isolated individual soul can take a rational interest and
find pleasure. Even in the case of its representations of religious
material art, in proportion as it develops, it attaches such more
closely to terrestrial conditions and the objects of actual vision,
giving to its content the complete presence of natural existence, so
that we ultimately find that the aspect of sensuous existence is most
important and the interest of devotional life only so in a subordinate
degree. For here, too, art receives the task to work out the Ideal in
its fullest realization, in other words, to present to our senses that
which is originally detached from them, to carry over objects taken
from the remoteness of past life into present life and unite them with
that present human life.

At our present stage of human evolution it is the ideality which we
find in actual life as it faces us, in the circumstances of daily
experience, the most common and the most trivial, which is the actual
content.

(_αα_) If we inquire, then, what it is that makes a content of this
kind, otherwise so poverty-stricken and indifferent, compatible with
the claims of art, we must reply that it is the substantive core that
is contained and made valid therein, in general terms the vitality and
delight of self-subsistent existence, exemplified in the greatest
variety of its aims and interests. The life of mankind is always in
the immediate Present. What a man may do in each moment thereof is
something specific, and its justification consists in the fact that
he carries through all his engagements, the least no less than the
greatest, with heart and soul. In this way he is united with each
particular incident, and, by infusing into each the entire force of
his individuality, appears to identify his whole existence with such.
This coalescence[277] produces that harmony of the individual with
the specific character of his immediate activity in the circumstances
that are nearest him, which is itself a mode of ideality, and which
communicates in such a case to the subsistency of an existence, which
is an exclusive and perfected whole, its attractive character. The
interest, therefore, that we derive from representations of this kind
is not to be attributed to the subject-matter, but rather to this
animating soul, which by itself, and independently of that wherein
it is disclosed as vital, finds an echo in every uncorrupted nature,
in every free spirit, and is for the same an object of sympathy and
delight. We must not, therefore, impair our enjoyment on the ground
that the demand is made of us to admire such works of art under the
aspect of their _likeness_ to _Nature_ so-called and such illusive
imitation[278]. This demand, which works of this kind appear at first
blush to support, is itself merely a deception which fails to hit the
real point. For an admiration of this type is solely deducible from
the wholly external comparison of a work of art and a work of Nature,
and is only associated with the similarity of the counterfeit with an
object or fact presented us, whereas the real content here and the
artistic quality in the composition and execution is the coalescence
of the matter portrayed _with its own substance_, which is the reality
as independently depicted in its vital characterization. According to
the principle of illusion, for instance, the portraits of Denner are
entitled to our praise, which are, no doubt, imitations of Nature, but
for the most part fail entirely to present us that vital animation on
which we lay the main stress in these cases, and are mainly concerned
with depicting hair, wrinkles, and generally every kind of trait which,
without exactly being indicative of a corpse, are equally remote from
the human physiognomy depicted as alive.

Moreover, if we permit ourselves to level down our enjoyment through
superficial thoughts of the above fashionable kind, believing subjects
of this type to be mean and unworthy of our contemplation, we accept
the content by doing so in a form other than that in which art offers
them us. In other words we merely associate with them the relation
in which we stand to them according to our personal needs, pleasure,
such education as we otherwise possess and other objects we have
before us, that is to say we merely conceive them in respect to their
_external purport_, throughout which it is our own requirements which
are the vital thing we aim at for ourselves, and the matter of all
importance. The life of the subject-matter itself, however, is thereby
destroyed, in so far, that is, as the sole object of its existence
appears to be that of a means simply, or lapses into a thing of no
moment at all, just because we personally have no need for it. A gleam
of sunlight, for example, which falls upon a room we enter through
an open door, a part of the country we travel through, a sempstress,
a maid we happen to see busily engaged, one and all we may regard
with indifference, because we suffer them to pass by remote from the
thoughts and interests which are bound up with them, and consequently
in our soliloquy, or conversation with another will not suffer the
situations which actually lie before us to speak a word in the current
of our own thoughts and speech; or we cast what is merely a passing
glance at them, the summary of which does not amount to more than the
remark, "how pleasant, fine, or ugly they are." Thus we are charmed
with the joviality of dance of peasants, while we merely glance at
it superficially, or turn away from it with contempt, because we are
hostile to "every sort of barbarism." We treat in a similar way the
human countenances we come across in our daily life, or which we
happen to chance upon. Our own personal point of view, and the various
matters which engage us are for ever being interposed. _We_ are forced
to address this or that person in a certain way, we have affairs to
despatch, we have certain things to consider, thoughts that affect
our relation to such a person; we observe him under the particular
circumstances of our knowledge; we regulate our conversation relatively
to that, or we are silent upon it, if he may be likely to resent
it--in short we have always in our minds the man's business, station,
and status, and our attitude to and business with him, remaining in
a wholly practical relation, or in a position of indifference and
preoccupied inattention. Art, however, when it depicts such real
life, wholly changes our attitude to it; it cuts away once and for
all all practical deviations[279], such as we are wont to associate
with such material; it places us simply in the attitude of abstract
contemplation to it; and in the like degree it does away with its
indifference, and directs our otherwise preoccupied attention wholly
to the situation portrayed; upon which we must collect and concentrate
all our faculties, if we are to enjoy it. Sculpture, in particular, by
virtue of its ideal mode of production from the first strikes off all
practical relation to the object to the extent that its product at once
betrays the fact that it does not belong to this reality. Painting, on
the contrary, carries us wholly into the presence of the daily life
with which we are in immediate contact, but it furthermore destroys
all the threads of practical necessity, attraction, inclination, or
disinclination, which draw us to such a Present, or the reverse,
and forces us to approach those objects more intimately as ends to
themselves in their own particular phase or mode of life. What we
meet with here is just the opposite to that which Herr von Schlegel,
for example, in the tale of Pygmalion, expresses so very prosily as
the return of the completed work of art to common life, that is to a
relation of a man's own inclinations and an actual enjoyment, a return
which is the very opposite of that alienation, in which the work of
art places the objects delineated in their relation to our practical
necessities, and, precisely by doing so, sets forth before us their own
independent life and appearance.

(_ββ_) Just as, then, art, in this particular sphere, re-establishes
the forfeited independence of a content, which we otherwise failed to
preserve in its unique characteristics, in the same way, _secondly_,
it is able to secure in stability such objects as may happen to
appear in actual existence in a form we are not accustomed to respect
simply as such. The higher Nature stretches in its organization and
shifting appearance the more it resembles the actor who only serves the
present need. In this connection I have already emphasized the fact
as a triumph of art over reality, namely, that it is able to fix that
which is most evanescent. This power of art in attaching permanence
to _momentary_ things applies not only to the sudden flash of life
we find concentrated in certain situations, but also to the magical
effect of its external presentment in the rapid changes of its colour.
A troop of horsemen, for example, may alter every moment in the mode
of its grouping, and the mutual relation of each rider within it. If
we were one of such we should have something else to do than consider
the lively effect of such changes. We should have to mount, dismount,
make up our haversack, eat, drink, rest, groom, drink and feed our
horses: or, if we looked on as ordinary folk, we should look at such
with wholly different interests. We should want to know what they are
there for, what nationality they are, for what reason they have left
their barracks, and so forth. The painter, on the contrary, smuggles
off the most volatile of the movements, the most evanescent expressions
of countenance, the most momentary gleams of colour apparent in such
motion, and places such before us solely in virtue of its interest
in the animation of such phenomena which without it would vanish.
For especially it is the play of the colouring, not treated merely
as flat tint, but in its lights and shadows, and in the prominence
or subordination of the objects painted which is the reason that the
representation appears lifelike, a fact which we are accustomed to
observe in works of art less than such an aspect deserves, bringing
as it does art first clearly to our minds. And, moreover, the artist
preferably accepts in depicting these natural relations the effort of
following the least detail, and making his work concrete, definite
and stamped with individuality, endeavouring as he does to secure for
his subject-matter the individuality which phenomenal life itself
supplies in its most momentary flashes; and yet withal does not so
much seek for such a detail merely as imitated closely to strike our
senses with its directness, but rather to furnish a definite image to
the imagination in which at the same time the ideality of the entire
composition remains active.

(_γγ_) The more insignificant the objects are, in comparison with
the material of religion, which this particular phase of painting
accepts for its content, to that very extent it is just this quality
of _artistic_ creation, the manner of observation, conception,
elaboration, the vitality communicated by the artist to his work by
all his individual faculties, in short the soul and living enthusiasm
of his execution, which constitute a prominent aspect of its interest,
and are part of its content. That which the subject treated is under
his workmanship must, however, substantially remain what it is in
fact and is capable of being. We believe, indeed, that we look upon
something different, and novel, because in actual life we do not pay
the same detailed attention to similar situations, and their manner of
colouring. Looked at on the reverse side no doubt we have something,
too, that is new added to such ordinary subjects, namely, just this
very enthusiasm, artistic insight and spirit, the soul, in which the
artist handles them, adapts them to his uses, and by doing so infuses
the enthusiasm of his activity like the breath of a new life throughout
all his work[280].

Such, then, are the essential points of view, which it was necessary to
discuss in regard to the content of painting.

(_b_) The _second_ aspect which we have next in order to examine is
connected with the more particular modes of definition, to which the
sensuous material, in so far as it has to accept in itself a given
content, has to accommodate itself.

(_α_) The _first_ of these of importance is the _linear perspective._
This is introduced as necessary, because painting has only the
superficies at its disposal and no longer, as was the case with the
bas-relief of antique sculpture, can extend its figures side by side on
one and the same plane, but has to proceed to a mode of presentation,
which finds it necessary to make the remoteness of its objects in
all their spatial dimensions merely appear as such to our senses. For
the art of painting has to unfold the content it selects, to place
the same in its various movement before our eyes, and to associate in
different ways its figures with the landscape of external Nature, its
buildings and so forth, in a wholly distinct grade of literalness to
that which sculpture in the relief is able to secure. And that which
painting in this respect cannot place before us in its actual degree of
remoteness in the realistic manner of sculpture it must present under
the illusion of reality. What we have first to notice here consists
in this that the _single_ surface which confronts painting is divided
into distinct planes, apparently remote from one another, and by this
means the contrasts of a near foreground and a remote background are
secured, which furthermore are linked together by means of a middle
distance. Inasmuch as the objects are, the more distant they are from
the vision, proportionately reduced in size, and this deduction follows
in Nature itself optical laws capable of mathematical determination,
the art of painting, too, has on its part to follow the same rules,
which, by virtue of the fact that objects are set forth on one surface,
are applicable here in a particular way. And this is the rational
ground of the so-called linear or mathematical perspective in the art
of painting, whose more detailed exposition, however, it is not our
business here to discuss.

(_β_) In the _second_ place, however, objects are not only placed
at a certain distance from one another, but they also differ in
_shape._ This particular mode of their spatial limitation by virtue
of which every object is made visible in its particular form is the
subject-matter of _draughtsmanship._ The art of drawing gives us for
the first time not merely the comparative distance of objects from
one another, but their respective configuration. Its most important
principle is _accuracy_ of form and relative distance, which of
course in the first instance is not as yet associated with ideal[281]
expression, but related simply to external appearance, and consequently
forms the purely external framework[282], an accuracy, however, which,
more particularly in the case of organic forms and their varied
movements, is on account of the fore-shortenings thereby rendered
necessary one of extreme difficulty. In so far as these two aspects
are related purely to _form_ and its spatial totality they constitute
the _plastic_ or sculpturesque features in painting, which this art,
for the very reason that it expresses what is most ideal in its
significance by means of external form, can as little dispense with as
it can in another respect remain solely content with. For its supreme
task is the employment of colour, and in such a way that in all that
is truly painting distance and shape only attain and discover their
genuine presentment by virtue of the distinctions of colour.

(_γ_) It is, therefore, _colour_, and the art of colouring, which
make the painter a painter. We dwell with pleasure, no doubt, on the
drawing, and exceptionally so on the study or sketch, as on that
which pre-eminently betrays the quality of genius; but however rich
with invention and imagination, with whatever directness the soul of
an artist may assert itself in such studies by reason of the more
transparent and mobile shell of their form, yet the fact remains
to be painting we must have colour, if the work is not to continue
abstract from the point of view of its sensuous material in the vital
individuality and articulation of its objects. We must, however, at
the same time admit that drawings and dry point drawings from the
hand of great masters such as Raphael and Albrecht Dürer are of real
importance. In fact from a certain point of view we may say that it is
just these hand drawings which carry with them the finest interest. We
find here the wonderful result that the entire spirit of the master is
expressed directly in such manual facility, a facility which places
with the greatest ease, in instantaneous work, without any preliminary
essays, the essential substance of the master's conception. The border
drawings of Dürer, for example, in the Prayer-book of the Munich
library, are of indescribable ideality and freedom. Idea and execution
appear in such a case to be one and the same thing, whereas in finished
pictures we cannot avoid the sense that the consummate result is only
secured after repeated over-paintings, a continuous process of advance
and finish.

In despite of this, however, it is only through its employment of
colour that the art of painting is able to give a real and vital
presentment to the wealth of soul-life. All the schools of painting
have, however, not retained the art of colouring at the same high
level. It is a significant fact that we may, with an exception here
and there, assert that it is only the Venetians and the Dutch[283] who
have become consummate masters in their use of it. Both peoples were
linked to the sea-coast, both situated on a low-lying land divided by
fens, streams, and canals. In the case of the Dutch we may find an
explanation in the fact that, on account of their having so perpetually
a cloud-covered horizon, their conception of a gray background became
fixed in their minds, and owing to this very gloomy prepossession they
were the more driven to study colour in all its effects and variety of
lighting, shadow, and chiaroscuro, to emphasize this and to discover
in this the main task of their artistic efforts. In contrast to that
of the Venetians and the Dutch the painting of the Italians generally,
if we except that of Correggio and one or two others, appears to be
more dry, sapless, cold, and lifeless. Looked at more closely we may
emphasize the following points in connection with the art of colouring
as the most important.

(_αα_) In the _first_ place we have the abstract basis of all colour
in _light_ and _dark._ When we posit this contrast and its transitions
by themselves without further distinctions of colour effect, we
get thereby simply the contrasts supplied us by white as light and
black as shadow together with their transitional grades and nuances,
contrasts which offer to the art of drawing its integrating quality,
appertaining as they do to the real plastic character of form, and
producing the prominence, retreat, rondure, and distance of objects.
We may incidentally mention in this connection the art of engraving on
the plate which is wholly concerned with light and shadow as such[284].
Apart from the infinite assiduity and labour it implies we find in
this highly valuable art, at the point of its supreme attainment, soul
intimately associated with the utility of great variety of form[285],
a variety which the art of bookbinding also possesses. Such an art,
however, is not wholly occupied with effects of light and shade as that
of simple draughtsmanship is; it endeavours further in its elaboration
to become distinctly a rival of painting, and in addition to light and
shade such as is purely the effect of illumination, also strives to
express those distinctions of more emphatic light and darkness which
are primarily the result of local colour; we find, for example, in
a copperplate engraving that an attempt is made by its use of light
effects to render visible the distinction between blond and black hair.

In painting, however, as already remarked, mere light and darkness
only supply the fundamental basis, albeit such a foundation is of
the greatest importance. For it is this contrast and only this which
defines the comparative prominence and retirement, the rondure, and
generally the actual appearance of form as sensuous shape, all that
we understand by _modelling._ Masters of colour in this respect
simply carry the process to the most extreme contrasts of the most
brilliant light and the deepest shadow, and merely produce thereby
their grand effects. Such contrasts are, however, only permissible in
so far as they avoid harshness, that is, in so far as they are made
within the limits of a just interplay of intermediate tones and colour
transitions, which bind the entire composition in a fluid unity and
render the finest gradations of tint possible. If such contrasts are
entirely absent the entire effect will be flat, because it is precisely
this distinction between that which is more brilliant and more obscure
which gives emphatic prominence to particular aspects of the work
and a like subordination to others. And especially in the case of
compositions having a large content, and where the distance between
objects is considerable, it is necessary to introduce the deepest
shadow in order to make the scale of light and shadow a broad one.

With regard to the closer definition of light and shade we find that
this depends more than anything else upon the mode of _lighting_
accepted by the artist. The light of day, that of morning, noon, and
evening, sunlight or moonlight, a clear or clouded sky, the light of
tempest, candle-light, a light that is veiled, or falls upon the object
or diffuses itself gradually, every conceivable mode of lighting, in
short, is possible, and the cause of every kind of effect. In treating
a subject of public interest, full of incident, a situation that at
once appeals to our common sense, the question of external lighting is
of subordinate importance. The artist will avail himself here with most
advantage of ordinary daylight, if, that is, the demands of dramatic
vividness, and a desire to emphasize particular figures and groups, or
to throw into the background others, do not render a less usual mode of
lighting necessary, which may fall in more readily with such objects.

The great painters of the earlier school have consequently as a rule
made little use of such contrasts or specific schemes of lighting.
And they did rightly, inasmuch as their emphasis was rather on the
spiritual aspect as such than on the sensuous impression of their
pictures. And on account of the pre-eminent ideality and spiritual
significance of the content they were able to dispense with the aspect
of their work which inclined more or less to the material side. In the
case of landscapes, on the contrary, and subjects of less importance
taken from ordinary life, the question of lighting makes a very
different appeal. In these important artistic and, often, artificial
and mysterious effects are indispensable. In the landscape the bold
contrasts between large masses in illumination and other parts in the
strongest shadow will receive their full effect, but tend also to
develop the artistic mannerism. Conversely we find, more especially
in the treatment of landscape, reflections of light, the flash and
its counterfeit, that wonderful echo of light, which arises from the
interplay of light and dark, and offers an ample and progressive
subject of study both to the artist and the spectator. Such a scheme
of lighting, which the artist has either by direct imitation or
imaginatively conceived in his work, can, however, by itself only be
a transient one, which is subject to rapid change. However sudden or
uncommon the lighting thus permanently retained may be, the artist must
see in the treatment of his composition, even though it be as full of
movement as possible, that the whole, despite all its variety, is not
injured by mere restlessness and wavering motive, but is throughout
clear and marked with unity.

(_ββ_) In accordance with what has already been stated the art of
painting, however, has not merely to express light and dark in its
purely abstract intension, but to add to it the distinctions of colour.
Light and shadow must be coloured light and shadow. We have therefore
in the _second_ place to discuss colour simply.

The _first_ point we have to deal with here is the _brightness_ and
_obscurity_ of particular colours respectively to one another, that
is in so far as they are operative as light and dark in their varied
relations, and either emphasize or suppress and impair their individual
effect. Red, for example, and still more yellow, is at an equal grade
of intensity more brilliant than blue. This is dependent upon the
nature of the colours themselves, which in recent times Goethe has
for the first time fully explained[286]. In other words, we find
that in blue _shadow_ is of main significance, which, in its first
operation through a brighter, but not as yet fully transparent medium,
appears to our sight as blue. The sky, for example, is dark, and on
the highest mountains it is yet darker. Seen through a transparent
but thick medium, such as the atmosphere of its lower planes is, it
appears as blue, and its brightness increases in proportion as the
air is less transparent. In the case of yellow, on the contrary,
essential brightness works through a density, which, however, suffers
this brightness to shine through it. Smoke, for example, is such an
obscuring medium; looked at in front of anything black which works
its way through it, it appears of a bluish tint, and before anything
bright it appears yellow and reddish. Genuine red is the actively
royal and concrete colour, in which blue and yellow, themselves also
extremes of opposition, press together in fusion, We may also regard
green as such a union, not, however, in a unity that is concrete, but
merely as a difference that is cancelled, as a medium of satiated and
tranquillized neutrality[287]. These colours are the purest, simplest,
and original _cardinal_ colours. We may consequently find a symbolical
significance in the way that the old masters made use of them.
Especially is this so in their use of blue and red. Blue corresponds
with the milder, sensuous, more tranquil aspect, a contemplation which
is rich in feeling, in so far as it has obscurity for its principle,
and offers no resistance, whereas the brightness therein rather
suggests that which resists, produces, is alive and blithesome. Red
corresponds with what is masculine, dominant, and royal, green with
that which is indifferent and neutral. According to such symbolism for
example, the Virgin Mary is frequently clothed in red where she is
enthroned, and set before us as queen of heaven; where she is depicted
as mother, she wears a blue mantle[288]. All the other colours in
their endless variety must be regarded as mere modifications of the
above, in which we must recognize a certain degree of shadow fused
with the cardinal colours. In this sense no painter would call violet
a colour[289]. Furthermore all these colours, in their mutual relation
to each other, are respectively of greater brightness or obscurity,
a fact that the artist must bear in mind if he is not to fail in
getting the just tone which any particular section of his modelling or
distance effects ought to have. In other words we have here a source
of exceptional difficulty. In the countenance, for example, the lip is
red, the eyebrow dark, black, brown, or, if blonde, at least darker as
such than the lip; in the same way the cheeks with their reddish tint
are more brilliant in colour than the nose, with its main impression
of yellow, brownish, or greenish tint. Such portions of the face can
readily receive a greater brightness and intensity owing to this local
colour than is consonant with their modelling as parts of the whole.
In sculpture, indeed in mere drawing too, such parts of a composition
receive their light and shadow wholly in reference to their particular
form and its manner of lighting. A painter on the contrary must
accept their local colouring, and this disturbs such a relation. Such
a difficulty is even more obvious between objects more removed from
one another. For the ordinary vision of sight it is our mind which
determines the distance and form of such objects, not merely by means
of their colour appearance, but also on a variety of other grounds. In
painting, however, all that we have before us is colour, which as such
is able to interfere with that which is demanded by mere brightness and
darkness as such. The art of the painter, therefore, consists in his
ability to resolve this contradiction, and so to arrange his colours
that neither in their local tints, nor in their mutual relation in
any other way, they impair the modelling as a whole. Only if success
is secured in both respects are we likely to see the actual shape and
colour of the objects realized in perfection. With what consummate
art, for example, have the Dutch painted the sheen of satin dresses
with all their variety of reflections and gradations of shadow in
their folds, or the flash of silver, gold, copper, vessels of glass
and velvet; and in the same way we may mention the lighting a Van Eyck
gives to his jewels, gold borders, and metals. The colours by means of
which the flash of gold is presented have nothing of metallic about
them: looked at closely we merely see yellow, which by itself is of
no great brightness. The entire effect is due on the one hand to the
prominence of the form, and on the other to the contiguity of the
mutual gradations of distinct colour tones.

A further aspect in the _second_ place is the _harmony_ of the
colouring.

I have already observed that the very nature of the facts necessitates
that colour should have itself an articulated system. And this complete
result should appear. No fundamental colour should be wholly omitted,
otherwise our sense of this integrated whole is lost. To an exceptional
degree the old Italian masters and the Dutch satisfy us in this
respect. We find in their pictures blue, yellow, red, and green[290].
It is this completeness which supplies the basis of our colour harmony.
The colours, moreover, must be so arranged that not merely their
artistic contrast, but also their mediation and resolution, and a
repose and reconciliation as the result of such, is made visible to the
sight. Such effective contrast and repose in conciliated extremes is
brought about partly by the way the colours are associated, and partly
by the degree of intensity which characterizes each colour. In early
painting it was principally the Dutch school[291], which employed the
cardinal colours in their purity and their unimpaired brilliance, by
which means the harmony is rendered more difficult by reason of the
emphasis laid on contrast, but when secured should be pleasing to the
eye. Where, however, the decisive character and force of colour is
insisted on the nature of the subject-matter itself should be more
definite and simple. And by attending to this a higher degree of
harmony between colouring and content is also obtained. The important
personages, for instance, must receive the colour that is most
emphatic, and in their characterization, their entire deportment and
expression should appear more imposing than the subordinate figures,
who will receive merely the composite colours. In landscape painting
the contrast of pure cardinal colours is less pronounced. In scenes,
on the contrary, in which human figures are of most importance, and
more particularly where drapery occupies large spaces of canvas, the
more simple colours will be in their right place. In such we have a
scene taken from the world of spiritual life, in which that which is
inorganic, the natural environment, is more abstract, in other words
must not appear in its natural completeness and isolated manner of
effect, and the varied tints of landscape in all the profusion of
their gradations are less suitable. As a rule the landscape is not
so entirely fitted to the environment of human scenes as a room, or
generally that which is architectural, inasmuch as situations which
take place in the open air are in general not accepted from a class in
which the life of soul without considerable reserve is manifested. If
a man is placed before us with the open landscape around him it should
appear simply as environment. And in cases of this type it is right
to make use of colours that are exceptionally prominent. But the use
of such involves also boldness and power of execution. Sickly sweet,
overpowered[292], doting faces are not the kind for such treatment.
Such soft expressions, such over-diluted countenances, which, ever
since Mengs gave them as people are wont to think typical of ideality,
would be entirely pulverized by such decision of colour. In recent
times and among us Germans, weak faces which have essentially nothing
to say[293], carefully posed in ways that imagine themselves to possess
grace, simplicity, and imposing character, are all the fashion. This
lack of distinction, on the side of spiritual characterization, has
its counterpart in and indeed produces a similar lack of definition
in colour and tone, so that all colours are run together in one
confusion, and forceless condition of mutilation and evaporization, and
no real emphasis is laid on any. You cannot say that one suppresses
another exactly, but then none adds contrast to another. It is no
doubt a colour harmony of a kind, and frequently it impresses with
its excessive sweetness and flattering endearment, but the note of
distinction is absent. In this connection Goethe thus expresses himself
in his observations added to the translation of Diderot's essay on
painting: "Critics do not by any means admit that it is easier to make
weak colour harmonious than a strong scheme: but it stands to reason
when colour is strong, when colours are placed before us vividly,
in that case the eye will experience their harmony or discord with
greater vividness. If, however, we weaken our colours, employ some with
brilliance, others in fusion, others in obscure squalour, then it is
obvious no one will be able to say whether the picture he looks at is
harmonious or not. One thing in any case we can say of it, it lacks
distinction."

With harmony of colour, however, we have not by any means attained the
goal of the art of colouring. To reach this consummate effect, in the
_third_ place, several other aspects must not be neglected. In this
respect I will restrict my observations to three points, first, the
so-called _atmospheric perspective_, secondly, _flesh-colour_, and in
conclusion, the magic of _colour brilliancy._[294]

Linear perspective is connected in the first instance merely with
the different degrees of size, which the lines of objects possess in
their greater or less remoteness from the human eye. This alteration
and reduction of form is, however, not the only thing painting has
to reproduce. In Nature everything is affected by the presence of
atmosphere, not merely between different objects, but even different
parts of them, a difference which asserts itself in colour. This tone
of colour which thus as it were evaporates with the distance is what
constitutes _atmospheric perspective_, in so far as thereby objects
are modified partly in deliberate outline, and partly in respect to
their light and shadow and general colouring. As a rule people think
that what is nearest to the eye in the foreground is brightest, and
what lies in the background is more obscure; in truth the matter is
otherwise[295]. But lights and shadows in the foreground are strongest,
in other words the contrast between light and shade has a more powerful
effect, and outlines are more defined near to the spectator. In
proportion, however, to the degree of their remoteness, they lose in
definition of colour and form, because the contrast of their light and
shadow is gradually reduced, until finally everything disappears in
transpicuous gray. Different schemes of lighting, however, necessitate
in this respect various modes of treatment. In landscape painting more
especially, but also in other compositions, which present large spaces,
atmospheric perspective is of first importance, and the great masters
of colour have carried out by this means the most bewitching effects.

The most difficult achievement in colouring, the ideal and consummation
of its art, is the colour effect of the human flesh[296], which unites
in its perfection all other colour tones, without permitting any
particular one to be singly prominent. The healthy red in the cheeks of
youth is, no doubt, pure carmine without any admixture of blue, violet,
or yellow, but this red is itself only a flush, or rather a sheen,
which appears to rise on the surface, and imperceptibly passes into the
prevailing flesh-tints. And this is an ideal[297] commixture of all the
fundamental colours. Through the transparent yellow of the skin the red
of the arteries and the blue of the veins is visible, and along with
the light and shade and all the variety of sheen and reflection we have
further tones of gray, brown, even green, which at first sight appear
as contrary to Nature, but for all that may contribute to the justness
and truth of the effect. Moreover, this composite treatment of many
apparent tints is wholly without sheen as such, that is, it reflects
nothing alien to it on its surface; its vital quality is entirely a
result of itself and the living thing it is. It is this rendering of
that which is the life shining through the organic integument which
constitutes the main difficulty. We may compare it to a lake in the
evening glow, in which we behold the objects that it reflects[298] no
less than the clear depth and native character of water. The flash of
metal combines on the contrary, no doubt, both light of its own and
transparency, jewels both flash and are translucent, and something
similar is seen in the case of velvet and silk-stuffs, but none of
these approaches the life-conferred interfusion of colours apparent
on the surface of the living flesh. The skin of animals, whether hair
or hide, wool, and so forth, are in like manner of the most varied
colouring, but it is a colour capable of more direct and independent
definition in its parts, so that the variety is rather the result
of different surfaces and planes, it is not a single transfusion
and suffusion of many colours such as human flesh is. The nearest
approach to it perhaps is the interplay of colour visible in the
bunch of grapes, or the exquisitely tender gradations of translucent
colour in the rose. And yet even this last example is unable to give
us the counterfeit of ideal animation[299] which flesh-colour should
possess. It is this volatile emanation of the soul exhibited on a
non-transparent surface which is one of the most difficult problems of
painting. For this ideality, this reflex of the inward life of soul
must not appear on a surface as imported there, must not be pasted
there as so many streaks, hatchings, and so forth of material colour,
but seem to us itself to belong to the living whole[300], a transparent
depth, as the blue of heaven, which offers our vision no repellent
surface, but one in which we are infallibly invited to unfold. Already
Diderot, in the essay on painting translated by Goethe, expressed
himself as follows on this head: "He who once has truly felt and
secured the apparition of flesh-colour is far on his way to perfect
victory. Thousands of painters have died without such a feeling, and
many thousands more will die without doing so."

In so far as the material is concerned, by means of which this
untransparent vitality of flesh is reproduced, the first medium to
declare its suitability for such an effect was the oil-pigment. Work
in mosaics is of all the least fitting to present us such a composite
effect. Its permanency is no doubt a recommendation, but inasmuch
as it can only express colour gradations through variously coloured
glass cubes or stones placed in juxtaposition, it is wholly unable to
reproduce the intermingling flow of one unified presentment of many
colours. Fresco and tempera painting carry us considerably further in
this direction. Yet in the case of fresco-painting the colours are
put on the wet plaster with too great rapidity, so that, on the one
hand, the greatest facility and sureness of brushwork is an essential,
and, on the other, the work has to be carried out with broad adjacent
strokes, which on account of their drying so rapidly do not admit of
a fine degree of finish[301]. The same kind of difficulty meets us in
the case of tempera-painting, a process[302] which no doubt admits of
great lucidity of expression[303] and beautiful contrasts of light
and shadow, yet for all that, by reason of the fact that its medium
dries so quickly, is less adapted to the fusion and elaboration of its
effects, and necessitates an articulate surface made up of definite
strokes of the brush. The oil pigment, on the contrary, not only
permits of the most tender and subtle melting together and elaborate
fusion of colour effect, so that transitions are so imperceptible we
cannot say where one colour begins and where it leaves off, but it is,
where its component elements are properly fused and the execution of it
is as it should be, itself remarkable for a luminous quality like that
of precious stones, and it can, by virtue of its distinctions between
opaque or transparent colours[304], reproduce in a far higher degree
than tempera painting the translucency of different layers of colour.

The _third_ and last point for our consideration in this connection
is the emanation[305] and _mystery_ of colour in its entire effect.
This witchery of colour appearance will mainly be found, where the
substantive ideality of objects has become an effusion of spirit which
enters into the scheme and treatment of its coloured presentment. In
general, we may say that the magic consists in a handling of colour
by means of which we obtain an interplay of scenic effect which is
devoid of defined articulation as such, which is, in fact, simply the
result of moulding of colour in the finest degree of fluency, a fusion
of coloured material, an interplay of reflected points which pass
into one another, and are so fine and evanescent in their gradations,
so full of vital cohesion that the medium here seems already to have
entered that of musical sound. From the point of view of modelling
the mastery of chiaroscuro is part of this magic result, an aspect of
the art in which among the Italians Leonardo da Vinci and, above all,
Correggio were supreme. While introducing the very deepest shadow, the
transparency of this is not only preserved, but is carried through
imperceptible gradations to the most brilliant light. By this means
roundness in the moulding of form is complete; there is no harshness
of line or limit, but all is equable transition. Light and shadow are
not here merely in their immediate effect as such, but gleam through
one another much as a spiritual force is operative through an external
shell. It is just an effect like this we find in the artistic treatment
of colour, and the Dutch were no less than others consummate masters
of this. By virtue of this ideality, this mutual relation between the
parts, this interfusion of reflections and colour scintillations, this
alternation and evanescence of transitional tones, a breath of soul and
vitality is throughout communicated in the brilliancy, depth, the mild
and juicy illumination of colour. It is this which gives us the magic
effect of a masterpiece of colour; it is the unique gift of the genius
of the artist who is himself the magician.

(_γγ_) And this brings us to the last point we have to discuss on this
part of our subject.

We started with the _linear perspective_, we passed on then to
_drawing_ and concluded with _colour_; _first_ considering light and
shade in its relation to modelling, and, _secondly_, viewing it as
colour simply, or more accurately, as the mutual relation between
degrees of brightness and darkness in colours, regarding it, moreover,
in its aspects of harmony, atmospheric perspective, flesh-colour
and magical effect. We have now to consider more directly[306] the
_creative impulse_ of the artist in bringing about such colour effects.

The ordinary view is that the art of painting follows definite rules
in attaining its results. This is, however, only true of the linear
perspective, being as it is a wholly geometrical science, and even
in this case rules must not obtrude themselves in their abstract
stringency, if we are to preserve all that essentially contributes to
our art. And, in the second place, we shall find that artistic drawing
accommodates itself even less readily than perspective to universal
rules, but least of all is this true of colouring. Sense of colour
ought to be an artistic instinct or quality, should be as much a unique
way of looking at and composing existing tones of colour, as it should
be an essential aspect of creative power and invention. On account
of this personal equation in the production of colour, the way, that
is, the artist looks at and is active in the making of his world, the
immense variety which we find in different modes of treating, it is no
mere caprice and favourite mannerism of colouring, which is absent from
the facts _in rerum natura_, but lies in the nature of the case. Goethe
supplies us with an example of personal experience which, as confided
in his "Dichtung und Wahrheit," illustrates what I mean: "As I returned
to my cobbler's house [he had just visited the Dresden Gallery] once
more to take lunch I could scarce trust the evidence of my eyes. I
believed myself to see before me a picture of Van Ostade[307], so
complete it was, that you might have hung it there and then in the
Gallery. Composition of subject-matter, light, shadow, brown tone
of the whole, all that is admirable in this artist's pictures I saw
actually before me. It was the first time that I was aware, to such a
high degree of the power which I subsequently exercised with intention,
the power of seeing, that is, with the eyes of the particular artist,
to whose works I had just happened to devote exceptional attention.
This facility afforded me great enjoyment, but also increased the
desire from time to time to persevere in the exercise of a talent
which Nature seemed ungracious enough to disallow me[308]." This
variety in the manner of colouring is exceptionally conspicuous in the
painting of human flesh, quite apart from all modifications rendered
necessary by the mode of lighting, age, sex, situation, and the like
considerations. And for the rest, whether the subject depicted be
daily life, outside or within the interior of private houses, taverns,
churches, or other buildings, or it be that of Nature's landscape,
with its wealth of objects and colour, which finds more or less
accurate reflection in the personal essay of any particular painter,
the result cannot fail to illustrate this varied play of form and
colour effect[309], which will infallibly appear, due as it is to the
manner in which each comprehends, reproduces, and creates his own work
according to his own outlook, experience and imaginative powers.

(_c_) We have hitherto, in discussing the several points of view which
are given effect to in the art of painting, referred, _firstly_, to its
content, and _secondly_ to the sensuous medium in which such content
can be built up. We have in conclusion to define the mode under which
the artist is bound to conceive and execute his content as a painter
and under the conditions of his particular medium. We will divide the
very considerable matter which such an investigation implies in the
following manner:

_First_, we have to deal with the more _general_ distinctions in forms
of _conception_, which it will be necessary to classify and follow in
their progressive advance to richer manifestations of life.

_Secondly_, we shall have to direct attention to the more definite
aspects, which, within these general types of conception, are more
directly referable to genuine pictorial _composition_, that is, the
artistic motives apparent in the particular situation and manner of
grouping selected.

_Lastly_, we propose to review rapidly the mode of _characterization_,
which results from distinctions of subject-matter no less than modes of
conception.

(_α_) With respect to the most generally prevailing modes of artistic
conception[310], we shall find these are in some measure due to the
content which has to be depicted, and in part are referable to the
course of the art's evolution, which does not from the first seek to
elaborate all that is apparent in any subject, but rather through a
variety of stages and transitions makes itself fully mistress of Life
and its manifestations.

(_αα_) The first position which the art of painting is able to secure
still betrays its origin from sculpture and architecture: in the
_entire mode_ of its conception it is still in close association with
these arts. And this will pre-eminently be the case where the artist
restricts himself to individual figures, which he does not place before
us in the vital connections of an essentially concrete situation,
but in the simple independence of its self-repose. Out of the many
sources of content which I have indicated as adapted to painting, we
shall find religious subjects, Christ, his apostles, and the like are
exceptionally suited to such abstract treatment. Such figures as these
must necessarily be assumed to possess sufficient significance in
their isolation, to be complete in themselves, and to unfold an object
sufficiently substantive of adoration and love. Belonging to this
type, particularly in early art, we meet with examples of Christ or
his saints isolated without definite situation and environment. If we
do find the latter it mainly consists in architectural embellishments,
particularly Gothic; this is frequently the case in early Flemish or
upper German art[311]. In this relation to architecture, among the
columns and arches of which such figures as the twelve apostles and
others are frequently composed, painting does not as yet attain to the
life-like actuality of its later development, and we find that even the
figures still retain in some measure a character which inclines to the
statuesque, or to some extent do not move beyond such a general type
as we find indicated in its fundamentals by Byzantine painting. For
isolated figures of this character, devoid of any background or only
retaining a purely architectonic outline, a more severe simplicity of
colour, and a more emphatic brilliancy, is as it should be. The oldest
school of painters have consequently employed a single-tinted ground of
gold instead of a rich natural landscape, a ground which the colours
of drapery have to confront, and to which they are compelled to adapt
themselves; these are consequently more decisive and glaring than the
colours employed in the periods of Art's finest bloom, just as we find
as a rule that simple vivid colours such as red, blue, and the rest are
most pleasing to uncultivated people.

To this earliest type of conception it is that for the most part the
miracle-working pictures belong. To such as to something stupendous
man is merely placed in a relation of stupidity, from which the aspect
of their artistic merit vanishes, so that they are not brought nearer
to his conscious life in friendly guise in accordance with their vital
humanity and beauty, and the very pictures which are most revered in a
religious sense are from an artistic standpoint the most execrable.

If, however, isolated figures of this type do not supply an object
for devotion or interest as being already complete and independent
personality, their execution, carried out as it is in consonance
with the principle of statuesque conception, has no meaning at all.
Portraits, for example, are of interest to relatives who know the
man thus portrayed and his individuality. But where the personages
thus depicted are forgotten or unknown the sympathy which is excited
by their portraiture in a given action or situation, which gives
definite content to a particular character, is of a wholly different
kind to that which we find in the entirely simple type of conception
above referred to. Really great portraits, when they face us in the
fullest wealth of life all the means of art can display, possess in
this wealth itself the power to stand forth from and step out of their
frames. In looking at the portraits of Van Dyck, for example, more
particularly when the pose of the figure is not wholly full face, but
slightly turned away, the frame has struck me like the door of the
world, which the man before me enters. When consequently individuals
do not possess, as saints, angels and the like do, a characterization
which is in itself sufficiently complete and acknowledged, and are only
interesting by virtue of the definite character of a given situation,
some single circumstance or particular action, it is not suitable to
present them as independent figures. As an example of this the last
work of Kügelchen in Dresden was a composition of four heads, half
figures, namely, Christ, John the Evangelist, John the Baptist, and the
Prodigal Son. So far as Christ and John the Evangelist are concerned I
found the conception quite appropriate. But in the case of the Baptist,
and in every respect in that of the Prodigal Son, I failed to connect
with them the authentic character which could justify a treatment of
them as half-length portraits. In such cases it is essential to place
the figures in a condition of action or incident, or at least to show
them in situations, by means of which, in vital association with
external environment, they can assert the individuality which marks an
essentially exclusive whole. The head of the Prodigal Son in the above
picture expresses no doubt, very finely too, pain, profound repentance
and remorse, but the only indication we have given us that this is the
repentance of the Prodigal Son is a very diminutive herd of swine in
the foreground. Instead of a symbolical reference of this kind we ought
to see him among his swine, or at least in some other scene of his
life. The Prodigal Son, in short, does not possess for us any further
general characterization complete as such in our minds and only exists,
in so far as he is not purely allegorical, in the well-known scenes of
Biblical narrative. He should be depicted to us as leaving his father's
house, or in his misery, his repentance and return, that is, in the
concrete facts of the tale. Those swine put in the foreground do not
carry us much further than a label with "The Prodigal Son" written on
it.

(_ββ_) And generally it is obvious that painting, for the reason that
its function is to accept as its content the wealth of soul-life in all
its detail, is, to a yet greater extent than sculpture, unable to rest
satisfied with that repose on itself which is without defined situation
and the conception of a character taken by itself and alone simply. It
is bound to make the effort to exhibit such self-subsistency and its
content in specific situation, variety, and distinction of character
viewed in their mutual relations and in association with their
environment. It is, in fact, just this departure from purely eclectic
and traditional types, from the architectonic composition of figures
and the statuesque mode of conception; it is just this liberation from
all that is devoid of movement and action, this striving after a living
human expression, a characteristic individuality; it is this investment
of a content with all the detail of the ideal and external condition
that affects it which constitutes the advance of the art, in virtue of
which it secures its own unique point of view. Consequently to painting
as to no other plastic art is it not merely permitted, but it is even
required from it, that it should unfold dramatic realization, and by
the composition of its figures display their activity in a distinctly
emphasized situation.

(_γγ_) And, in the _third_ place, closely connected with this
absorption in the complete wealth of existing life and the dramatic
movement of circumstance and character, we are aware of the importance
which is increasingly attached, both in conception and execution, to
the individuality and the vital wealth of the colour aspect of all
objects, in so far as in painting we attain to the supremest effects of
vital truth which are capable of being expressed purely by colour.

This magical result of appearance can, however, be carried to such
a pitch, that in contrast to it the exhibition of content becomes a
matter of indifference, and painting tends to pass over, in the mere
charm and perfume of its colour tones, and the contrast, fusion, and
play of their harmonies, into the art of music, precisely as sculpture,
in the elaboration of its reliefs, tends to associate itself with
painting.

(_β_) What we have in the first instance now to pass in review are the
particular lines[312] that pictorial _composition_ is constrained to
adhere to in its productions when presenting to us a definite situation
and the more immediate motives referable to it by virtue of the way it
concentrates and groups together various figures and natural objects in
one self-exclusive whole.

(_αα_) What is of fundamental and pre-eminent importance here is the
happy selection of a situation adapted to the art.

In this respect the imaginative powers of the painter possess an
immeasurable field to select from, a field whose limits extend from
the simplest situation[313] of an object insignificant in itself,
such as a wreath of flowers, or a wineglass composed with plates,
bread, and certain fruits, to rich compositions of important public
events, political actions, coronation fêtes, battles, or even the Last
Judgment, in which God the Father, Christ, his apostles, the heavenly
legions, nay, our entire humanity, and earth, heaven, and hell are
brought together. And here a closer inspection will show us that we
must clearly distinguish what is truly pictorial on the one hand from
that which is sculpturesque, and on the other from what is poetical in
the sense that it is only poetry that can fully express it.

The essential difference between a _pictorial_, and _sculpturesque_
situation consists, as we have already seen, in this, that the
main function of sculpture is to place before us that which is
self-subsistent in its tranquillity, without conflict under conditions
that do not affect it, in which distinctness of definition is not the
main demand, it is only in the relief that it really begins to approach
a group composition, and an epic expanse of figures begins to represent
actions involving motion, and which imply collision of opposing forces.
The art of painting, on the contrary, only thoroughly takes up its
proper task, when it moves away from figures composed independently
of their more concrete relations, moves away from a situation that
is deficient in its elaboration, in order that it may thus pass into
the sphere of living movement, human conditions, passions, conflicts,
actions in persistent association with external environment, and even
in its composition of natural landscape is able to retain firmly
this definite structure of a given situation and its most lifelike
individuality. It was for this reason that from the first we maintained
that painting was called upon to effect the exposition of character,
soul, and ideal qualities, not in the way that this spiritual world
enables us to recognize it directly in its external shape, but in the
way it evolves and expresses its actual substance by means of _actions._

And the truth we have just mentioned is that which brings painting
into closer relation with _poetry._ Both arts have in this respect an
advantage[314], and from another point of view, also a disadvantage.
Painting is unable to give us the development of a situation, event, or
action, as poetry or music, that is to say, in a _series_ of changes;
it can only embody one moment of time. A simple reflection is deducible
from this, namely, that we must in this one moment have placed before
us the substance of the situation or action in its entirety, the very
bloom of it; consequently, that moment should be selected in which all
that preceded and followed it is concentrated in one point. In the case
of a battle, for example, this moment will be that of victory. The
conflict is still apparent, but its decisive conclusion is equally so.
The artist is able, therefore, to retain as it were the residue of the
Past, which, in the very act of withdrawal and disappearance, still
asserts itself in the Present, and furthermore can suggest what has yet
to be evolved as the immediate result of a given situation. I cannot,
however, here enlarge further on this head. The painter, however,
together with this disadvantage as against the poet, is to this extent
advantaged in that he can bring the precise scene before our vision
in all the appearance of its reality, can depict it perfectly in all
its detail. "_Ut pictura poesis erit_" is no doubt a favourite saying
which is particularly and pertinaciously advanced by theorists, and is
no doubt actually accepted and exemplified by narrative poetry in its
descriptions of the seasons, its flowers, and its landscapes. Detailed
transcription of such objects and situations is, however, not only a
very dry and tedious affair, and indeed, so far from being exhaustive,
always leaves something more to say. It is, further, contrasted with
painting, only a confusing result, because it is forced to present as
a successive series of ideas what painting sets before our vision once
and for all, so that we constantly tend to forget what has gone before
and lose it from our minds, despite the fact that it should be held
in essential relation with that which follows, inasmuch as under the
spatial condition it is in fact a part of it, and only is significant
in this association and this immediacy. It is, however, just in this
contemporaneous exposition of detail that the painter can restore that
which, in respect to the progressive series of past and future events,
he fails to secure.

There is, however, another respect in which painting yields place to
poetry and music, and that is in its lyrical quality. The art of poetry
can not only develop emotions and ideas generally as such respectively,
but also in their transitions, movement, and increased intensity. In
respect to concentrated intensity this is yet more the case in music,
which is essentially concerned with soul-movement. To represent this
painting has nothing beyond the expression of face and pose; and if it
does exclusively direct its effort, to what is actually lyrical, it
misconceives the means at hand. However much the soul's passion may
be expressed in the play of the countenance or bodily movement, such
expression should not be directly referable to emotion as such, but
to emotions in so far as they are present, with a _definite_ mode of
expression, in an event or action. The fact that it reveals ideality in
external form therefore does not connote the abstract meaning that it
makes the nature of the soul visible by means of physiognomy and form,
under the mode of which it expresses soul-life; it is rather just the
individual situation of an action, passion in some specific outburst
thereof, by means of which the emotion is unfolded and recognized.
When, therefore, it is attempted to interpret the poetical quality
of painting under the assumption that it should express the soul's
emotion directly, without a motive and action more near to it in facial
expression and pose, all that we do in such a case is to throw the art
back upon an abstraction, which its effort should precisely strive to
be rid of; we ask of it, in short, that it should master the peculiar
and just contribution of poetry; and if it attempts to do this the
result will be a barren and stale one.

I particularly insist on this point because in the exhibition of art
we had here last year (1828) several pictures from the so-called
Düsseldorf school have received much attention, the painters of which,
while displaying in their work considerable knowledge and technical
ability, have laid almost exclusive stress on this ideal aspect, on
material that is only capable of adequate presentment in poetry. The
content, for the most part borrowed from poems of Goethe or from
Shakespeare, Ariosto, and Tasso, may be generally indicated as the
ideal emotion of Love. As a rule the most capable of these pictures set
before us a pair of lovers, Romeo and Juliet, for example, or Rinaldo
and Armida, without any further situation, so that these couples have
nothing more to do and express except the fact that they are in love
with each other, in other words, they share a mutual attraction, gaze
on each other as lovers, and as lovers look yet again. Naturally in
such a case the main expression must be concentrated in the mouth and
eyes; and we may add that our Rinaldo has been so placed relatively
to his spider legs that he looks very much as though he did not know
what to do with them. They are extensions which are entirely without
meaning. Sculpture, as we have seen, dispenses with the glance of
eye, the soul-flash; painting, on the other hand, seizes on this
potent means of expression, but it must not focus everything at this
one point, it should not make the fire or the refluent languor and
yearning of the eye or soft friendliness of lips the soul and centre
of expression without any other motives. Equally defective was the
fisherman of Hübner, the theme of which was borrowed from that famous
poem of Goethe, which depicts with such wonderful depth and charm of
feeling the indefinite yearning for the repose, coolness and purity
of water. The naked fisher lad, who in this picture is being drawn
into the water, has, just as the male figures in the other pictures
have, a very prosaic looking face, such as we could not imagine, if
the features were in repose, to be capable of profound or beautiful
emotions. And, as a rule, we cannot assert of these figures, whether
male or female, that they are beautiful in a healthy sense; they, on
the contrary, merely betray the nervous excitement, weakness, and
disease of Love and emotional life generally, which people have no
business to repeat and which we would willingly, whether in life or
Art, be spared. To the same class of conception belongs the way that
Schadow, the master of this school, has depicted Goethe's Mignon. The
character of Mignon is wholly poetical. What makes her interesting is
her Past, the severity of her destiny as it affects both her inward
and outward life, the conflict of her Italian, wholly excited passion
in a soul which is still obscure to itself, which can neither decide
upon a course of action or object, and which, being this mystery
to itself, merges itself in such and yet can do itself no good. It
is this self-expression wholly divided in itself and yet retiring
into itself, and only letting us see its confusion in isolated and
unrelated eruptions, which creates the awful interest we cannot fail
to experience in her. Such a network of contradictions we may no
doubt imagine in our minds, but the art of painting is wholly unable
to, present it to us, as Schadow has attempted to do, simply by
means of Mignon's form and physiognomy, without defining further any
situation or action. We may, therefore, assert generally that the
above-mentioned pictures are conceived without any real insight for
situations, motives, and expression. It is, in short, an inseparable
condition of genuine artistic representations of painting that the
entire subject-matter should be grasped with imaginative power,
should be made visible to us in figurative form, which is expressed
and manifests its ideal quality through a series of feeling, that
is, through an action, which is of such significance to the emotion,
that each and everything in the work of art appears to be entirely
appropriated by the imagination to express the content selected. The
old Italian painters have to a conspicuous degree, no less than their
modern fraternity, depicted love-scenes, and in part borrowed the
material from poetry; but they have known how to clothe the same with
imagination and delight. Cupid and Psyche, Cupid and Venus, Pluto's
rape of Proserpine, the rape of the Sabine women, such and other
similar subjects the old masters depicted in lifelike and definite
situations, in scenes properly motived and not merely as simple emotion
conceived without imaginative grasp, without action. They have also
borrowed love scenes from the Old Testament. We may find an example
in the Dresden Gallery, a picture of Giorgione, in which Jacob, after
his long journey, greets Rachel, presses her hand and kisses her; in
the distance there stand a pair of youths by a spring, busily engaged
in watering their herds, which are feeding, a large number of them, in
the dale. Another picture presents to us Isaac and Rebecca. Rebecca
gives Abraham's carls water to drink and is recognized in doing so.
In the same way scenes are taken from Ariosto; we have Medor, for
example, writing the name of Angelica on the edge of a spring. When,
therefore, people nowadays refer to poetry in painting, this can only
mean, as already insisted, that we must grasp a subject imaginatively
and suffer emotions to unfold themselves in action; it excludes the
idea of securing feeling simply as such or endeavouring thus to express
it. Even poetry, which is capable of expressing emotion in its ideal or
spiritual substance, is unfolded in ideas, images, and descriptions.
If this art was content to abide by a mere "I love thee," repeated
eternally, as its entire expression, such a consummation no doubt,
might prove highly agreeable to those masters who have talked so much
about the poetry of poetry, but it would be the blankest prose for all
that. For art generally in its relation to emotion consists in the
apprehension and enjoyment of the same by means of the imagination,
which in poetry displays passion in its conceptions, and satisfies us
in their expression, whether that expression be lyrical, or conveyed
in epical events, or dramatic action. As a presentment of the inward
life of soul, however, in painting the mouth, eye, and pose, do not
alone suffice; we must have the total objective realization in its
concreteness to make valid and vouch for such ideality.

The main thing, then, in a picture is that it present to us a
situation, the scene of some action. And closely associated with this
we have the primary law of _intelligibility._ In this respect religious
subjects possess the supreme advantage, that they are universally
known. The annunciation of the angel, the adoration of the shepherds or
of the three kings, the repose in the flight to Egypt, the crucifixion,
burial, resurrection, no less than the legends of the saints, were
well known subjects with the public, for whom such pictures were
painted, albeit to our own generation the stories of the martyrs are
removed to some distance. For a particular church, for example, it was
mainly the biography of its patrons or its guardian saints which was
represented. Consequently it was not always the painters themselves
who selected such subjects; particular circumstances rendered such
selection inevitable for particular altars, chapels, and cloisters, so
that the place where they are exhibited in itself contributes to their
elucidation. And this is, in part, necessary, for in painting we do not
find speech, words, and names, by which interpretation of poetry may be
materially assisted to say nothing of all its other means. And in the
same way in a royal residence, council-hall, or parliament-building,
scenes of great events, important situations taken from the history of
the state, city, and building in which they are found are there, and
receive a just recognition in the place for which they were originally
painted. It is hardly likely, for instance, that in painting a picture
for one of our palaces an artist would select a subject borrowed from
English or Chinese history, or from the life of King Mithridates. It
is otherwise in picture galleries, where we have all kinds of subjects
brought together that we could wish to buy or possess as examples of
fine works of art. In such a case, of course, the peculiar relation of
any picture to a definite locale, no less than its intelligibility, so
far as it is thereby promoted, disappears. The same thing is true of
the private collection. The collector brings together just what he can
get; the principle is that of a public gallery, and his love of art or
caprice may extend in other directions.

Allegorical pictures are far inferior to those of historical content
in the matter of intelligibility; they are, moreover, for the reason
that the ideal vitality and emphatic characterization of the figures
must in great measure pass out of them, indefinite, and not motive to
enthusiasm. Landscapes and situations borrowed from the reality of
daily life, are, on the contrary, no less clear in their substantial
import than, in respect to their characterization, dramatic variety,
movement and wealth of existence, they supply a highly favourable
opportunity for inventive power and executive ability.

(_ββ_) To render the defined situation of a picture intelligible, in so
far as the artist is called upon to do this, the mere fact of its local
place of exposition and a general knowledge of its subject will not
suffice. As a general rule, these are purely external relations, under
which the work as a work of art is less affected. The main point of
real importance consists, on the contrary, in this that the artist be
sufficiently endowed in artistic sense and general talent to bring into
prominence and give form to the varied motives, which such a situation
contains, with all the bounty of invention. Every action, in which
the ideal world is manifested in that which is external, possesses
immediate modes of expression, sensuous results and relations, which,
in so far as they are actually the activities of spirit, betray and
reflect its emotion, and consequently can be utilized with the greatest
advantage as motives which contribute to the intelligibility of the
work no less than its individual character. It is, for example, a
frequent criticism of the Transfiguration picture of Raphael, that
the composition is cut up into two unrelated parts; and this from an
_objective_ standpoint is the case. We have the transfiguration on
the hill and the incident of the possessed child in the foreground.
From an ideal[315] point of view, however, an association of supreme
significance is undoubtedly present. For, on the one hand, the sensuous
transfiguration of Christ is just this very exaltation of himself
above the earth and his removal from his disciples, a removal which as
such separation ought to be made visible; and from a further point of
view the majesty of Christ is in this, an actual and particular case,
to the highest degree emphasized by the fact that the disciples are
unable to heal the possessed child without the assistance of their
Master. In this instance, therefore, this twofold action is throughout
motived, and the association is enforced before our eyes, both in its
external and ideal aspect, by the incident that a disciple expressly
points to Christ who is removed from them, and in doing so suggests the
profounder truth of the Son of God to be at the same time on Earth,
in accordance with the truth of that saying, "If two are gathered
together in my name I am in the midst of them." I will give yet another
illustration. Goethe on one occasion gave as a subject for a prize
exhibition the representation of Achilles in female garments at the
coming of Odysseus. In one drawing Achilles glances at the helmet of
the armed hero, his heart fires up at the sight, and in consequence
of this emotion the pearl necklace is broken which he wears round the
neck. A lad seeks for and picks up the pieces from the ground. Such is
an example of admirable motive.

Moreover, the artist finds he has to a more or less extent large
spaces to fill in; he requires landscape as background, lighting,
architectonic surrounding, and he has to introduce incidental figures
and objects and so forth. All this material he should apply, in so far
as it can be so adapted, as motives in the situation, and bring this
external matter into unity with his subject in such a way that it is no
longer insignificant. Two princes or patriarchs shake hands. If this
is indicative of a peace treaty, and the seal upon the same, warriors,
armed bands, and the like, preparations for a sacrifice to solemnize
the pact, will be an obviously fitting environment. If such people
happen to meet each other with a similar welcome on a journey, other
motives will be necessary. To invent the same in a way that attaches
real significance and individualization to the action, this it is which
more than anything else will test the artistic insight of the painter
so far as this aspect of his work is concerned. And in order to promote
this not a few artists have also attached symbolical relations between
background and the main action. In the composition, for example, of
the Adoration of the three Kings, we not unfrequently find the holy
Infant in His cradle beneath a ruined roof, around Him the walls of a
building falling in decay, and in the background the commencement of
a cathedral. The falling stone-work and the rising cathedral directly
suggest the victory of the Christian church over paganism[316]. In the
same way we find, not unfrequently, in pictures, more especially of
the Van Eyck school, which depict the greeting of the angel Gabriel to
Mary, flowering lilies like stamens. They indicate the maidenhood of
the mother of God.

(_γγ_) Inasmuch as in the _third_ place the art of painting, by
virtue of the principle of ideal and external variety, in which it is
bound to give clear definition to situations, events, conflicts, and
actions, is forced to deal on its way with many kinds of distinction
and contradiction in its subject-matter, whether purely natural objects
or human figures, and, moreover, receives the task to subdivide this
composite content, and create of it one harmonious whole, a way of
posing and _grouping_ its figures artistically, becomes one of the
most important and necessary claims made upon it. Among the crowd of
particular rules and definitions, however, which are applicable to
this subject, what we are able to affirm in its most general terms can
only be valid in quite a formal way, and I will merely draw attention
shortly to a few of the main points.

The earliest mode of composition still remains entirely architectonic,
a homogeneous juxtaposition of figures or a regular opposition and
symmetrical arrangement, not merely of the figures themselves, but
also their posture and movements. We may add that at this stage the
pyramidal form of grouping is much in favour. When the subject is the
Crucifixion of our Lord such shapes follow as a matter of course.
Christ is suspended on high from the cross, and at the sides we have
a group of the disciples, Mary the mother, or saints. In pictures of
the Madonna also, in which Mary is seated with her Child on a raised
throne, and we find adoring apostles, martyrs, and so forth, beneath
them on either side we have a further illustration of this form. Even
in the Sistine Madonna picture this mode of grouping is still in its
fundamental features retained. And, generally, it brings repose to the
eye because the pyramids, by virtue of its apex, makes the otherwise
dispersed association coherent, giving an external point of unity to
the group[317].

Within the limits, however, of such a generally abstract symmetrical
composition, the pose of the figures may be marked in detail by great
vividness and individuality, and equally the general expression and
movement. The artist, while using in combination the means of his art,
will have his several planes, whereby he is able more definitely to
emphasize the more important figures as against the others; and he can
in addition avail himself of his scheme of lighting and colour. The way
he will arrange his groups to arrive at this result is sufficiently
obvious. He will not, of course, place his main figures at the sides,
or place subordinate ones in positions which are likely to attract the
highest attention. And similarly he will throw the strongest light on
objects which are part of the most significant content, rather than
leave them in shadow, and emphasize with such strong light and the most
conspicuous tints objects which are incidental.

In the case he adopts a method of grouping less symmetrical, and
thereby more life-like, the artist will have to take especial pains not
to make the figures press too closely on each other, which results
in a confusion not unfrequently noticeable in certain pictures; we
should not be under the necessity of having first to identify limbs and
discover which belong to which, whether they be arms, legs, or other
properties, such as drapery, armour, and so forth. It will, on the
contrary, be wisest in the case of larger compositions, in the first
instance no doubt, to separate the whole into component parts easily
ascertained, but, at the same time, not to isolate them in dispersion
entirely. And particularly will this be advisable where we have scenes
and situations, which on their own account naturally tend to a broad
and disunited effect such as the gathering of manna in the wilderness,
market-fairs, and similar subjects.

On the above subject I must restrict myself here to these very general
observations.

(_γ_) Having thus, _firstly_, dealt with the general types of pictorial
composition, and, _secondly_, with a composition from the point of
view of selection of situations, arrangement of motives and grouping,
we will now add a few remarks upon the mode of _characterization_, by
means of which painting is to be distinguished from sculpture and its
ideal plastic character.

(_αα_) I have several times previously taken occasion to remark,
that in painting the ideal and external _particularity_ of soul-life
is admitted in its freedom, and consequently is not necessarily
that typical beauty of individualization which is inseparable from
the Ideal itself, but one which is suffered to expand in every
direction of particular appearance, by virtue of which we obtain
that which in modern parlance is called _characteristic._ Critics
have generally referred to "the characteristic" thus understood as
the distinctive mark of modern art in its contrast to the antique;
and, in the significance we are here attaching to the term, no doubt
the above contrast is just. According to our modern criterion Zeus,
Apollo, Diana, and the rest are really not characters at all in this
sense, although we cannot fail to admire their infinitely lofty,
plastic, and ideal individualities. We already find a more articulate
individualization is approached by the Homeric Achilles, the Agamemnon
and Clytemnestra of Aeschylus[318], or the Odysseus, Antigone, and
Ismene in the type of spiritual development which by word and deed
Sophocles unfolds to us, a definition in which these figures subsist in
what appears to be consonant with their substantive nature, so that we
can no doubt discover the presentment of character in the antique if
we are prepared to call such creations characters. Still in Agamemnon,
Ajax, Odysseus, and the rest, the individualization remains throughout
of a generalized type, the character of a prince, of frantic rage, of
cunning in its more abstract determinacy. The individual aspect is in
the result closely intertwined with the general conception, and the
character is merged in an individualization of ideal import. The art
of painting, on the contrary, which does not restrain particularity
within the limits of such ideality, is more than anything else occupied
with developing the entire variety of that aspect of particularization
which is accidental, so that what we have now set before us, instead of
those plastic ideals of gods and men, is _particular people_ viewed in
all the varied appearance of their accidental qualities. Consequently
perfection of corporeal form, and the fully realized consonancy of
the spiritual or ideal aspect with its free and sane existence, in a
word, all that in sculpture we referred to as ideal beauty, in the
art of painting neither make the same claim upon us, nor generally
are regarded as the matter of most importance, inasmuch as now it is
the ideality of soul-life itself, and its manifestation as conscious
life which forms the centre of interest. In this more ideal sphere
that realm of Nature is not so profoundly insistent. Piety of heart,
religion of soul can, no less than ethical sense, and activity in
fact did in the Silenus face of Socrates, find a dwelling in a bodily
form which, viewed on the outside simply, is ugly and distorted. No
doubt in expressing spiritual beauty, the artist will avoid what is
essentially ugly in external form, or will find a way to subdue and
illumine it in the power of the soul which breaks through it, but he
cannot for all that entirely dispense with ugliness[319]. For the
content of painting, as we have above depicted it at length, includes
within itself an aspect, for which it is precisely the abnormal and
distorted traits of human figures and physiognomy, which are most able
to express. This is no other than the sphere of what is bad and evil,
which in religious subjects we find mainly represented by the common
soldiers, who take a part in the passion of Christ, or by the sinners
and devils in hell. Michelangelo was pre-eminent in his delineation of
devils. In his imaginative realization, though we find he passes beyond
the scale of ordinary human life, yet at the same time an affinity with
it is retained. However much notwithstanding the impersonations which
painting sets before us necessarily disclose an essentially complete
whole of characteristic realization, we will not go so far as to
maintain that we cannot find in them an analogue of that which we refer
to as the Ideal in the most plastic type of art[320]. In religious
subjects, no doubt, the feature of all importance is that of pure Love.
This is exceptionally so in the case of the Virgin mother, whose entire
life reposes in this love; it is more or less the same thing with the
women who accompany the Master, and with John, the disciple of Love. In
the expression of this we may also find the sensuous beauty of forms
associated, as is the case with Raphael's conceptions. Such a close
affinity must not, however, assert itself merely as formal beauty, but
must be spiritually made vital through the most intimate expression of
soul-life, and thereby transfigured; and this spiritual penetration
must make itself felt as the real object and content. The conception,
too, of beauty, has its real opportunity in the stories of Christ's
childhood and those of John the Baptist. In the case of the other
historical persons, whether apostles, saints, disciples, or wise men
of antiquity, this expression of an emphasized intensity of soul-life
is rather simply an affair of particular critical situations, apart
from which they are mainly placed before us as independent characters
of the actual world of experience, endowed with force and endurance of
courage, faith and action, so that what most determines the gist of
their characters in all its variety is an earnest and worthy manliness.
They are not ideals of gods, but entirely individualized human
ideals; not simply men, as they ought to be, but human ideals[321],
as they actually are in a certain place, to which neither particular
definition of character is wanting, nor yet a real association
between such particularity and the universal type which completes
them. Michelangelo, Raphael and Leonardo da Vinci, in his famous Last
Supper, have supplied examples of this type, in the composition of
which we find an entirely different quality of worth, majesty and
nobility present than in those presented by other painters[322]. This
is precisely the point at which painting meets on the same ground with
the ancients, without, however, sacrificing the character of its own
province.

(_ββ_) Inasmuch, moreover, as the art of painting, to the fullest
extent among the plastic arts, acknowledges the claim of the specific
form, and the individualized characterization to assert itself, so
above all we find here the transition to real _portraiture._ We should
be therefore wholly in the wrong if we condemned portrait painting
as incompatible with the lofty aims of art. Who indeed could desire
to lose the great number of excellent portraits painted by the great
masters? Who is not, quite apart from the artistic merits of such
works, curious to have definitely substantiated to their vision this
actual counterfeit of the idea of famous personalities, their genius,
and their exploits, which they may have otherwise had to accept from
history. For even the greatest and most highly placed man was, or is,
a veritable individual, and we desire to see in visible shape this
individuality, and the spiritual impression of it in all its most
actual and vital characteristics. But apart from objects, which lie
outside the purview of art, we may assert in a real sense, that the
advances in painting from its imperfect essays consist in nothing so
much as this very elaboration of the _portrait._ It was, in the first
instance, the pious and devotional sense which brought into prominence
the ideal life of soul. A yet finer art added new life to this sense by
adding to its product reality of expression and individual existence;
and with this profounder penetration into external fact the inward
life of spirit, the expression of which was its main object, was also
enhanced and deepened. In order, however, that the portrait should
be a genuine work of art the unity of the spiritual individuality
must, as I have already stated, be stamped upon it, and the spiritual
impression of the characterization must be the one mainly emphasized
and made prominent. Every feature of the countenance contributes
to this result in a conspicuous degree, and the fine instinct for
detecting such in the artist will declare itself by the way in which
he makes visible the unique impression of any personality by seizing
and emphasizing precisely those traits, and parts in which this
distinctive personal quality is expressed in its clearest and most
vitally pregnant embodiment. In this respect a portrait may be very
true to Nature, executed with the greatest perseverance, and yet
entirely devoid of life, while a mere sketch[323], a few outlines from
the hand of a master, may be infinitely more vivacious and arresting
in its truth. Such a study should, however, by indicating the lines or
features of real significance, reflect that character in its structural
completeness[324], if on the simplest scale, which the previous
lifeless execution and insistence upon crude fact glosses over and
renders invisible. The most advisable course, as a rule, is to maintain
a happy mean between such studies, and purely natural imitation. The
masterly portraits of Titian are of this type. The impression such
make on us is that of a complete personality. We get from them an
idea of spiritual vitality, such as actual experience is unable to
supply. The effect is similar to that afforded by the description of
great actions and events in the hands of a truly artistic historian.
We obtain from such a much loftier and vitally true picture of the
facts than any we could have taken from the direct evidence of our
senses. Concrete reality is so overburdened with the phenomenal, that
is incidental or accidental detail, that we frequently cannot see the
forest for the trees, and often the most important fact slips by us as
a thing of common or daily occurrence. It is the indwelling insight
and genius of the writer which first adds the quality of greatness
to events or actions, presenting them fully in a truly historical
composition, which rejects what is purely external, and only brings
into prominence that through which that ideal substance is vitally
unfolded. In this way, too, the painter should place before us the
mind[325] and character of the impersonation by means of his art. If
success is fully attained we may affirm that a portrait of this qualify
is more to the mark, more like the personality thus conceived than the
real man himself is. Albrecht Dürer has also executed portraits of
this character. With a few technical means the traits are emphasized
with such simplicity, definition, and dignity, that we wholly believe
ourselves to be facing spiritual life itself. The longer we look at
such a picture, the more profoundly we penetrate into it, the more it
is revealed to us. It reminds one of a clear-cut drawing, instinct
with genius, which completely gives expression to the characteristic,
and for the rest is merely executive in its colour and outlines in
so far as the same may make the characterization more intelligible,
apparent, and finished as a whole, without entering into all the
importunate detail of the facts of natural life. In the same way also
Nature in her landscape paints every leaf, branch, and blade to the
last shadow of a line or tint. Landscape painting, on the contrary,
has no business to attempt such elaboration, but may only follow her
subject to a principle of treatment, in which the expression of the
whole is involved, which emphasizes detail, but nevertheless does not
copy slavishly such particulars in all their threads, irregularities
and so forth, assuming it is to remain essentially characteristic
and individual work. In the human face the drawing of _Nature_ is
the framework of bone in its harsh lines, around which the softer
ones are disposed and continue in various accidental details. Truly
characteristic _portraiture_, however, despite all the importance we may
rightly attach to these well defined lines, consists in other traits
indicated with equal force, the countenance in short as _elaborated by
the creative artist._[326] In this sense we may say of the portrait
that it not only can, but that it ought to flatter, inasmuch as it
neglects what pertains to Nature's contingency, and only accepts that
which contributes to the characteristic content of the individual
portrayed, his most unique and most intimate self. Nowadays we find it
the fashion to give every kind of face just a ripple of a smile, to
emphasize its amiability, a very questionable fashion indeed, and one
hard to restrain within the limit imposed. Charming, no doubt; but the
merely polite amiability of social intercourse is not a fundamental
trait of any character, and becomes in the hands of many artists only
too readily the most insipid kind of sweetness.

(_γγ_) However compatible with portraiture the course of painting
may be in all its modes of production it should, however, make the
particular features of the face, the specific forms, ways of posing,
grouping, and schemes of colour consonant with the actual situation, in
which it composes its figures and natural objects in order to express a
content. For it is just this content in this particular situation which
should be portrayed.

Out of the infinitely diversified detail which in this connection we
might examine I will only touch upon one point of vital importance. It
is this that the situation may either be on its own account a passing
one, and the emotion expressed by it of a momentary character, so that
one and the same individual could express many similar ones in addition
and also feelings in contrast with it, or the situation and emotion
strikes at the very heart of a character, which thereby discloses
its entire and most intimate nature. Situations and emotions of this
latter type are the truly momentous crises in characterization[327].
In the situations, for example, in which I have already referred to
the Madonna, one finds nothing, however essentially complete the
individualization of the Mother of God may be in its composition,
which is not a real factor in the embracing compass of her soul and
character. In this case, too, the characterization is such that it is
_self_-evident that she does not exist apart from what she can express
in this specific circumstance. Supreme masters consequently have
painted the Madonna in such immortal maternal situations or phases.
Other masters have still retained in her character the expression of
ordinary life otherwise experienced and actual. This expression may be
very beautiful and life-like, but this form, the like features, and a
similar expression would be equally applicable to other interests and
relations of marriage lore. We are consequently inclined to regard
a figure of this type from yet other points of view than that of a
Madonna, whereas in the supremest works we are unable to make room
for any other thoughts but that which the situation awakens in us.
It is on this ground that I admire so strongly the Mary Magdalene of
Correggio in Dresden, and it will for ever awake such admiration.
We have here the repentant sinner, but we cannot fail to see that
sinfulness is not here the point of serious consideration[328]; it is
assumed she was essentially noble and could not have been capable of
bad passions and actions. Her profound and intimately self-imposed
restraint therefore can only be a return to that which she really is,
what is no momentary situation, but her entire nature. Throughout this
entire composition, whether we look at form, facial expression, dress,
pose, or environment, the artist has therefore not in the slightest
degree laid a stress on those circumstances, which might indicate sin
and culpability; she has lost the consciousness of those times, and
is entirely absorbed in her present condition, and this faith, this
instinct, this absorption appears to be her real and complete character.

Such a complete reciprocity between soul-life and external
surroundings, determinacy of character and situation, the masters
of Italy have illustrated with exceptional beauty. In the example
I have already referred to of Kügelchen's picture of the Prodigal
Son, on the contrary, we have no doubt the remorse of repentance and
grief expressed to the life; but the artist has failed to secure the
unity of the entire character, which, apart from such an aspect of
it, he possessed, and of the actual conditions under which such was
depicted to us. If we examine quietly such features, we can only find
in them the physiognomy of any one we might chance to meet on the
Dresden bridge or anywhere else. In the case of a real coalescence of
character with the expression of a specific situation such a result
would be impossible; just as, in true genre-painting, even where
the concentration is upon the most fleeting moments of time, the
realization is too vivid to leave room for the notion that the figures
before us could ever be otherwise placed or could have received other
traits or an altered type of expression.

These, then, are the main points we have to consider in respect to
the content and the artistic treatment in the sensuous material of
painting, the surface, that is, and colour.



3. HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF PAINTING


In our consideration of this _third_ section of our subject we are
unable to confine ourselves, as we have hitherto done, to a wholly
general examination of the content and purport appropriate to painting,
and the mode of configuration, which follows from its principle, for
in so far as this art is built up on the particularity of characters
and their situation, and upon form and its pose, colour, and so
forth, we are compelled to fix in our minds and discuss the _actual
reality_ of this art's separate productions. No study of painting is
complete that does not take into its survey and is unable to enjoy
and criticize the pictures themselves, in which the aspects of it we
have examined are enforced. This is a general rule in the case of all
art, but it applies with exceptional force to painting among those we
have up to the present considered. In the case of architecture and
sculpture, where the embrace of the content is more restricted, the
means of exposition and configuration are to a less extent stamped
with wealth and distinctive modification, and the particular aspects
of their definition are simpler and more radical, we can more readily
avail ourselves of copies, descriptions, and casts. It is essential
in dealing with the art of painting that we should see the actual
works themselves. In this case mere descriptions, however important
they may be in a subsidiary sense, will not suffice. In the infinite
variety, however, of its explication, the various aspects of which are
united in particular works of art, these works appear to us in the
first instance as a mere motley array, which, by reason of the fact
that our review of it is based upon no principle of classification,
is only to a small extent able to disclose to us the unique quality
of individual pictures. And it follows from this that galleries, as
a rule, if we are not already able to connect with each picture our
knowledge of the country, period, school, and master to which it
belongs, is simply a collection without meaning, in which we lose
ourselves. The most profitable arrangement for study and enjoyment with
our eyes is therefore an exhibition based on _historical sequence._ A
collection of this kind, co-ordinated in relation to such a principle,
unique and invaluable of its class, we shall shortly be able to admire
in the picture gallery of the royal museum in this city[329]. In
this we shall not only possess a historical survey of the technique
of art in its stages of development, but shall have set before our
minds, as an essential process with a history, that articulation of
its ideal content in the distinctions of its schools, their various
subject-matter, and their different modes of artistic conception and
treatment. It is only through having given us a survey as consonant
as this is with that vital process that we can form an idea from its
origins in traditional and eclectic types, of the living growth of
art, its search after expression and individual characteristic, its
liberation from the inactive and tranquil station of its figures, that
we can appreciate its progress to dramatic movement, grouping, and all
the wealth and witchery of its colour, or finally learn to distinguish
its schools, which either to some extent treat similar subject-matter
in a way peculiar to themselves, or are distinct from each other by
reasons of the variety of their respective content.

A historical development of painting such as that referred to is of as
great importance to _scientific_ observation and exposition as it is
to accurate study. The content of art as I have presented it, namely,
the elaboration of its material, the distinct and fundamental changes
in the mode of its conception, we find all this and more receives thus
for the first time its concrete coherence in a sequence and under
a classification which corresponds with the facts. It is therefore
incumbent on us to glance at this process, if only by way of emphasis
to what most immediately arrests attention.

In general the advance consists in this, that it originates in
_religious_ subjects conceived still in a _typical_ way, with simple
architectonic arrangement and unelaborated colour. After this, in
an increasing degree of fusion with religious situations, we get
actuality, vital beauty of form, individuality, depth of penetration,
charm and witchery of colouring, until Art finally turns its attention
to the world itself, makes itself master of Nature, the daily
occurrence of ordinary life, or what is of significance in national
history whether present or past, or portraiture and anything else
down to the merest trifle and the least significant fact, and with
an enthusiasm equal to that it devoted to the religious ideal, and
pre-eminently in this sphere secures not merely the most consummate
result of technical accomplishment, but also a treatment and execution
which is most full of life and personality. This progress is followed
in clearest outline if we take in succession the schools of Byzantine,
Italian, Flemish, Dutch, and German painting, after noting the most
prominent features of which briefly we shall finally indicate the
transition to the art of music[330].

(_a_) In our review of Byzantine painting we may remark to start with
that the practice of painting among the Greeks was to a definable
degree always carried on; and examples of antique work contributed
to the greater excellence of its results relatively to posture,
draping, and other respects. On the other hand the touch of Nature
and life wholly vanished from this art; in facial types it adhered
strictly to tradition; in its figures and modes of expression it
was conventional and rigid; in its general composition more or less
architectonic. We find no trace of natural environment and a landscape
background. The modelling, by means of light and shadow, brilliance
and obscurity, and their fusion, no less than perspective and the
art of lifelike grouping, either were not elaborated at all, or to a
very slight extent. By reason of this strict adherence to a single
acknowledged type independent artistic production had little room for
its exercise. The art of painting and mosaic frequently degenerated
into a mere craft, and became thereby lifeless and devoid of spirit,
albeit such craftsmen, equally with the workers on antique vases,
possessed excellent examples of previous work, which they could imitate
so far as pose and the folding of drapery was concerned. A similar
type of painting spread its sombre influence over the ravaged West
and more particularly in Italy. Here, however, although in the first
instance with beginnings of little strength, we are even at an early
date conscious of an effort to break away from inflexible forms and
modes of expression, and to face, at first, however, in a rough and
ready way, a development of loftier aim. Of Byzantine pictures we
may, on the contrary, affirm, as Herr von Rumohr[331] has maintained
of Greek Madonnas and images of Christ that "it is obvious even in
the most favoured examples, their origin was that of the mosaic, and
artistic elaboration was rejected from the first." In other words[332]
the Italians endeavoured even before the period of their independent
art development in painting, and in contrast to the Byzantines to
approximate to a more spiritual conception of Christian subjects.
The writer above-named draws attention also as noteworthy support of
his contention to the manner in which the later Greeks and Italians
respectively represented Christ on crucifixes. According to this writer
"the Greeks, to whom the sight of terrible bodily suffering was of
common occurrence, conceived the Saviour suspended on the Cross with
the entire weight of his body, the lower part of the body swollen and
the slackened knees bent to the left, the bowed head contending with
the pains of an awful death. Their subject was consequently in its
essentials bodily suffering. The Italians, on the contrary, in their
more ancient monuments, while we must not overlook the fact that the
representation of the Virgin Mary with her Child no less than the
Crucified is only of rare occurrence, were accustomed to depict the
figure of the Saviour on the cross adopting, so it appears to us,
the idea of the victory of the spiritual, not as in the former case
the death of the body. And this unquestionably nobler conception
asserts itself at an early date in the more favoured parts of Western
Europe[333]." With this sketch I must here rest content.

(_b_) We have, however, _secondly_, another characteristic of art to
consider in the earlier development of Italian painting. Apart from
the religious content of the Old and New Testament and the biographies
of martyrs and saints, it borrows its subjects in the main from Greek
mythology, very seldom, that is, from the events of national history,
or, if we except portraits, from the reality of contemporary life,
and equally rarely, and only at a late stage and exceptionally, from
natural landscape. Now that which it before all contributes to its
conception and artistic elaboration of the subject-matter of religion
is the _vital reality_ of spiritual and corporeal existence, relatively
to which at this stage all its forms are embodied and endowed with
animation. For this vitality the essential principle on the spiritual
side is that natural delightfulness, and on the corporeal side is
that beauty which is consonant with physical form, a beauty which
independently, as beautiful form, already displays innocence, buoyancy,
maidenhood, natural grace of temperament, nobility, imagination,
and a loving soul. If there is further added to a _naturel_ of this
type the exaltation and adornment of the soul in virtue of the ideal
intimacy of religion and the spiritual characteristics of a profounder
piety established as a vitalizing principle of soul-life in this
essentially more admitted and inviolable province of spiritual
redemption[334],--in such a case we have presented to us thereby an
original harmony of form and its expression, which, wherever it is
perfected, vividly reminds us in this sphere of romantic art and
Christian art of the pure Ideal of art. No doubt also within a new
accord of this type the inward life of the heart will be predominant;
but this inward experience is a more happy, a purer heaven of the
soul, the way of return to which form what is sensuous and finite, and
the return to God, albeit the passage may be through a travail in the
profounder anguish of repentance and death, is, however, less saturated
with trouble and its insistency. And the reason of this is that the
pain is concentrated in the sphere of soul, of idea, of faith, without
making a descent into the region of passionate desire, intractable
savagery, obstinate self-seeking and sin, and only arriving at the
hardly won victory through smiting down such enemies of the blessed
state. It is rather a transition of ideal permanence[335], a pain of
the inward life, which feels itself as such suffering rather simply
in virtue of its enthusiasm, a suffering of more abstract type, more
spiritually abundant, which has as little need to brush away bodily
anguish as we have to seek signs in the characterization of its bodily
presence and physiognomy of obstinacy, uncouthness, crookedness, or the
traits of superficial and mean natures, in which an obstinate conflict
is first necessary, before such are meet to express real religious
feeling[336] and piety. This more benign[337] intimacy of soul, this
more original consonancy of exterior forms to ideal experience of this
kind is what creates the charming clarity and the untroubled delight,
which the genuinely beautiful works of Italian painting excite and
supply. Just as we say of instrumental music that there is tone and
melody in it, so, too, we find that the pure song of soul floats here
in melodious fusion over the entire configuration and all its forms.
And as in the music of the Italians and in the tones of their song,
when the pure strains ring forth without a forced utterance, in every
separate note and inflection of sound and melody, it is simply the
delight of the voice itself which rings out; so, too, such an intimate
personal enjoyment of the loving soul is the fundamental tone of their
painting[338]. It is the same intimacy, clarity, and freedom which
meet us again in the great Italian poets. To start with this artistic
resonance of rhymes in their terzets, canzonets, sonnets, and stanzas,
this accord, which is not merely satisfied to allay its thirst for
reverberation in the one repetition, but repeats the echo three times
and more, this is itself a euphony which streams forth on its own
account and for the sake of its own enjoyment. And a like freedom is
stamped upon the spiritual content. In Petrarch's sonnets, sestets, and
canzonets it is not so much the actual possession of their subject,
after which the heart yearns; it is not the consideration and emotion
which are involved in the actual content of the poem as such, and which
is therein necessarily expressed; rather it is the expression itself
which constitutes the source of enjoyment. It is the self-delight of
Love, which seeks its bliss in its own mourning, its laments, its
descriptions, memories, and experience; a yearning, which is satisfied
in itself as such, and with the image, the spirit of those it loves,
is already in full possession of the soul, with which it longs to
unite itself. Dante, too, when conducted by his master Virgil through
hell and hell-fire, gazes at what is the culmination of horror, of
awfulness; he is fearful, he often bursts into tears, but he strides
on comforted and tranquil, without affright and anxiety, without the
sullenness and embitterment which implies "these things should not
be thus." Nay, even his damned in hell receive the blessedness of
eternity. _Io eterno duro_ is inscribed over the gates of hell. They
are what they are, without repentance and longing; they do not speak
of their sufferings; they are as immaterial to us as they are to them,
for they endure for ever. Rather they are absorbed simply in their
personal experience and actions, secure of themselves as rooted in the
same interests, without lamentation and without yearning[339].

When we have grasped this trait of happy independence and freedom of
the soul in love we shall understand the character of the greatest
Italian painters. It is in this freedom that they are masters of the
detail of expression, and situation. On the wings of this tranquillity
of soul they can maintain their sovereignty over form, beauty, and
colour. In their most defined presentation of reality and character,
while remaining wholly on the earth and often only producing portraits,
or appearing to produce such, what we have are pictures of another sun,
another spring. They are roses which are equally heavenly blossoms.
And, consequently, we find that in their beauty we do not have merely
beauty of form, we do not have only the sensuous unity of soul
impressed on sensuous corporeal shapes; we are confronted with this
very trait of reconciled Love in every mode, feature, and individuality
of character. It is the butterfly, the Psyche[340], which in the
sunlight of its heaven, even hovers round stunted flowers[341]. It is
only by virtue of this rich, free, and rounded beauty that they are
able to unfold the ideals of the antique art's more recent perfection.

Italian art has, however, not immediately and from the first attained
to such a point of perfection; it had in truth a long road to traverse
before it arrived there. And yet, despite this, the purity and
innocence of its piety, the largeness of the entire conception, the
unassuming beauty of form, this intimate revelation of soul[342], are
frequently and above all in the case of the old Italian masters most
conspicuous where the technical elaboration is still wholly incomplete.
In the previous century it was fashionable to depreciate these earlier
masters, and place them on one side as clumsy, dull, and barren[343].
It is only in more recent times that they have been once more rescued
from oblivion by savants and artists; but the wonder and imitation thus
awakened has run off into the excess of a preference which tends to
deny the advances of a further development in mode of conception and
presentment, and can only lead astray in the opposite direction.

In drawing the reader's more close attention to the more important
phases in the development of Italian art up to this period of its
fullest perfection, I will only briefly emphasize the following points
which immediately concern the characterization of the essential aspects
of painting and its modes of expression.

(_α_) After the earliest stage of rawness and barbarism the Italians
moved forward with a fresh impetus from that in the main craftsmanship
type of art which was planted by the Byzantines. The compass of
subjects depicted was, however, not extensive, and the distinctive
features of the type were austerity, solemnity, and religious
loftiness. But even at this stage--I am quoting the conclusions of
Herr von Rumohr--who is generally recognized as an authority upon
these earlier periods[344], Duccio, the Sienese, and Cimabue, the
Florentine, endeavoured to assimilate the few remains of antique
drawing, which was grounded on laws of perspective and anatomical
precision, and so far as possible, to rejuvenate the same in their own
genius. They "instinctively recognized the value of such drawings, but
strove to soften the extreme insistence[345] of their ossification,
comparing such insufficiently comprehended traits with the life such
as we find it in fact or suggestion when face to face with their own
productions[345]." Such are merely the first and mediating efforts of
art to rise from the inflexibility of a type to lifelike and individual
expression.

(_β_) The _further_ step of advance consists in the complete severation
from those previous Greek examples, in the full acceptance, relatively
both to the entire conception and execution of what is distinctively
human and individual, and along with this in the profounder suitability
of human characters and forms which was gradually evolved to express
the religious content thus to be expressed.

(_αα_) It is here before all we must draw attention to the great
influence which Giotto and his pupils exercised. Giotto, along with the
changes he effected in respect to modes of conception and composition,
brought about a reform in the art of preparing colours. The later
Greeks probably, such at least is the result of chemical analysis, made
use of wax either as a medium of colour, or as a kind of varnish[346],
and from this we get the yellow-green and obscure general tone, which
is not sufficiently explained by the action of lamplight[347]. Giotto
wholly dispensed with this glutinous medium of the Greek painters, and
used instead, when preparing his colours[348], the clarified milk of
young shoots, unripe figs, and other less oliginous limes[349], which
Italian painters of the early Middle Ages had used, very likely even
before they strenuously imitated the Byzantines[350]. A medium of this
kind had no darkening effect on the colours, but left their luminosity
and clarity unimpaired. Still more important was the reform effected by
Giotto in Italian painting with respect to selection of subjects and
their manner of presentment. Ghiberti himself praises Giotto for having
abandoned the rude style of the Greeks, and without leaning in this
direction to an excess having introduced the truth and grace of Nature.
Boccaccio, too, says of him that Nature is unable to create anything
that Giotto could not imitate to the point of deception[351]. In
Byzantine pictures we can hardly detect a trace of natural appearance.
It was Giotto, then, who concentrated his attention on what is present
and actual, and compared the forms and effects which he undertook to
exhibit with Life as it existed around him. And we may associate with
this tendency the fact that during the times of Giotto not only do we
find that the state of society was more free and intent on enjoyment,
but that the veneration of several later saints took its rise then,
saints whose lives more or less fell in that period[352]. It was such
Giotto utilized particularly in emphasizing the truthful presentment of
the subjects of his art; there was, in fact, thus the further demand
suggested by the content itself that he should bring into prominence
the natural features of the bodily presence and exhibit more defined
characterization, action, passion, situation, pose, and movement. What
we find, however, to a relative degree disappears from this attempt
is that imposing religious seriousness which is the fundamental
characteristic of the phase of art which it followed[353]. The things
of the world receive a stage and a wider opportunity for expression;
and this is illustrated by the way Giotto, under the influence of his
age, found room for burlesque along with so much that was pathetic.
In this connection Herr von Rumohr states rightly, "Under conditions
of this description I am at a loss to understand how certain critics,
who have exclusively insisted on this feature of Giotto's work, can so
overestimate Giotto's tendency and performance by claiming it as the
most sublime effort of modern art[354]." It is a great service of the
above-named critic to have once more placed in a true light the point
of view from which Giotto can be justly appreciated; he throughout
makes us careful to see, that in this tendency of Giotto to humanize
and towards realism he never really, as a rule, advances beyond a
comparatively subordinate stage in the process.

(_ββ_) The advance of painting continued under the manner of
conception for which Giotto was in the main responsible. The typical
representation of Christ, the apostles, and the more important
events which are reported us by the evangelists, were more and more
thrust into the background. Yet in another direction the embrace of
subject-matter was for that reason extended. As our author expresses
it: "All artists engaged in depicting the various phases in the life
of latter-day saints, such as their previous worldliness, the sudden
awakening of conscience, their entrance into the life of piety and
asceticism, the miracles of their lives, more particularly after their
decease, in the representation of which, as is to be expected from
the external conditions of the art, the expression of the effect upon
the living exceeded any suggestion of invisible powder[355]." Add
to this that the events of the Life and Passion of Christ were not
neglected. The birth and education of Christ, the Madonna with her
Child were exceptionally favoured subjects, and were invested with a
more life-like domesticity, touched with a more intimate tenderness,
revealed to us in the medium of human feeling, and, moreover, to quote
yet further: "In the problems[356] suggested by the Passion it was
not so much the sublime and the triumph as simply the pathetic aspect
which was emphasized, a direct consequence of the enthusiastic wave of
sympathy with the earthly sufferings of the Saviour, to which Saint
Francis, both by example and teaching, had communicated a vital energy
hitherto unheard of."

In respect to a yet further advance towards the middle of the fifteenth
century, we have to lay exceptional stress on two names, Masaccio and
Fiesole. In the progressive steps through which the religious content
was vividly carried into the living forms of the human figure and
the animated expression of human traits Herr von Rumohr[357] draws
attention to two essential aspects as of most importance. The one is
the increase of rondure in all forms to which it applies; the other
he indicates as "a profounder penetration into the articulation, the
consistency, the most varied phases of the charm and significance
of the features of the human countenance." Masaccio and Angelico da
Fiesole between them were the first to contribute effectively to
the solution of this artistic problem, the difficulty of which in
its entirety exceeded the powers of any one artist of that period.
"Masaccio was mainly occupied with the problem of chiaroscuro, and the
rounding and effective articulations of groups of figures. Angelico da
Fiesole, on the other hand, devoted himself to sounding the depths of
ideal coherence, that indwelling significance of human features, the
mine of whose treasure he was the first to open to painting[358]." The
effort of Masaccio was not so much one in the direction of grace as
in that of imposing conception, manliness, and under the instinctive
need for unity of the entire composition. The impulse of Fra Angelico
was that of religious intensity, a love severed from the world, a
cloistral purity of emotion, an exaltation and consecration of the
soul. Vasari assures us in his account of him that he never commenced
work without prayer, and never depicted the sufferings of the Redeemer
without bursting into tears[359]. We have, then as aspects of this
advance of painting a more exalted vitality and realism: but, on the
other hand, the depth of piety, the ingenuous devotion of the soul
in its faith overran itself and overpowered the freedom, dexterity,
naturalism, and beauty of the composition, pose, drapery, and colour.
If the later development was able to attain to a far more exalted and
complete expression of the spiritual consciousness, yet the epoch we
are now considering has never been surpassed in purity and innocence
of religious feeling and serious depth of conception. Many pictures of
this time may very well, by reason of the fact that the forms of life,
which are used to depict the religious intensity of soul-life, do not
appear fully adequate to this expression, give us something like a
repulse; from the point of view, however, of spiritual emotion, which
is the most vital source of these works of art, we have still less
reason to fail to acknowledge the naive purity, the intimacy with the
most profound depths of the truly religious content, the assuredness
of faithful love even under oppression and in grief, and oft, too,
the charm of innocence and blessedness, inasmuch as the epochs that
followed it, however much in other aspects of artistic perfection
they made a step forwards, yet for all that never secured again the
perfection of these previous excellencies, when once it had been lost.

(_γγ_) A _third_ aspect attaches to the further development of the
art, in addition to those already discussed, which may be described
as the wider embrace of it relatively to the subjects accepted
for presentation by the new impulse. Just as what was regarded as
sacred had from the very commencement of Italian painting approached
more closely to reality by reason of the fact that men whose lives
fell about the time of the painters themselves were declared to be
saints, so too Art received into its own sphere other aspects of
reality and present life. Starting from that earliest phase of pure
spirituality and piety, an art whose aim was wholly absorbed in the
expression of such religious emotions, painting proceeded more and
more to associate the external life of the world with its religious
subject-matter. The gladsome, forceful self-reliance of the citizen
in the midst of his professional career, the business and the craft
that was bound up with such qualities, the freedom, the manly courage
and patriotism, in one word, his weal in the vital activities of
the Present, all this newly-awakened sense of human delight in the
virtues of civil life and its cheer and humour[360], this harmonized
sympathy with what was actual in both its aspects of ideal life[361]
and the external framework of the same, all this it was which entered
now into his artistic conceptions and modes of presenting such and
was made valid therein. It is in this spirit that the enthusiasm
for landscape backgrounds, views of cities, environment of church
buildings and palaces becomes a real instinct of artistic life; the
living portraits of famous savants, friends, statesmen, artists, and
other persons remarkable in their day for their wit and vivacity find
a place in religious compositions; traits borrowed from both civil and
domestic life are utilized with a greater or less degree of freedom
and dexterity; and if, no doubt, the spiritual aspect of the religious
content remained the foundation of all, yet the expression of piety was
no longer exclusively isolate, but is linked together with the more
ample life of reality and the open stage of the world[362]. No doubt we
must add that by reason of this tendency the expression of religious
concentration and its intimate piety is weakened, but art required also
this worldly element in order to arrive at its culminating point.

(_γ_) Out of this fusion of the more embracing reality of life with
the ideal material of religious emotion arose a new problem for
genius to solve, the complete solution of which was reserved for the
great masters of the sixteenth century. The supreme aim now was to
bring the intimate life of soul, the seriousness and the loftiness
of religious emotion into harmony with the animation, the actual
presence of characters and forms both in its corporeal and spiritual
aspect, in order that the bodily configuration in its pose, movement,
and colour, may not simply remain an external framework, but become
itself essentially an expression of spirit and life, and by virtue of
that expression, made throughout all its parts wholly the reflex of
soul-life no less than of external form, reveal a beauty without break
or interruption.

Among the masters of most distinction, who set before themselves such
an aim, we should pre-eminently mention Leonardo da Vinci. It was he,
who, by virtue of his artistic thoroughness, his almost over-refined
passion for detail, his exquisite delicacy of mind and feeling, not
only penetrated further than any other[363] into the mysteries of the
human form and the secrets of its expression, but, through his equally
profound knowledge of all the technique of a painter, attained to an
extraordinary infallibility in the employment of all the means that his
researches and practice had placed within his reach. And, along with
this, he was able to retain a reverential seriousness in composing his
religious subjects, so that his figures, however much they present to
us the ideal of a more complete and rounded actuality, and disclose
the expression of sweet, smiling joyfulness in facial traits and the
delicate rhythm of drapery, do not thereby dispense with the dignity,
which the worth and truth of religion demand[364].

The most unflecked quality[365] of perfection reached in this direction
was, however, that first attained by Raphael. Herr von Rumohr assigns
more particularly to the artists of the Umbrian School dating from
the middle of the fifteenth century a mysterious fascination, which
no sympathetic nature can resist, and endeavours to find the source
of this attraction in the depth and tenderness of feeling no less
than the marvellous unity into which these painters knew how to bring
memories from the oldest essays of Christian art of a style only very
partially understood by them[366] with the milder conceptions of a
later time, and in this respect proved themselves superior to the
Tuscan, Lombard, and Venetian fellow artists of that period[367]. It
was just this expression of "flawless purity of soul and absolute
surrender to the yearning and enthusiastic flow of tender feeling" to
which Pietro Perugino, the master of Raphael, devoted his artistic
efforts, and succeeded by doing so in fusing the objectivity and
vitality of external forms, throughout all its actual realization and
in every detail, an aim which had previously received the most marked
attention in the elaborate work of the Florentines. Starting from
the work of Perugino, to whose artistic taste and style he appears
to have consistently adhered in his early work, Raphael proceeded
yet further to realize to the most consummate degree the demand of
the ideal above indicated. In other words we find united in him the
highest ecclesiastical feeling for the themes of religious art and a
complete knowledge and enthusiastic respect for natural phenomena in
all the animation of their colour and shape together with an insight
fully as great for the beauty of the antique. This great admiration
for the idealistic beauty of the ancients did not bring him in any
way to imitate and adapt to his work the forms which Greek sculpture
had elaborated in their perfection. What he seized from it was simply
the general principle of their free beauty which in his hands was
throughout suffused with a more individual vitality more applicable
to his art and with a type of expression more deeply informed with
soul-life, and at the same time with an open, blithesome clarity and
thoroughness, in all the detail of the presentment that up to his
time was as yet unknown among Italian artists. In the elaboration and
consistent fusion and coherence of this ideal atmosphere he reached
the highest point of his attainment. On the other hand, in the magical
charm of chiaroscuro, in the exquisite tenderness and grace of
soul-expression, of forms, movements, and grouping, it is Correggio
who most excels, while the incomparable greatness of Titian consists
in the wealth of natural life that he displays, the illuminating
bloom, fervency, warmth, and power of his colour. We know nothing more
delightful than the _naïveté_ of Correggio's not so much natural as
religious and spiritual grace, nothing more sweet than his smiling,
unconscious beauty and innocence[368].

The artistic perfection of these great masters is a culminating point
of art such as could only be mastered by one nation in the course of
historical development.

(_c_) _Thirdly_, in so far as the question is that of German painting
we may affiliate that which is entirely German with that of Flemish
or Dutch painters. The general distinction between the above schools
and that of the Italians, consists in this, that neither the Germans
nor the painters of the Netherlands were willing as a creation of
their own to attain to the free ideal forms and modes of expression
characteristic of Italian art, or were able to progress to that
spiritually transfigured type of beauty which is essentially the result
of such. What they did elaborate, however, was, in one aspect of it,
the expression of depth of emotion and the austere seclusion of the
individual soul, and, from another point of view, they attach to this
intensity of faith the separate definition of individual character in
the broader significance of it, that is to say, one which does not
merely disclose the fact of its close interest with the claims of faith
and salvation, but also shows how the individuals represented are
affected by the concerns of the world, how they are buffeted by the
cares of life, and in this severe ordeal have gained worldly wisdom,
fidelity, consistency, straightforwardness, the constancy of chivalry
and the sterling character of good citizens. Agreeably to this more
restricted and depressed vision of the detail of life we find here,
and it is particularly conspicuous in the German school, from the
beginning, in deliberate contrast with the purer forms and characters
of the Italians, rather the expression of a formal obstinacy of
stubborn natures, which either oppose themselves to God with energetic
defiance and brutal wilfulness, or are forced to impose restraint on
themselves in order that they may, with sore travail, wrest themselves
from their limitations and uncouthness, and fight their way to the
reconciliation of religion; consequently the deep wounds which they
inflict on their spiritual life inevitably contribute to the visible
expression of their piety. In illustrating this more closely I will
merely draw attention to certain prominent features, which are
important indications of the contrast between the older Flemish school
and the upper German and more recent Dutch masters of the seventeenth
century.

(_α_) Among the early Flemish masters, the brothers Van Eyck, Hubert,
and John are exceptionally distinguished in the early half of the
fifteenth century, and it is only recently that their true merits
have once more been established. It is now an established fact that
they discovered, or at least they were the first to fully perfect,
the process of oil-painting. Looking at the great advance they made
we must now assume that a distinct series of stages in the course of
this progress to its culmination could be set forth. We have, however,
no historical array of works of art preserved for us whereby we could
illustrate such a gradual process. We are face to face at one moment of
time with the beginning and final consummation. For painting of greater
excellence than that of these two brothers it is almost impossible
to imagine. Moreover, the works that have come down to us, in which
the mere type is already dispensed with and overcome, not merely
display a grand mastery in drawing, arrangement, grouping, ideal and
exterior characterization, enthusiasm, clarity, harmony, and delicacy
of colouring, dignity and repose of composition; but we must add that
the entire wealth of painting respectively to nature's environment,
architectonic accessories, backgrounds, splendour and variety of
material, drapery, style of weapons, ornamentation, and much besides,
is already treated with such fidelity, with such an instinctive sense
of what is pictorial, and with such a technical virtuosity, that even
later centuries, at any rate from the point of view of thoroughness
and truth, have been unable to produce any more consummate result. We
are, however, more strongly attracted by the master works of Italian
painting, if we contrast them with this Flemish school, because the
Italians, along with the completest expression of soul-life and the
religious sense, retain throughout the ideal of spiritual freedom and
imaginative beauty. The figures of Flemish art delight us, no doubt,
by virtue of their innocence, _naïveté_, and piety; nay, in the depth
of their emotional life they, in some measure, surpass the work of the
most excellent Italian artists; but the Flemish masters have never been
able to attain to a beauty of form and a freedom of soul comparable
with that of the Italians. Their Christ-babes are, in particular, badly
modelled; and for the rest their characters, whether men or women,
however strongly, subject to their dominant expression of religious
fervour, they may display a sterling character in their relation to
secular interests sanctified by the depth of their faith, nevertheless
appear to us lacking in a significance which can exalt itself over
such a piety, or rather, as dominated by it, do not appear able at the
same time to be essentially free, instinct with imagination and the
enterprise of superior qualities.

(_β_) A further aspect we shall do well to consider is the transition
from the more tranquil, reverential piety to the representation of
martyrdoms, and, in general, what is not beautiful in reality. It is
more particularly the North German masters who excel in scenes borrowed
from the Passion in which they emphasize the savagery of the soldiery,
the evil aspects of the mocking, the fierceness of the hate against
Christ during the course of His sufferings, with particular insistence
on features of ugliness and distortion, and which are intended to
denote external forms correspondent with the depravity of spirit. The
tranquil and beautiful activity of an unassuming personal piety is
thrown into the background, and the movements which are inseparable
from the situations above mentioned unfold us hideous distortions,
expressions of ferocity, and all the unbridled exhibition of passions.
Where we have the contending tumult and the uncouthness of characters
presented with such detail, it is not surprising that such pictures are
defective in the ideal harmony of their composition no less than their
colour, so that, more especially where a taste for old German paintings
first crops up, critics when thus confronted with what is, as a rule,
an inferior class of technical accomplishment, fall into many mistakes
when determining the date of their production. Thus it has been
maintained that they are previous to the more consummate pictures of
the Van Eyck period, although, for the most part, they hail from a more
recent time. However, the Upper German masters were not exclusively
occupied with works of this type, but have likewise treated a variety
of religious subjects, and, indeed--Albrecht Dürer, with others,
exemplifies this--even in scenes from Christ's Passion, have understood
how effectively to grapple with the extremes of pure savagery, and even
when treating such themes to preserve an ideal nobility and an external
independence[369] and freedom.

(_γ_) Finally, the development of German and Flemish art is
characterized in a complete identification of itself with the
_ordinary_ life of the Present; and, along with this, in a unified
system of the most varied modes of presentation, which, both in
respect to their content and technique, are distinct from one another
and independently elaborated. We have seen already the advance made
by Italian painting from the simple nobility of devotion to an
ever-increasing assertion of secular motive, which here, however, as
we pointed out in the case of Raphael, was in some measure permeated
by ecclesiastical prepossessions, and in part limited by the coherent
principle of antique beauty. We may add that the later course of
this school is not so much a dissolution of that unity in the
representation of every kind of subject-matter under the predominant
interest of the colourist as a more superficial disposition, or
rather, eclectic imitation of styles of draughtsmanship and painting.
German and Flemish art, on the contrary, has in the most definite and
exceptional degree traversed the entire scheme of content and modes
of treatment, starting from its wholly traditional church pictures,
single figures and half lengths, then on to thoughtful, pious, and
devotional subjects, until we come to that animation and extension of
the same in larger compositions and scenes, in which, however, the
free characterization of figure, the heightened vitality effected by
means of processions, retinues, incidental personages, embellishment
of garments and utensils, wealth of portraiture, architectural works,
environment, views of churches, cities, streams, forests, mountains,
is still conceived and executed as a whole subject to religious
motivation. This focal centre still persists; but we find that the
range of subjects, which had hitherto been held together in unity,
is broken into division, and the separate parts become, in the
specific singularity and contingent character of their alternations or
independent modifications, subject to every possible type of conception
and pictorial execution[370].

In order to arrive at a full appreciation of this aspect of art's
development in the present context, for we have already referred to
the point, we will pass briefly in review the national conditions
which were operative in the change. We are under the necessity to
justify, as we shall attempt to do in the following observations, a
transition from direct relations to the Church and the outlook and
pictorial modes of piety to a delight in the world simply, that is to
say, to the objects and particular phenomena of Nature, to domestic
life in its dignity, congeniality, and peaceful seclusion, to an
enjoyment of national festivities and processions, rustic dances, the
games and follies attendant upon church fêtes. Now the Reformation had
thoroughly penetrated Holland. The Dutch had become Protestants and
overcome the despotism of the Spanish Crown and Church. And what is
more we do not, if we consider the political condition here, either
find a distinguished nobility which drives forth its princes and
tyrants, or imposes laws on them, nor yet an agricultural people,
oppressed peasantry, who break free as the Swiss have done, but rather
a population which, in by far the largest proportion of it, if we
except the few brave souls that tilled the soil and its more than brave
heroes of the sea, consisted of citizens of the town, men of business,
well-to-do burghers, men who, rejoicing in their ordinary avocations,
entertained no lofty pretensions, but, as became their courage and
intelligence, with audacious reliance in God, stood up to defend the
freedom of their hardly-won liberties and the particular privileges
of their provinces, cities, and guilds, dared to oppose themselves to
all hazards without fear of the transcendent prestige of the Spanish
dominion over half the world, to bravely let their blood flow for
such an aim, and by virtue of this righteous boldness and endurance
victoriously secured both their religious and civic independence. And
if we may brand any single condition of soul-life as distinctively
_deutsch_, it is just this loyal, well-to-do, and genial citizenship,
which, in a self-respect that is without pride, in a piety which is not
merely absorbed in enthusiasm and devotion, but which is concretely
pious in the affairs of the world[371] and is homely and contented in
its abundance, remains neat and clean, and in persistent carefulness
and contentment under all circumstances, armed with its own enduring
sense of independence and freedom, is able, with loyalty to its former
life, to preserve the sterling character of its forefathers unimpaired.
This intelligent and artistically endowed people furthermore seeks
its enjoyment in the pictorial presentment of its vigorous, justly
co-ordinated, satisfying, and comfortable existence; it is all for
taking a renewed delight by means of its pictures in the cleanliness
under all conditions of its towns, houses, and domestic arrangements,
of enjoying thus its household felicity, its wealth, the generous
adornment of its wives and children, the splendour of its civic
feasts, the boldness of its seamen, the fame of its merchandise and
the shipping, in which it rides over all the seas of the world. And
it is just this instinct of orderly and cheerful existence, which the
Dutch masters emphasize also in their landscape subjects. In one word,
in all their pictorial accomplishment they succeed in combining with
freedom, and truth of conception, with their enthusiasm for what is in
appearance of inferior and momentary significance, with the freshness
of open vision and the concentration of their entire soul on all that
is most stamped with the seclusion and limitations of their life, the
most ample freedom of artistic composition, no less than the finest
feeling for accessories and the most perfect effects of studious
elaboration. From one point of view this school of painting has
developed to an incomparable degree the magic and mystery of lighting
and colour[372] generally in its scenes borrowed from war and military
life, in its tavern jollifications, in its weddings and other rustic
fêtes, in its pictures of domestic life, in its portraits, landscapes,
animals, flowers, and the rest. From another aspect it has elaborated
with a similar excellence the characterization which penetrates to
the heart of life in all the truth of which Art is capable. And
although its insistence on the insignificant and contingent includes
the expression of what is boorish, rude, and common, yet these scenes
are so permeated throughout with ingenuous lustiness and jollity,
that it is not the common in its meanness and naughtiness so much as
the gaiety and joviality which creates the artistic subject and its
content. We do not look at mean feelings and passions, but simply
what is boorish, in the sense of being rustic, near to nature, in
the poorer classes, a quality which connotes geniality, waggishness,
and comedy. In short the Ideal itself is not wholly absent from this
unperturbed easy-way-of-life. It is the Sabbath of Life, which brings
all to one level and removes all badness, simply as such. Men who are
thus so whole-heartedly of good temper can neither be wholly bad nor
mean. In this respect it is not one and the same thing, whether evil
is of purely momentary appearance in a character, or lies at its root
and essence. In the work of these Dutch painters what is humorous in a
situation cancels what is evil, and it is at once clear to us that the
characters could be something other than that in the guise of which
they are for the time being set before us[373]. A gaiety and comedy of
this description contributes much to the invaluable character of these
pictures. If pictures of this rollicking type are attempted nowadays,
the painter, as a rule, only places before us what is essentially
mean, coarse and bad without the illuminating atmosphere of a comic
situation[374]. A bad wife rails at her tipsy husband in the tavern
with all her might. In a scene of this kind we have only put before us,
as I have already remarked, the bald facts that the man is a dissipated
brute and the woman a rating wench.

If we look at the Dutch masters in this light we shall no longer
entertain the view that the art of painting should have said goodbye to
such subjects altogether, and merely confined itself to depicting the
gods of old, myths, and fables, or even Madonna pictures, crucifixions,
martyrs, popes, and saints of both sexes. What is a vital ingredient
of every work of art is inseparable also from painting, and this is
the observance of what generally concerns our humanity, the spirit
and characterization of man, in other words what man is and what
_each_ individual is. This vital grasp of the conscious life of human
nature and the external forms of its appearance, this naive delight
and artistic freedom, this freshness and cheerfulness of imaginative
sympathy, this absolute directness of execution is what constitutes
the poetry that underlies the work of the majority of the Dutch
painters of this period. In their paintings we may study and acquaint
ourselves with human nature and mankind. Nowadays, however, our artist
only too frequently will confront us with portraits and historical
pictures, at which we have only to cast a bare glance, and we see that,
while flatly contradicting the wildest dream of what is possible in
mankind or anyone in particular, he neither knows aught at all about
man or his natural colour, nor yet the modes of composition[375] in
which we may justly express that humanity[376].

[Footnote 214: _Die gesammte Menschen-brust._]

[Footnote 215: _Die in sich gediegene Individualität des Gottes._]

[Footnote 216: _Betrachtung_, here implying thought rather than vision.]

[Footnote 217: That is a unity which dissolves all difference.]

[Footnote 218: _Als Inneres._]

[Footnote 219: _Als Reflexion in sich._ Probably Hegel means simply the
ultimate fact of self-conscious life--which is to find itself in Nature
as the antithesis of the synthetic unity of the ego. This is developed
in the latter half of the sentence.]

[Footnote 220: Lit., "Is not an essentially persistent and stereotyped
(_Erstarrtes_, stiffened) individual."]

[Footnote 221: Less than sculpture.]

[Footnote 222: He may mean type of art generally, but I think the
reference here is simply to painting. The passage is an important one.]

[Footnote 223: I presume Hegel uses the word _seeligkeit_ in the
ordinary sense, not "soulfulness." The close relation with _Schmertz_
necessitates this. But the spelling suggests the other interpretation.]

[Footnote 224: Which is absent in the classical treatment.]

[Footnote 225: That is, the creative artist.]

[Footnote 226: _Innerlichkeit._ It is impossible to express Hegel's use
of this word by one expression. It combines intimacy, ideal union, and
inwardness of soul-life in its contrast to objective reality.]

[Footnote 227: That is the romantic type.]

[Footnote 228: _Die für sich seyende Subjektivität._ That is a process
that elaborates itself in independent form consonant to its own
substance.]

[Footnote 229: _Als dieses Subjekt._ That is, I assume, as the
distinctive personality of the artist. This must appear on the face of
the work as the crown of its independent type and concrete unity (_Zur
Spitze des Fürsichseyns_) but must not dominate it to the extent of
destroying all natural detail, not even to the extent of sculpture.]

[Footnote 230: _Zur Spitze des Fürsichseyns._ See note above.]

[Footnote 231: That is their union in sculpture.]

[Footnote 232: _Als solcher._ Hegel means that the universal present in
emotion is objective therein as part of the self-conscious life, but
is only presented in the concrete objective shape in the work of the
artist who therein suffers to escape the wholly personal side.]

[Footnote 233: _Sein Inneres_, his ideal substance, with more direct
reference to feeling.]

[Footnote 234: _Aus demselben in sich hineingehend._ I think what is
meant is that the material is idealized out of one of its spatial
conditions rather than that the artist selects his _medium_ in
consonance with his temperament and technique.]

[Footnote 235: That is, does not affect the stability and total effect
of the work. Of course the actual effect may vary.]

[Footnote 236: _Für diesen festen Punkt des Subjekts._]

[Footnote 237: _Die in sich besonderte Innerlichkeit._]

[Footnote 238: The distinctions in matter conditioned in Space.]

[Footnote 239: The meaning, if rather obscurely expressed, appears
to be this. The art of sculpture shows us when it treats the spatial
dimensions as essential that we must have the entire spatial form
to do this, and it shows us that if we wish to pass from the mere
presentment of bodily form to a fuller ideal quality we must contract
this exclusive appearance of physical matter.]

[Footnote 240: Lit., "Begins to be subjective." Begins to possess a
self-excluding centre of unity, _i.e._, self-identity.]

[Footnote 241: That is to the point of a real subject or ego.]

[Footnote 242: _E.g._, secure an abstract result in superficies only.]

[Footnote 243: Apart from artistic means.]

[Footnote 244: Though the statements here are suggestive, they are
obviously influenced by Hegel's belief in the false theory of light
propounded by Goethe.]

[Footnote 245: This is a direct reference to the Newtonian theory, of
course.]

[Footnote 246: _Zeichnung_ here refers to line rather than technical
excellence in draughtsmanship. It must be admitted Hegel's emphasis of
these two aspects is carried rather too far.]

[Footnote 247: The above passage is open to criticism. Hegel hardly
makes allowance for the fact that the defective technique, so far
as it is defective, of the earlier masters, was mainly due to their
state of knowledge. Art was, in a certain aspect of technique, in its
infancy. Moreover to compare Dutch landscape with that of Bellini or
Raphael is to compare things that are each unique of their kind and
not comparable. Their aim was entirely different. In such pictures as
the San Sisto Madonna of Raphael, the great Crucifixion of Tintoret,
or the Entombment of Titian it is quite impossible to maintain that
the earnestness of conception is in any way inferior to the technique,
although we have no doubt a different degree of conviction expressed by
Fra Angelico. And the classical landscape of Titian or Tintoret is of
its type supreme.]

[Footnote 248: This statement of Hegel again requires parenthesis or
at least interpretation. There is a realism such as that we find in
the most consummate work of a Titian, or the genre work of the Dutch
school, or our own Pre-Raphaelites, to say nothing of mere academical
realism, which hardly comes within his remarks. It is obvious that the
Ideal is subserved in different degrees by such examples, and in fact
to preserve that unity of conception despite the greatest elaboration,
_is_ to serve the Ideal at least in one aspect of it. Hegel, at least
in the concluding part of this paragraph, appears mainly to have in
his mind still life and the genre pictures of the Dutch, and rather
seems to overlook his own statement as to the necessity of selection
and the power to express detail by the shorthand of genius rather than
deliberate imitation.]

[Footnote 249: _Grossartigkeit._]

[Footnote 250: _Innigkeit._ Intimate ideality, inwardness.]

[Footnote 251: I am not sure what Hegel means by the expression _Nicht
das Niedrige ist zerdrückt._ If the text is correct I suppose it means
the sensuous side does not make way for a more spiritual synthesis.
What we should expect is some other verb than _zerdrückt_ such as
_ausgedrückt_, the sense being that "_though_ the mean emotion is not
expressed, and no rage, etc., is asserted, _yet_ despite of it all,"
etc. I think there must be some misprint here.]

[Footnote 252: _Ein starres Beisichseyn._ Compare the expression lower
down _affirmatives Fürsichseyn_ with which it contrasts.]

[Footnote 253: _Für sich bestehende Herz._]

[Footnote 254: _Als ein göttliches Moment._ It means an actual phase in
the Divine existence.]

[Footnote 255: An important statement. Hegel's words are _Sondern
wir müssen das geistige Daseyn im Bewusstseyn des Menschen als die
wesentliche geistige Existenz Gottes ansehn._]

[Footnote 256: A bad master at any rate for such a subject.]

[Footnote 257: This metaphor appears to me rather confused, and in
fact I do not pretend wholly to understand its meaning. I suppose the
idea is that beyond the clouds of soul-life there are the clouds that
obscure Providence. In all this passage Hegel shows his limitations as
an art student.]

[Footnote 258: _Näher._ That is our love of God is mainly through
Christ.]

[Footnote 259: _Ein bloss eingelnes Moment._ A phase that passes or
becomes relatively insignificant.]

[Footnote 260: _Innigste_, most intimate. A curious but characteristic
conclusion of Hegel.]

[Footnote 261: This analysis must be accepted of course mainly as an
analysis of the ideal proposed to us by the profoundest Christian
art. It is obviously not true of much Italian art, Titian's work for
example, and it is equally remote from many of the most probable facts
of history.]

[Footnote 262: _Die Starrheit._ The rigid or unyielding character.]

[Footnote 263: _Der Gehalt ihres Gemüths._ It is possible to see in
this analysis something rather capricious and far-fetched, and yet to
appreciate its value as an analysis of Christian love for the deceased
beloved as contrasted with pagan sentiment. The finest illustration I
myself can recollect of this is not the mother Mary at all, but the
figure of the Magdalene in Tintoret's "Deposition" in the S. Giorgio
Maggiore Church in Venice. As a matter of fact the divine mother in
sacred art is almost invariably depicted in a state of swoon under the
stress of her grief, though Tintoret's Pietà in the Brera is a notable
exception.]

[Footnote 264: I do not know this painter. For pathos I know no finer
conception of the death than that of Rembrandt's etching. Blake's
drawing, exhibited recently at Cambridge, shows us the tranquillity and
dignity of the scene more finely than any other representation.]

[Footnote 265: I presume Hegel means this by the words _die
Menschheit_, but it is a difficult passage.]

[Footnote 266: It is impossible in English to preserve the antithesis
between _bitten_ and _beten._]

[Footnote 267: _Und nichts für sich hat._ That is to say reciprocity is
of its essence. "Give and it shall be given unto you."]

[Footnote 268: _Die Gestalt_ may possibly refer to the suppliant.]

[Footnote 269: The Sistine Madonna.]

[Footnote 270: A good instance is the great Crucifixion of Fra Angelico
in the S. Mark convent in Florence.]

[Footnote 271: And a painter like Carlo Dolci or the Caracci are even
worse.]

[Footnote 272: It would perhaps have been more instructive to consider
the difference of temperament in the artist when dealing with such
subjects and its influence on his treatment. It is very far from an
obvious truth that physiognomy upon which the conflict of soul-life is
most marked loses thereby the characteristics of beauty. There is the
beauty of gnarled oak no less than that of the rose and the lily.]

[Footnote 273: _Das Beisichseyn der Liebe im Absoluten._ Lit., the
self-inherency cf Love within the Absolute.]

[Footnote 274: _Sondern auch selbständig._ He seems to mean that they
receive from this relation the subsistent individuality of spirit. This
reference to landscape is obviously very perfunctory and insufficient.]

[Footnote 275: See vol. I, p. 220.]

[Footnote 276: _Mit dem in sich particularisirten Innern._ With the
ideal complexus of particular objects as related to one subject. Their
particularity is due to their characterization, and that is dependent
on idealization.]

[Footnote 277: _Diess Verwachsenseyn._ Lit., this growing up with.]

[Footnote 278: There is, however, the aspect of consummate execution
which in itself is a very real source of artistic enjoyment, and Hegel
rather seems to overlook this here.]

[Footnote 279: _Verzweigungen._ All off-shoots of attention or
interest.]

[Footnote 280: Of course, even in the painting of still life, artistic
composition itself implies by its selection and subordination to an
idea a new result. And the characteristic technique of a painter
inevitably has the same result.]

[Footnote 281: _Geistigen Ausdrück._]

[Footnote 282: _Grundlage._]

[Footnote 283: It is perhaps rather strange that Hegel should have
considered the Dutch and Flemish schools as pre-eminently colourists.
Apart from Rembrandt the truth is not very apparent. But he was mainly
thinking of their dexterity in the lighting of a picture and the
scintillation of colour.]

[Footnote 284: That is, as black and white and its gradations.]

[Footnote 285: It is not quite clear what is intended here by
_Vervielfältigung_, probably power of being adapted to various subject
matter and modes of expression.]

[Footnote 286: It is hardly necessary to point out that this
discussion, being based on Goethe's false theory of colour in
opposition to Newton's prismatic analysis, has no scientific value,
though historically of interest. The blueness of the sky is due to the
blue rays being detained.]

[Footnote 287: I presume by concrete unity Hegel refers in some form to
a unity that is such owing to its intrinsic nature.]

[Footnote 288: But red quite as often symbolizes enthusiasm and love,
and in Tintoret's Paradise the Virgin has the red tunic and the blue
mantle.]

[Footnote 289: As a matter of fact violet or purple is a cardinal
colour.]

[Footnote 290: Green is not a cardinal colour.]

[Footnote 291: Hegel seems to have in view the Flemish school rather
than the Dutch in the restricted sense. It is rather strange that he
should dwell on this rather than work of the Venetians such as Bellini.]

[Footnote 292: _Verschwemmte._ Carried away by a stream.]

[Footnote 293: Such as Ary Scheffer and others of the same monotony.
The flesh tints of Leighton and Poynter and many less men suffer in the
same way.]

[Footnote 294: _Farbenschein_, as Hegel uses it later on, I find it
impossible to translate in one word. In fact it is not easy to seize
precisely what he means. "Modulation of colour" partly expresses it.
But he also seems to refer to what we understand as the personal
quality of a picture or its general atmosphere, not regarded simply
as Nature's atmosphere, but as the communication of the artist's own
afflatus.]

[Footnote 295: I crossed a young landscape-artist of growing fame the
other day, who affirmed and endeavoured to express in his pictures the
conviction that colour was as strong in distance as foreground. His
pictures were of great interest, but I still think his robust theory
unsound.]

[Footnote 296: We have no English equivalent for the German _das
Incarnat_ or colour incarnate.]

[Footnote 297: _Ein ideelles Ineinander._ By ideal Hegel means
apparently that the distinctions of tint fine away beyond the grasp of
sense vision. This of course is true in all natural colouring. Possibly
he may mean that the idea of Life is contributive to the result.]

[Footnote 298: Hardly a just simile for the reason that, as Hegel
himself points out, flesh does not reflect external objects.]

[Footnote 299: _Den Schein innerer Belebung._ This expression seems
to prove that Hegel uses the word _ideel_ in its ordinary sense of
spiritual ideality.]

[Footnote 300: _Als selbst lebendiges Ganze._ The colour must appear as
itself a part of the vitality, not a mere covering.]

[Footnote 301: _Vertreibung._ What Hegel exactly means I am not sure,
probably finish by overpaintings.]

[Footnote 302: Fresco painting is strictly in tempera. I suppose Hegel
has here before him the two processes of tempera painting on the wet
wall of plaster and tempera painting on some other dry surface.]

[Footnote 303: _Zu grosser innerer Klarheit und schönen Leuchten._ I
give what appears to me to be the meaning.]

[Footnote 304: I presume Hegel understands by _Deck und Lasurfarben_
the distinction of our opaque and transparent colours such as flake
white and the madders or umbers. He clearly refers to glazes.]

[Footnote 305: _Die Duftigkeit, Magie in der Wirkung des Kolorits._
This is a difficult passage to translate, and I am not quite sure
what Hegel is aiming at. He seems to have in his mind both the ideal
atmosphere of a composition and the presence of a personal style.]

[Footnote 306: Hegel has already related the effects considered to the
artist's personality. He now endeavours to examine more closely what is
implied in the relation.]

[Footnote 307: Adriaen van Ostade, 1610-1685.]

[Footnote 308: He means painting, of course. He never passed beyond the
stage of the average amateur.]

[Footnote 309: _Spiel von Scheinen._ The play of appearance, that is,
as it strikes on different natures.]

[Footnote 310: _Malerischen Auffassung._ Here the ideas on mental
conception and artistic composition seem to be combined. But Hegel is
rather loose in his use of them.]

[Footnote 311: Hegel has doubtless Albrecht Dürer and yet earlier
German art in his mind.]

[Footnote 312: _Die besonderen Bestimmungen._ The lines of its definite
exposition.]

[Footnote 313: I adopt Hegel's generic term. But he means here little
more than delineation or composition.]

[Footnote 314: As between the art of painting and those of poetry and
music.]

[Footnote 315: _Geistig._ We may say the same thing of Tintoret's great
Golden Calf picture. But the objection to the composition as a work of
art remains more strongly than is the case with Raphael's picture.]

[Footnote 316: The same thing is a characteristic of Tintoret's
Annunciation in the S. Rocco Scuola and several pictures of Dürer.]

[Footnote 317: Fine examples of this are Rembrandt's Descent from the
Cross in the Munich Gallery, and the group of mourners in Tintoret's
Great Crucifixion.]

[Footnote 318: They have in this respect been well contrasted with the
characters of Euripides in the play of Aristophanes which particularly
emphasizes the difference between the heroic type of Aeschylus and the
realism of Euripides, "The Frogs of Aristophanes," text and translation
of B. B. Rogers; see Introd., pp. XVIII, XIX, XLV.]

[Footnote 319: As to ugliness and its treatment by Hegel, see Professor
Bosanquet's "History of Aesthetik," pp. 338, 355, and generally pp.
432-436.]

[Footnote 320: That is sculpture. Hegel calls it _im Plastischen._]

[Footnote 321: An ideal with Hegel is not necessarily an image of the
mind, but far more generally the concrete realization of life.]

[Footnote 322: He should have added Tintoretto at least. What could be
more pertinent than his Sages in the Palazzo Reale in Venice.]

[Footnote 323: Applies to the study rather than the talent exercised.]

[Footnote 324: _Aber ganze Grundbild des Charakters darstellen._]

[Footnote 325: _Den geistigen Sinn und Charakter._ He means the entire
spiritual impression, heart, soul, and intelligence, with its practical
effect in substantive character.]

[Footnote 326: I think this is implied here in Hegel's use of the words
_verarbeitet durch den Geist._ But it may mean "in the face as worked
upon the soul within the _person portrayed._"]

[Footnote 327: _Die wahrhaften absoluten Momente für die
Characteristik._]

[Footnote 328: The German expression is, "It is not a serious affair
with her sinning." I am not sure that Hegel's view here does not lean
towards the sentimentalism he generally so strongly opposes. No doubt a
clear conception of the Magdalene's character is difficult. But it is
obvious that the less stress we lay upon her sin, the less weight her
conversion carries from the religious point of view, and the less great
appears the effect of the interposition of her divine Master. Correggio
was not a master likely to penetrate profoundly into his subject.
But, on the other hand, it must be admitted that Hegel's contention
is in one aspect of it supported by the far finer conceptions of the
Magdalene in Tintoret's work. At least this great master clearly shows
us that in his view of her she was strongly emotional, heart and soul
in everything whether for good, under good influence, or for evil under
opposite direction. It is possible to understand Hegel's interpretation
as one mainly aesthetic.]

[Footnote 329: In Berlin. The statement is made in February 1829.]

[Footnote 330: The omission of the Spanish school at least omits a most
important link with modern impressionism and its close relation to that
transition to music. And it is impossible to indicate the progress of
landscape without reference to the English school.]

[Footnote 331: "Ital. Forsch.," vol. I, p. 279.]

[Footnote 332: The words _in ähnlicher Weise_ make no sense.]

[Footnote 333: "Ital. Forsch.," vol. I, p. 280.]

[Footnote 334: Literally the sense is "Which (apparently agrees with
the trait of piety) invigorates with soul that assuredness and accepted
fact (_Fertigkeit_) of existence, which is from the very first (_von
Hause aus_) more decisive (_entscheidenere_) in this province of
salvation (_des Heils_)." _Heils_ must obviously be used in the same
sense as _Heiland_ above. My translation is necessarily rather free,
but I hope I have emphasized the meaning.]

[Footnote 335: _Ein ideal bleibender Uebergang._ The transition is
rather one the soul imagines than an actual fact. "Ideal persistence"
is perhaps better.]

[Footnote 336: _Religiosität_ here used in good sense.]

[Footnote 337: Lit., "More free from struggling." Compare Saint John
and Saint Paul as examples on the higher levels.]

[Footnote 338: That is Italian painting.]

[Footnote 339: Hegel's delight in Italian opera is well known to
readers of his correspondence. In the above fine passage he to some
extent unbelts himself from his ordinary tone of rather austere
reticence.]

[Footnote 340: The distinction seems to be between the more formal
unity of personality and the peculiarly seductive charm of Italian art.
It is rather a fine one and it seems to me rather confusing. Moreover
I do not quite see the pertinency of the simile of a Psyche that is
wafted as a butterfly even round blooms that have been spoiled of
their treasure, for such I understand to be the sense of _verkümmerte
Blumen._ A butterfly comes into no active relation with such unless the
idea is pictorial decoration. But possibly Hegel was thinking of his
reference to Dante, and in that case employed the metaphor loosely,
rather too loosely I should say.]

[Footnote 341: "Stunted" is perhaps the best translation. The fault
of the simile lies in its superficiality. It does not penetrate the
conception Hegel has before him.]

[Footnote 342: Giotto, Mantegna, Carpaccio, Masaccio, would be leading
names in point here. Hegel mentions two himself lower down.]

[Footnote 343: "Ital. Forsch.," vol. II, p. 4.]

[Footnote 344: _Grelle._ That is harsh and flagrant outline.]

[Footnote 345: _Ihrer_ must refer I think to the Italians, though the
sentence might mean, "In contrast to these Greek productions."]

[Footnote 346: _Als Ueberzug._ The expression suggests it was used as a
facial glaze or varnish.]

[Footnote 347: "Ital. Forsch.," vol. I, p. 312.]

[Footnote 348: That is mixed with the attrited colour in its dryness.]

[Footnote 349: _Leimen. Leim_ is size or lime, in the compound word
_leim-farbe_ signifying distemper.]

[Footnote 350: "Ital. Forsch.," vol. II, p. 42.]

[Footnote 351: Decam. Giorn., 6. Nov. 5.]

[Footnote 352: Such as S. Francis as presented us in Giotto's great
frescoes in Assisi.]

[Footnote 353: No doubt the serious aspect is less imposingly
emphasized; but if the opinion condemned below is too sweeping it
remains the fact that we can imagine nothing more profoundly serious in
the religious sense than the frescoes in the Arena Chapel in Padua.]

[Footnote 354: "Ital. Forsch.," vol. II, p. 73.]

[Footnote 355: "Ital. Forsch.," vol. II, p. 213.]

[Footnote 356: _Aufgaben_, artistic problems, themes.]

[Footnote 357: "Ital. Forsch.," vol. II, p. 243.]

[Footnote 358: This of course is too strong a statement, and indeed is
ridiculous to anyone who has complete knowledge of the best work even
of Giotto.]

[Footnote 359: "Ital. Forsch.," vol. II, p. 252.]

[Footnote 360: The frescoes of Mantegna, and those of Ghirlandaio, we
would mention in particular the fine examples in the S. Maria Novella
church in Florence, or for Mantegna our own cartoons at Hampton Court
and the invaluable but now hopelessly ruined frescoes of Gozzoli, in
the Campo Santo of Pisa, are fine illustrations of the text.]

[Footnote 361: _Des inneren Geistes_ may here refer to the ideal
aspects of civil and domestic life, but I think Hegel is contrasting
the two extremes and it refers to the religious content.]

[Footnote 362: "Ital. Forsch.," vol. II, p. 282.]

[Footnote 363: To make this judgment in any degree a sound one we
must assume the stress is laid on the mysterious aspect of expression
and form. The genuine examples of Leonardo are so very few. But quite
apart from that unless we exclude the great triumvirate of the Venetian
school altogether Tintoret, Titian, and Veronese, the praise here given
to Leonardo as a consummate master of the technique in oil-painting can
only be received with considerable reserve and qualification.]

[Footnote 364: Compare "Ital. Forsch.," vol. II, p. 308.]

[Footnote 365: _Die reinste Vollendung._ The adjective refers to the
character of the perfection as an expression of artistic feeling and
execution.]

[Footnote 366: _Halbdeutliche Erinnerungen._ Not I think memories that
are obscure themselves so much as memories which have failed to grasp
the content of what is recollected. The expression is rather confused.]

[Footnote 367: Modern criticism would doubtless have a good deal to say
in qualification of this. The name of Bellini alone is sufficiently
suggestive.]

[Footnote 368: This emphasis on the work of Raphael and Correggio is
characteristic of the best art criticism of the times of Hegel, but
marks its limitations. Neither Raphael nor Correggio can be called
religious painters in the sense that those profound masters Tintoret
and Michelangelo were such. The essentially academic aspect of so much
of Raphael's later production is not noticed. And it is these three
great names, Titian, Tintoret, and Michelangelo, who most truly mark
the transition to our modern outlook.]

[Footnote 369: _Eine aüssere Abgeschlossenheit._ This must mean, I
think, a dignified and reserved treatment of the technique mainly of
such themes.]

[Footnote 370: The technical and somewhat long-worded aspect of Hegel's
style is here at its worst and I find it hard to make complete sense
of this doubtless unrevised passage. The main difficulty is this, that
the sentence appears to assert that "the centre" (_der Mittelpunkt_)
of religion persists (_fortbleibt_) and yet asserts in the same breath
that the informing unity is broken up. I have done my best.]

[Footnote 371: A piety which is not merely emotional, but is concrete
in active life, possesses practical content.]

[Footnote 372: See note at end of chapter.]

[Footnote 373: This appears rather to contradict what Hegel has said
before of the impression a fine picture such as Correggio's Magdalene
leaves upon us that we cannot imagine the character to be other than it
is. See note below.]

[Footnote 374: More literally, "Without the alleviating effect of what
is comic."]

[Footnote 375: I presume _die Formen_ refers here rather to the
artistic forms of grouping and composition than the traits of vital
expression. But perhaps the latter interpretation would be more natural
to the words.]

[Footnote 376: The above survey of Dutch art is of great interest, and
in its careful comparison of the type of that art with the national
development of the Dutch may be contrasted favourably with the somewhat
prejudiced criticism of such a critic as John Ruskin. At the same
time I think it must be obvious that Hegel is a little inclined to
overrate the ideal aspect of that portion of it we may indicate in
the work of painters such as Wouvermans or Teniers, many examples of
which are little removed from the defects of theme he points out in
more modern work. Also personally I should say that, if we exclude
the supreme genius of Rembrandt, he rather exaggerates their rank as
supreme colourists in respect to the scintillation, mystery, and other
effects of light. To consider that they rank above the Venetians in
this respect is wholly impossible, to say nothing of Velasquez. Rubens,
however, may add some support to the view, but he is hardly in the
school described, and Van Dyck stands with him.]




