CHAPTER VIII. ABNER'S WHALE

In a previous chapter I have referred to the fact of a bounty being
offered to whoever should first sight a useful whale, payable only in
the event of the prize being secured by the ship. In consequence of our
ill-success, and to stimulate the watchfulness of all, that bounty was
now increased from ten pounds of tobacco to twenty, or fifteen dollars,
whichever the winner chose to have. Most of us whites regarded this
as quite out of the question for us, whose untrained vision was as the
naked eye to a telescope when pitted against the eagle-like sight of the
Portuguese. Nevertheless, we all did our little best, and I know, for
one, that when I descended from my lofty perch, after a two hours'
vigil, my eyes often ached and burned for an hour afterwards from the
intensity of my gaze across the shining waste of waters.

Judge, then, of the surprise of everybody, when one forenoon watch,
three days after we had lost sight of Trinidada, a most extraordinary
sound was heard from the fore crow's-nest. I was, at the time, up at the
main, in company with Louis, the mate's harpooner, and we stared across
to see whatever was the matter, The watchman was unfortunate Abner
Cushing, whose trivial offence had been so severely punished a short
time before, and he was gesticulating and howling like a madman. Up from
below came the deep growl of the skipper, "Foremast head, there, what
d'ye say?" "B-b-b-blow, s-s-sir," stammered Abner; "a big whale right in
the way of the sun, sir." "See anythin', Louey?" roared the skipper to
my companion, just as we had both "raised" the spout almost in the glare
cast by the sun. "Yessir," answered Louis; "but I kaint make him eout
yet, sir." "All right; keep yer eye on him, and lemme know sharp;" and
away he went aft for his glasses.

The course was slightly altered, so that we headed direct for the whale,
and in less than a minute afterwards we saw distinctly the great black
column of a sperm whale's head rise well above the sea, scattering a
circuit of foam before it, and emitting a bushy, tufted burst of vapour
into the clear air. "There she white-waters! Ah bl-o-o-o-o-o-w, blow,
blow!" sang Louis; and then, in another tone, "Sperm whale, sir; big,
'lone fish, headin' 'beout east-by-nothe." "All right. 'Way down
from aloft," answered the skipper, who was already half-way up the
main-rigging; and like squirrels we slipped out of our hoops and down
the backstays, passing the skipper like a flash as he toiled upwards,
bellowing orders as he went. Short as our journey down had been, when we
arrived on deck we found all ready for a start. But as the whale was
at least seven miles away, and we had a fair wind for him, there was no
hurry to lower, so we all stood at attention by our respective boats,
waiting for the signal. I found, to my surprise, that, although I was
conscious of a much more rapid heart-beat than usual, I was not half so
scared as I expected to be--that the excitement was rather pleasant
than otherwise. There were a few traces of funk about some of the others
still; but as for Abner, he was fairly transformed; I hardly knew the
man. He was one of Goliath's boat's crew, and the big darkey was quite
proud of him. His eyes sparkled, and he chuckled and smiled constantly,
as one who is conscious of having done a grand stroke of business, not
only for himself, but for all hands. "Lower away boats!" came pealing
down from the skipper's lofty perch, succeeded instantly by the rattle
of the patent blocks as the falls flew through them, while the four
beautiful craft took the water with an almost simultaneous splash.
The ship-keepers had trimmed the yards to the wind and hauled up the
courses, so that simply putting the helm down deadened our way, and
allowed the boats to run clear without danger of fouling one another. To
shove off and hoist sail was the work of a few moments, and with a fine
working breeze away we went. As before, our boat, being the chief's,
had the post of honour; but there was now only one whale, and I rather
wondered why we had all left the ship. According to expectations, down
he went when we were within a couple of miles of him, but quietly and
with great dignity, elevating his tail perpendicularly in the air, and
sinking slowly from our view. Again I found Mr. Count talkative.

"Thet whale 'll stay down fifty minutes, I guess," said he, "fer he's
every gill ov a hundred en twenty bar'l; and don't yew fergit it." "Do
the big whales give much more trouble than the little ones?" I asked,
seeing him thus chatty. "Wall, it's jest ez it happens, boy--just ez
it happens. I've seen a fifty-bar'l bull make the purtiest fight I ever
hearn tell ov--a fight thet lasted twenty hours, stove three boats, 'n
killed two men. Then, again, I've seen a hundred 'n fifty bar'l whale
lay 'n take his grooel 'thout hardly wunkin 'n eyelid--never moved ten
fathom from fust iron till fin eout. So yew may say, boy, that they're
like peepul--got thair iudividooal pekyewlyarities, an' thars no
countin' on 'em for sartin nary time." I was in great hopes of getting
some useful information while his mood lasted; but it was over, and
silence reigned. Nor did I dare to ask any more questions; he looked so
stern and fierce. The scene was very striking. Overhead, a bright blue
sky just fringed with fleecy little clouds; beneath, a deep blue sea
with innumerable tiny wavelets dancing and glittering in the blaze of
the sun; but all swayed in one direction by a great, solemn swell that
slowly rolled from east to west, like the measured breathing of some
world-supporting monster. Four little craft in a group, with twenty-four
men in them, silently waiting for battle with one of the mightiest of
God's creatures--one that was indeed a terrible foe to encounter were he
but wise enough to make the best use of his opportunities. Against
him we came with our puny weapons, of which I could not help reminding
myself that "he laugheth at the shaking of a spear." But when the man's
brain was thrown into the scale against the instinct of the brute, the
contest looked less unequal than at first sight, for THERE is the secret
of success. My musings were very suddenly interrupted. Whether we had
overrun our distance, or the whale, who was not "making a passage," but
feeding, had changed his course, I do not know; but, anyhow, he broke
water close ahead, coming straight for our boat. His great black head,
like the broad bow of a dumb barge, driving the waves before it, loomed
high and menacing to me, for I was not forbidden to look ahead now.
But coolly, as if coming alongside the ship, the mate bent to the
big steer-oar, and swung the boat off at right angles to her course,
bringing her back again with another broad sheer as the whale passed
foaming. This manoeuvre brought us side by side with him before he
had time to realize that we were there. Up till that instant he had
evidently not seen us, and his surprise was correspondingly great. To
see Louis raise his harpoon high above his head, and with a hoarse grunt
of satisfaction plunge it into the black, shining mass beside him up to
the hitches, was indeed a sight to be remembered. Quick as thought he
snatched up a second harpoon, and as the whale rolled from us it flew
from his hands, burying itself like the former one, but lower down the
body. The great impetus we had when we reached the whale carried us a
long way past him, out of all danger from his struggles. No hindrance
was experienced from the line by which we were connected with the whale,
for it was loosely coiled in a space for the purpose in the boat's bow
to the extent of two hundred feet, and this was cast overboard by the
harpooner as soon as the fish was fast. He made a fearful to-do over it,
rolling completely over several times backward and forward, at the same
time smiting the sea with his mighty tail, making an almost deafening
noise and pother. But we were comfortable enough, while we unshipped the
mast and made ready for action, being sufficiently far away from him
to escape the full effect of his gambols. It was impossible to avoid
reflecting, however, upon what WOULD happen if, in our unprepared and
so far helpless state, he were, instead of simply tumbling about in an
aimless, blind sort of fury, to rush at the boat and try to destroy it.
Very few indeed would survive such an attack, unless the tactics were
radically altered. No doubt they would be, for practices grow up in
consequence of the circumstances with which they have to deal.

After the usual time spent in furious attempts to free himself from our
annoyance, he betook himself below, leaving us to await his return, and
hasten it as much as possible by keeping a severe strain upon the line.
Our efforts in this direction, however, did not seem to have any effect
upon him at all. Flake after flake ran out of the tubs, until we were
compelled to hand the end of our line to the second mate to splice his
own on to. Still it slipped away, and at last it was handed to the third
mate, whose two tubs met the same fate. It was now Mistah Jones' turn to
"bend on," which he did with many chuckles as of a man who was the last
resource of the unfortunate. But his face grew longer and longer as the
never-resting line continued to disappear. Soon he signalled us that he
was nearly out of line, and two or three minutes after he bent on his
"drogue" (a square piece of plank with a rope tail spliced into its
centre, and considered to hinder a whale's progress at least as much as
four boats), and let go the end. We had each bent on our drogues in the
same way, when we passed our ends to one another. So now our friend was
getting along somewhere below with 7200 feet of 1 1/2-inch rope, and
weight additional equal to the drag of sixteen 30-feet boats.

Of course we knew that, unless he were dead and sinking, he could not
possibly remain much longer beneath the surface. The exhibition of
endurance we had just been favoured with was a very unusual one, I was
told, it being a rare thing for a cachalot to take out two boats' lines
before returning to the surface to spout.

Therefore, we separated as widely as was thought necessary, in order
to be near him on his arrival. It was, as might be imagined, some time
before we saw the light of his countenance; but when we did, we had no
difficulty in getting alongside of him again. My friend Goliath, much
to my delight, got there first, and succeeded in picking up the bight of
the line. But having done so, his chance of distinguishing himself was
gone. Hampered by the immense quantity of sunken line which was attached
to the whale, he could do nothing, and soon received orders to cut the
bight of the line and pass the whale's end to us. He had hardly obeyed,
with a very bad grace, when the whale started off to windward with us at
a tremendous rate. The other boats, having no line, could do nothing to
help, so away we went alone, with barely a hundred fathoms of line, in
case he should take it into his head to sound again. The speed at which
he went made it appear as if a gale of wind was blowing and we flew
along the sea surface, leaping from crest to crest of the waves with
an incessant succession of cracks like pistol-shots. The flying spray
drenched us and prevented us from seeing him, but I fully realized
that it was nothing to what we should have to put up with if the wind
freshened much. One hand was kept bailing the water out which came so
freely over the bows, but all the rest hauled with all their might upon
the line, hoping to get a little closer to the flying monster. Inch
by inch we gained on him, encouraged by the hoarse objurgations of the
mate, whose excitement was intense. After what seemed a terribly long
chase, we found his speed slackening, and we redoubled our efforts. Now
we were close upon him; now, in obedience to the steersman, the boat
sheered out a bit, and we were abreast of his labouring flukes; now the
mate hurls his quivering lance with such hearty good-will that every
inch of its slender shaft disappears within the huge body. "Layoff! Off
with her, Louey!" screamed the mate; and she gave a wide sheer away from
the whale, not a second too soon. Up flew that awful tail, descending
with a crash upon the water not two feet from us. "Out oars! Pull, two!
starn, three!" shouted the mate; and as we obeyed our foe turned to
fight. Then might one see how courage and skill were such mighty factors
in the apparently unequal contest. The whale's great length made it no
easy job for him to turn, while our boat, with two oars a-side, and
the great leverage at the stern supplied by the nineteen-foot steer-oar
circled, backed, and darted ahead like a living thing animated by the
mind of our commander. When the leviathan settled, we gave a wide berth
to his probable place of ascent; when he rushed at us, we dodged him;
when he paused, if only momentarily, in we flew, and got home a fearful
thrust of the deadly lance.

All fear was forgotten now--I panted, thirsted for his life. Once,
indeed, in a sort of frenzy, when for an instant we lay side by side
with him, I drew my sheath-knife, and plunged it repeatedly into the
blubber, as if I were assisting is his destruction. Suddenly the mate
gave a howl: "Starn all--starn all! oh, starn!" and the oars bent like
canes as we obeyed. There was an upheaval of the sea just ahead; then
slowly, majestically, the vast body of our foe rose into the air. Up,
up it went, while my heart stood still, until the whole of that immense
creature hung on high, apparently motionless, and then fell--a
hundred tons of solid flesh--back into the sea. On either side of that
mountainous mass the waters rose in shining towers of snowy foam, which
fell in their turn, whirling and eddying around us as we tossed and fell
like a chip in a whirlpool. Blinded by the flying spray, baling for very
life to free the boat from the water with which she was nearly full,
it was some minutes before I was able to decide whether we were still
uninjured or not. Then I saw, at a little distance, the whale lying
quietly. As I looked he spouted, and the vapour was red with his blood.
"Starn all!" again cried our chief, and we retreated to a considerable
distance. The old warrior's practised eye had detected the coming climax
of our efforts, the dying agony or "furry" of the great mammal. Turning
upon his side, he began to move in a circular direction, slowly at
first, then faster and faster, until he was rushing round at tremendous
speed, his great head raised quite out of water at times, clashing his
enormous jaws. Torrents of blood poured from his spout-hole, accompanied
by hoarse bellowings, as of some gigantic bull, but really caused by the
labouring breath trying to pass through the clogged air passages. The
utmost caution and rapidity of manipulation of the boat was necessary to
avoid his maddened rush, but this gigantic energy was short-lived. In a
few minutes he subsided slowly in death, his mighty body reclined on one
side, the fin uppermost waving limply as he rolled to the swell, while
the small waves broke gently over the carcass in a low, monotonous surf,
intensifying the profound silence that had succeeded the tumult of
our conflict with the late monarch of the deep. Hardly had the flurry
ceased, when we hauled up alongside of our hard-won prize, in order to
secure a line to him in a better manner than at present for hauling
him to the ship. This was effected by cutting a hole through the tough,
gristly substance of the flukes with the short "boat-spade," carried for
the purpose. The end of the line, cut off from the faithful harpoon that
had held it so long, was then passed through this hole and made fast.
This done, it was "Smoke-oh!" The luxury of that rest and refreshment
was something to be grateful for, coming, as it did, in such complete
contrast to our recent violent exertions.

The ship was some three or four miles off to leeward, so we reckoned she
would take at least an hour and a half to work up to us. Meanwhile, our
part of the performance being over, and well over, we thoroughly enjoyed
ourselves, lazily rocking on the gentle swell by the side of a catch
worth at least L800. During the conflict I had not noticed
what now claimed attention--several great masses of white,
semi-transparent-looking substance floating about, of huge size and
irregular shape. But one of these curious lumps came floating by as we
lay, tugged at by several fish, and I immediately asked the mate if he
could tell me what it was and where it came from. He told me that, when
dying, the cachalot always ejected the contents of his stomach, which
were invariably composed of such masses as we saw before us; that he
believed the stuff to be portions of big cuttle-fish, bitten off by the
whale for the purpose of swallowing, but he wasn't sure. Anyhow, I could
haul this piece alongside now, if I liked, and see. Secretly wondering
at the indifference shown by this officer of forty years' whaling
experience to such a wonderful fact as appeared to be here presented,
I thanked him, and, sticking the boat-hook into the lump, drew it
alongside. It was at once evident that it was a massive fragment of
cuttle-fish--tentacle or arm--as thick as a stout man's body, and with
six or seven sucking-discs or ACETABULA on it. These were about as large
as a saucer, and on their inner edge were thickly set with hooks or
claws all round the rim, sharp as needles, and almost the shape and size
of a tiger's.

To what manner of awful monster this portion of limb belonged, I could
only faintly imagine; but of course I remembered, as any sailor would,
that from my earliest sea-going I had been told that the cuttle-fish was
the biggest in the sea, although I never even began to think it might be
true until now. I asked the mate if he had ever seen such creatures as
this piece belonged to alive and kicking. He answered, languidly, "Wall,
I guess so; but I don't take any stock in fish, 'cept for provisions
er ile--en that's a fact." It will be readily believed that I vividly
recalled this conversation when, many years after, I read an account by
the Prince of Monaco of HIS discovery of a gigantic squid, to which
his naturalist gave the name of LEPIDOTEUTHIS GRIMALDII! Truly the
indifference and apathy manifested by whalers generally to everything
except commercial matters is wonderful--hardly to be credited. However,
this was a mighty revelation to me. For the first time, it was possible
to understand that, contrary to the usual notion of a whale's being
unable to swallow a herring, here was a kind of whale that could
swallow--well, a block four or five feet square apparently; who lived
upon creatures as large as himself, if one might judge of their bulk by
the sample to hand; but being unable, from only possessing teeth in one
jaw, to masticate his food, was compelled to tear it in sizable pieces,
bolt it whole, and leave his commissariat department to do the rest.

While thus ruminating, the mate and Louis began a desultory conversation
concerning what they termed "ambergrease." I had never even heard
the word before, although I had a notion that Milton, in "Paradise
Regained," describing the Satanic banquet, had spoken of something
being "grisamber steamed." They could by no means agree as to what this
mysterious substance was, how it was produced, or under what conditions.
They knew that it was sometimes found floating near the dead body of a
sperm whale--the mate, in fact, stated that he had taken it once from
the rectum of a cachalot--and they were certain that it was of great
value--from one to three guineas per ounce. When I got to know more of
the natural history of the sperm whale, and had studied the literature
of the subject, I was so longer surprised at their want of agreement,
since the learned doctors who have written upon the subject do not seem
to have come to definite conclusions either.

By some it is supposed to be the product of a diseased condition of the
creature; others consider that it is merely the excreta, which, normally
fluid, has by some means become concreted. It is nearly always found
with cuttle-fish beaks imbedded in its substance, showing that these
indigestible portions of the sperm whale's food have in some manner
become mixed with it during its formation in the bowel. Chemists have
analyzed it with scanty results. Its great value is due to its property
of intensifying the power of perfumes, although, strange to say, it
has little or no odour of its own, a faint trace of musk being perhaps
detectable in some cases. The Turks are said to use it for a truly
Turkish purpose, which need not be explained here, while the Moors are
credited with a taste for it in their cookery. About both these latter
statements there is considerable doubt; I only give them for what they
are worth, without, committing myself to any definite belief in them.

The ship now neared us fast, and as soon as she rounded-to, we left
the whale and pulled towards her, paying out line as we went. Arriving
alongside, the line was handed on board, and in a short time the prize
was hauled to the gangway. We met with a very different reception this
time. The skipper's grim face actually looked almost pleasant as he
contemplated the colossal proportions of the latest addition to our
stock. He was indeed a fine catch, being at least seventy feet long,
and in splendid condition. As soon as he was secured alongside in the
orthodox fashion, all hands were sent to dinner, with an intimation to
look sharp over it. Judging from our slight previous experience, there
was some heavy labour before us, for this whale was nearly four times as
large as the one caught off the Cape Verds. And it was so. Verily those
officers toiled like Titans to get that tremendous head off even the
skipper taking a hand. In spite of their efforts, it was dark before the
heavy job was done. As we were in no danger of bad weather, the head
was dropped astern by a hawser until morning, when it would be safer
to dissect it. All that night we worked incessantly, ready to drop with
fatigue, but not daring to suggest, the possibility of such a thing.
Several of the officers and harpooners were allowed a few hours off,
as their special duty of dealing with the head at daylight would be so
arduous as to need all their energies. When day dawned we were allowed a
short rest, while the work of cutting up the head was undertaken by the
rested men. At seven bells (7.30) it was "turn to" all hands again. The
"junk" was hooked on to both cutting tackles, and the windlass manned by
everybody who could get hold. Slowly the enormous mass rose, canting the
ship heavily as it came, while every stick and rope aloft complained of
the great strain upon them. When at last it was safely shipped, and
the tackles cast off, the size of this small portion of a full-grown
cachalot's body could be realized, not before.

It was hauled from the gangway by tackles, and securely lashed to the
rail running round beneath the top of the bulwarks for that purpose--the
"lash-rail"--where the top of it towered up as high as the third ratline
of the main-rigging. Then there was another spell, while the "case" was
separated from the skull. This was too large to get on board, so it was
lifted half-way out of water by the tackles, one hooked on each side;
then they were made fast, and a spar rigged across them at a good
height above the top of the case. A small block was lashed to this spar,
through which a line was rove. A long, narrow bucket was attached to
one end of this rope; the other end on deck was attended by two men. One
unfortunate beggar was perched aloft on the above-mentioned spar, where
his position, like the main-yard of Marryatt's verbose carpenter was
"precarious and not at all permanent." He was provided with a pole, with
which he pushed the bucket down through a hole cut in the upper end
of the "case," whence it was drawn out by the chaps on deck full of
spermaceti. It was a weary, unsatisfactory process, wasting a great
deal of the substance being baled out; but no other way was apparently
possible. The grease blew about, drenching most of us engaged in an
altogether unpleasant fashion, while, to mend matters, the old barky
began to roll and tumble about in an aimless, drunken sort of way, the
result of a new cross swell rolling up from the south-westward. As the
stuff was gained, it was poured into large tanks in the blubber-room,
the quantity being too great to be held by the try-pots at once.
Twenty-five barrels of this clear, wax-like substance were baled from
that case; and when at last it was lowered a little, and cut away from
its supports, it was impossible to help thinking that much was still
remaining within which we, with such rude means, were unable to save.
Then came the task of cutting up the junk. Layer after layer, eight to
ten inches thick, was sliced off, cut into suitable pieces, and passed
into the tanks. So full was the matter of spermaceti that one could
take a piece as large as one's head in the hands, and squeeze it like a
sponge, expressing the spermaceti in showers, until nothing remained
but a tiny ball of fibre. All this soft, pulpy mass was held together by
walls of exceedingly tough, gristly integrument ("white horse"), which
was as difficult to cut as gutta-percha, and, but for the peculiar
texture, not at all unlike it.

When we had finished separating the junk, there was nearly a foot of oil
on deck in the waist, and uproarious was the laughter when some hapless
individual, losing his balance, slid across the deck and sat down with a
loud splash in the deepest part of the accumulation.

The lower jaw of this whale measured exactly nineteen feet in length
from the opening of the mouth, or, say the last of the teeth, to the
point, and carried twenty-eight teeth on each side. For the time, it was
hauled aft out of the way, and secured to the lash-rail. The subsequent
proceedings were just the same as before described, only more so. For a
whole week our labours continued, and when they were over we had stowed
below a hundred and forty-six barrels of mingled oil and spermaceti, or
fourteen and a half tuns.

It was really a pleasant sight to see Abner receiving as if being
invested with an order of merit, the twenty pounds of tobacco to which
he was entitled. Poor fellow! he felt as if at last he were going to be
thought a little of, and treated a little better. He brought his bounty
forrard, and shared it out as far as it would go with the greatest
delight and good nature possible. Whatever he might have been thought of
aft, certainly, for the time, he was a very important personage forrard;
even the Portuguese, who were inclined to be jealous of what they
considered an infringement of their rights, were mollified by the
generosity shown.

After every sign of the operations had been cleared away, the jaw was
brought out, and the teeth extracted with a small tackle. They were set
solidly into a hard white gum, which had to be cut away all around them
before they would come out. When cleaned of the gum, they were headed up
in a small barrel of brine. The great jaw-pans were sawn off, and placed
at the disposal of anybody who wanted pieces of bone for "scrimshaw," or
carved work. This is a very favourite pastime on board whalers, though,
in ships such as ours, the crew have little opportunity for doing
anything, hardly any leisure during daylight being allowed. But our
carpenter was a famous workman at "scrimshaw," and he started half a
dozen walking-sticks forthwith. A favourite design is to carve the bone
into the similitude of a rope, with "worming" of smaller line along its
lays. A handle is carved out of a whale's tooth, and insets of baleen,
silver, cocoa-tree, or ebony, give variety and finish. The tools used
are of the roughest. Some old files, softened in the fire, and filed
into grooves something like saw-teeth, are most used; but old knives,
sail-needles, and chisels are pressed into service. The work turned
out would, in many cases, take a very high place in an exhibition of
turnery, though never a lathe was near it. Of course, a long time is
taken over it, especially the polishing, which is done with oil and
whiting, if it can be got--powdered pumice if it cannot. I once had
an elaborate pastry-cutter carved out of six whale's teeth, which I
purchased for a pound of tobacco from a seaman of the CORAL whaler,
and afterwards sold in Dunedin, New Zealand, for L2 10s., the purchaser
being decidedly of opinion that he had a bargain.





