CHAPTER VI. "DIRTY WORK FOR CLEAN MONEY"

If in the preceding chapter too much stress has been laid upon the
smashing of our own boat and consequent sufferings, while little or no
notice was taken of the kindred disaster to Mistah Jones' vessel, my
excuse must be that the experience "filled me right up to the chin," as
the mate concisely, if inelegantly, put it. Poor Goliath was indeed to
be pitied, for his well-known luck and capacity as a whaleman seemed
on this occasion to have quite deserted him. Not only had his boat been
stove upon first getting on to the whale, but he hadn't even had a run
for his money. It appeared that upon striking his whale, a small, lively
cow, she had at once "settled," allowing the boat to run over her; but
just as they were passing, she rose, gently enough, her pointed hump
piercing the thin skin of half-inch cedar as if it had been cardboard.
She settled again immediately, leaving a hole behind her a foot long
by six inches wide, which effectually put a stop to all further fishing
operations on the part of Goliath and his merry men for that day, at any
rate. It was all so quiet, and so tame and so stupid, no wonder Mistah
Jones felt savage. When Captain Slocum's fluent profanity flickered
around him, including vehemently all he might be supposed to have any
respect for, he did not even LOOK as if he would like to talk back; he
only looked sick and tired of being himself.

The third mate, again, was of a different category altogether. He had
distinguished himself by missing every opportunity of getting near a
whale while there was a "loose" one about, and then "saving" the crew of
Goliath's boat, who were really in no danger whatever. His iniquity was
too great to be dealt with by mere bad language. He crept about like a
homeless dog--much, I am afraid, to my secret glee, for I couldn't help
remembering his untiring cruelty to the green hands on first leaving
port.

In consequence of these little drawbacks we were not a very jovial crowd
forrard or aft. Not that hilarity was ever particularly noticeable among
us, but just now there was a very decided sense of wrong-doing over us
all, and a general fear that each of us was about to pay the penalty due
to some other delinquent. But fortunately there was work to be done.
Oh, blessed work! how many awkward situations you have extricated people
from! How many distracted brains have you soothed and restored, by
your steady irresistible pressure of duty to be done and brooking of no
delay!

The first thing to be done was to cut the whale's head off. This
operation, involving the greatest amount of labour in the whole of the
cutting in, was taken in hand by the first and second mates, who, armed
with twelve-feet spades, took their station upon the stage, leaned over
the handrail to steady themselves, and plunged their weapons vigorously
down through the massive neck of the animal--if neck it could be said to
have--following a well-defined crease in the blubber. At the same time
the other officers passed a heavy chain sling around the long, narrow
lower jaw, hooking one of the big cutting tackles into it, the "fall" of
which was then taken to the windlass and hove tight, turning the whale
on her back. A deep cut was then made on both sides of the rising jaw,
the windlass was kept going, and gradually the whole of the throat was
raised high enough for a hole to be cut through its mass, into which the
strap of the second cutting tackle was inserted and secured by passing
a huge toggle of oak through its eye. The second tackle was then hove
taut, and the jaw, with a large piece of blubber attached, was cut off
from the body with a boarding-knife, a tool not unlike a cutlass blade
set into a three-foot-long wooden handle.

Upon being severed the whole piece swung easily inboard and was lowered
on deck. The fast tackle was now hove upon while the third mate on
the stage cut down diagonally into the blubber on the body, which the
purchase ripped off in a broad strip or "blanket" about five feet
wide and a foot thick. Meanwhile the other two officers carved away
vigorously at the head, varying their labours by cutting a hole right
through the snout. This when completed received a heavy chain for the
purpose of securing the head. When the blubber had been about half
stripped off the body, a halt was called in order that the work of
cutting off the head might be finished, for it was a task of incredible
difficulty. It was accomplished at last, and the mass floated astern
by a stout rope, after which the windlass pawls clattered merrily, the
"blankets" rose in quick succession, and were cut off and lowered into
the square of the main batch or "blubber-room." A short time sufficed to
strip off the whole of the body-blubber, and when at last the tail was
reached, the backbone was cut through, the huge mass of flesh floating
away to feed the innumerable scavengers of the sea. No sooner was the
last of the blubber lowered into the hold than the hatches were put on
and the head hauled up alongside. Both tackles were secured to it and
all hands took to the windlass levers. This was a small cow whale of
about thirty barrels, that is, yielding that amount of oil, so it was
just possible to lift the entire head on board; but as it weighed as
much as three full-grown elephants, it was indeed a heavy lift for even
our united forces, trying our tackle to the utmost. The weather was very
fine, and the ship rolled but little; even then, the strain upon the
mast was terrific, and right glad was I when at last the immense cube of
fat, flesh, and bone was eased inboard and gently lowered on deck.

As soon as it was secured the work of dividing it began. From the snout
a triangular mass was cut, which was more than half pure spermaceti.
This substance was contained in spongy cells held together by layers
of dense white fibre, exceedingly tough and elastic, and called by the
whalers "white-horse." The whole mass, or "junk" as it is called, was
hauled away to the ship's side and firmly lashed to the bulwarks for the
time being, so that it might not "take charge" of the deck during the
rest of the operations.

The upper part of the head was now slit open lengthwise, disclosing an
oblong cistern or "case" full of liquid spermaceti, clear as water. This
was baled out with buckets into a tank, concreting as it cooled into a
wax-like substance, bland and tasteless. There being now nothing more
remaining about the skull of any value, the lashings were loosed, and
the first leeward roll sent the great mass plunging overboard with a
mighty splash. It sank like a stone, eagerly followed by a few small
sharks that were hovering near.

As may be imagined, much oil was running about the deck, for so
saturated was every part of the creature with it that it really gushed
like water during the cutting-up process. None of it was allowed to run
to waste, though, for the scupper-holes which drain the deck were all
carefully plugged, and as soon as the "junk" had been dissected all the
oil was carefully "squeegeed" up and poured into the try-pots.

Two men were now told off as "blubber-room men," whose duty it became
to go below, and squeezing themselves in as best they could between
the greasy masses of fat, cut it up into "horse-pieces" about eighteen
inches long and six inches square. Doing this they became perfectly
saturated with oil, as if they had taken a bath in a tank of it; for
as the vessel rolled it was impossible to maintain a footing, and
every fall was upon blubber running with oil. A machine of wonderful
construction had been erected on deck in a kind of shallow trough about
six feet long by four feet wide and a foot deep. At some remote period
of time it had no doubt been looked upon as a triumph of ingenuity,
a patent mincing machine. Its action was somewhat like that of a
chaff-cutter, except that the knife was not attached to the wheel, and
only rose and fell, since it was not required to cut right through the
"horse-pieces" with which it was fed. It will be readily understood
that in order to get the oil quickly out of the blubber, it needs to be
sliced as thin as possible, but for convenience in handling the refuse
(which is the only fuel used) it is not chopped up in small pieces, but
every "horse-piece" is very deeply scored as it were, leaving a thin
strip to hold the slices together. This then was the order of work. Two
harpooners attended the try-pots, replenishing them with minced blubber
from the hopper at the port side, and baling out the sufficiently
boiled oil into the great cooling tank on the starboard. One officer
superintended the mincing, another exercised a general supervision over
all. There was no man at the wheel and no look-out, for the vessel was
"hove-to" under two close-reefed topsails and fore-topmast-staysail,
with the wheel lashed hard down. A look-out man was unnecessary, since
we could not run anybody down, and if anybody ran us down, it would only
be because all hands were asleep, for the glare of our try-works fire,
to say nothing of the blazing cresset before mentioned, could have been
seen for many miles. So we toiled watch and watch, six hours on and six
off, the work never ceasing for an instant night or day. Though the
work was hard and dirty, and the discomfort of being so continually wet
through with oil great, there was only one thing dangerous about the
whole business. That was the job of filling and shifting the huge casks
of oil. Some of these were of enormous size, containing 350 gallons when
full, and the work of moving them about the greasy deck of a rolling
ship was attended with a terrible amount of risk. For only four men at
most could get fair hold of a cask, and when she took it into her silly
old hull to start rolling, just as we had got one half-way across
the deck, with nothing to grip your feet, and the knowledge that one
stumbling man would mean a sudden slide of the ton and a half weight,
and a little heap of mangled corpses somewhere in the lee scuppers--well
one always wanted to be very thankful when the lashings were safely
passed.

The whale being a small one, as before noted, the whole business was
over within three days, and the decks scrubbed and re-scrubbed until
they had quite regained their normal whiteness. The oil was poured by
means of a funnel and long canvas hose into the casks stowed in the
ground tier at the bottom of the ship, and the gear, all carefully
cleaned and neatly "stopped up," stowed snugly away below again.

This long and elaborate process is quite different from that followed
on board the Arctic whaleships, whose voyages are of short duration,
and who content themselves with merely cutting the blubber up small and
bringing it home to have the oil expressed. But the awful putrid mass
discharged from a Greenlander's hold is of very different quality and
value, apart from the nature of the substance, to the clear and sweet
oil, which after three years in cask is landed from a south-seaman as
inoffensive in smell and flavour as the day it was shipped. No attempt
is made to separate the oil and spermaceti beyond boiling the "head
matter," as it is called, by itself first, and putting it into casks
which are not filled up with the body oil. Spermaceti exists in all
the oil, especially that from the dorsal hump; but it is left for
the refiners ashore to extract and leave the oil quite free from any
admixture of the wax-like substance, which causes it to become solid at
temperatures considerably above the freezing-point.

Uninteresting as the preceding description may be, it is impossible to
understand anything of the economy of a south-sea whaler without giving
it, and I have felt it the more necessary because of the scanty notice
given to it in the only two works published on the subject, both of them
highly technical, and written for scientific purposes by medical men.
Therefore I hope to be forgiven if I have tried the patience of my
readers by any prolixity.

It will not, of course, have escaped the reader's notice that I have not
hitherto attempted to give any details concerning the structure of the
whale just dealt with. The omission is intentional. During this, our
first attempt at real whaling, my mind was far too disturbed by the
novelty and danger of the position in which I found myself for the first
time, for me to pay any intelligent attention to the party of the second
part.

But I may safely promise that from the workman's point of view, the
habits, manners, and build of the whales shall be faithfully described
as I saw them during my long acquaintance with them, earnestly hoping
that if my story be not as technical or scientific as that of Drs.
Bennett and Beale, it may be found fully as accurate and reliable; and
perhaps the reader, being like myself a mere layman, so to speak, may be
better able to appreciate description free from scientific formula and
nine-jointed words.

Two things I did notice on this occasion which I will briefly allude to
before closing this chapter. One was the peculiar skin of the whale. It
was a bluish-black, and as thin as gold-beater's skin. So thin, indeed,
and tender, that it was easily scraped off with the finger-nail.
Immediately beneath it, upon the surface of the blubber, was a layer or
coating of what for want of a better simile I must call fine short fur,
although unlike fur it had no roots or apparently any hold upon the
blubber. Neither was it attached to the skin which covered it; in fact,
it seemed merely a sort of packing between the skin and the surface of
the thick layer of solid fat which covered the whole area of the whale's
body. The other matter which impressed me was the peculiarity of the
teeth. For up till that time I had held, in common with most seamen, and
landsmen, too, for that matter, the prevailing idea that a "whale" lived
by "suction" (although I did not at all know what that meant), and that
it was impossible for him to swallow a herring. Yet here was a mouth
manifestly intended for greater things in the way of gastronomy than
herrings; nor did it require more than the most casual glances to
satisfy one of so obvious a fact. Then the teeth were heroic in size,
protruding some four or five inches from the gum, and solidly set more
than that into its firm and compact substance. They were certainly not
intended for mastication, being, where thickest, three inches apart, and
tapering to a short point, curving slightly backwards. In this specimen,
a female, and therefore small as I have said, there were twenty of
them on each side, the last three or four near the gullet being barely
visible above the gum.

Another most convincing reason why no mastication could have been
possible was that there were no teeth visible in the upper jaw. Opposed
to each of the teeth was a socket where a tooth should apparently have
been, and this was conclusive evidence of the soft and yielding nature
of the great creature's food. But there were signs that at some period
of the development of the whale it had possessed a double row of teeth,
because at the bottom of these upper sockets we found in a few cases
what seemed to be an abortive tooth, not one that was growing, because
they had no roots, but a survival of teeth that had once been perfect
and useful, but from disuse, or lack of necessity for them, had
gradually ceased to come to maturity. The interior of the mouth and
throat was of a livid white, and the tongue was quite small for so large
an animal. It was almost incapable of movement, being somewhat like a
fowl's. Certainly it could not have been protruded even from the angle
of the mouth, much less have extended along the parapet of that lower
mandible, which reminded one of the beak of some mighty albatross or
stork.





