
THE CRUISE OF THE "CACHALOT"

ROUND THE WORLD AFTER SPERM WHALES

Frank T. Bullen, F.R.G.S.

First Mate




     To

     Miss Emily Hensley

     In grateful remembrance of thirty years' constant friendship and
     practical help this work is affectionately dedicated by her
     humble pupil.




PREFACE

In the following pages an attempt has been made--it is believed for the
first time--to give an account of the cruise of a South Sea whaler from
the seaman's standpoint. Two very useful books have been published--both
of them over half a century ago--on the same subject; but, being written
by the surgeons of whale-ships for scientific purposes, neither of them
was interesting to the general reader. ["Narrative of a Whaling Voyage
round the Globe," by F Debell Bennett, F.R.C.S. (2 vols). Bentley,
London (1840). "The Sperm Whale Fishery," by Thomas Beale, M.R.C.S.
London (1835).] They have both been long out of print; but their value
to the student of natural history has been, and still is, very great,
Dr. Beale's book, in particular, being still the authority on the sperm
whale.

This book does not pretend to compete with either of the above valuable
works. Its aims is to present to the general reader a simple account of
the methods employed, and the dangers met with, in a calling about
which the great mass of the public knows absolutely nothing. Pending the
advent of some great writer who shall see the wonderful possibilities
for literature contained in the world-wide wanderings of the South Sea
whale-fishers, the author has endeavoured to summarize his experiences
so that they may be read without weariness, and, it is hoped, with
profit.

The manifold shortcomings of the work will not, it is trusted, be laid
to the account of the subject, than which none more interesting could
well be imagined, but to the limitations of the writer, whose long
experience of sea life has done little to foster the literary faculty.

One claim may be made with perfect confidence--that if the manner be
not all that could be wished, the matter is entirely trustworthy, being
compiled from actual observation and experience, and in no case at
second-hand. An endeavour has also been made to exclude such matter
as is easily obtainable elsewhere--matters of common knowledge and
"padding" of any sort--the object not being simply the making of a book,
but the record of little-known facts.

Great care has been taken to use no names either of ships or persons,
which could, by being identified, give annoyance or pain to any one, as
in many cases strong language has been necessary for the expression of
opinions.

Finally, the author hopes that, although in no sense exclusively a
book for boys, the coming generation may find this volume readable and
interesting; and with that desire he offers it confidently, though in
all humility, to that great impartial jury, the public.

F.T.B. Dulwich, July, 1897.




CONTENTS

CHAPTER I--OUTWARD BOUND Adrift in New Bedford--I get a ship--A
motley crowd--"Built by the mile, and cut off as you want 'em"--Mistah
Jones--Greenies--Off to sea.

CHAPTER II--PREPARING FOR ACTION Primitive steering-gear--Strange
drill--Misery below--Short commons--Goliath rigs the
"crow's-nest"--Useful information--Preparing for war--Strange weapons--A
boat-load.

CHAPTER III--FISHING BEGINS The cleanliness of a whale-ship--No
skulking--Porpoise-fishing--Cannibals--Cooking operations--Boat-drill--A
good look-out--"Black-fishing"--Roguery in all trades--Plenty of fresh
beef--The nursery of American whalemen.

CHAPTER IV--BAD WEATHER Nautical routine--The first gale--Comfort
versus speed--A grand sea-boat--The Sargasso Sea--Natural history
pursuits--Dolphin--Unconventional fishing--Rumours of a visit to the
Cape Verdes--Babel below--No allowance, but not "full and plenty"--Queer
washing--Method of sharing rations--The "slop-shop" opened--Our
prospects.


