CHAPTER XXIV. THE BAY OF ISLANDS AND NEW ZEALAND COAST

In a comparative new colony like New Zealand, where the marvellous
growth of the young state can be traced within living memory, from
the privations of the pioneer to the fully developed city with all
the machinery of our latest luxurious civilization, it is exceedingly
interesting to note how the principal towns have sprung up arbitrarily,
and without any heed to the intentions of the ruling powers. The
old-fashioned township of Kororarika, or Port Russell, is a case very
much in point. As we sailed in between the many islets from which the
magnificent bay takes its name, for all appearances to the contrary, we
might have been the first, discoverers. Not a house, not a sail, not a
boat, broke the loneliness and primeval look of the placid waters and
the adjacent shores. Not until we drew near the anchorage, and saw
upon opening up the little town the straight-standing masts of three
whale-ships, did anything appear to dispel the intense air of solitude
overhanging the whole. As we drew nearer, and rounded-to for mooring,
I looked expectantly for some sign of enterprise on the part of the
inhabitants--some tradesman's boat soliciting orders; some of the
population on the beach (there was no sign of a pier), watching the
visitor come to an anchor. Not a bit of it. The whole place seemed a
maritime sleepy hollow, the dwellers in which had lost all interest in
life, and had become far less energetic than the much-maligned Kanakas
in their dreamy isles of summer.

Yet this was once intended for the capital of New Zealand. When the
large and splendidly-built city of Dunedin, Otago, was a barren bush,
haunted only by the "morepork" and the apteryx, Russell was humming with
vitality, her harbour busy with fleets of ships, principally whalers,
who found it the most convenient calling-place in the southern temperate
zone. Terrible scenes were enacted about its "blackguard beach," orgies
of wild debauchery and bloodshed indulged in by the half-savage and
utterly lawless crews of the whaleships. But it never attained to any
real importance. As a port of call for whalers, it enjoyed a certain
kind of prosperity; but when the South Sea fishery dwindled, Russell
shrank in immediate sympathy. It never had any vitality of its own, no
manufactures or products, unless the wretched coalmines adjacent, with
their dirty output, which is scoffed at by the grimiest tug afloat,
could be dignified by the name.

Remembering, as I did, the beauty, the energy, and prosperity of the
great New Zealand ports, some of them with not a tithe of the natural
advantages of Russell, I felt amazed, almost indignant, at its
dead-and-alive appearance.

Our anchor was no sooner down than the captains of the JAMES ARNOLD,
MATILDA SAYER, and CORAL lowered and came on board, eager to hear or to
tell such news as was going. As we had now grown to expect, all work was
over immediately the sails were fast and decks cleared up, so that we
were free to entertain our visitors. And a high old time we had of it
that afternoon! What with songs, dances, and yarns, the hours flew
by with lightning speed. Our Kanakas, too, were overjoyed to find
compatriots among the visitors, and settled down to a steady stream of
talk which lasted, without intermission, the whole night through. It was
a wonderful exhibition of tongue-wagging, though what it was all about
puzzled me greatly.

Life on board those three ships, though described in glowing terms by
the visitors, was evidently not to be mentioned for comfort in the same
breath as ours. But we found that our late captain's fame as a "hard
citizen" was well known to all; so that it is only ordinary justice to
suppose that such a life as he led us was exceptional for even a Yankee
spouter. Our friends gave us a blood-curdling account of the Solander
whaling ground, which we were about to visit, the JAMES ARNOLD and CORAL
having spent a season there that cruise. I did not, however, pay much
attention to their yarns, feeling sure that, even if they were fact,
it would not help to brood over coming hardships, and inclined to give
liberal discount to most of their statements. The incessant chatter,
got wearisome at last, and I, for one, was not sorry when, at two in the
morning, our visitors departed to their several ships, and left us to
get what sleep still remained left to us.

A pleasant expedition was planned for the next day. Our visit being
principally for wooding and watering, both of which it was necessary
for us to do ourselves, Captain Count showed his usual promptitude in
commencing at once. Permission having been obtained and, I suppose,
paid for, we set out with two boats and a plentiful supply of axes for a
well-wooded promontory to prepare a store of wood. Wood chopping is not
usually looked upon as a sailor's pastime; but we had had considerable
experience during the voyage, as a result of which most of us could
swing an axe in fine style. But the Kanakas beat us all hollow.
Delighted to get ashore again, pleased with the fine axes as children
with new toys, they laid about them in grand style, the young trees
falling right and left in scores. Anybody would have judged that we were
working piece-work, at so much a cord, the pile grew so fast. There
was such a quantity collected that, instead of lightering it off in the
boats, which is very rough and dirty usage for them, I constructed a
sort of raft with four large spars arranged in the form of an oblong,
placing an immense quantity of the smaller stuff in between. Upright
sticks were rudely lashed here and there, to keep the pile from bobbing
out underneath, and thus loaded we proceeded slowly to the ship with
sufficient wood for our wants brought in one journey. It was immediately
hoisted on board, sawn into convenient lengths, and stowed away, the
whole operation being completed, of getting between eight and ten tons
of firewood cut, ferried, and stowed, in less than eight hours.

Next day was devoted to watering; but as I have elsewhere described that
necessary if prosaic occupation, I will not repeat the story. Sufficient
to say that the job was successfully "did" in the course of the day.

All the work being accomplished for which we had come, it only remained
to give the crew "liberty." So the port watch, in their best (?) rig,
were mustered aft; each man received ten shillings, and away they went
in glee for the first genuine day's liberty since leaving Honolulu. For
although they had been much ashore in Vau Vau, that was not looked upon
in the same light as a day's freedom in a town where liquor might
be procured, and the questionable privilege of getting drunk taken
advantage of. Envious eyes watched their progress from the other ships,
but, much to my secret satisfaction, none of their crews were allowed
ashore at the same time. There were quite sufficient possibilities of
a row among our own crowd, without farther complications such as would
almost certainly have occurred had the strangers been let loose at
the same time. Unfortunately, to the ordinary sailor-man, the place
presented no other forms of amusement besides drinking, and I was
grieved to see almost the whole crowd, including the Kanakas, emerge
from the grog-shop plentifully supplied with bottles, and, seating
themselves on the beach, commence their carouse. The natives evinced the
greatest eagerness to get drunk, swallowing down the horrible "square
gin" as if it were water. They passed with the utmost rapidity through
all the stages of drunkenness. Before they had been ashore an hour,
most of them were lying like logs, in the full blaze of the sun, on the
beach. Seeing this, the captain suggested the advisability of bringing
them on board at once, as they were only exposed to robbery by the few
prowling Maories that loafed about the beach--a curious contrast to the
stately fellows met with in other parts of New Zealand.

So we set to work, and brought them on board again, handing them over to
their compatriots by way of warning against similar excesses, although,
it must be confessed, that they were hardly to blame, with the example
of their more civilized shipmates before their eyes. Sam was energetic
in his condemnation of both the Kanakas for getting drunk, and the
captain for giving them any money wherewith to do so. The remainder
of the watch fortunately concluded their carouse without any serious
disorder. A few bruises bestowed upon one another, more in clumsy
horseplay than real fighting summed up the casualties among them. By ten
o'clock that evening we had them all safely on board again, ready for
sore heads and repentance in the morning.

During the day I had evolved a scheme, which I had great hopes of
carrying out when our watch should be let loose on the morrow. When
morning came, and the liberty men received their money, I called them
together and unfolded my plan. Briefly, I proposed a sort of picnic at a
beautiful spot discovered during our wooding expedition. I was surprised
and very pleased at the eager way in which all, with the sole exceptions
of Tui and his fellow-harpooner, a Portuguese, fell in with my
suggestions. Without any solicitation on my part, my Kanakas brought me
their money, begging me to expend it for them, as they did not know how,
and did not want to buy gin.

Under such favourable auspices as these, we landed shortly after eight
a.m., making a bee-line for the only provision shop the place boasted.
Here we laid in a stock of such savouries as we had long been strangers
to, both eatables and drinkables, although I vetoed fire-water
altogether. Beer in bottle was substituted, at my suggestion, as being,
if we must have drinks of that nature, much the least harmful to men
in a hot country, besides, in the quantity that we were able to take,
non-intoxicant. We also took tea, sugar, milk, and a kettle, Thus
furnished, we struck for the country, merry as a group of schoolboys,
making the quiet air ring again with song, shout, and laughter--all
of which may seem puerile and trivial in the extreme; but having seen
liberty men ashore in nearly every big port in the world, watched the
helpless, dazed look with which they wander about, swinging hands, bent
shoulders, and purposeless rolling gait, I have often fervently wished
that some one would take a party of them for a ramble with a definite
purpose, helping them to a little enjoyment, instead of them falling,
from sheer lack of knowing what else to do, into some dirty, darksome
gin-mill, to be besotted, befooled, and debased.

I do earnestly wish that some of the good folk in London and Liverpool,
who are wringing their hands for want of something to do among their
fellow-men, would pay a visit to sailor-town for the purpose of getting
up a personally-conducted party of sailors to see the sights worth
seeing. It is a cheap form of pleasure, even if they paid all expenses,
though that would not be likely. They would have an uphill job at first,
for the sailor has been so long accustomed to being preyed upon by the
class he knows, and neglected by everybody else except the few good
people who want to preach to him, that he would probably, in a sheepish
shame-faced sort of way, refuse to have any "truck" with you, as he
calls it. If the "sailors' home" people were worth their salt, they
would organize expeditions by carriage to such beautiful places as--in
London, for instance--Hampton Court, Zoological Gardens, Crystal Palace,
Epping Forest, and the like, with competent guides and good catering
arrangements. But no; the sailor is allowed to step outside the door of
the "home" into the grimy, dismal streets with nothing open to him
but the dance-house and brothel on one side, and the mission hall or
reading-room on the other. God forbid that I should even appear to sneer
at missions to seamen; nothing is farther from my intention; but I do
feel that sailors need a little healthy human interest to be taken in
providing some pleasure for them, and that there are unorthodox ways of
"missioning" which are well worth a trial.

I once took a party (while I was an A.B.) from Wells-street Home to the
South Kensington Museum. There were six of them--a Frenchman, a Dane,
a Russian Finn, two Englishmen, and an Irishman. Though continually
sailing from London for years, this was the first occasion they had ever
been west of Aldgate. The only mistake I made was in going too deep
at one step. The journey from Shadwell to South Kensington, under the
guidance of one familiar, through the hardest personal experiences, with
every corner of the vast network, was quite enough for one day. So that
by the time we entered the Museum they were surfeited temporarily with
sight-seeing, and not able to take in the wonders of the mighty place.
Seeing this, I did not persist, but, after some rest and refreshment,
led them across the road among the naval models. Ah! it was a rare treat
to see them there. For if there is one thing more than another which
interests a sailor, it is a well-made model of a ship. Sailors are
model-makers almost by nature, turning out with the most meagre outfit
of tools some wonderfully-finished replicas of the vessels is which they
have sailed. And the collection of naval models at South Kensington is,
I suppose, unsurpassed in the world for the number and finish of the
miniature vessels there shown.

Our day was a great success, never to be forgotten by those poor
fellows, whose only recreation previously had been to stroll listlessly
up and down the gloomy, stone-flagged hall of the great barracks until
sheer weariness drove them out into the turbid current of the "Highway,"
there to seek speedily some of the dirty haunts where the "runner" and
the prostitute: awaited them.

But I have wandered far from the Bay of Islands while thus chattering
of the difficulties that beset the path of rational enjoyment for the
sailor ashore. Returning to that happy day, I remember vividly how,
just after we got clear of the town, we were turning down a lane
between hedgerows wonderfully like one of our own country roads, when
something--I could not tell what--gripped my heart and sent a lump into
my throat. Tears sprang unbidden to my eyes, and I trembled from head
to foot with emotion. Whatever could it be? Bewildered for the moment,
I looked around, and saw a hedge laden with white hawthorn blossom, the
sweet English "may." Every Londoner knows how strongly that beautiful
scent appeals to him, even when wafted from draggled branches borne
slumwards by tramping urchins who have been far afield despoiling the
trees of their lovely blossoms, careless of the damage they have been
doing. But to me, who had not seen a bit for years, the flood of feeling
undammed by that odorous breath, was overwhelming. I could hardly
tear myself away from the spot, and, when at last I did, found myself
continually turning to try and catch another whiff of one of the most
beautiful scents in the world.

Presently we came to a cottage flooded from ground to roof-ridge with
blossoms of scarlet geranium. There must have been thousands of them,
all borne by one huge stem which was rooted by the door of the house. A
little in front of it grew a fuchsia, twelve or fourteen feet high, with
wide-spreading branches, likewise loaded with handsome blooms; while the
ground beneath was carpeted with the flowers shaken from their places by
the rude wind.

So, through scenes of loveliness that appealed even to the dusky
Kanakas, we trudged gaily along, arriving pretty well fagged at our
destination--a great glade of tenderest green, surrounded by magnificent
trees on three sides; the fourth opening on to a dazzling white beach
sloping gently down to the sea. Looking seaward, amidst the dancing,
sparkling wavelets, rose numerous tree-clothed islets, making a
perfectly beautiful seascape. On either side of the stretch of beach
fantastic masses of rock lay about, as if scattered by some tremendous
explosion. Where the sea reached them, they were covered with untold
myriads of oysters, ready to be eaten and of delicious flavour.

What need to say more? With oyster-feeding, fishing, bathing,
tree-climbing, tea-making, song-singing the hours fled with pitiless
haste, so that, before we had half emptied the brimming cup of joys
proffered us, the slanting rays of the setting sun warned us to return
lest we should get "hushed" in the dark. We came on board rejoicing,
laden with spoils of flowers and fish, with two-thirds of our money
still in our pockets, and full of happy memories of one of the most
delightful days in our whole lives.

A long night's sound sleep was rudely broken into in the morning by the
cry of "Man the windlass." Having got all we wanted, we were bound away
to finish, if luck were with us, the lading of our good ship from the
teeming waters of the Solander grounds. I know the skipper's hopes were
high, for he never tired of telling how, when in command of a new ship,
he once fished the whole of his cargo--six thousand barrels of sperm
oil--from the neighbourhood to which we were now bound. He always
admitted, though, that the weather he experienced was unprecedented.
Still, nothing could shake his belief in the wonderful numbers of sperm
whales to be found on the south coasts of New Zealand, which faith was
well warranted, since he had there won from the waves, not only the
value of his new ship, but a handsome profit in addition, all in one
season.

Hearing this kind of thing every day made me feel quite hungry to reach
the battle-field; but, for reasons which doubtless were excellent,
although I cannot pretend to explain them, we started north about, which
not only added nearly one hundred miles to the distance we had to go,
but involved us in a gale which effectually stopped our progress for
a week. It was our first taste of the gentle zephyrs which waft their
sweetness over New Zealand, after sweeping over the vast, bleak,
iceberg-studded expanse of the Antarctic Ocean. Our poor Kanakas were
terribly frightened, for the weather of their experience, except on the
rare occasions when they are visited by the devastating hurricane, is
always fine, steady, and warm. For the first time in their lives they
saw hail, and their wonder was too great for words. But the cold was
very trying, not only to them, but to us, who had been so long in the
tropics that our blood was almost turned to water. The change was nearly
as abrupt as that so often experienced by our seamen, who at the rate of
sixteen knots an hour plunge from a temperature of eighty degrees to one
of thirty degrees in about three days.

We, with the ready adaptability of seamen, soon got accustomed to the
bleak, bitter weather, but the Kanakas wilted like hothouse plants under
its influence. They were well fed and well clothed, yet they seemed
to shrivel up, looking thinner every day, several of them getting deep
coughs strongly suggestive of a cemetery. It was no easy task to get
them to work, or even move, never a one of them lumbering aloft but I
expected him to come down by the run. This was by no means cheering,
when it was remembered what kind of a campaign lay before us. Captain
Count seemed to be quite easy in his mind, however, and as we had
implicit confidence in his wisdom and judgment, we were somewhat
reassured.

The gale at last blew itself out, the wind veering to the northward
again, with beautiful, spring-like weather, just cool enough to be
pleasant, and, withal, favourable for getting to our destination. We
soon made the land again about New Plymouth, jogging along near enough
to the coast to admire the splendid rugged scenery of the Britain of
the south. All hands were kept busily employed preparing for stormy
weather--reeving new running-gear, bending the strongest suit of sails,
and looking well to all the whaling gear.

In this active exercise of real sailor-work, the time, though long for
an ordinary passage, passed quickly and pleasantly away, so that when
we hauled round the massive promontory guarding the western entrance
to Foveaux Straits, we were almost surprised to find ourselves there so
soon.

This, then, was the famous and dreaded Solander whaling ground. Almost
in the centre of the wide stretch of sea between Preservation Inlet,
on the Middle Island, and the western end of the South, or Stewart's
Island, rose a majestic mass of wave-beaten rock some two thousand
feet high, like a grim sentinel guarding the Straits. The extent of the
fishing grounds was not more than a hundred and fifty square miles, and
it was rarely that the vessels cruised over the whole of it. The most
likely area for finding whales was said to be well within sight of the
Solander Rock itself, but keeping on the western side of it.

It was a lovely day when we first entered upon our cruising ground, a
gentle north-east wind blowing, the sky a deep, cloudless blue, so
that the rugged outline of Stewart's Island was distinctly seen at its
extreme distance from us. To the eastward the Straits narrowed rapidly,
the passage at the other end being scarcely five miles wide between the
well-known harbour of the Bluff, the port of Invercargill, and a long
rocky island which almost blocked the strait. This passage, though
cutting off a big corner, not only shortening the distance from the
westward considerably, but oftentimes saving outward bounders a great
deal of heavy weather off the Snares to the south of Stewart's Island,
is rarely used by sailing-ships, except coasters; but steamers regularly
avail themselves of it, being independent of its conflicting currents
and baffling winds.





