CHAPTER XI. ROUND THE COCOS AND SEYCHELLES

Hitherto, with the exception of a couple of gales in the North and
South Atlantic, we had been singularly fortunate in our weather. It does
happen so sometimes.

I remember once making a round voyage from Cardiff to Hong Kong and the
Philippines, back to London, in ten months, and during the whole of that
time we did not have a downright gale. The worst weather we encountered
was between Beachy Head and Portland, going round from London to
Cardiff.

And I once spoke the barque LUTTERWORTH, a companion ship to us from
Portland, Oregon to Falmouth, whose mate informed me that they carried
their royals from port to port without ever furling them once, except
to shift the suit of sails. But now a change was evidently imminent. Of
course, we forward had no access to the barometer; not that we should
have understood its indications if we had seen it, but we all knew that
something was going to be radically wrong with the weather. For instead
of the lovely blue of the sky we had been so long accustomed to by
day and night, a nasty, greasy shade had come over the heavens,
which, reflected in the sea, made that look dirty and stale also. That
well-known appearance of the waves before a storm was also very marked,
which consists of an undecided sort of break in their tops. Instead of
running regularly, they seemed to hunch themselves up in little heaps,
and throw off a tiny flutter of spray, which generally fell in the
opposite direction to what little wind there was. The pigs and fowls
felt the approaching change keenly, and manifested the greatest
uneasiness, leaving their food and acting strangely. We were making
scarcely any headway, so that the storm was longer making its appearance
than it would have been had we been a swift clipper ship running down
the Indian Ocean. For two days we were kept in suspense; but on the
second night the gloom began to deepen, the wind to moan, and a very
uncomfortable "jobble" of a sea got up. Extra "gaskets" were put upon
the sails, and everything movable about the decks was made as secure as
it could be. Only the two close-reefed topsails and two storm stay-sails
were carried, so that we were in excellent trim for fighting the bad
weather when it did come. The sky gradually darkened and assumed a livid
green tint, the effect of which was most peculiar.

The wind blew fitfully in short, gusts, veering continually back and
forth over about a quarter of the compass. Although it was still light,
it kept up an incessant mournful moan not to be accounted for in
any way. Darker and darker grew the heavens, although no clouds were
visible, only a general pall of darkness. Glimmering lightnings played
continually about the eastern horizon, but not brilliant enough to show
us the approaching storm-cloud. And so came the morning of the third
day from the beginning of the change. But for the clock we should hardly
have known that day had broken, so gloomy and dark was the sky. At last
light came in the east, but such a light as no one would wish to see. It
was a lurid glare, such as may be seen playing over a cupola of Bessemer
steel when the speigeleisen is added, only on such an extensive scale
that its brilliancy was dulled into horror. Then, beneath it we saw the
mountainous clouds fringed with dull violet and with jagged sabres of
lightning darting from their solid black bosoms. The wind began to rise
steadily but rapidly, so that by eight a.m. it was blowing a furious
gale from E.N.E. In direction it was still unsteady, the ship coming up
and falling off to it several points. Now, great masses of torn,
ragged cloud hurtled past us above, so low down as almost to touch the
mastheads. Still the wind increased, still the sea rose, till at last
the skipper judged it well to haul down the tiny triangle of storm
stay-sail still set (the topsail and fore stay-sail had been furled long
before), and let her drift under bare poles, except for three square
feet of stout canvas in the weather mizen-rigging. The roar of the
wind now dominated every sound, so that it might have been thundering
furiously, but we should not have heard it. The ship still maintained
her splendid character as a sea-boat, hardly shipping a drop of water;
but she lay over at a most distressing angle, her deck sloping off fully
thirty-five to forty degrees. Fortunately she did not roll to windward.
It may have been raining in perfect torrents, but the tempest tore off
the surface of the sea, and sent it in massive sheets continually flying
over us, so that we could not possibly have distinguished between fresh
water and salt.

The chief anxiety was for the safety of the boats. Early on the second
day of warning they had been hoisted to the topmost notch of the cranes,
and secured as thoroughly as experience could suggest; but at every lee
lurch we gave it seemed as if we must dip them under water, while the
wind threatened to stave the weather ones in by its actual solid weight.
It was now blowing a furious cyclone, the force of which has never been
accurately gauged (even by the present elaborate instruments of various
kinds in use). That force is, however, not to be imagined by any one who
has not witnessed it, except that one notable instance is on record by
which mathematicians may get an approximate estimate.

Captain Toynbee, the late highly respected and admired Marine
Superintendent of the British Meteorological Office, has told us how,
during a cyclone which he rode out in the HOTSPUR at Sandheads, the
mouth of the Hooghly, the three naked topgallant-masts of his ship,
though of well-tested timber a foot in diameter, and supported by all
the usual network of stays, and without the yards, were snapped off and
carried away solely by the violence of the wind. It must, of course,
have been an extreme gust, which did not last many seconds, for no cable
that was ever forged would have held the ship against such a cataclysm
as that. This gentleman's integrity is above suspicion, so that no
exaggeration could be charged against him, and he had the additional
testimony of his officers and men to this otherwise incredible fact.

The terrible day wore on, without any lightening of the tempest, till
noon, when the wind suddenly fell to a calm. Until that time, the sea,
although heavy, was not vicious or irregular, and we had not shipped
any heavy water at all. But when the force of the wind was suddenly
withdrawn, such a sea arose as I have never seen before or since. Inky
mountains of water raised their savage heads in wildest confusion,
smashing one another in whirlpools of foam. It was like a picture of the
primeval deep out of which arose the new-born world. Suddenly out of
the whirling blackness overhead the moon appeared, nearly in the zenith,
sending down through the apex of a dome of torn and madly gyrating cloud
a flood of brilliant light. Illumined by that startling radiance, our
staunch and seaworthy ship was tossed and twirled in the hideous vortex
of mad sea until her motion was distracting. It was quite impossible to
loose one's hold and attempt to do anything without running the imminent
risk of being dashed to pieces. Our decks were full of water now, for
it tumbled on board at all points; but as yet no serious weight of a sea
had fallen upon us, nor had any damage been done. Such a miracle as that
could not be expected to continue for long. Suddenly a warning shout
rang out from somewhere--"Hold on all, for your lives!" Out of the
hideous turmoil around arose, like some black, fantastic ruin, an awful
heap of water. Higher and higher it towered, until it was level with our
lower yards, then it broke and fell upon us. All was blank. Beneath that
mass every thought, every feeling, fled but one--"How long shall I
be able to hold my breath?" After what seemed a never-ending time, we
emerged from the wave more dead than alive, but with the good ship still
staunch underneath us, and Hope's lamp burning brightly. The moon
had been momentarily obscured, but now shone out again, lighting up
brilliantly our bravely-battling ship. But, alas for others!--men,
like ourselves, whose hopes were gone. Quite near us was the battered
remainder of what had been a splendid ship. Her masts were gone, not
even the stumps being visible, and it seemed to our eager eyes as if she
was settling down. It was even so, for as we looked, unmindful of our
own danger, she quietly disappeared--swallowed up with her human freight
in a moment, like a pebble dropped into a pond.

While we looked with hardly beating hearts at the place where she had
sunk, all was blotted out in thick darkness again. With a roar, as of
a thousand thunders, the tempest came once more, but from the opposite
direction now. As we were under no sail, we ran little risk of being
caught aback; but, even had we, nothing could have been done, the vessel
being utterly out of control, besides the impossibility of getting
about. It so happened, however, that when the storm burst upon us again,
we were stern on to it, and we drove steadily for a few moments until we
had time to haul to the wind again. Great heavens! how it blew! Surely,
I thought, this cannot last long--just as we sometimes say of the
rain when it is extra heavy. It did last, however, for what seemed an
interminable time, although any one could see that the sky was getting
kindlier. Gradually, imperceptibly, it took off, the sky cleared, and
the tumult ceased, until a new day broke in untellable beauty over a
revivified world.

Years afterwards I read, in one of the hand-books treating of hurricanes
and cyclones, that "in the centre of these revolving storms the sea is
so violent that few ships can pass through it and live." That is true
talk. I have been there, and bear witness that but for the build and
sea-kindliness of the CACHALOT, she could not have come out of that
horrible cauldron again, but would have joined that nameless unfortunate
whom we saw succumb, "never again heard of." As it was, we found two
of the boats stove in, whether by breaking sea or crushing wind nobody
knows. Most of the planking of the bulwarks was also gone, burst outward
by the weight of the water on deck. Only the normal quantity of water
was found in the well on sounding, and not even a rope-yarn was gone
from aloft. Altogether, we came out of the ordeal triumphantly, where
many a gallant vessel met her fate, and the behaviour of the grand old
tub gave me a positive affection for her, such as I have never felt for
a ship before or since.

There was now a big heap of work for the carpenter, so the skipper
decided to run in for the Cocos or Keeling islands, in order to lay
quietly and refit. We had now only three boats sound, the one smashed
when poor Bamberger died being still unfinished--of course, the repairs
had practically amounted to rebuilding. Therefore we kept away for this
strange assemblage of reefs and islets, arriving off them early the next
day.

They consist of a true "atoll," or basin, whose rim is of coral
reefs, culminating occasionally in sandy islands or cays formed by the
accumulated debris washed up from the reef below, and then clothed upon
with all sorts of plants by the agency of birds and waves.

These islands have lately been so fully described in many different
journals, that I shall not burden the reader with any twice-told tales
about them, but merely chronicle the fact that for a week we lay at
anchor off one of the outlying cays, toiling continuously to get the
vessel again in fighting trim.

At last the overworked carpenter and his crew got through their heavy
task, and the order was given to "man the windlass." Up came the anchor,
and away we went again towards what used to be a noted haunt of the
sperm whale, the Seychelle Archipelego. Before the French, whose flag
flies over these islands, had with their usual short-sighted policy,
clapped on prohibitive port charges, Mahe was a specially favoured place
of call for the whalers. But when whale-ships find that it does not pay
to visit a place, being under no compulsion as regards time, they soon
find other harbours that serve their turn. We, of course, had no need to
visit any port for some time to come, having made such good use of our
opportunities at the Cocos.

We found whales scarce and small, so, although we cruised in this
vicinity for nearly two months, six small cow cachalots were all we were
able to add to our stock, representing less then two hundred barrels
of oil. This was hardly good enough for Captain Slocum. Therefore, we
gradually drew away from this beautiful cluster of islands, and crept
across the Indian Ocean towards the Straits of Malacca. On the way, we
one night encountered that strange phenomenon, a "milk" sea. It was a
lovely night, with scarcely any wind, the stars trying to make up for
the absence of the moon by shining with intense brightness. The water
had been more phosphorescent than usual, so that every little fish left
a track of light behind him, greatly disproportionate to his size. As
the night wore on, the sea grew brighter and brighter, until by midnight
we appeared to be sailing on an ocean of lambent flames. Every little
wave that broke against the ship's side sent up a shower of diamond-like
spray, wonderfully beautiful to see, while a passing school of porpoises
fairly set the sea blazing as they leaped and gambolled in its glowing
waters. Looking up from sea to sky, the latter seemed quite black
instead of blue, and the lustre of the stars was diminished till they
only looked like points of polished steel, having quite lost for the
time their radiant sparkle. In that shining flood the blackness of the
ship stood out in startling contrast, and when we looked over the side
our faces were strangely lit up by the brilliant glow.

For several hours this beautiful appearance persisted, fading away
at last as gradually as it came. No satisfactory explanation of this
curious phenomenon has ever been given, nor does it appear to portend
any change of weather. It cannot be called a rare occurrence, although
I have only seen it thrice myself--once in the Bay of Cavite, in the
Philippine Islands; once in the Pacific, near the Solomon Islands; and
on this occasion of which I now write. But no one who had ever witnessed
it could forget so wonderful a sight.

One morning, a week after are had taken our departure from the
Seychelles, the officer at the main crow's-nest reported a vessel of
some sort about five miles to the windward. Something strange in her
appearance made the skipper haul up to intercept her. As we drew nearer,
we made her out to be a Malay "prahu;" but, by the look of her, she
was deserted. The big three-cornered sail that had been set, hung in
tattered festoons from the long, slender yard, which, without any gear
to steady it, swung heavily to and fro as the vessel rolled to the long
swell. We drew closer and closer, but no sign of life was visible on
board, so the captain ordered a boat to go and investigate.

In two minutes we were speeding away towards her, and, making a sweep
round her stern, prepared to board her. But we were met by a stench
so awful that Mr. Count would not proceed, and at once returned to the
ship. The boat was quickly hoisted again, and the ship manoeuvred to
pass close to windward of the derelict. Then, from our mast-head, a
horrible sight became visible. Lying about the weather-beaten deck,
in various postures, were thirteen corpses, all far advanced in decay,
which horrible fact fully accounted for the intolerable stench that had
driven us away. It is, perhaps, hardly necessary to say that we promptly
hauled our wind, and placed a good distance between us and that awful
load of death as soon as possible. Poor wretches! What terrible calamity
had befallen them, we could not guess; whatever it was, it had been
complete; nor would any sane man falling across them run the risk of
closer examination into details than we had done. It was a great pity
that we were not able to sink the prahu with her ghastly cargo, and so
free the air from that poisonous foetor that was a deadly danger to any
vessel getting under her lee.

Next day, and for a whole week after, we had a stark calm such a calm as
one realizes who reads sympathetically that magical piece of work, the
"Ancient Mariner." What an amazing instance of the triumph of the human
imagination! For Coleridge certainly never witnessed such a scene as he
there describes with an accuracy of detail that is astounding. Very
few sailors have noticed the sickening condition of the ocean when the
life-giving breeze totally fails for any length of time, or, if they
have, they have said but little about it. Of course, some parts of the
sea show the evil effects of stagnation much sooner than others; but,
generally speaking, want of wind at sea, if long continued, produces
a condition of things dangerous to the health of any land near by.
Whale-ships, penetrating as they do to parts carefully avoided by
ordinary trading vessels, often afford their crews an opportunity of
seeing things mostly hidden from the sight of man, when, actuated by
some mysterious impulse, the uncanny denizens of the middle depths of
the ocean rise to higher levels, and show their weird shapes to the sun.





