CHAPTER XII. WHICH TREATS OF THE KRAKEN

It has often been a matter for considerable surprise to me, that while
the urban population of Great Britain is periodically agitated over the
great sea-serpent question, sailors, as a class, have very little to say
on the subject. During a considerable sea experience in all classes of
vessels, except men-of-war, and in most positions, I have heard a fairly
comprehensive catalogue of subjects brought under dog-watch discussion;
but the sea-serpent has never, within my recollection, been one of them.

The reasons for this abstinence may vary a great deal, but chief among
them is--sailors, as a class, "don't believe in no such a pusson." More
than that, they do believe that the mythical sea-serpent is "boomed"
at certain periods, in the lack of other subjects, which may not be
far from the fact. But there is also another reason, involving a
disagreeable, although strictly accurate, statement. Sailors are, again
taken as a class, the least observant of men. They will talk by the
hour of trivialities about which they know nothing; they will spin
interminable "cuffers" of debaucheries ashore all over the world; pick
to pieces the reputation of all the officers with whom they have ever
sailed; but of the glories, marvels, and mysteries of the mighty deep
you will hear not a word. I can never forget when on my first voyage to
the West Indies, at the age of twelve, I was one night smitten with awe
and wonder at the sight of a vast halo round the moon, some thirty or
forty degrees in diameter. Turning to the man at the wheel, I asked him
earnestly "what THAT was." He looked up with an uninterested eye for
an instant in the direction of my finger, then listlessly informed me,
"That's what they call a sarcle." For a long time I wondered what he
could mean, but it gradually dawned upon me that it was his Norfolk
pronunciation of the word "circle." The definition was a typical one, no
worse than would be given by the great majority of seamen of most of the
natural phenomena they witness daily. Very few seamen could distinguish
between one whale and another of a different species, or give an
intelligible account of the most ordinary and often-seen denizens of the
sea. Whalers are especially to be blamed for their blindness. "Eyes and
no Eyes; or the Art of Seeing" has evidently been little heard of among
them. To this day I can conceive of no more delightful journey for a
naturalist to take than a voyage in a southern whaler, especially if he
were allowed to examine at his leisure such creatures as were caught.
But on board the CACHALOT I could get no information at all upon the
habits of the strange creatures we met with, except whales, and very
little about them.

I have before referred to the great molluscs upon which the sperm whale
feeds, portions of which I so frequently saw ejected from the stomach of
dying whales. Great as my curiosity naturally was to know more of these
immense organisms, all my inquiries on the subject were fruitless. These
veterans of the whale-fishery knew that the sperm whale lived on big
cuttlefish; but they neither knew, nor cared to know, anything more
about these marvellous molluscs. Yet, from the earliest dawn of history,
observant men have been striving to learn something definite about the
marine monsters of which all old legends of the sea have something to
say.

As I mentioned in the last chapter, we were gradually edging across the
Indian Ocean towards Sumatra, but had been checked in our course by a
calm lasting a whole week. A light breeze then sprang up, aided by which
we crept around Achin Head, the northern point of the great island of
Sumatra. Like some gigantic beacon, the enormous mass of the Golden
Mountain dominated the peaceful scene. Pulo Way, or Water Island, looked
very inviting, and I should have been glad to visit a place so well
known to seamen by sight, but so little known by actual touching at.
Our recent stay at the Cocos, however, had settled the question of our
calling anywhere else for some time decidedly in the negative, unless we
might be compelled by accident; moreover, even in these days of law
and order, it is not wise to go poking about among the islands of the
Malayan seas unless you are prepared to fight. Our mission being to
fight whales, we were averse to running any risks, except in the lawful
and necessary exercise of our calling.

It would at first sight appear strange that, in view of the enormous
traffic of steamships through the Malacca Straits, so easily "gallied"
a creature as the cachalot should care to frequent its waters; indeed,
I should certainly think that a great reduction in the numbers of whales
found there must have taken place. But it must also be remembered, that
in modern steam navigation certain well-defined courses are laid down,
which vessels follow from point to point with hardly any deviation
therefrom, and that consequently little disturbance of the sea by their
panting propellers takes place, except upon these marine pathways; as,
for instance, in the Red Sea, where the examination of thousands of
log-books proved conclusively that, except upon straight lines drawn
from point to point between Suez to Perim, the sea is practically unused
to-day.

The few Arab dhows and loitering surveying ships hardly count in this
connection, of course. At any rate, we had not entered the straits, but
were cruising between Car Nicobar and Junkseylon, when we "met up" with
a full-grown cachalot, as ugly a customer as one could wish. From nine
a.m. till dusk the battle raged--for I have often noticed that unless
you kill your whale pretty soon, he gets so wary, as well as fierce,
that you stand a gaudy chance of being worn down yourselves before you
settle accounts with your adversary. This affair certainly looked at one
time as if such would be the case with us; but along about five p.m.,
to our great joy, we got him killed. The ejected food was in masses of
enormous size, larger than any we had yet seen on the voyage, some of
them being estimated to be of the size of our hatch-house, viz. 8 feet x
6 feet x 6 feet. The whale having been secured alongside, all hands were
sent below, as they were worn out with the day's work. The third mate
being ill, I had been invested with the questionable honour of standing
his watch, on account of my sea experience and growing favour with the
chief. Very bitterly did I resent the privilege at the time, I remember,
being so tired and sleepy that I knew not how to keep awake. I did
not imagine that anything would happen to make me prize that night's
experience for the rest of my life, or I should have taken matters with
a far better grace.

At about eleven p.m. I was leaning over the lee rail, grazing steadily
at the bright surface of the sea, where the intense radiance of the
tropical moon made a broad path like a pavement of burnished silver.
Eyes that saw not, mind only confusedly conscious of my surroundings,
were mine; but suddenly I started to my feet with an exclamation, and
stared with all my might at the strangest sight I ever saw. There was
a violent commotion in the sea right where the moon's rays were
concentrated, so great that, remembering our position, I was at first
inclined to alarm all hands; for I had often heard of volcanic islands
suddenly lifting their heads from the depths below, or disappearing in
a moment, and, with Sumatra's chain of active volcanoes so near, I felt
doubtful indeed of what was now happening. Getting the night-glasses
out of the cabin scuttle, where they were always hung in readiness,
I focussed them on the troubled spot, perfectly satisfied by a short
examination that neither volcano nor earthquake had anything to do with
what was going on; yet so vast were the forces engaged that I might well
have been excused for my first supposition. A very large sperm whale was
locked in deadly conflict with a cuttle-fish or squid, almost as large
as himself, whose interminable tentacles seemed to enlace the whole
of his great body. The head of the whale especially seemed a perfect
net-work of writhing arms--naturally I suppose, for it appeared as
if the whale had the tail part of the mollusc in his jaws, and, in a
business-like, methodical way, was sawing through it. By the side of the
black columnar head of the whale appeared the head of the great squid,
as awful an object as one could well imagine even in a fevered dream.
Judging as carefully as possible, I estimated it to be at least as large
as one of our pipes, which contained three hundred and fifty gallons;
but it may have been, and probably was, a good deal larger. The eyes
were very remarkable from their size and blackness, which, contrasted
with the livid whiteness of the head, made their appearance all the more
striking. They were, at least, a foot in diameter, and, seen under such
conditions, looked decidedly eerie and hobgoblin-like. All around the
combatants were numerous sharks, like jackals round a lion, ready to
share the feast, and apparently assisting in the destruction of the huge
cephalopod. So the titanic struggle went on, in perfect silence as
far as we were concerned, because, even had there been any noise, our
distance from the scene of conflict would not have permitted us to hear
it.

Thinking that such a sight ought not to be missed by the captain, I
overcame my dread of him sufficiently to call him, and tell him of what
was taking place. He met my remarks with such a furious burst of anger
at my daring to disturb him for such a cause, that I fled precipitately
on deck again, having the remainder of the vision to myself, for none
of the others cared sufficiently for such things to lose five minutes'
sleep in witnessing them. The conflict ceased, the sea resumed its
placid calm, and nothing remained to tell of the fight but a strong
odour of fish, as of a bank of seaweed left by the tide in the blazing
sun. Eight bells struck, and I went below to a troubled sleep, wherein
all the awful monsters that an over-excited brain could conjure up
pursued me through the gloomy caves of ocean, or mocked my pigmy efforts
to escape.

The occasions upon which these gigantic cuttle-fish appear at the sea
surface must, I think, be very rare. From their construction, they
appear fitted only to grope among the rocks at the bottom of the ocean.
Their mode of progression is backward, by the forcible ejection of a
jet of water from an orifice in the neck, beside the rectum or cloaca.
Consequently their normal position is head-downward, and with tentacles
spread out like the ribs of an umbrella--eight of them at least; the
two long ones, like the antennae of an insect, rove unceasingly around,
seeking prey.

The imagination can hardly picture a more terrible object than one
of these huge monsters brooding in the ocean depths, the gloom of his
surroundings increased by the inky fluid (sepia) which he secretes in
copious quantities, every cup-shaped disc, of the hundreds with which
the restless tentacles are furnished, ready at the slightest touch to
grip whatever is near, not only by suction, but by the great claws
set all round within its circle. And in the centre of this net-work of
living traps is the chasm-like mouth, with its enormous parrot-beak,
ready to rend piecemeal whatever is held by the tentaculae. The very
thought of it makes one's flesh crawl. Well did Michelet term them "the
insatiable nightmares of the sea."

Yet, but for them, how would such great creatures as the sperm whale be
fed? Unable, from their bulk, to capture small fish except by accident,
and, by the absence of a sieve of baleen, precluded from subsisting upon
the tiny crustacea, which support the MYSTICETAE, the cachalots seem
to be confined for their diet to cuttle-fish, and, from their point of
view, the bigger the latter are the better. How big they may become in
the depths of the sea, no man knoweth; but it is unlikely that even the
vast specimens seen are full-sized, since they have only come to the
surface under abnormal conditions, like the one I have attempted to
describe, who had evidently been dragged up by his relentless foe.

Creatures like these, who inhabit deep waters, and do not need to come
to the surface by the exigencies of their existence, necessarily present
many obstacles to accurate investigation of their structure and habits;
but, from the few specimens that have been obtained of late years,
fairly comprehensive details have been compiled, and may be studied in
various French and German works, of which the Natural History Museum at
South Kensington possesses copies. These, through the courtesy of the
authorities in charge, are easily accessible to students who wish to
prosecute the study of this wonderful branch of the great mollusca
family.

When we commenced to cut in our whale next morning, the sea was fairly
alive with fish of innumerable kinds, while a vast host of sea-birds, as
usual, waited impatiently for the breaking-up of the huge carcass, which
they knew would afford them no end of a feast. An untoward accident,
which happened soon after the work was started, gave the waiting myriads
immense satisfaction, although the unfortunate second mate, whose slip
of the spade was responsible, came in for a hurricane of vituperation
from the enraged skipper. It was in detaching the case from the
head--always a work of difficulty, and requiring great precision of aim.
Just as Mr. Cruce made a powerful thrust with his keen tool, the vessel
rolled, and the blow, missing the score in which he was cutting, fell
upon the case instead, piercing its side. For a few minutes the result
was unnoticed amidst the wash of the ragged edges of the cut, but
presently a long streak of white, wax-like pieces floating astern, and
a tremendous commotion among the birds, told the story. The liquid
spermaceti was leaking rapidly from the case, turning solid as it got
into the cool water. Nothing could be done to stop the waste, which,
as it was a large whale, was not less than twenty barrels, or about two
tuns of pure spermaceti. An accident of this kind never failed to make
our skipper almost unbearable in his temper for some days afterwards;
and, to do him justice, he did not discriminate very carefully as to who
felt his resentment besides its immediate cause.

Therefore we had all a rough time of it while his angry fit lasted,
which was a whole week, or until all was shipshape again. Meanwhile we
were edging gradually through the Malacca Straits and around the big
island of Borneo, never going very near the land on account of the great
and numerous dangers attendant upon coasting in those localities to any
but those continually engaged in such a business.

Indeed, all navigation in those seas to sailing vessels is dangerous,
and requires the greatest care. Often we were obliged at a minute's
notice to let go the anchor, although out of sight of land, some rapid
current being found carrying us swiftly towards a shoal or race,
where we might come to grief. Yet there was no fuss or hurry, the same
leisurely old system was continued, and worked as well as ever. But it
was not apparent why we were threading the tortuous and difficult waters
of the Indian Archipelago. No whales of any kind were seen for at least
a month, although, from our leisurely mode of sailing, it was evident
that they were looked for.

An occasional native craft came alongside, desirous of bartering fish,
which we did not want, being able to catch all we needed as readily
almost as they were. Fruit and vegetables we could not get at such
distances from land, for the small canoes that lie in wait for passing
ships do not of course venture far from home.





