CHAPTER XV. WHICH COMES UNCOMFORTABLY NEAR BEING THE LAST

All unversed as I am in the finer shades of literary craftsmanship,
there is great uncertainty in my mind whether it is good or bad "art" to
anticipate your next chapter by foreshadowing its contents; but whether
good or bad art, the remembrance of my miseries on the eventful occasion
I wish to describe was so strong upon me as I wrote the last few lines
of the previous chapter that I just had to let those few words leak out.

Through all the vicissitudes of this strange voyage I had hitherto felt
pretty safe, and as the last thing a man anticipates (if his digestion
is all right) is the possibility of coming to grief himself while fully
prepared to see everybody else go under, so I had got to think that
whoever got killed I was not to be--a very pleasing sentiment, and one
that carries a man far, enabling him to face dangers with a light heart
which otherwise would make a nerveless animal of him.

In this optimistic mood, then, I gaily flung myself into my place in the
mate's boat one morning, as we were departing in chase of a magnificent
cachalot that had been raised just after breakfast. There were no other
vessels in sight--much to our satisfaction--the wind was light, with a
cloudless sky, and the whale was dead to leeward of us. We sped along
at a good rate towards our prospective victim, who was, in his leisurely
enjoyment of life, calmly lolling on the surface, occasionally lifting
his enormous tail out of water and letting it fall flat upon the surface
with a boom audible for miles.

We were as usual, first boat; but, much to the mate's annoyance, when we
were a short half-mile from the whale, our main-sheet parted. It became
immediately necessary to roll the sail up, lest its flapping should
alarm the watchful monster, and this delayed us sufficiently to allow
the other boats to shoot ahead of us. Thus the second mate got fast some
seconds before we arrived on the scene, seeing which we furled sail,
unshipped the mast, and went in on him with the oars only. At first the
proceedings were quite of the usual character, our chief wielding his
lance in most brilliant fashion, while not being fast to the animal
allowed us much greater freedom in our evolutions; but that fatal habit
of the mate's--of allowing his boat to take care of herself so long as
he was getting in some good home-thrusts--once more asserted itself.
Although the whale was exceedingly vigorous, churning the sea into
yeasty foam over an enormous area, there we wallowed close to him, right
in the middle of the turmoil, actually courting disaster.

He had just settled down for a moment, when, glancing over the gunwale,
I saw his tail, like a vast shadow, sweeping away from us towards the
second mate, who was laying off the other side of him. Before I had time
to think, the mighty mass of gristle leapt into the sunshine, curved
back from us like a huge bow. Then with a roar it came at us, released
from its tension of Heaven knows how many tons. Full on the broadside
it struck us, sending every soul but me flying out of the wreckage as if
fired from catapults. I did not go because my foot was jammed somehow in
the well of the boat, but the wrench nearly pulled my thigh-bone out of
its socket. I had hardly released my foot, when, towering above me,
came the colossal head of the great creature, as he ploughed through the
bundle of debris that had just been a boat. There was an appalling roar
of water in my ears, and darkness that might be felt all around. Yet,
in the midst of it all, one thought predominated as clearly as if I had
been turning it over in my mind in the quiet of my bunk aboard--"What
if he should swallow me?" Nor to this day can I understand how I escaped
the portals of his gullet, which of course gaped wide as a church door.
But the agony of holding my breath soon overpowered every other feeling
and thought, till just as something was going to snap inside my head I
rose to the surface. I was surrounded by a welter of bloody froth, which
made it impossible for me to see; but oh, the air was sweet!

I struck out blindly, instinctively, although I could feel so strong an
eddy that voluntary progress was out of the question. My hand touched
and clung to a rope, which immediately towed me in some direction--I
neither knew nor cared whither. Soon the motion ceased, and, with a
seaman's instinct, I began to haul myself along by the rope I grasped,
although no definite idea was in my mind as to where it was attached.
Presently I came butt up against something solid, the feel of which
gathered all my scattered wits into a compact knub of dread. It was the
whale! "Any port in a storm," I murmured, beginning to haul away again
on my friendly line. By dint of hard work I pulled myself right up the
sloping, slippery bank of blubber, until I reached the iron, which,
as luck would have it, was planted in that side of the carcass now
uppermost. Carcass I said--well, certainly I had no idea of there being
any life remaining within the vast mass beneath me, yet I had
hardly time to take a couple of turns round myself with the rope (or
whale-line, as I had proved it to be), when I felt the great animal
quiver all over, and begin to forge ahead. I was now composed enough to
remember that help could not be far away, and that my rescue, providing
that I could keep above water, was but a question of a few minutes. But
I was hardly prepared for the whale's next move. Being very near his
end, the boat, or boats, had drawn off a bit, I supposed, for I could
see nothing of them. Then I remembered the flurry. Almost at the same
moment it began; and there was I, who with fearful admiration had so
often watched the titanic convulsions of a dying cachalot, actually
involved in them. The turns were off my body, but I was able to twist a
couple of turns round my arms, which, in case of his sounding, I could
readily let go.

Then all was lost in roar and rush, as of the heart of some mighty
cataract, during which I was sometimes above, sometimes beneath, the
water, but always clinging with every ounce of energy still left, to the
line. Now, one thought was uppermost--"What if he should breach?" I had
seen them do so when in flurry, leaping full twenty feet in the air.
Then I prayed.

Quickly as all the preceding changes had passed came perfect peace.
There I lay, still alive, but so weak that, although I could feel the
turns slipping off my arms, and knew that I should slide off the slope
of the whale's side into the sea if they did, I could make no effort
to secure myself. Everything then passed away from me, just as if I had
gone to sleep.

I do not at all understand how I kept my position, nor how long, but
I awoke to the blessed sound of voices, and saw the second mate's
boat alongside, Very gently and tenderly they lifted me into the boat,
although I could hardly help screaming with agony when they touched me,
so bruised and broken up did I feel. My arms must have been nearly torn
from their sockets, for the strands of the whale-line had cut deep
into their flesh with the strain upon it, while my thigh was swollen
enormously from the blow I received at the onset. Mr. Cruce was the most
surprised man I think I ever saw. For full ten minutes he stared at me
with wide-open eyes. When at last he spoke, it was with difficulty, as
if wanting words to express his astonishment. At last he blurted out,
"Whar you bin all de time, ennyhaow? 'Cawse ef you bin hangin' on to dat
ar wale ev'sence you boat smash, w'y de debbil you hain't all ter bits,
hey?" I smiled feebly, but was too weak to talk, and presently went off
again into a dead faint.

When I recovered, I was snug in my bunk aboard, but aching in every
joint, and as sore as if I had been pounded with a club until I was
bruised all over. During the day Mr. Count was kind enough to pay me a
visit. With his usual luck, he had escaped without the slightest injury;
neither was any other member of the boat's crew the worse for the
ducking but myself. He told me that the whale was one of the largest
he had ever seen, and as fat as butter. The boat was an entire loss, so
completely smashed to pieces that nothing of her or her gear had been
recovered. After spending about a quarter of an hour with me, he left me
considerably cheered up, promising to look after me in the way of food,
and also to send me some books. He told me that I need not worry
myself about my inability to be at work, because the old man was not
unfavourably disposed towards me, which piece of news gave me a great
deal of comfort.

When my poor, weary shipmates came below from their heavy toil of
cutting in, they were almost inclined to be envious of my comfort--small
blame to them--though I would gladly have taken my place among them
again, could I have got rid of my hurts. But I was condemned to lie
there for nearly three weeks before I was able to get about once more.
In my sleep I would undergo the horrible anticipation of sliding down
that awful, cavernous mouth over again, often waking with a shriek and
drenched with sweat.

While I lay there, three whales were caught, all small cows, and I was
informed that the skipper was getting quite disgusted with the luck. At
last I managed to get on deck, quite a different-looking man to when I
went below, and feeling about ten years older. I found the same sullen
quiet reigning that I had noticed several times before when we were
unfortunate. I fancied that the skipper looked more morose and savage
than ever, though of me, to my great relief, he took not the slightest
notice.

The third day after my return to duty we sighted whales again. We
lowered three boats as promptly as usual; but when within about half a
mile of the "pod" some slight noise in one of the boats gallied them,
and away they went in the wind's eye, it blowing a stiffish breeze at
the time, It was from the first evidently a hopeless task to chase them,
but we persevered until recalled to the ship, dead beat with fatigue.
I was not sorry, for my recent adventure seemed to have made quite a
coward of me, so much so that an unpleasant gnawing at the pit of my
stomach as we neared them almost made me sick. I earnestly hoped that
so inconvenient a feeling would speedily leave me, or I should be but a
poor creature in a boat.

In passing, I would like to refer to the wonderful way in which these
whales realize at a great distance, if the slightest sound be made, the
presence of danger. I do not use the word "hear" because so abnormally
small are their organs of hearing, the external opening being quite
difficult to find, that I do not believe they can hear at all well. But
I firmly believe they possess another sense by means of which they are
able to detect any unusual vibration of the waves of either air or sea
at a far greater distance than it would be possible for them to hear,
Whatever this power may be which they possess, all whalemen are well
acquainted with their exercise of it, and always take most elaborate
precautions to render their approach to a whale noiseless.

Our extraordinary want of success at last so annoyed the skipper that
he determined to quit the ground and go north. The near approach of
the open season in those regions probably hastened his decision, but I
learned from Goliath that he had always been known as a most fortunate
man among the "bowheads," as the great MYSTICETAE of that part of
the Arctic seas are called by the Americans. Not that there is any
difference, as far as I have been able to ascertain, between them
and the "right" whale of the Greenland seas, but from some caprice of
nomenclature for which there is no accounting.

So in leisurely fashion we worked north, keeping, of course, a bright
look-out all the way for straggling cachalots, but not seeing any. From
scraps of information that in some mysterious fashion leaked out, we
learned that we were bound to the Okhotsk Sea, it being no part of
the skipper's intentions to go prowling around Behrings Sea, where he
believed the whales to be few and far between.

It may be imagined that we of the crew were not at all pleased with
this intelligence, our life being, we considered, sufficiently miserable
without the addition of extreme cold, for we did not realize that in the
Arctic regions during summer the cold is by no means unbearable, and our
imagination pictured a horrible waste of perpetual ice and snow, in the
midst of which we should be compelled to freeze while dodging whales
through the crevices of the floes. But whether our pictures of the
prospects that awaited us were caricatures or no made not the slightest
difference. "Growl you may, but go you must" is an old sea-jingle of the
truest ring; but, while our going was inevitable, growling was a luxury
none of us dare indulge in.

We had by no means a bad passage to the Kuriles, which form a natural
barrier enclosing the immense area of the Okhotsk Sea from the
vast stretch of the Pacific. Around this great chain of islands the
navigation is exceedingly difficult, and dangerous as well, from the
ever-varying currents as from the frequent fogs and sudden storms. But
these impediments to swift and safe navigation are made light of by
the whalemen, who, as I feel never weary of remarking, are the finest
navigators in the world where speed is not the first consideration.

The most peculiar features of these inhospitable shores to a seaman are
the vast fields of seaweed surrounding them all, which certainly helps
to keep the sea down during gales, but renders navigation most difficult
on account of its concealment of hidden dangers. These islands are aptly
named, the word "Kurile" being Kamschatkan for smoke; and whether it be
regarded as given in consequence of the numerous volcanoes which pour
their fumes into the air, or the all-prevailing fog fostered by the Kuro
Siwo, or Japanese counterpart of the Gulf stream, the designation is
equally appropriate.

We entered the Okhotsk Sea by the Nadeshda Channel, so-named after
Admiral Krusenstern's ship, which was the first civilized vessel that
passed through its turbulent waters. It separates the islands Rashau and
Mantaua by about twenty miles, yet so conflicting and violent are the
currents which eddy and swirl in all parts of it, that without a
steady, strong, fair wind it is most dangerous to a sailing vessel.
Thenceforward the navigation was free from difficulty, or at least none
that we could recognize as such, so we gave all our attention to the
business which brought us there.

Scarcely any change was needed in our equipment, except the substitution
of longer harpoons for those we had been using, and the putting away
of the bomb-guns. These changes were made because the blubber of the
bowhead is so thick that ordinary harpoons will not penetrate beyond it
to the muscle, which, unless they do, renders them liable to draw, upon
a heavy strain. As for the bombs, Yankees hold the mysticetae in such
supreme contempt that none of them would dream of wasting so expensive
a weapon as a bomb upon them. I was given to understand by my constant
crony, Mistah Jones, that there was no more trouble in killing a bowhead
than in slaughtering a sheep; and that while it was quite true that
accidents DID occur, they were entirely due to the carelessness or
clumsiness of the whalemen, and not in any way traceable to a desire on
the victim's part to do any one harm.

The sea was little encumbered with ice, it being now late in June, so
that our progress was not at all impeded by the few soft, brashy floes
that we encountered, none of them hard enough to do a ship's hull any
damage. In most places the sea was sufficiently shallow to permit of our
anchoring. For this purpose we used a large kedge, with stout hawser for
cable, never furling all the sails in case of a strong breeze suddenly
springing up, which would cause us to drag. This anchoring was very
comfortable. Besides allowing us to get much more rest than when on
other cruising-grounds, we were able to catch enormous quantities
of fish, mostly salmon, of which there were no less than fourteen
varieties. So plentiful were these splendid fish that we got quite
critical in our appreciation of them, very soon finding that one kind,
known as the "nerker," was far better flavoured than any of the others.
But as the daintiest food palls the quickest, it was not long before we
got tired of salmon, and wished most heartily for beef.

Much fun has been made of the discontent of sailors. With food which is
considered a luxury ashore, and wonder expressed that if, as we assert,
the ordinary dietary of the seaman be so bad, he should be so ready to
rebel when fed with delicacies. But in justice to the sailor, it ought
to be remembered that the daintiest food may be rendered disgusting by
bad cookery, such as is the rule on board merchant ships. "God sends
meat, but the devil sends cooks" is a proverb which originated on board
ship, and no one who has ever served any time in a ship's forecastle
would deny that it is abundantly justified. Besides which, even good
food well cooked of one kind only, served many times in succession,
becomes very trying, only the plainest foods, such as bread, rice,
potatoes, etc., retaining their command of the appetite continually.

I remember once, when upon the Coromandel coast in a big Greenock ship,
we found fowls very cheap. At Bimliapatam the captain bought two or
three hundred, which, as we had no coops, were turned loose on deck. We
had also at the same time prowling about the decks three goats, twenty
pigs, and two big dogs.

Consequently the state of the ship was filthy, nor could all our efforts
keep her clean. This farmyard condition of things was permitted to
continue for about a week, when the officers got so tired of it, and
the captain so annoyed at the frequent loss of fowls by their flying
overboard, that the edict went forth to feed the foremast hands on
poultry till further orders. Great was our delight at the news. Fowl for
dinner represented to our imagination almost the apex of high living,
only indulged in by such pampered children of fortune as the officers of
ships or well-to-do people ashore.

When dinner-time arrived, we boys made haste to the galley with watering
mouths, joyfully anticipating that rare delight of the sailor--a good
"feed." The cook uncovered his coppers, plunged his tormentors therein,
and produced such a succession of ugly corpses of fowls as I had never
seen before. To each man a whole one was allotted, and we bore the
steaming hecatomb into the forecastle. The boisterous merriment became
hushed at our approach, and faces grew lengthy when the unwholesome
aspect of the "treat" was revealed. Each man secured his bird, and
commenced operations. But oh, the disappointment, and the bad words!
What little flesh there was upon the framework of those unhappy fowls
was like leather itself, and utterly flavourless. It could not well
have been otherwise. The feathers had been simply scalded off, the heads
chopped off, and bodies split open to facilitate drawing (I am sure I
wonder the cook took the trouble to do that much), and thus prepared
they were cast into a cauldron of boiling salt water. There, with the
water fiercely bubbling, they were kept for an hour and a half, then
pitchforked out into the mess kid and set before us. We simply could not
eat them; no one but a Noumean Kanaka could, for his teeth are equal to
husking a cocoa-nut, or chopping off a piece of sugar-cane as thick as
your wrist.

After much heated discussion, it was unanimously resolved to protest at
once against the substitution of such a fraud as this poultry for our
legitimate rations of "salt horse." so, bearing the DISJECTA MEMBRA of
our meal, the whole crowd marched aft, and requested an interview with
the skipper. He came out of the cabin at once, saying, "Well, boys,
what's the matter?" The spokesman, a bald-headed Yankee, who had been
bo'sun's mate of an American man-of-war, stepped forward and said,
offering his kid, "Jest have a look at that sir." The skipper looked,
saying, inquiringly, "Well?" "D'yew think, sir," said Nat, "THET'S
proper grub for men?" "Proper grub! Why, you old sinner, you don't mean
to say you're goin' to growl about havin' chicken for dinner?" "Well,
sir, it depends muchly upon the chicken. All I know is, that I've et
some dam queer tack in my time, but sence I ben fishin' I never had no
such bundles of sticks parcelled with leather served out to me. I HEV et
boot--leastways gnawed it; when I was cast away in a open boat for three
weeks--but it wa'n't bad boot, as boots go. Now, if yew say that these
things is boots, en thet it's necessary we should eat'em, or starve,
w'y, we'll think about it. But if yew call'em chickens,'n say you're
doin' us a kindness by stoppin' our'lowance of meat wile we're wrastlin'
with 'em, then we say we don't feel obliged to yew, 'n 'll thank yew
kindly to keep such lugsuries for yerself, 'n give us wot we signed
for." A murmur of assent confirmed this burst of eloquence, which we all
considered a very fine effort indeed. A moment's silence ensued; then
the skipper burst out, "I've often heard of such things, but hang me if
I ever believed 'em till now! You ungrateful beggars! I'll see you get
your whack, and no more, from this out. When you get any little extras
aboard this ship agen, you'll be thankful for 'em; now I tell you." "All
right, sir," said Nat; "so long as we don't hev to chaw any more of yer
biled Bimly crows, I dessay we shall worry along as usual." And, as the
Parliamentary reports say, the proceedings then terminated.

Now, suppose the skipper had told the story to some of his shore
friends, how very funny the sailors' conduct would have been made to
appear.

On another occasion long after, when I was mate of a barque loading
mahogany in Tonala, Mexico, the skipper thought he would practise
economy by buying a turtle instead of beef. A large turtle was obtained
for twenty-five cents, and handed over to the cook to be dealt with,
particular instructions being given him as to the apportionment of the
meat.

At eight bells there was a gathering of the men in front of the poop,
and a summons for the captain. When he appeared, the usual stereotyped
invitation to "have a look at THAT, if you please, sir," was uttered.
The skipper was, I think, prepared for a protest, for he began to
bluster immediately. "Look here!" he bawled, "I ain't goin' to 'ave any
of your dam nonsense. You WANT somethin' to growl about, you do." "Well,
Cap'n George," said one of the men, "you shorely don't think we k'n eat
shells, do yer?" Just then I caught sight of the kid's contents, and
could hardly restrain my indignation. For in a dirty heap, the sight
of which might have pleased an Esquimaux, but was certainly enough
to disgust any civilized man, lay the calipee, or under-shell of the
turtle, hacked into irregular blocks. It had been simply boiled, and
flung into the kid, an unclean, disgusting heap of shell, with pieces
of dirty flesh attached in ragged lumps. But the skipper, red-faced and
angry, answered, "W'y, yer so-and-so ijits, that's wot the Lord Mayor of
London gives about a guinea a hounce for w'en 'e feeds lords n' dooks.
Only the haristocracy at 'ome get a charnce to stick their teeth in
such grub as that. An' 'ere are you lot a-growlin' at 'avin' it for a
change!" "That's all right, cap'n," said the man; "bein' brort up ter
such lugsuries, of corse you kin appreshyate it. So if yer keep it fer
yer own eatin', an' giv us wot we signed for, we shall be werry much
obliged." "Now, I ain't a-goin' to 'ave none o' YOUR cheek, so you'd
better git forrard. You can betcher life you won't get no more fresh
messes this voy'ge." So, with grumbling and ill-will on both sides, the
conference came to an end. But I thought, and still think, that the
mess set before those men, who had been working hard since six a.m., was
unfit for the food of a good dog.

Out of my own experience I might give many other instances of the kind,
but I hope these will suffice to show that Jack's growling is often
justified, when both sides of the story are heard.





