CHAPTER XXVIII. TO THE BLUFF, AND HOME

And now the cruise of the good old whaling barque CACHALOT, as far as
whaling is concerned, comes to an end. For all practical purposes
she becomes a humdrum merchantman in haste to reach her final port of
discharge, and get rid of her cargo. No more will she loiter and pry
around anything and everything, from an island to a balk of drift-wood,
that comes in her way, knowing not the meaning of "waste of time." The
"crow's-nests" are dismantled, taut topgallant-masts sent up, and royal
yards crossed. As soon as we get to sea we shall turn-to and heave that
ancient fabric of bricks and mortar--always a queer-looking erection to
be cumbering a ship's deck--piecemeal over the side. It has long been
shaky and weather-beaten; it will soon obstruct our movements no more.
Our rigging has all been set up and tarred down; we have painted hull
and spars, and scraped wherever the wood-work is kept bright. All gear
belonging to whaling has been taken out of the boats, carefully cleaned,
oiled, and stowed away for a "full due." Two of the boats have been
taken inboard, and stowed bottom-up upon the gallows aft, as any
other merchantman carries them. At last, our multifarious preparations
completed, we ride ready for sea.

It was quite in accordance with the fitness of things that, when all
things were now ready for our departure, there should come a change of
wind that threatened to hold us prisoners for some days longer. But our
"old man" was hard to beat, and he reckoned that, if we could only get
out of the "pond," he would work her across to the Bluff somehow or
other. So we ran out a kedge with a couple of lines to it, and warped
her out of the weather side of the harbour, finding, when at last we
got her clear, that she would lay her course across the Straits to clear
Ruapuke--nearly; but the current had to be reckoned with. Before we
reached that obstructing island we were down at the eastern end of it,
and obliged to anchor promptly to save ourselves from being swept down
the coast many miles to leeward of our port.

But the skipper was quite equal to the occasion. Ordering his boat,
he sped away into Bluff harbour, only a matter of six or seven miles,
returning soon with a tug, who for a pound or two placed us, without
further trouble, alongside the wharf, amongst some magnificent clipper
ships of Messrs. Henderson's and the New Zealand Shipping Co.'s, who
seemed to turn up their splendid noses at the squat, dumpy, antiquated
old serving-mallet that dared to mingle with so august a crowd. There
had been a time, not so very far back, when I should have shared their
apparent contempt for our homely old tub; but my voyage had taught me,
among other things, that, as far as true comfort went at sea, not a
"three-skysail-yarder" among them could compare with the CACHALOT. And
I was extremely glad that my passage round the Horn was to be in my own
ship, and not in a long, snaky tank that, in the language of the sailor,
takes a header when she gets outside the harbour, and only comes up two
or three times to blow before she gets home.

Our only reason for visiting this place being to discharge Captain
Count's oil, and procure a sea-stock of salt provisions and hard bread,
these duties were taken in hand at once. The skipper sold his venture of
oil to good advantage, being so pleased with his success that he gave us
all a good feed on the strength of it.

As soon as the stores were embarked and everything ready for sea,
leave was given to all hands for twenty-four hours, upon the distinct
understanding that the privilege was not to be abused, to the detriment
of everybody, who, as might be supposed, were anxious to start for
home. In order that there might be less temptation to go on the spree
generally, a grand picnic was organized to a beautiful valley some
distance from the town. Carriages were chartered, an enormous quantity
of eatables and drinkables provided, and away we went, a regular
wayzgoose or bean-feast party. It was such a huge success, that I have
ever since wondered why such outings cannot become usual among sailors
on liberty abroad, instead of the senseless, vicious waste of health,
time, and hard-earned wages which is general. But I must not let myself
loose upon this theme again, or we shall never get to sea.

Liberty over without any trouble arising, and all hands comfortably on
board again, the news ran round that we were to sail in the morning.
So, after a good night's rest, we cast loose from the wharf, and, with
a little assistance from the same useful tug that brought us in, got
fairly out to sea. All sail was set to a strong, steady north-wester,
and with yards canted the least bit in the world on the port tack, so
that every stitch was drawing, we began our long easterly stretch to the
Horn, homeward bound at last.

Favoured by wind and weather, we made an average run of one hundred and
eighty miles per day for many days, paying no attention to "great circle
sailing," since in such a slow ship the net gain to be secured by going
to a high latitude was very small, but dodging comfortably along on
about the parallel of 48deg. S., until it became necessary to draw down
towards "Cape Stiff," as that dreaded extremity of South America, Cape
Horn, is familiarly called by seamen. As we did so, icebergs became
numerous, at one time over seventy being in sight at once. Some of them
were of immense size--one, indeed, that could hardly be fitly described
as an iceberg, but more properly an ice-field, with many bergs rising
out of it, being over sixty miles long, while some of its towering peaks
were estimated at from five hundred to one thousand feet high. Happily,
the weather kept clear; for icebergs and fog make a combination truly
appalling to the sailor, especially if there be much wind blowing.

Needless, perhaps, to say, our look-out was of the best, for all hands
had a double interest in the safety of the ship. Perhaps it may be
thought that any man would have so much regard for the safety of his
life that he would not think of sleeping on his look-out; but I can
assure my readers that, strange as it may seem, such is not the case, I
have known men who could never be trusted not to go to sleep, no matter
how great the danger. This is so well recognized in merchant ships that
nearly every officer acts as if there was no look-out at all forward, in
case his supposed watchman should be having a surreptitious doze.

Stronger and stronger blew the brave west wind; dirtier, gloomier, and
colder grew the weather, until, reduced to two topsails and a reefed
foresail, we were scudding dead before the gale for all we were worth.
This was a novel experience for us in the CACHALOT, and I was curious
to see how she would behave. To my mind, the supreme test of a ship's
sea-kindliness is the length of time she will scud before a gale without
"pooping" a sea, or taking such heavy water on board over her sides
as to do serious damage. Some ships are very dangerous to run at all.
Endeavouring to make the best use of the gale which is blowing in the
right direction, the captain "hangs on" to all the sail he can carry,
until she ships a mighty mass of water over all, so that the decks
are filled with wreckage, or, worse still, "poops" a sea. The latter
experience is a terrible one, even to a trained seaman. You are running
before the wind and waves, sometimes deep in the valley between two
liquid mountains, sometimes high on the rolling ridge of one. You watch
anxiously the speed of the sea, trying to decide whether it or you are
going the faster, when suddenly there seems to be a hush, almost a
lull, in the uproar. You look astern, and see a wall of water rising
majestically higher and higher, at the same time drawing nearer and
nearer. Instinctively you clutch at something firm, and hold your
breath. Then that mighty green barrier leans forward, the ship's stern
seems to settle at the same time, and, with a thundering noise as of
an avalanche descending, it overwhelms you. Of course the ship's way is
deadened; she seems like a living thing overburdened, yet struggling to
be free; and well it is for all hands if the helmsman be able to keep
his post and his wits about him. For if he be hurt, or have fled from
the terrible wave, it is an even chance that she "broaches to;" that is
to say, swings round broadside on to the next great wave that follows
relentlessly its predecessor. Then, helpless and vulnerable, she will
most probably be smashed up and founder. Many a good ship has gone with
all hands to the bottom just as simply as that.

In order to avoid such a catastrophe, the proper procedure is to
"heave-to" before the sea has attained so dangerous a height; but even a
landsman can understand how reluctant a shipmaster may be to lie like
a log just drifting, while a more seaworthy ship is flying along at the
rate of, perhaps, three hundred miles a day in the desired direction.
Ships of the CACHALOT's bluff build are peculiarly liable to delays of
this kind from their slowness, which, if allied to want of buoyancy,
makes it necessary to heave-to in good time, if safety is at all cared
for.

To my great astonishment and delight, however, our grand old vessel
nobly sustained her character, running on without shipping any heavy
water, although sometimes hedged in on either side by gigantic waves
that seemed to tower as high as her lowermast heads. Again and again
we were caught up and passed by the splendid homeward-bound colonial
packets, some of them carrying an appalling press of canvas, under
which the long, snaky hulls, often overwhelmed by the foaming seas, were
hardly visible, so insignificant did they appear by comparison with the
snowy mountain of swelling sail above.

So we fared eastward and ever southward, until in due time up rose the
gloomy, storm-scarred crags of the Diego Ramirez rocks, grim outposts
of the New World. To us, though, they bore no terrific aspect; for were
they not the turning-point from which we could steer north, our head
pointed for home? Immediately upon rounding them we hauled up four
points, and, with daily improving weather climbed the southern slopes
towards the line.

Very humdrum and quiet the life appeared to all of us, and had it not
been for the saving routine of work by day, and watch by night, kept up
with all our old discipline, the tedium would have been insupportable
after the incessant excitement of expectation to which we had so long
been accustomed. Still, our passage was by no means a bad one for a slow
ship, being favoured by more than ordinarily steadfast winds until we
reached the zone of the south-east trades again, where the usual mild,
settled wind and lovely weather awaited us. On and on, unhasting but
unresting, we stolidly jogged, by great good fortune slipping across the
"doldrums"--that hateful belt of calms about the line so much detested
by all sailor-men--without losing the south-east wind.

Not one day of calm delayed us, the north-east trades meeting us like a
friend sent to extend a welcoming hand and lend us his assistance on our
homeward way. They hung so far to the eastward, too--sometimes actually
at east-by-north-that we were able to steer north on the starboard
tack--a slice of luck not usually met with. This "slant" put all hands
in the best of humours, and already the date of our arrival was settled
by the more sanguine ones, as well as excellent plans made for spending
the long voyage's earnings.

For my part, having been, in spite of my youth, accustomed to so many
cruel disappointments and slips between the cup and lip, I was afraid to
dwell too hopefully upon the pleasures (?) of getting ashore. And after
the incident which I have now to record occurred, I felt more nervous
distrust than I had ever felt before at sea since first I began to
experience the many vicissitudes of a sailor's life.

We had reached the northern verge of the tropics in a very short time,
owing to the favourable cant in the usual direction of the north-east
trades before noted, and had been met with north-westerly winds and
thick, dirty weather, which was somewhat unusual in so low a latitude.
Our look-outs redoubled their vigilance, one being posted on each bow
always at night, and relieved every hour, as we were so well manned. We
were now on the port tack, of course, heading about north-east-by-north,
and right in the track of outward-hound vessels from both the United
Kingdom and the States. One morning, about three a.m.--that fateful
time in the middle watch when more collisions occur than at any
other--suddenly out of the darkness a huge ship seemed to leap right at
us. She must have come up in a squall, of which there were many about,
at the rate of some twelve knots an hour, having a fair wind, and every
rag of sail set. Not a gleam of light was visible anywhere on board of
her, and, to judge from all appearances, the only man awake on board was
the helmsman.

We, being "on the wind, close-hauled," were bound by the "rule of the
road at sea" to keep our course when meeting a ship running free. The
penalty for doing ANYTHING under such circumstances is a severe one.
First of all, you do not KNOW that the other ship's crew are asleep or
negligent, even though they carry no lights; for, by a truly infernal
parsimony, many vessels actually do not carry oil enough to keep their
lamps burning all the voyage, and must therefore economize in this
unspeakably dangerous fashion. And it may be that just as you alter your
course, daring no longer to hold on, and, as you have every reason to
believe, be run down, the other man alters his. Then a few breathless
moments ensue, an awful crash, and the two vessels tear each other to
pieces, spilling the life that they contain over the hungry sea. Even if
you escape, YOU are to blame for not keeping your course, unless it can
be proved that you were not seen by the running ship.

Well, we kept our course until, I verily believe, another plunge would
have cut us sheer in two halves. At the last moment our helm was put
hard down, bringing our vessel right up into the wind at the same
moment as the helmsman on board the other vessel caught sight of us, and
instinctively put his helm down too. The two vessels swung side by side
amidst a thunderous roar of flapping canvas, crackling of fallen spars,
and rending of wood as the shrouds tore away the bulwarks. All our
davits were ripped from the starboard side, and most of our bulwarks
too; but, strangely enough, we lost no spars nor any important gear.
There seemed to be a good deal of damage done on board the stranger,
where, in addition, all hands were at their wits' end. Well they might
be, aroused from so criminal a sleep as theirs. Fortunately, the third
mate had powerful bull's-eye lantern, which in his watch on deck he
always kept lighted. Turning it on the stern of the delinquent vessel
as she slowly forged clear of us, we easily read her name, which, for
shame's sake as well as for prudential reasons, I withhold. She was a
London ship, and a pretty fine time of it I had for the next day or
two, listening to the jeers and sarcasms on the quality of British
seamanship.

Repairing damages kept us busy for a few days; but whatever of
thankfulness we were capable of feeling was aroused by this hairbreadth
escape from death through the wicked neglect of the most elementary duty
of any man calling himself a seaman.

Then a period of regular Western-ocean weather set in. It was early
spring in the third year since our departure from this part of the
world, and the north-easter blew with bitter severity, making even the
seasoned old captain wince again; but, as he jovially said, "it smelt
homey, n' HE warn't a-goin' ter growl at thet." Neither were any of
us, although we could have done with less of a sharp edge to it all the
same.

Steadily we battled northward, until at last, with full hearts, we made
Cape Navesink ("Ole Neversunk"), and on the next day took a tug and
towed into New Bedford with every flag we could scare up flying, the
centre of admiration--a full whale-ship safe back from her long, long
fishing round the world.

My pleasant talk is done. I wish from my heart it were better performed;
but, having done my best, I must perforce be content. If in some small
measure I have been able to make you, my friendly reader, acquainted
with a little-known or appreciated side of life, and in any wise made
that life a real matter to you, giving you a fresh interest in the
toilers of the sea, my work has not been wholly in vain. And with that
fond hope I give you the sailor's valedictory--

SO LONG!





End of Project Gutenberg's The Cruise of the Cachalot, by Frank T. Bullen

