CHAPTER XVIII. ON THE "LINE" GROUNDS

We weighed at last, one morning, with a beautiful breeze, and, bidding
a long farewell to the lovely isles and their amiable inhabitants, stood
at sea, bound for the "line" or equatorial grounds on our legitimate
business of sperm whaling. It was now a long while since we had been in
contact with a cachalot, the last one having been killed by us on the
Coast of Japan some six months before. But we all looked forward to the
coming campaign with considerable joy, for we were now a happy family,
interested in the work, and, best of all, even if the time was still
distant, we were, in a sense, homeward bound. At any rate, we all chose
so to think, from the circumstance that we were now working to the
southward, towards Cape Horn, the rounding of which dreaded point would
mark the final stage of our globe-encircling voyage.

We had, during our stay at Honolulu, obtained a couple of grand boats in
addition to our stock, and were now in a position to man and lower five
at once, if occasion should arise, still leaving sufficient crew on
board to work the vessel. The captain had also engaged an elderly seaman
of his acquaintance--out of pure philanthropy, as we all thought,
since he was in a state of semi-starvation ashore--to act as a kind of
sailing-master, so as to relieve the captain of ship duty at whaling
time, allowing him still to head his boat. This was not altogether
welcome news to me, for, much as I liked the old man and admired his
pluck, I could not help dreading his utter recklessness when on a
whale, which had so often led to a smash-up that might have been easily
avoided. Moreover, I reasoned that if he had been foolhardy before, he
was likely to be much more so now, having no superior to look black
or use language when a disaster occurred. For now I was his harpooner,
bound to take as many risks as he chose to incur, and anxious also
to earn a reputation among the more seasoned whalemen for smartness
sufficient to justify my promotion.

The Kanakas shipped at Honolulu were distributed among the boats, two
to each, being already trained whalemen, and a fine lot of fellows they
were. My two--Samuela and Polly--were not very big men, but sturdy,
nimble as cats, as much at home in the water as on deck, and simply
bubbling over with fun and good-humour. From my earliest sea-going,
I have always had a strong liking for natives of tropical countries,
finding them affectionate and amenable to kindness. Why, I think, white
men do not get on with darkies well, as a rule, is, that they seldom
make an appeal to the MAN, in them. It is very degrading to find one's
self looked down upon as a sort of animal without reason or feelings;
and if you degrade a man, you deprive him of any incentive to make
himself useful, except the brute one you may feel bound to apply
yourself. My experience has been limited to Africans (of sorts),
Kanakas, natives of Hindostan, Malagasy, and Chinese; but with all these
I have found a little COMARADERIE answer excellently. True, they are
lazy; but what inducement have they to work? The complicated needs
of our civilized existence compel US to work, or be run over by the
unresting machine; but I take leave to doubt whether any of us with a
primitive environment would not be as lazy as any Kanaka that ever dozed
under a banana tree through daylight hours. Why, then, make an exalted
virtue of the necessity which drives us, and objurgate the poor black
man because he prefers present ease to a doubtful prospective retirement
on a competency? Australian blackfellows and Malays are said to be
impervious to kind treatment by a great number of witnesses, the former
appearing incapable of gratitude, and the latter unable to resist the
frequent temptation to kill somebody. Not knowing anything personally of
either of these races, I can say nothing for or against them.

All the coloured individuals that I have had to do with have amply
repaid any little kindness shown them with fidelity and affection, but
especially has this been the case with Kanakas, The soft and melodious
language spoken by them is easy to acquire, and is so pleasant to speak
that it is well worth learning, to say nothing of the convenience to
yourself, although the Kanaka speedily picks up the mutilated jargon
which does duty for English on board ship.

What I specially longed for now was a harpooner, or even two, so that
I might have my boat to myself, the captain taking his own boat with
a settled harpooner. Samuela, the biggest of my two Kanakas, very
earnestly informed me that he was no end of a "number one" whale
slaughterer; but I judged it best to see how things went before asking
to have him promoted. My chance, and his, came very promptly; so nicely
arranged, too, that I could not have wished for anything better. The
skipper had got a fine, healthy boil on one knee-cap, and another on
his wrist, so that he was, as you may say, HORS DE COMBAT. While he was
impatiently waiting to get about once more, sperm whales were raised.
Although nearly frantic with annoyance, he was compelled to leave the
direction of things to Mr. Cruce, who was quite puffed up with the
importance of his opportunity.

Such a nice little school of cow-whales, a lovely breeze, clear sky,
warm weather--I felt as gay as a lark at the prospect. As we were
reaching to windward, with all boats ready for lowering, the skipper
called me aft and said, "Naow, Mr. Bullen, I cain't lower, because of
this condemned leg'n arm of mine; but how'r yew goin' ter manage 'thout
a harpooneer?" I suggested that if he would allow me to try Samuela, who
was suffering for a chance to distinguish himself, we would "come out on
top." "All right," he said; "but let the other boats get fast first,
'n doan be in too much of a hurry to tie yerself up till ya see what's
doin'. If everythin's goin' bizness-fashion', 'n yew git a chance, sail
right in; yew got ter begin some time. But ef thet Kanaka looks
skeered goin' on, take the iron frum him ter onct." I promised, and the
interview ended.

When I told Samuela, of his chance, he was beside himself with joy. As
to his being scared, the idea was manifestly absurd. He was as pleased
with the prospect as it was possible for a man to be, and hardly able
to contain himself for impatience to be off. I almost envied him his
exuberant delight, for a sense of responsibility began to weigh upon me
with somewhat depressing effect.

We gained a good weather-gage, rounded to, and lowered four boats.
Getting away in good style, we had barely got the sails up, when
something gallied the school. We saw or heard nothing to account for it,
but undoubtedly the "fish" were off at top speed dead to windward, so
that our sails were of no use. We had them in with as little delay as
possible, and lay to our oars for all we were worth, being fresh and
strong, as well as anxious to get amongst them. But I fancy all our
efforts would have availed us little had it not been for the experience
of Mr. Cruce, whose eager eye detected the fact that the fish were
running on a great curve, and shaped our course to cut them off along a
chord of the arc.

Two and a half hours of energetic work was required of us before we got
on terms with the fleeing monsters; but at last, to our great joy,
they broke water from sounding right among us. It was a considerable
surprise, but we were all ready, and before they had spouted twice,
three boats were fast, only myself keeping out, in accordance with my
instructions. Samuela was almost distraught with rage and grief at the
condition of things. I quite pitied him, although I was anything but
pleased myself. However, when I ranged up alongside the mate's fish, to
render what assistance was needed, he shouted to me, "We's all right;
go'n git fas', if yew kin." That was enough, and away we flew after a
retreating spout to leeward. Before we got there, though, there was an
upheaval in the water just ahead, and up came a back like a keelless
ship bottom up. Out came the head belonging to it, and a spout like
an explosion burst forth, denoting the presence of an enormous
bull-cachalot. Close by his side was a cow of about one-third his size,
the favoured sultana of his harem, I suppose. Prudence whispered,
"Go for the cow;" ambition hissed, "All or none--the bull, the bull."
Fortunately emergencies of this kind leave one but a second or two to
decide, as a rule; in this case, as it happened, I was spared even
that mental conflict, for as we ran up between the two vast creatures,
Samuela, never even looking at the cow, hurled his harpoon, with all
the energy that he had been bursting with so long, at the mighty bull.
I watched its flight--saw it enter the black mass and disappear to the
shaft, and almost immediately came the second iron, within a foot of the
first, burying itself in the same solid fashion.

"Starn--starn all!" I shouted; and we backed slowly away, considerably
hampered by the persistent attentions of the cow, who hung round
us closely. The temptation to lance her was certainly great, but I
remembered the fate that had overtaken the skipper on the first occasion
we struck whales, and did not meddle with her ladyship. Our prey was not
apparently disposed to kick up much fuss at first, so, anxious to settle
matters, I changed ends with Samuela, and pulled in on the whale. A
good, steady lance-thrust--the first I had ever delivered--was obtained,
sending a thrill of triumph through my whole body. The recipient,
thoroughly roused by this, started off at a great lick, accompanied,
somewhat to my surprise, by the cow. Thenceforward for another hour,
in spite of all our efforts, we could not get within striking distance,
mainly because of the close attention of the cow, which stuck to her
lord like a calf to its mother. I was getting so impatient of this
hindrance, that it was all I could do to restrain myself from lancing
the cow, though I felt convinced that, if I did, I should spoil a good
job. Suddenly I caught sight of the ship right ahead. We were still
flying along, so that in a short time we were comparatively close to
her. My heart beat high and I burned to distinguish myself under the
friendly and appreciative eye of the skipper.

None of the other boats were in sight, from our level at least, so that
I had a reasonable hope of being able to finish my game, with all the
glory thereunto attaching, unshared by any other of my fellow-officers.
As we ran quite closely past the ship, calling on the crew to haul up
for all they were worth, we managed actually to squeeze past the cow,
and I got in a really deadly blow. The point of the lance entered just
between the fin and the eye, but higher up, missing the broad plate of
the shoulder-blade, and sinking its whole four feet over the hitches
right down into the animal's vitals. Then, for the first time, he threw
up his flukes, thrashing them from side to side almost round to his
head, and raising such a turmoil that we were half full of water in
a moment. But Samuela was so quick at the steer-oar, so lithe and
forceful, and withal appeared so to anticipate every move of mine, that
there seemed hardly any danger.

After a few moments of this tremendous exertion, our victim settled
down, leaving the water deeply stained with his gushing blood. With him
disappeared his constant companion, the faithful cow, who had never left
his side a minute since we first got fast. Down, down they went, until
my line began to look very low, and I was compelled to make signals to
the ship for more. We had hardly elevated the oars, when down dropped
the last boat with four men in her, arriving by my side in a few minutes
with two fresh tubs of tow-line. We took them on board, and the boat
returned again. By the time the slack came we had about four hundred and
fifty fathoms out--a goodly heap to pile up loose in our stern-sheets. I
felt sure, however, that we should have but little more trouble with our
fish; in fact, I was half afraid that he would die before getting to
the surface, in which case he might sink and be lost. We hauled steadily
away, the line not coming in very easily, until I judged there was only
about another hundred fathoms out. Our amazement may be imagined, when
suddenly we were compelled to sleek away again, the sudden weight on the
line suggesting that the fish was again sounding. If ever a young hand
was perplexed, it was I. Never before had I heard of such unseemly
behaviour, nor was my anxiety lessened when I saw, a short distance
away, the huge body of my prize at the surface spouting blood. At the
same time, I was paying out line at a good rate, as if I had a fast fish
on which was sounding briskly.

The skipper had been watching me very closely from his seat on the
taffrail, and had kept the ship within easy distance. Now, suspecting
something out of the common, he sent the boat again to my assistance,
in charge of the cooper. When that worthy arrived, he said, "Th' ol' man
reckens yew've got snarled erp'ith thet ar' loose keow, 'n y'r irons hev
draw'd from th' other. I'm gwine ter wait on him,'n get him 'longside
'soon's he's out'er his flurry. Ole man sez yew'd best wait on what's
fast t' yer an' nev' mine th' other." Away he went, reaching my prize
just as the last feeble spout exhaled, leaving the dregs of that great
flood of life trickling lazily down from the widely expanded spiracle.
To drive a harpoon into the carcass, and run the line on board, was the
simplest of jobs, for, as the captain had foreseen, my irons were drawn
clean. I had no leisure to take any notice of them now, though, for
whatever was on my line was coming up hand-over-fist.

With a bound it reached the surface--the identical cow so long attendant
upon the dead whale. Having been so long below for such a small whale,
she was quite exhausted, and before she had recovered we had got
alongside of her and lanced her, so thoroughly that she died without
a struggle. The ship was so close that we had her alongside in a
wonderfully short time, and with scarcely any trouble.

When I reached the deck, the skipper called me, and said several things
that made me feel about six inches taller. He was, as may be thought,
exceedingly pleased, saying that only once in his long career had he
seen a similar case; for I forgot to mention that the line was entangled
around the cow's down-hanging jaw, as if she had actually tried to bite
in two the rope that held her consort, and only succeeded in sharing
his fate. I would not like to say that whales do not try to thus sever a
line, but, their teeth being several inches apart, conical, and fitting
into sockets in the upper jaw instead of meeting the opposed surfaces
of other teeth, the accomplishment of such a feat must, I think, be
impossible.

The ship being now as good as anchored by the vast mass of flesh hanging
to her, there was a tremendous task awaiting us to get the other fish
alongside. Of course they were all to windward; they nearly always are,
unless the ship is persistently "turned to windward" while the fishing
is going on. Whalers believe that they always work up into the wind
while fast, and, when dead, it is certain that they drift at a pretty
good rate right in the "wind's eye." This is accounted for by the play
of the body, which naturally lies head to wind; and the wash of the
flukes, which, acting somewhat like the "sculling" of an oar at the
stern of a boat, propel the carcass in the direction it is pointing,
Consequently we had a cruel amount of towing to do before we got the
three cows alongside. Many a time we blessed ourselves that they were no
bigger, for of all the clumsy things to tow with boats, a sperm whale
is about the worst. Owing to the great square mass of the head, they can
hardly be towed head-on at all, the practice being to cut off the tips
of the flukes, and tow them tail first. But even then it is slavery. To
dip your oar about three times in the same hole from whence you withdrew
it, to tug at it with all your might, apparently making as much progress
as though you were fast to a dock-wall, and to continue this fun for
four or five hours at a stretch, is to wonder indeed whether you have
not mistaken your vocation.

However, "it's dogged as does it," so by dint of sheer sticking to the
oar, we eventually succeeded in getting all our prizes alongside before
eight bells that evening, securing them around us by hawsers to the
cows, but giving the big bull the post of honour alongside on the best
fluke-chain.

We were a busy company for a fortnight thence, until the last of the oil
was run below--two hundred and fifty barrels, or twenty-five tuns,
of the valuable fluid having rewarded our exertions. During these
operations we had drifted night and day, apparently without anybody
taking the slightest account of the direction we were taking; when,
therefore, on the day after clearing up the last traces of our fishing,
the cry of "Land ho!" came ringing down from the crow's-nest, no one was
surprised, although the part of the Pacific in which we were cruising
has but few patches of TERRA FIRMA scattered about over its immense area
when compared with the crowded archipelagoes lying farther south and
east.

We could not see the reported land from the deck for two hours after
it was first seen from aloft, although the odd spectacle of a scattered
group of cocoa-nut trees apparently growing out of the sea was for some
time presented to us before the island itself came into view. It
was Christmas Island, where the indefatigable Captain Cook landed on
December 24, 1777, for the purpose of making accurate observations of an
eclipse of the sun. He it was who gave to this lonely atoll the name it
has ever since borne, with characteristic modesty giving his own great
name to a tiny patch of coral which almost blocks the entrance to the
central lagoon. Here we lay "off and on" for a couple of days, while
foraging parties went ashore, returning at intervals with abundance
of turtle and sea-fowls' eggs. But any detailed account of their
proceedings must be ruthlessly curtailed, owing to the scanty limits of
space remaining.





