CHAPTER XIX. EDGING SOUTHWARD

The line whaling grounds embrace an exceedingly extensive area, over the
whole of which sperm whales may be found, generally of medium size. No
means of estimating the probable plenty or scarcity of them in any given
part of the grounds exist, so that falling in with them is purely a
matter of coincidence. To me it seems a conclusive proof of the enormous
numbers of sperm whales frequenting certain large breadths of ocean,
that they should be so often fallen in with, remembering what a little
spot is represented by a day's cruise, and that the signs which denote
almost infallibly the vicinity of right whales are entirely absent in
the case of the cachalot. In the narrow waters of the Greenland seas,
with quite a small number of vessels seeking, it is hardly possible for
a whale of any size to escape being seen; but in the open ocean a goodly
fleet may cruise over a space of a hundred thousand square miles without
meeting any of the whales that may yet be there in large numbers. So
that when one hears talk of the extinction of the cachalot, it is well
to bear in mind that such a thing would take a long series of years to
effect, even were the whaling business waxing instead of waning, While,
however, South Sea whaling is conducted on such old-world methods
as still obtain; while steam, with all the power it gives of rapidly
dealing with a catch, is not made use of, the art and mystery of the
whale-fisher must continually decrease. No such valuable lubricant has
ever been found as sperm oil; but the cost of its production, added to
the precarious nature of the supply, so handicaps it in the competition
with substitutes that it has been practically eliminated from the
English markets, except in such greatly adulterated forms as to render
it a lie to speak of the mixture as sperm oil at all.

Except to a few whose minds to them are kingdoms, and others who
can hardly be said to have any minds at all, the long monotony of
unsuccessful seeking for whales is very wearying. The ceaseless motion
of the vessel rocking at the centre of a circular space of blue, with a
perfectly symmetrical dome of azure enclosing her above, unflecked by
a single cloud, becomes at last almost unbearable from its changeless
sameness of environment. Were it not for the trivial round and common
task of everyday ship duty, some of the crew must become idiotic, or, in
sheer rage at the want of interest in their lives, commit mutiny.

Such a weary time was ours for full four weeks after sighting Christmas
Island. The fine haul we had obtained just previous to that day seemed
to have exhausted our luck for the time being, for never a spout did we
see. And it was with no ordinary delight that we hailed the advent of
an immense school of black-fish, the first we had run across for a long
time. Determined to have a big catch, if possible, we lowered all five
boats, as it was a beautifully calm day, and the ship might almost
safely have been left to look after herself. After what we had recently
been accustomed to, the game seemed trifling to get up much excitement
over; but still, for a good day's sport, commend me to a few lively
black-fish.

In less than ten minutes we were in the thick of the crowd, with
harpoons flying right and left. Such a scene of wild confusion and
uproarious merriment ensued as I never saw before in my life. The
skipper, true to his traditions, got fast to four, all running different
ways at once, and making the calm sea boil again with their frantic
gyrations. Each of the other boats got hold of three; but, the mate
getting too near me, our fish got so inextricably tangled up that it was
hopeless to try and distinguish between each other's prizes. However,
when we got the lances to work among them, the hubbub calmed down
greatly, and the big bodies one by one ceased their gambols, floating
supine.

So far, all had been gay; but the unlucky second mate must needs go and
do a thing that spoiled a day's fun entirely. The line runs through a
deep groove in the boat's stem, over a brass roller so fitted that
when the line is running out it remains fixed, but when hauling in it
revolves freely, assisting the work a great deal. The second mate had
three fish fast, like the rest of us--the first one on the end of the
main line, the other two on "short warps," or pieces of whale-line some
eight or ten fathoms long fastened to harpoons, with the other ends
running on the main line by means of bowlines round it. By some mistake
or other he had allowed the two lines to be hauled together through the
groove in his boat's stem, and before the error was noticed two fish
spurted off in opposite directions, ripping the boat in two halves
lengthways, like a Dutchman splitting a salt herring.

Away went the fish with the whole of the line, nobody being able to get
at it to cut; and, but for the presence of mind shown by the crew
in striking out and away from the tangle, a most ghastly misfortune,
involving the loss of several lives, must have occurred. As it was, the
loss was considerable, almost outweighing the gain on the day's fishing,
besides the inconvenience of having a boat useless on a whaling grounds.

The accident was the fruit of gross carelessness, and should never have
occurred; but then, strange to say, disasters to whale-boats are nearly
always due to want of care, the percentage of unavoidable casualties
being very small as compared with those like the one just related. When
the highly dangerous nature of the work is remembered, this statement
may seem somewhat overdrawn; but it has been so frequently corroborated
by others, whose experience far outweighs my own, that I do not hesitate
to make it with the fullest confidence in its truth.

Happily no lives were lost on this occasion, for it would have indeed
been grievous to have seen our shipmates sacrificed to the MANES of a
mere black-fish, after successfully encountering so many mighty whales.
The episode gave us a great deal of unnecessary work getting the two
halves of the boat saved, in addition to securing our fish, so that by
the time we got the twelve remaining carcasses hove on deck we were all
quite fagged out. But under the new regime we were sure of a good rest,
so that did not trouble us; it rather made the lounge on deck in the
balmy evening air and the well-filled pipe of peace doubly sweet.

Our next day's work completed the skinning of the haul we had made, the
last of the carcasses going overboard with a thunderous splash at
four in the afternoon. The assemblage of sharks round the ship on
this occasion was incredible for its number and the great size of the
creatures. Certainly no mariners see so many or such huge sharks as
whalemen; but, in spite of all our previous experience, this day touched
high-water mark. Many of these fish were of a size undreamed of by the
ordinary seafarer, some of them full thirty feet in length, more like
whales than sharks. Most of them were striped diagonally with bands
of yellow, contrasting curiously with the dingy grey of their normal
colour. From this marking is derived their popular name--"tiger sharks,"
not, as might be supposed, from their ferocity. That attribute cannot
properly be applied to the SQUALUS at all, which is one of the
most timid fish afloat, and whose ill name, as far as regards
blood-thirstiness, is quite undeserved. Rapacious the shark certainly
is; but what sea-fish is not? He is not at all particular as to his
diet; but what sea-fish is? With such a great bulk of body, such
enormous vitality and vigour to support, he must needs be ever eating;
and since he is not constructed on swift enough lines to enable him
to prey upon living fish, like most of his neighbours, he is perforce
compelled to play the humble but useful part of a sea-scavenger.

He eats man, as he eats anything else eatable because in the water man
is easily caught, and not from natural depravity or an acquired taste
begetting a decided preference for human flesh. All natives of shores
infested by sharks despise him and his alleged man-eating propensities,
knowing that a very feeble splashing will suffice to frighten him away
even if ever so hungry. Demerara River literally swarms with sharks, yet
I have often seen a negro, clad only in a beaming smile, slip into its
muddy waters, and, after a few sharp blows with his open hand upon the
surface, calmly swim down to the bottom, clear a ship's anchor, or
do whatever job was required, coming up again as leisurely as if in a
swimming-bath. A similar disregard of the dangerous attributes awarded
by popular consent to the shark may be witnessed everywhere among the
people who know him best. The cruelties perpetrated upon sharks by
seamen generally are the result of ignorance and superstition combined,
the most infernal forces known to humanity. What would be said at home
of such an act, if it could be witnessed among us, as the disembowelling
of a tiger, say, and then letting him run in that horrible condition
somewhere remote from the possibility of retaliating upon his torturers?
Yet that is hardly comparable with a similar atrocity performed upon
a shark, because he will live hours to the tiger's minutes in such a
condition.

I once caught a shark nine feet long, which we hauled on board and
killed by cutting off its head and tail. It died very speedily--for a
shark--all muscular motion ceasing in less than fifteen minutes. It was
my intention to prepare that useless and unornamental article so dear to
sailors--a walking-stick made of a shark's backbone. But when I came to
cut out the vertebra, I noticed a large scar, extending from one side to
the other, right across the centre of the back. Beneath it the backbone
was thickened to treble its normal size, and perfectly rigid; in fact,
it had become a mass of solid bone. At some time or other this shark had
been harpooned so severely that, in wrenching himself free, he must
have nearly torn his body in two halves, severing the spinal column
completely. Yet such a wound as that had been healed by natural process,
the bone knit together again with many times the strength it had
before--minus, of course, its flexibility--and I can testify from the
experience of securing him that he could not possibly have been more
vigorous than he was.

A favourite practice used to be--I trust it is so no longer--to catch a
shark, and, after driving a sharpened stake down through his upper jaw
and out underneath the lower one, so that its upper portion pointed
diagonally forward, to let him go again. The consequence of this cruelty
would be that the fish was unable to open his mouth, or go in any
direction without immediately coming to the surface. How long he might
linger in such torture, one can only guess; but unless his fellows,
finding him thus helpless, came along and kindly devoured him, no doubt
he would exist in extreme agony for a very long time.

Two more small cows were all that rewarded our search during the next
fortnight, and we began to feel serious doubts as to the success of our
season upon the line grounds, after all. Still, on the whole, our voyage
up to the present had not been what might fairly be called unsuccessful,
for we were not yet two years away from New Bedford, while we had
considerably more than two thousand barrels of oil on board--more, in
fact, than two-thirds of a full cargo. But if a whale were caught every
other day for six months, and then a month elapsed without any being
seen, grumbling would be loud and frequent, all the previous success
being forgotten in the present stagnation. Perhaps it is not so
different in other professions nearer home?

Christmas Day drew near, beloved of Englishmen all the world over,
though thought little of by Americans. The two previous ones spent on
board the CACHALOT have been passed over without mention, absolutely no
notice being taken of the season by any one on board, to all appearance.
In English ships some attempt is always made to give the day somewhat
of a festive character, and to maintain the national tradition of
good-cheer and goodwill in whatever part of the world you may happen to
be. For some reason or other, perhaps because of the great increase in
comfort; we had all experienced lately, I felt the approach of the great
Christian anniversary very strongly; although, had I been in London, I
should probably have spent it in lonely gloom, having no relatives or
friends whom I might visit. But what of that? Christmas is Christmas;
and, if we have no home, we think of the place where our home should be;
and whether, as cynics sneer, Dickens invented the English Christmas or
not, its observance has taken deep root among us. May its shadow never
be less!

On Christmas morning I mounted to the crow's-nest at daybreak, and stood
looking with never-failing awe at the daily marvel of the sunrise.
Often and often have I felt choking for words to express the tumult of
thoughts aroused by this sublime spectacle. Hanging there in cloudland,
the tiny microcosm at one's feet forgotten, the grandeur of the
celestial outlook is overwhelming. Many and many a time I have bowed
my head and wept in pure reverence at the majesty manifested around
me while the glory of the dawn increased and brightened, till with one
exultant bound the sun appeared.

For some time I stood gazing straight ahead of me with eyes that
saw not, filled with wonder and admiration. I must have been looking
directly at the same spot for quite a quarter of an hour, when suddenly,
as if I had but just opened my eyes, I saw the well-known bushy spout of
a sperm whale. I raised the usual yell, which rang through the stillness
discordantly, startling all hands out of their lethargy like bees out
of a hive. After the usual preliminaries, we were all afloat with
sails set, gliding slowly over the sleeping sea towards the unconscious
objects of our attention. The captain did not lower this time, as there
only appeared to be three fish, none of them seeming large. Though at
any distance it is extremely difficult to assess the size of whales, the
spout being very misleading. Sometimes a full-sized whale will show a
small spout, while a twenty-barrel cow will exhale a volume of vapour
extensive enough for two or three at once.

Now although, according to etiquette, I kept my position in the rear
of my superior officers, I had fully determined in my own mind, being
puffed up with previous success, to play second fiddle to no one, if
I could help it, this time. Samuela was decidedly of the same opinion;
indeed, I believe he would have been delighted to tackle a whole school
single-handed, while my crew were all willing and eager for the fight.
We had a long, tedious journey before we came up with them, the wind
being so light that even with the occasional assistance of the paddles
our progress was wretchedly slow. When at last we did get into their
water, and the mate's harpooner stood up to dart, his foot slipped,
and down he came with a clatter enough to scare a cachalot twenty
miles away. It gallied our friends effectually, sending them flying in
different directions at the top of their speed. But being some distance
astern of the other boats, one of the fish, in his headlong retreat,
rose for a final blow some six or seven fathoms away, passing us in
the opposite direction. His appearance was only momentary, yet in that
moment Samuela hurled his harpoon into the air, where it described a
beautiful parabola, coming down upon the disappearing monster's back
just as the sea was closing over it. Oh, it was a splendid dart,
worthy of the finest harpooner that ever lived! There was no time for
congratulations, however, for we spun round as on a pivot, and away we
went in the wake of that fellow at a great rate. I cast one look astern
to see whether the others had struck, but could see nothing of them; we
seemed to have sprung out of their ken in an instant.

The speed of our friend was marvellous, but I comforted myself with the
knowledge that these animals usually run in circles--sometimes, it
is true, of enormous diameter, but seldom getting far away from their
starting-point. But as the time went on, and we seemed to fly over the
waves at undiminished speed, I began to think this whale might be the
exception necessary to prove the rule, so I got out the compass and
watched his course. Due east, not a degree to north or south of it,
straight as a bee to its hive. The ship was now far out of sight astern,
but I knew that keen eyes had been watching our movements from the
masthead, and that every effort possible would be made to keep the run
of us. The speed of our whale was not only great, but unflagging. He was
more like a machine than an animal capable of tiring; and though we did
our level best, at the faintest symptom of slackening, to get up closer
and lance him, it was for some time impossible. After, at a rough
estimate, running in a direct easterly course for over two hours, he
suddenly sounded, without having given us the ghost of a chance to "land
him one where he lived." Judging from his previous exertions, though,
it was hardly possible he would be able to stay down long, or get
very deep, as the strain upon these vast creatures at any depth is
astonishingly exhausting. After a longer stay below than usual, when
they have gone extra deep, they often arrive at the surface manifestly
"done up" for a time. Then, if the whaleman be active and daring, a
few well-directed strokes may be got in which will promptly settle the
business out of hand.

Now, when my whale sounded he was to all appearance as frightened a
beast as one could wish--one who had run himself out endeavouring to
get away from his enemies, and as a last resource had dived into the
quietness below in the vain hope to get away. So I regarded him, making
up my mind to wait on him with diligence upon his arrival, and not allow
him to get breath before I had settled him. But when he did return,
there was a mighty difference in him. He seemed as if he had been
getting some tips on the subject from some school below where whales are
trained to hunt men; for his first move was to come straight for me
with a furious rush, carrying the war into the enemy's country with
a vengeance. It must be remembered that I was but young, and a
comparatively new hand at this sort of thing; so when I confess that I
felt more than a little scared at this sudden change in the tactics of
my opponent, I hope I shall be excused. Remembering, however, that all
our lives depended on keeping cool, I told myself that even if I was
frightened I must not go all to pieces, but compel myself to think and
act calmly, since I was responsible for others. If the animal had
not been in so blind a fury, I am afraid my task would have been much
harder; but he was mad, and his savage rushes were, though disquieting,
unsystematic and clumsy. It was essential, however, that he should not
be allowed to persist too long in his evil courses; for a whale learns
with amazing rapidity, developing such cunning in an hour or two that
all a man's smartness may be unable to cope with his newly acquired
experience. Happily, Samuela was perfectly unmoved. Like a machine, he
obeyed every gesture, every look even, swinging the boat "off" or "on"
the whale with such sweeping strokes of his mighty oar that she revolved
as if on a pivot, and encouraging the other chaps with his cheerful
cries and odd grimaces, so that the danger was hardly felt. During a
momentary lull in the storm, I took the opportunity to load my bomb-gun,
much as I disliked handling the thing, keeping my eye all the time
on the water around where I expected to see mine enemy popping up
murderously at any minute. Just as I had expected, when he rose, it was
very close, and on his back, with his jaw in the first biting position,
looking ugly as a vision of death. Finding us a little out of reach,
he rolled right over towards us, presenting as he did so the great
rotundity of his belly. We were not twenty feet away, and I snatched up
the gun, levelled it, and fired the bomb point-blank into his bowels.
Then all was blank. I do not even remember the next moment. A rush of
roaring waters, a fighting with fearful, desperate energy for air and
life, all in a hurried, flurried phantasmagoria about which there was
nothing clear except the primitive desire for life, life, life! Nor do
I know how long this struggle lasted, except that, in the nature of
things, it could not have been very long.

When I returned to a consciousness of external things, I was for some
time perfectly still, looking at the sky, totally unable to realize what
had happened or where I was. Presently the smiling, pleasant face of
Samuela bent over me. Meeting my gratified look of recognition, he set up
a perfect yell of delight. "So glad, so glad you blonga life! No go Davy
Jonesy dis time, hay?" I put my hand out to help myself to a sitting
posture, and touched blubber. That startled me so that I sprung up as if
shot. Then I took in the situation at a glance. There were all my poor
fellows with me, stranded upon the top of our late antagonist, but
no sign of the boat to be seen. Bewildered at the state of affairs, I
looked appealingly from one to the other for an explanation. I got it
from Abner, who said, laconically, "When yew fired thet ole gun, I guess
it mus' have bin loaded fer bear, fer ye jest tumbled clar head over
heels backwards outen the boat. Et that very same moment I suspicion the
bomb busted in his belly, fer he went clean rampageous loony. He rolled
right over an' over to'rds us, n' befo' we c'd rightly see wat wuz
comin', we cu'dnt see anythin' 'tall; we wuz all grabbin' at nothin',
some'rs underneath the whale. When I come to the top, I lit eout fer the
fust thing I c'd see to lay holt of, which wuz old squarhead himself,
deader 'n pork. I guess thet ar bomb o' yourn kinder upset his
commissary department. Anyway, I climed up onto him, 'n bime-by the rest
ov us histed themselves alongside ov me. Sam Weller here; he cum last,
towin' you 'long with him. I don'no whar he foun' ye, but ye was very
near a goner, 'n's full o' pickle as ye c'd hold." I turned a grateful
eye upon my dusky harpooner, who had saved my life, but was now
apparently blissfully unconscious of having done anything meritorious.

Behold us, then, a half-drowned row of scarecrows perched, like some new
species of dilapidated birds, upon the side of our late foe. The sun
was not so furiously hot as usual, for masses of rain-laden NIMBI were
filling the sky, so that we were comparatively free from the awful
roasting we might have expected: nor was our position as precarious for
a while as would be thought. True, we had only one harpoon, with its
still fast line, to hold on by; but the side of the whale was somehow
hollowed, so that, in spite of the incessant movement imparted to the
carcass by the swell, we sat fairly safe, with our feet in the said
hollow. We discussed the situation in all its bearings, unable to
extract more than the faintest gleam of hope from any aspect of the
case. The only reasonable chance we had was, that the skipper had almost
certainly taken our bearings, and would, we were sure, be anxiously
seeking us on the course thus indicated. Meanwhile, we were ravenously
hungry and thirsty. Samuela and Polly set to work with their
sheath-knives, and soon excavated a space in the blubber to enable them
to reach the meat. Then they cut off some good-sized junks, and divided
it up. It was not half bad; and as we chewed on the tough black fibre,
I could hardly help smiling as I thought how queer a Christmas dinner
we were having. But eating soon heightened our thirst, and our real
sufferings then began. We could eat very little once the want of drink
made itself felt. Hardly two hours had elapsed, though, before one
of the big-bellied clouds which bad been keeping the sun off us most
considerately emptied out upon us a perfect torrent of rain. It filled
the cavity in the whale's side in a twinkling; and though the water was
greasy, stained with blood, and vilely flavoured, it was as welcome a
drink as I have ever tasted. Thus fed, and with our thirst slaked, we
were able to take a more hopeful view of things while the prospect of
our being found seemed much more probable than it had done before the
rain fell.

Still, we had to endure our pillory for a long while yet. The sharks and
birds began to worry us, especially the former, who in their eagerness
to get a portion of the blubber, fought, writhed and tore at the carcass
with tireless energy. Once, one of the smaller ones actually came
sliding up right into our hollow; but Samuela and Polly promptly
dispatched him with a cut throat, sending him back to encourage the
others. The present relieved us of most of their attentions for a short
time at least, as they eagerly divided the remains of their late comrade
among them.

To while away the time we spun yarns--without much point, I am afraid;
and sung songs, albeit we did not feel much like singing--till after a
while our poor attempts at gaiety fizzled out like a damp match, leaving
us silent and depressed. The sun, which had been hidden for some time,
now came out again, his slanting beams revealing to us ominously the
flight of time and the near approach of night. Should darkness overtake
us in our present position, we all felt that saving us would need
the performance of a miracle; for in addition to the chances of the
accumulated gases within the carcass bursting it asunder, the unceasing
assault of the sharks made it highly doubtful whether they would not in
a few hours more have devoured it piecemeal. Already they had scooped
out some deep furrows in the solid blubber, making it easier to get hold
and tear off more, and their numbers were increasing so fast that the
surrounding sea was fairly alive with them. Lower and lower sank the
sun, deeper and darker grew the gloom upon our faces, till suddenly
Samuela leaped to his feet in our midst, and emitted a yell so
ear-piercing as to nearly deafen us. He saw the ship! Before two minutes
had passed we all saw her--God bless her!--coming down upon us like
some angelic messenger. There were no fears among us that we should be
overlooked. We knew full well how anxiously and keenly many pairs
of eyes had been peering over the sea in search of us, and we felt
perfectly sure they had sighted us long ago. On she came, gilded by the
evening glow, till she seemed glorified, moving in a halo of celestial
light, all her homeliness and clumsy build forgotten in what she then
represented to us.

Never before or since has a ship looked like that, to me, nor can I ever
forget the thankfulness, the delight, the reverence, with which I once
more saw her approaching. Straight down upon us she bore, rounding to
within a cable's length, and dropping a boat simultaneously with her
windward sweep. They had no whale--well for us they had not. In five
minutes we were on board, while our late resting-place was being hauled
alongside with great glee.

The captain shook hands with me cordially, pooh-poohing the loss of
the boat as an unavoidable incident of the trade, but expressing his
heart-felt delight at getting us all back safe. The whale we had killed
was ample compensation for the loss of several boats, though such was
the vigour with which the sharks were going for him, that it was deemed
advisable to cut in at once, working all night. We who had been rescued,
however, were summarily ordered below by the skipper, and forbidden, on
pain of his severe displeasure, to reappear until the following morning.
This great privilege we gladly availed ourselves of, awaking at daylight
quite well and fit, not a bit the worse for our queer experience of the
previous day.

The whale proved a great acquisition, for although not nearly so large
as many we had caught, he was so amazingly rich in blubber that he
actually yielded twelve and a half tuns of oil, in spite of the heavy
toll taken of him by the hungry multitudes of sharks. In addition to the
oil, we were fortunate enough to secure a lump of ambergris, dislodged
perhaps by the explosion of my bomb in the animal's bowels. It was
nearly black, wax-like to the touch, and weighed seven pounds and a
half. At the current price, it would be worth about L200, so that, taken
altogether, the whale very nearly approached in value the largest one we
had yet caught. I had almost omitted to state that incorporated with the
substance of the ambergris were several of the horny cuttle-fish beaks,
which, incapable of being digested, had become in some manner part of
this peculiar product.





