CHAPTER V. ACTUAL WARFARE. OUR FIRST WHALE

Simultaneous ideas occurring to several people, or thought transference,
whatever one likes to call the phenomenon is too frequent an occurrence
in most of our experience to occasion much surprise. Yet on the occasion
to which I am about to refer, the matter was so very marked that few of
us who took part in the day's proceedings are ever likely to forget it.

We were all gathered about the fo'lk'sle scuttle one evening, a few days
after the gale referred to in the previous chapter, and the question of
whale-fishing came up for discussion. Until that time, strange as it
may seem, no word of this, the central idea of all our minds, had been
mooted. Every man seemed to shun the subject, although we were in
daily expectation of being called upon to take an active part in
whale-fighting. Once the ice was broken, nearly all had something to say
about it, and very nearly as many addle-headed opinions were ventilated
as at a Colney Hatch debating society. For we none of us KNEW anything
about it. I was appealed to continually to support this or that theory,
but as far as whaling went I could only, like the rest of them, draw
upon my imagination for details. How did a whale act, what were the
first steps taken, what chance was there of being saved if your boat got
smashed, and so on unto infinity. At last, getting very tired of this
"Portugee Parliament" of all talkers and no listeners, I went aft to
get a drink of water before turning in. The harpooners and other petty
officers were grouped in the waist, earnestly discussing the pros and
cons of attack upon whales. As I passed I heard the mate's harpooner
say, "Feels like whale about. I bet a plug (of tobacco) we raise sperm
whale to-morrow." Nobody took his bet, for it appeared that they were
mostly of the same mind, and while I was drinking I heard the officers
in dignified conclave talking over the same thing. It was Saturday
evening, and while at home people were looking forward to a day's
respite from work and care, I felt that the coming day, though never
taken much notice of on board, was big with the probabilities of strife
such as I at least had at present no idea of. So firmly was I possessed
by the prevailing feeling.

The night was very quiet. A gentle breeze was blowing, and the sky was
of the usual "Trade" character, that is, a dome of dark blue fringed at
the horizon with peaceful cumulus clouds, almost motionless. I turned
in at four a.m. from the middle watch and, as usual, slept like a babe.
Suddenly I started wide awake, a long mournful sound sending a thrill
to my very heart. As I listened breathlessly other sounds of the same
character but in different tones joined in, human voices monotonously
intoning in long drawn-out expirations the single word "bl-o-o-o-o-w."
Then came a hurricane of noise overhead, and adjurations in no gentle
language to the sleepers to "tumble up lively there, no skulking, sperm
whales." At last, then, fulfilling all the presentiments of yesterday,
the long dreaded moment had arrived. Happily there was no time for
hesitation, in less than two minutes we were all on deck, and hurrying
to our respective boats. There was no flurry or confusion, and except
that orders were given more quietly than usual, with a manifest air of
suppressed excitement, there was nothing to show that we were not
going for an ordinary course of boat drill. The skipper was in the main
crow's-nest with his binoculars presently he shouted, "Naow then, Mr.
Count, lower away soon's y'like. Small pod o'cows, an' one'r two bulls
layin' off to west'ard of 'em." Down went the boats into the water
quietly enough, we all scrambled in and shoved off. A stroke or two of
the oars were given to get clear of the ship, and one another, then oars
were shipped and up went the sails. As I took my allotted place at the
main-sheet, and the beautiful craft started off like some big bird, Mr.
Count leant forward, saying impressively to me, "Y'r a smart youngster,
an' I've kinder took t'yer; but don't ye look ahead an' get gallied, 'r
I'll knock ye stiff wi' th' tiller; y'hear me? N' don't ye dare to make
thet sheet fast, 'r ye'll die so sudden y' won't know whar y'r hurted."
I said as cheerfully as I could, "All right, sir," trying to look
unconcerned, telling myself not to be a coward, and all sorts of things;
but the cold truth is that I was scared almost to death because I
didn't know what was coming. However, I did the best thing under the
circumstances, obeyed orders and looked steadily astern, or up into the
bronzed impassive face of my chief, who towered above me, scanning
with eagle eyes the sea ahead. The other boats were coming flying along
behind us, spreading wider apart as they came, while in the bows of each
stood the harpooner with his right hand on his first iron, which
lay ready, pointing over the bow in a raised fork of wood called the
"crutch."

All of a sudden, at a motion of the chief's hand, the peak of our
mainsail was dropped, and the boat swung up into the wind, laying
"hove to," almost stationary. The centre-board was lowered to stop her
drifting to leeward, although I cannot say it made much difference that
ever I saw. NOW what's the matter, I thought, when to my amazement the
chief addressing me said, "Wonder why we've hauled up, don't ye?" "Yes,
sir, I do," said I. "Wall," said he, "the fish hev sounded, an' 'ef we
run over 'em, we've seen the last ov'em. So we wait awhile till they
rise agin, 'n then we'll prob'ly git thar' 'r thareabonts before they
sound agin." With this explanation I had to be content, although if
it be no clearer to my readers than it then was to me, I shall have to
explain myself more fully later on. Silently we lay, rocking lazily upon
the gentle swell, no other word being spoken by any one. At last Louis,
the harpooner, gently breathed "blo-o-o-w;" and there, sure enough,
not half a mile away on the lee beam, was a little bushy cloud of steam
apparently rising from the sea. At almost the same time as we kept away
all the other boats did likewise, and just then, catching sight of the
ship, the reason for this apparently concerted action was explained. At
the main-mast head of the ship was a square blue flag, and the ensign
at the peak was being dipped. These were signals well understood and
promptly acted upon by those in charge of the boats, who were thus
guided from a point of view at least one hundred feet above the sea.

"Stand up, Louey," the mate murmured softly. I only just stopped myself
in time from turning my head to see why the order was given. Suddenly
there was a bump, at the same moment the mate yelled, "Give't to him,
Louey, give't to him!" and to me, "Haul that main sheet, naow haul, why
don't ye?" I hauled it flat aft, and the boat shot up into the wind,
rubbing sides as she did so with what to my troubled sight seemed an
enormous mass of black india-rubber floating. As we CRAWLED up into the
wind, the whale went into convulsions befitting his size and energy.
He raised a gigantic tail on high, threshing the water with deafening
blows, rolling at the same time from side to side until the surrounding
sea was white with froth. I felt in an agony lest we should be crushed
under one of those fearful strokes, for Mr. Count appeared to be
oblivious of possible danger, although we seemed to be now drifting back
on to the writhing leviathan. In the agitated condition of the sea, it
was a task of no ordinary difficulty to unship the tall mast, which was
of course the first thing to be done. After a desperate struggle, and a
narrow escape from falling overboard of one of the men, we got the lone
"stick," with the sail bundled around it, down and "fleeted" aft, where
it was secured by the simple means of sticking the "heel" under the
after thwart, two-thirds of the mast extending out over the stern.
Meanwhile, we had certainly been in a position of the greatest danger,
our immunity from damage being unquestionably due to anything but
precaution taken to avoid it.

By the time the oars were handled, and the mate had exchanged places
with the harpooner, our friend the enemy had "sounded," that is, he had
gone below for a change of scene, marvelling no doubt what strange thing
had befallen him. Agreeably to the accounts which I, like most boys, had
read of the whale fishery, I looked for the rushing of the line round
the logger-head (a stout wooden post built into the boat aft), to raise
a cloud of smoke with occasional bursts of flame; so as it began to
slowly surge round the post, I timidly asked the harpooner whether I
should throw any water on it. "Wot for?" growled he, as he took a couple
more turns with it. Not knowing "what for," and hardly liking to quote
my authorities here, I said no more, but waited events. "Hold him up,
Louey, bold him up, cain't ye?" shouted the mate, and to my horror, down
went the nose of the boat almost under water, while at the mate's order
everybody scrambled aft into the elevated stern sheets.

The line sang quite a tune as it was grudgingly allowed to surge round
the loggerhead, filling one with admiration at the strength shown by
such a small rope. This sort of thing went on for about twenty minutes,
in which time we quite emptied the large tub and began on the small one.
As there was nothing whatever for us to do while this was going on, I
had ample leisure for observing the little game that was being played
about a quarter of a mile away. Mr. Cruce, the second mate, had got a
whale and was doing his best to kill it; but he was severely handicapped
by his crew, or rather had been, for two of them were now temporarily
incapable of either good or harm. They had gone quite "batchy" with
fright, requiring a not too gentle application of the tiller to their
heads in order to keep them quiet. The remedy, if rough, was effectual,
for "the subsequent proceedings interested them no more." Consequently
his manoeuvres were not so well or rapidly executed as he, doubtless,
could have wished, although his energy in lancing that whale was
something to admire and remember. Hatless, his shirt tail out of the
waist of his trousers streaming behind him like a banner, he lunged and
thrust at the whale alongside of him, as if possessed of a destroying
devil, while his half articulate yells of rage and blasphemy were
audible even to us.

Suddenly our boat fell backward from her "slantindicular" position
with a jerk, and the mate immediately shouted, "Haul line, there! look
lively, now, you--so on, etcetera, etcetera" (he seemed to invent new
epithets on every occasion). The line came in hand over hand, and was
coiled in a wide heap in the stern sheets, for silky as it was, it could
not be expected in its wet state to lie very close. As it came flying
in the mate kept a close gaze upon the water immediately beneath us,
apparently for the first glimpse of our antagonist. When the whale broke
water, however, he was some distance off, and apparently as quiet as a
lamb. Now, had Mr. Count been a prudent or less ambitious man, our task
would doubtless have been an easy one, or comparatively so; but, being
a little over-grasping, he got us all into serious trouble. We were
hauling up to our whale in order to lance it, and the mate was standing,
lance in hand, only waiting to get near enough, when up comes a large
whale right alongside of our boat, so close, indeed, that I might have
poked my finger in his little eye, if I had chosen. The sight of that
whale at liberty, and calmly taking stock of us like that, was too much
for the mate. He lifted his lance and hurled it at the visitor, in
whose broad flank it sank, like a knife into butter, right up to the
pole-hitches. The recipient disappeared like a flash, but before one had
time to think, there was an awful crash beneath us, and the mate shot
up into the air like a bomb from a mortar. He came down in a sitting
posture on the mast-thwart; but as he fell, the whole framework of the
boat collapsed like a derelict umbrella. Louis quietly chopped the line
and severed our connection with the other whale, while in accordance
with our instructions we drew each man his oar across the boat and
lashed it firmly down with a piece of line spliced to each thwart for
the purpose. This simple operation took but a minute, but before it was
completed we were all up to our necks in the sea. Still in the boat,
it is true, and therefore not in such danger of drowning as if we were
quite adrift; but, considering that the boat was reduced to a mere
bundle of loose planks, I, at any rate, was none too comfortable.
Now, had he known it, was the whale's golden opportunity; but he, poor
wretch, had had quite enough of our company, and cleared off without any
delay, wondering, no doubt, what fortunate accident had rid him of our
very unpleasant attentions.

I was assured that we were all as safe as if we were on board the
ship, to which I answered nothing; but, like Jack's parrot, I did some
powerful thinking. Every little wave that came along swept clean over
our heads, sometimes coming so suddenly as to cut a breath in half. If
the wind should increase--but no--I wouldn't face the possibility of
such a disagreeable thing. I was cool enough now in a double sense, for
although we were in the tropics, we soon got thoroughly chilled.

By the position of the sun it must have been between ten a.m. and noon,
and we, of the crew, had eaten nothing since the previous day at supper,
when, as usual, the meal was very light. Therefore, I suppose we felt
the chill sooner than the better-nourished mate and harpooner, who
looked rather scornfully at our blue faces and chattering teeth.

In spite of all assurances to the contrary, I have not the least doubt
in my own mind that a very little longer would have relieved us of ALL
our burdens finally. Because the heave of the sea had so loosened the
shattered planks upon which we stood that they were on the verge of
falling all asunder. Had they done so we must have drowned, for we
were cramped and stiff with cold and our constrained position. However,
unknown to us, a bright look-out upon our movements had been kept
from the crow's-nest the whole time. We should have been relieved long
before, but that the whale killed by the second mate was being secured,
and another boat, the fourth mate's, being picked up, having a hole in
her bilge you could put you head through. With all these hindrances,
especially securing the whale, we were fortunate to be rescued as
soon as we were, since it is well known that whales are of much higher
commercial value than men.

However, help came at last, and we were hauled alongside. Long exposure
had weakened us to such an extent that it was necessary to hoist us on
board, especially the mate, whose "sudden stop," when he returned to
us after his little aerial excursion, had shaken his sturdy frame
considerably, a state of body which the subsequent soaking had by
no means improved. In my innocence I imagined that we should be
commiserated for our misfortunes by Captain Slocum, and certainly be
relieved from further duties until we were a little recovered from
the rough treatment we had just undergone. But I never made a greater
mistake. The skipper cursed us all (except the mate, whose sole fault
the accident undoubtedly was) with a fluency and vigour that was, to put
it mildly, discouraging. Moreover, we were informed that he "wouldn't
have no adjective skulking;" we must "turn to" and do something after
wasting the ship's time and property in such a blanked manner. There was
a limit, however, to our obedience, so although we could not move at all
for awhile, his threats were not proceeded with farther than theory.

A couple of slings were passed around the boat, by means of which she
was carefully hoisted on board, a mere dilapidated bundle of sticks and
raffle of gear. She was at once removed aft out of the way, the business
of cutting in the whale claiming precedence over everything else just
then. The preliminary proceedings consisted of rigging the "cutting
stage." This was composed of two stout planks a foot wide and ten feet
long, the inner ends of which were suspended by strong ropes over the
ship's side about four feet from the water, while the outer extremities
were upheld by tackles from the main rigging, and a small crane abreast
the try-works.

These planks were about thirty feet apart, their two outer ends being
connected by a massive plank which was securely bolted to them. A
handrail about as high as a man's waist, supported by light iron
stanchions, ran the full length of this plank on the side nearest the
ship, the whole fabric forming an admirable standing-place from whence
the officers might, standing in comparative comfort, cut and carve at
the great mass below to their hearts' content.

So far the prize had been simply held alongside by the whale-line, which
at death had been "rove" through a hole cut in the solid gristle of the
tail; but now it became necessary to secure the carcase to the ship in
some more permanent fashion. Therefore, a massive chain like a small
ship's cable was brought forward, and in a very ingenious way, by means
of a tiny buoy and a hand-lead, passed round the body, one end brought
through a ring in the other, and hauled upon until it fitted tight round
the "small" or part of the whale next the broad spread of the tail. The
free end of the fluke-chain was then passed in through a mooring-pipe
forward, firmly secured to a massive bitt at the heel of the bowsprit
(the fluke-chain-bitt), and all was ready.

But the subsequent proceedings were sufficiently complicated to demand a
fresh chapter.





