CHAPTER XXII--FAREWELL TO VAU VAU Ignorance of the habits of whales--A
terrific encounter--VAE VICTIS--Rewarding our "flems"--We leave Van
Vau--The Outward bounder--Sailors' "homes"--A night of horror--Sudden
death--Futuna.


CHAPTER XXIII--AT FUTUNA, RECRUITING A fleet of nondescripts--"Tui
Tongoa" otherwise Sam--Eager recruits--Devout Catholics--A visit to
Sunday Island--A Crusoe family--Their eviction--Maori cabbage--Fine
fishing--Away for New Zealand--Sight the "Three Kings"--The Bay of
Islands.


CHAPTER XXIV--THE BAY OF ISLANDS AND NEW ZEALAND COAST Sleepy
hollow--Wood and water--liberty day--A plea for the sailors'
recreation--Our picnic--A a whiff of "May"--A delightful excursion--To
the southward again--Wintry weather--Enter Foveaux Straits.


CHAPTER XXV--ON THE SOLANDER GROUNDS Firstfruits of the Solander--An
easy catch--Delights of the Solander--Port William--The
old CHANCE--"Paddy Gilroy"--Barbarians from the East
End--Barracouta-Fishing--Wind-bound--An enormous school of
cachalots--Misfortune--A bursting whale--Back on the Solander
again--Cutting-in at Port William--Studying anatomy--Badly battered
Yankees--Paddy in luck again.


CHAPTER XXVI--PADDY'S LATEST EXPLOIT We try Preservation Inlet--An
astounding feat of Paddy Gilroy's.


CHAPTER XXVII--PORT PEGASUS Port Pegasus--Among old
acquaintances--"Mutton birds"--Skilled auxiliaries--A gratifying
catch--Leave port again--Back to the Solander--A grim escape--Our last
whales--Into Port William again--Paddy's assistance--We part with our
Kanakas--Sam's plans of conquest.


CHAPTER XXVIII--TO THE BLUFF, AND HOME And last--In high-toned
company--Another picnic--Depart from the Bluff--Hey for the Horn!--Among
the icebergs--"Scudding"--Favouring trades--A narrow escape from
collision--Home at last.




INTRODUCTION

Without attempting the ambitious task of presenting a comprehensive
sketch of the origin, rise, and fall of whale-fishing as a whole, it
seems necessary to give a brief outline of that portion of the subject
bearing upon the theme of the present book before plunging into the
first chapter.

This preliminary is the more needed for the reason alluded to in
the Preface--the want of knowledge of the subject that is apparent
everywhere. The Greenland whale fishery has been so popularized that
most people know something about it; the sperm whale fishery still
awaits its Scoresby and a like train of imitators and borrowers.

Cachalots, or sperm whales, must have been captured on the coasts of
Europe in a desultory way from a very early date, by the incidental
allusions to the prime products spermaceti and ambergris which are found
in so many ancient writers, Shakespeare's reference--"The sovereign'st
thing on earth was parmaceti for an inward bruise"--will be familiar to
most people, as well as Milton's mention of the delicacies at Satan's
feast--"Grisamber steamed"--not to carry quotation any further.

But in the year 1690 the brave and hardy fishermen of the north-east
coasts of North America established that systematic pursuit of the
cachalot which has thriven so wonderfully ever since, although it must
be confessed that the last few years have witnessed a serious decline in
this great branch of trade.

For many years the American colonists completely engrossed this branch
of the whale fishery, contentedly leaving to Great Britain and the
continental nations the monopoly of the northern or Arctic fisheries,
while they cruised the stormy, if milder, seas around their own shores.

For the resultant products, their best customer was the mother country,
and a lucrative commerce steadily grew up between the two countries. But
when the march of events brought the unfortunate and wholly unnecessary
War of Independence, this flourishing trade was the first to suffer, and
many of the daring fishermen became our fiercest foes on board their own
men-of-war.

The total stoppage of the importation of sperm oil and spermaceti was
naturally severely felt in England, for time had not permitted the
invention of substitutes. In consequence of this, ten ships were
equipped and sent out to the sperm whale fishery from England in 1776,
most of them owned by one London firm, the Messrs. Enderby. The next
year, in order to encourage the infant enterprise, a Government bounty,
graduated from L500 to L1000 per ship, was granted. Under this
fostering care the number of ships engaged in the sperm whale fishery
progressively increased until 1791, when it attained its maximum.

This method of whaling being quite new to our whalemen, it was
necessary, at great cost, to hire American officers and harpooners
to instruct them in the ways of dealing with these highly active
and dangerous cetacea. Naturally, it was by-and-by found possible
to dispense with the services of these auxiliaries; but it must be
confessed that the business never seems to have found such favour, or to
have been prosecuted with such smartness, among our whalemen as it has
by the Americans.

Something of an exotic the trade always was among us, although it did
attain considerable proportions at one time. At first the fishing was
confined to the Atlantic Ocean; nor for many years was it necessary to
go farther afield, as abundance of whales could easily be found.

As, however, the number of ships engaged increased, it was inevitable
that the known grounds should become exhausted, and in 1788 Messrs.
Enderby's ship, the EMILIA, first ventured round Cape Horn, as the
pioneer of a greater trade than ever. The way once pointed out, other
ships were not slow to follow, until, in 1819, the British whale-ship
SYREN opened up the till then unexplored tract of ocean in the western
part of the North Pacific, afterwards familiarly known as the "Coast
of Japan." From these teeming waters alone, for many years an average
annual catch of 40,000 barrels of oil was taken, which, at the average
price of L8 per barrel, will give some idea of the value of the trade
generally.

The Australian colonists, early in their career, found the sperm whale
fishery easy of access from all their coasts, and especially lucrative.
At one time they bade fair to establish a whale fishery that should
rival the splendid trade of the Americans; but, like the mother country,
they permitted the fishery to decline, so that even bounties could not
keep it alive.

Meanwhile, the Americans added to their fleet continually, prospering
amazingly. But suddenly the advent of the civil war let loose among
those peaceable cruisers the devastating ALABAMA, whose course was
marked in some parts of the world by the fires of blazing whale-ships. A
great part, of the Geneva award was on this account, although it must be
acknowledged that many pseudo-owners were enriched who never owned aught
but brazen impudence and influential friends to push their fictitious
claims. The real sufferers, seamen especially, in most cases never
received any redress whatever.

From this crushing blow the American sperm whale fishery has never fully
recovered. When the writer was in the trade, some twenty-two years ago,
it was credited with a fleet of between three and four hundred sail; now
it may be doubted whether the numbers reach an eighth of that amount. A
rigid conservatism of method hinders any revival of the industry, which
is practically conducted to-day as it was fifty, or even a hundred
years ago; and it is probable that another decade will witness the
final extinction of what was once one of the most important maritime
industries in the world.




THE CRUISE OF THE "CACHALOT"




