CHAPTER I. OUTWARD BOUND

At the age of eighteen, after a sea-experience of six years from the
time when I dodged about London streets, a ragged Arab, with wits
sharpened by the constant fight for food, I found myself roaming the
streets of New Bedford, Massachusetts. How I came to be there, of all
places in the world, does not concern this story at all, so I am not
going to trouble my readers with it; enough to say that I WAS there, and
mighty anxious to get away. Sailor Jack is always hankering for shore
when he is at sea, but when he is "outward bound"--that is, when his
money is all gone--he is like a cat in the rain there.

So as MY money was all gone, I was hungry for a ship; and when a long,
keen-looking man with a goat-like beard, and mouth stained with dry
tobacco-juice, hailed me one afternoon at the street-corner, I answered
very promptly, scenting a berth. "Lookin' fer a ship, stranger?" said
he. "Yes; do you want a hand?" said I, anxiously. He made a funny little
sound something like a pony's whinny, then answered, "Wall, I should
surmise that I want between fifty and sixty hands, ef yew kin lay me
onto 'em; but, kem along, every dreep's a drop, an' yew seem likely
enough." With that he turned and led the way until we reached a building
around which were gathered one of the most nondescript crowds I had ever
seen. There certainly did not appear to be a sailor among them. Not
so much by their rig, though that is not a great deal to go by, but
by their actions and speech. One thing they all had in common, tobacco
chewing but as nearly every male I met with in America did that, it was
not much to be noticed. I had hardly done reckoning them up when two or
three bustling men came out and shepherded us all energetically into a
long, low room, where some form of agreement was read out to us. Sailors
are naturally and usually careless about the nature of the "articles"
they sign, their chief anxiety being to get to sea, and under somebody's
charge. But had I been ever so anxious to know what I was going to sign
this time, I could not, for the language might as well have been Chinese
for all I understood of it. However, I signed and passed on, engaged to
go I knew not where, in some ship I did not know even the name of, in
which I was to receive I did not know how much, or how little, for my
labour, nor how long I was going to be away. "What a young fool!" I hear
somebody say. I quite agree, but there were a good many more in that
ship, as in most ships that I have ever sailed in.

From the time we signed the articles, we were never left to ourselves.
Truculent-looking men accompanied us to our several boarding-houses,
paid our debts for us, finally bringing us by boat to a ship lying out
in the bay. As we passed under her stern, I read the name CACHALOT, of
New Bedford; but as soon as we ranged alongside, I realized that I was
booked for the sailor's horror--a cruise in a whaler. Badly as I wanted
to get to sea, I had not bargained for this, and would have run some
risks to get ashore again; but they took no chances, so we were all soon
aboard. Before going forward, I took a comprehensive glance around, and
saw that I was on board of a vessel belonging to a type which has almost
disappeared off the face of the waters. A more perfect contrast to the
trim-built English clipper-ships that I had been accustomed to I could
hardly imagine. She was one of a class characterized by sailors as
"built by the mile, and cut off in lengths as you want 'em," bow and
stern almost alike, masts standing straight as broomsticks, and bowsprit
soaring upwards at an angle of about forty-five degrees. She was as
old-fashioned in her rig as in her hull; but I must not go into the
technical differences between rigs, for fear of making myself tedious.
Right in the centre of the deck, occupying a space of about ten feet by
eight, was a square erection of brickwork, upon which my wondering gaze
rested longest, for I had not the slightest idea what it could be. But
I was rudely roused from my meditations by the harsh voice of one of the
officers, who shouted, "Naow then, git below an' stow yer dunnage, 'n
look lively up agin." I took the broad hint, and shouldering my traps,
hurried forward to the fo'lk'sle, which was below deck. Tumbling down
the steep ladder, I entered the gloomy den which was to be for so long
my home, finding it fairly packed with my shipmates. A motley crowd
they were. I had been used in English ships to considerable variety of
nationality; but here were gathered, not only the representatives of
five or six nations, but 'long-shoremen of all kinds, half of whom had
hardly ever set eyes on a ship before! The whole space was undivided
by partition, but I saw at once that black men and white had separated
themselves, the blacks taking the port side and the whites the
starboard. Finding a vacant bunk by the dim glimmer of the ancient
teapot lamp that hung amidships, giving out as much smoke as light, I
hurriedly shifted my coat for a "jumper" or blouse, put on an old cap,
and climbed into the fresh air again. For a double reason, even MY
seasoned head was feeling bad with the villainous reek of the place, and
I did not want any of those hard-featured officers on deck to have
any cause to complain of my "hanging back." On board ship, especially
American ships, the first requisite for a sailor who wants to be treated
properly is to "show willing," any suspicion of slackness being noted
immediately, and the backward one marked accordingly. I had hardly
reached the deck when I was confronted by a negro, the biggest I ever
saw in, my life. He looked me up and down for a moment, then opening his
ebony features in a wide smile, he said, "Great snakes! why, here's a
sailor man for sure! Guess thet's so, ain't it, Johnny?" I said "yes"
very curtly, for I hardly liked his patronizing air; but he snapped me
up short with "yes, SIR, when yew speak to me, yew blank lime-juicer.
I'se de fourf mate ob dis yar ship, en my name's Mistah Jones, 'n yew,
jest freeze on to dat ar, ef yew want ter lib long'n die happy. See,
sonny." I SAW, and answered promptly, "I beg your pardon, sir, I didn't
know." "Ob cawse yew didn't know, dat's all right, little Britisher;
naow jest skip aloft 'n loose dat fore-taupsle." "Aye, aye, sir," I
answered cheerily, springing at once into the fore-rigging and up the
ratlines like a monkey, but not too fast to hear him chuckle, "Dat's a
smart kiddy, I bet." I had the big sail loose in double quick time, and
sung out "All gone, the fore-taupsle," before any of the other sails
were adrift. "Loose the to-gantsle and staysles" came up from below in a
voice like thunder, and I bounded up higher to my task. On deck I could
see a crowd at the windlass heaving up anchor. I said to myself, "They
don't waste any time getting this packet away." Evidently they were not
anxious to test any of the crew's swimming powers. They were wise, for
had she remained at anchor that night I verily believe some of the poor
wretches would have tried to escape.

The anchor came aweigh, the sails were sheeted home, and I returned on
deck to find the ship gathering way for the heads, fairly started on her
long voyage.

What a bear-garden the deck was, to be sure! The black portion of the
crew--Portuguese natives from the Western and Canary Islands--were doing
their work all right in a clumsy fashion; but the farmers, and bakers,
and draymen were being driven about mercilessly amid a perfect hurricane
of profanity and blows. And right here I must say that, accustomed as
I had always been to bad language all my life, what I now heard was a
revelation to me. I would not, if I could, attempt to give a sample
of it, but it must be understood that it was incessant throughout
the voyage. No order could be given without it, under the impression,
apparently, that the more curses the more speed.

Before nightfall we were fairly out to sea, and the ceremony of dividing
the crew into watches was gone through. I found myself in the chief
mate's or "port" watch (they called it "larboard," a term I had never
heard used before, it having long been obsolete in merchant ships),
though the huge negro fourth mate seemed none too well pleased that
I was not under his command, his being the starboard watch under the
second mate.

As night fell, the condition of the "greenies," or non-sailor portion of
the crew, was pitiable. Helpless from sea-sickness, not knowing where
to go or what to do, bullied relentlessly by the ruthless petty
officers--well, I never felt so sorry for a lot of men in my life. Glad
enough I was to get below into the fo'lk'sle for supper, and a brief
rest and respite from that cruelty on deck. A bit of salt junk and
a piece of bread, i.e. biscuit, flinty as a pantile, with a pot of
something sweetened with "longlick" (molasses), made an apology for a
meal, and I turned in. In a very few minutes oblivion came, making me as
happy as any man can be in this world.





