CHAPTER III. FISHING BEGINS

During all the bustle of warlike preparation that had been going on,
the greenhorns had not suffered from inattention on the part of those
appointed to look after them. Happily for them, the wind blew steadily,
and the weather, thanks to the balmy influence of the Gulf Stream, was
quite mild and genial. The ship was undoubtedly lively, as all good
sea-boats are, but her motions were by no means so detestable to a
sea-sick man as those of a driving steamer. So, in spite of their
treatment, perhaps because of it, some of the poor fellows were
beginning to take hold of things "man-fashion," although of course sea
legs they had none, their getting about being indeed a pilgrimage of
pain. Some of them were beginning to try the dreadful "grub" (I cannot
libel "food" by using it in such a connection), thereby showing that
their interest in life, even such a life as was now before them, was
returning. They had all been allotted places in the various boats,
intermixed with the seasoned Portuguese in such a way that the officer
and harpooner in charge would not be dependant upon them entirely in
case of a sudden emergency. Every endeavour was undoubtedly made to
instruct them in their duties, albeit the teachers were all too apt
to beat their information in with anything that came to hand, and
persuasion found no place in their methods.

The reports I had always heard of the laziness prevailing on board
whale-ships were now abundantly falsified. From dawn to dark work went
on without cessation. Everything was rubbed and scrubbed and scoured
until no speck or soil could be found; indeed, no gentleman's yacht or
man-of-war is kept more spotlessly clean than was the CACHALOT.

A regular and severe routine of labour was kept up; and, what was most
galling to me, instead of a regular four hours' watch on and off, night
and day, all hands were kept on deck the whole day long, doing quite
unnecessary tasks, apparently with the object of preventing too much
leisure and consequent brooding over their unhappy lot. One result of
this continual drive and tear was that all these landsmen became rapidly
imbued with the virtues of cleanliness, which was extended to the den in
which we lived, or I verily believe sickness would have soon thinned us
out.

On the fourth day after leaving port we were all busy as usual except
the four men in the "crow's-nests," when a sudden cry of "Porps! porps!"
brought everything to a standstill. A large school of porpoises had just
joined us, in their usual clownish fashion, rolling and tumbling around
the bows as the old barky wallowed along, surrounded by a wide ellipse
of snowy foam. All work was instantly suspended, and active preparations
made for securing a few of these frolicsome fellows. A "block," or
pulley, was hung out at the bowsprit end, a whale-line passed through
it and "bent" (fastened) on to a harpoon. Another line with a running
"bowline," or slip-noose, was also passed out to the bowsprit end, being
held there by one man in readiness. Then one of the harpooners ran out
along the backropes, which keep the jib-boom down, taking his stand
beneath the bowsprit with the harpoon ready. Presently he raised his
iron and followed the track of a rising porpoise with its point until
the creature broke water. At the same instant the weapon left his grasp,
apparently without any force behind it; but we on deck, holding the
line, soon found that our excited hauling lifted a big vibrating body
clean out of the smother beneath. "'Vast hauling!" shouted the mate,
while as the porpoise hung dangling, the harpooner slipped the ready
bowline over his body, gently closing its grip round the "small" by the
broad tail. Then we hauled on the noose-line, slacking away the harpoon,
and in a minute had our prize on deck. He was dragged away at once and
the operation repeated. Again and again we hauled them in, until the
fore part of the deck was alive with the kicking, writhing sea-pigs, at
least twenty of them. I had seen an occasional porpoise caught at
sea before, but never more than one at a time. Here, however, was a
wholesale catch. At last one of the harpooned ones plunged so furiously
while being hauled up that he literally tore himself off the iron,
falling, streaming with blood, back into the sea.

Away went all the school after him, tearing at him with their long
well-toothed jaws, some of them leaping high in the air in their
eagerness to get their due share of the cannibal feast. Our fishing was
over for that time. Meanwhile one of the harpooners had brought out
a number of knives, with which all hands were soon busy skinning the
blubber from the bodies. Porpoises have no skin, that is hide, the
blubber or coating of lard which encases them being covered by a black
substance as thin as tissue paper. The porpoise hide of the boot maker
is really leather, made from the skin of the BELUGA, or "white whale,"
which is found only in the far north. The cover was removed from the
"tryworks" amidships, revealing two gigantic pots set in a frame of
brickwork side by side, capable of holding 200 gallons each. Such a
cooking apparatus as might have graced a Brobdingnagian kitchen. Beneath
the pots was the very simplest of furnaces, hardly as elaborate as the
familiar copper-hole sacred to washing day. Square funnels of sheet-iron
were loosely fitted to the flues, more as a protection against the oil
boiling over into the fire than to carry away the smoke, of which from
the peculiar nature of the fuel there was very little. At one side of
the try-works was a large wooden vessel, or "hopper," to contain the raw
blubber; at the other, a copper cistern or cooler of about 300 gallons
capacity, into which the prepared oil was baled to cool off, preliminary
to its being poured into the casks. Beneath the furnaces was a space as
large as the whole area of the try-works, about a foot deep, which, when
the fires were lighted, was filled with water to prevent the deck from
burning.

It may be imagined that the blubber from our twenty porpoises made but
a poor show in one of the pots; nevertheless, we got a barrel of very
excellent oil from them. The fires were fed with "scrap," or pieces
of blubber from which the oil had been boiled, some of which had been
reserved from the previous voyage. They burnt with a fierce and steady
blaze, leaving but a trace of ash. I was then informed by one of the
harpooners that no other fuel was ever used for boiling blubber at any
time, there being always amply sufficient for the purpose.

The most interesting part of the whole business, though, to us poor
half-starved wretches, was the plentiful supply of fresh meat. Porpoise
beef is, when decently cooked, fairly good eating to a landsman; judge,
then, what it must have been to us. Of course the tit-bits, such as the
liver, kidneys, brains, etc., could not possibly fall to our lot; but
we did not complain, we were too thankful to get something eatable, and
enough of it. Moreover, although few sailors in English ships know it,
porpoise beef improves vastly by keeping, getting tenderer every day the
longer it hangs, until at last it becomes as tasty a viand as one could
wish to dine upon. It was a good job for us that this was the case,
for while the porpoises lasted the "harness casks," or salt beef
receptacles, were kept locked; so if any man had felt unable to eat
porpoise--well, there was no compulsion, he could go hungry.

We were now in the haunts of the Sperm Whale, or "Cachalot," a brilliant
look-out being continually kept for any signs of their appearing. One
officer and a foremast hand were continually on watch during the day
in the main crow's-nest, one harpooner and a seaman in the fore one.
A bounty of ten pounds of tobacco was offered to whoever should first
report a whale, should it be secured, consequently there were no sleepy
eyes up there. Of course none of those who were inexperienced stood much
chance against the eagle-eyed Portuguese; but all tried their best,
in the hope of perhaps winning some little favour from their hard
taskmasters. Every evening at sunset it was "all hands shorten sail,"
the constant drill rapidly teaching even these clumsy landsmen how to
find their way aloft, and do something else besides hold on to anything
like grim death when they got there.

At last, one beautiful day, the boats were lowered and manned, and away
went the greenies on their first practical lesson in the business of the
voyage. As before noticed, there were two greenies in each boat, they
being so arranged that whenever one of them "caught a crab," which of
course was about every other stroke, his failure made little difference
to the boat's progress. They learned very fast under the terrible
imprecations and storm of blows from the iron-fisted and iron-hearted
officers, so that before the day was out the skipper was satisfied of
our ability to deal with a "fish" should he be lucky enough to "raise"
one. I was, in virtue of my experience, placed at the after-oar in the
mate's boat, where it was my duty to attend to the "main sheet" when the
sail was set, where also I had the benefit of the lightest oar except
the small one used by the harpooner in the bow.

The very next day after our first exhaustive boat drill, a school of
"Black Fish" was reported from aloft, with great glee the officers
prepared for what they considered a rattling day's fun.

The Black Fish (PHOCAENA SP.) is a small toothed whale, not at all
unlike a miniature cachalot, except that its head is rounded at the
front, while its jaw is not long and straight, but bowed. It is as
frolicsome as the porpoise, gambolling about in schools of from twenty
to fifty or more, as if really delighted to be alive. Its average size
is from ten to twenty feet long, and seven or eight feet in girth,
weight from one to three tons. Blubber about three inches thick, while
the head is almost all oil, so that a good rich specimen will make
between one and two barrels of oil of medium quality.

The school we were now in sight of was of middling size and about
average weight of individuals, and the officers esteemed it a fortunate
circumstance that we should happen across them as a sort of preliminary
to our tackling the monarchs of the deep.

All the new harpoons were unshipped from the boats, and a couple of
extra "second" irons, as those that have been used are called, were put
into each boat for use if wanted. The sails were also left on board. We
lowered and left the ship, pulling right towards the school, the noise
they were making in their fun effectually preventing them from hearing
our approach. It is etiquette to allow the mate's boat first place,
unless his crew is so weak as to be unable to hold their own; but as the
mate always has first pick of the men this seldom happens. So, as usual,
we were first, and soon I heard the order given, "Stand up, Louey, and
let 'em have it!" Sure enough, here we were right among them. Louis let
drive, "fastening" a whopper about twenty feet long. The injured animal
plunged madly forward, accompanied by his fellows, while Louis calmly
bent another iron to a "short warp," or piece of whale-line, the loose
end of which he made a bowline with around the main line which was fast
to the "fish." Then he fastened another "fish," and the queer sight was
seen of these two monsters each trying to flee in opposite directions,
while the second one ranged about alarmingly as his "bridle" ran along
the main line. Another one was secured in the same way, then the game
was indeed great. The school had by this time taken the alarm and
cleared out, but the other boats were all fast to fish, so that didn't
matter. Now, at the rate our "game" were going it would evidently be
a long while before they died, although, being so much smaller than a
whale proper, a harpoon will often kill them at a stroke. Yet they were
now so tangled or "snarled erp," as the mate said, that it was no easy
matter to lance them without great danger of cutting the line. However,
we hauled up as close to them as we dared, and the harpooner got a good
blow in, which gave the biggest of the three "Jesse," as he said, though
why "Jesse" was a stumper. Anyhow, it killed him promptly, while almost
directly after another one saved further trouble by passing in his own
checks. But he sank at the same time, drawing the first one down with
him, so that we were in considerable danger of having to cut them adrift
or be swamped. The "wheft" was waved thrice as an urgent signal to the
ship to come to our assistance with all speed, but in the meantime our
interest lay in the surviving Black Fish keeping alive. Should HE die,
and, as was most probable, sink, we should certainly have to cut and
lose the lot, tools included.

We waited in grim silence while the ship came up, so slowly, apparently,
that she hardly seemed to move, but really at a good pace of about four
knots an hour, which for her was not at all bad. She got alongside of us
at last, and we passed up the bight of our line, our fish all safe, very
much pleased with ourselves, especially when we found that the other
boats had only five between the three of them.

The fish secured to the ship, all the boats were hoisted except one,
which remained alongside to sling the bodies. During our absence the
ship-keepers had been busy rigging one of the cutting falls, an immense
fourfold tackle from the main lowermast-head, of four-inch rope through
great double blocks, large as those used at dockyards for lifting ships'
masts and boilers. Chain-slings were passed around the carcases, which
gripped the animal at the "small," being prevented from slipping off by
the broad spread of the tail. The end of the "fall," or tackle-rope,
was then taken to the windlass, and we hove away cheerily, lifting the
monsters right on deck. A mountainous pile they made. A short spell was
allowed, when the whole eight were on board, for dinner; then all hands
turned to again to "flench" the blubber, and prepare for trying-out.
This was a heavy job, keeping all hands busy until it was quite
dark, the latter part of the work being carried on by the light of
a "cresset," the flames of which were fed with "scrap," which blazed
brilliantly, throwing a big glare over all the ship. The last of the
carcases was launched overboard by about eight o'clock that evening, but
not before some vast junks of beef had been cut off and hung up in the
rigging for our food supply.

The try-works were started again, "trying-out" going on busily all
night, watch and watch taking their turn at keeping the pots supplied
with minced blubber. The work was heavy, while the energetic way in
which it was carried on made us all glad to take what rest was allowed
us, which was scanty enough, as usual.

By nightfall the next day the ship had resumed her normal appearance,
and we were a tun and a quarter of oil to the good. Black Fish oil is of
medium quality, but I learned that, according to the rule of "roguery
in all trades," it was the custom to mix quantities such as we had just
obtained with better class whale-oil, and thus get a much higher price
than it was really worth.

Up till this time we had no sort of an idea as to where our first
objective might be, but from scraps of conversation I had overheard
among the harpooners, I gathered that we were making for the Cape
Verde Islands or the Acores, in the vicinity of which a good number
of moderate-sized sperm whales are often to be found. In fact, these
islands have long been a nursery for whale-fishers, because the cachalot
loves their steep-to shores, and the hardy natives, whenever and
wherever they can muster a boat and a little gear, are always ready to
sally forth and attack the unwary whale that ventures within their ken.
Consequently more than half of the total crews of the American whaling
fleet are composed of these islanders. Many of them have risen to the
position of captain, and still more are officers and harpooners;
but though undoubtedly brave and enterprising, they are cruel and
treacherous, and in positions of authority over men of Teutonic or
Anglo-Saxon origin, are apt to treat their subordinates with great
cruelty.





