CHAPTER VII. GETTING SOUTHWARD

Whether our recent experience had altered the captain's plans or not
I do not know, but much to the dismay of the Portuguese portion of the
crew, we did but sight, dimly and afar off, the outline of the Cape
Verde Islands before our course was altered, and we bore away for the
southward like any other outward-bounder. That is, as far as our course
went; but as to the speed, we still retained the leisurely tactics
hitherto pursued, shortening sail every night, and, if the weather was
very fine, setting it all again at daybreak.

The morose and sullen temper of the captain had been, if anything, made
worse by recent events, and we were worked as hard as if the success of
the voyage depended upon our ceaseless toil of scrubbing, scraping,
and polishing. Discipline was indeed maintained at a high pitch of
perfection, no man daring to look awry, much less complain of any
hardship, however great. Even this humble submissiveness did not satisfy
our tyrant, and at last his cruelty took a more active shape. One of
the long Yankee farmers from Vermont, Abner Cushing by name, with the
ingenuity which seems inbred in his 'cute countrymen, must needs try
his hand at making a villainous decoction which he called "beer," the
principal ingredients in which were potatoes and molasses. Now potatoes
formed no part of our dietary, so Abner set his wits to work to steal
sufficient for his purpose, and succeeded so far that he obtained half
a dozen. I have very little doubt that one of the Portuguese in the
forecastle conveyed the information aft for some reason best known to
himself, any more than we white men all had that in a similar manner
all our sayings and doings, however trivial, became at once known to the
officers. However, the fact that the theft was discovered soon became
painfully evident, for we had a visit from the afterguard in force one
afternoon, and Abner with his brewage was haled to the quarter-deck.
There, in the presence of all hands, he was arraigned, found guilty of
stealing the ship's stores, and sentence passed upon him. By means of
two small pieces of fishing line he was suspended by his thumbs in the
weather rigging, in such a manner that when the ship was upright his
toes touched the deck, but when she rolled his whole weight hung from
his thumbs. This of itself one would have thought sufficient torture for
almost any offence, but in addition to it he received two dozen lashes
with an improvised cat-o'-nine-tails, laid on by the brawny arm of
one of the harpooners. We were all compelled to witness this, and our
feelings may be imagined. When, after what seemed a terribly long
time to me (Heaven knows what it must have been to him!), he fainted,
although no chicken I nearly fainted too, from conflicting emotions of
sympathy and impotent rage.

He was then released in leisurely fashion, and we were permitted to take
him forward and revive him. As soon as he was able to stand on his feet,
he was called on deck again, and not allowed to go below till his watch
was over. Meanwhile Captain Slocum improved the occasion by giving us a
short harangue, the burden of which was that we had now seen a LITTLE of
what any of us might expect if we played any "dog's tricks" on him. But
you can get used to anything, I suppose: so after the first shock of the
atrocity was over, things went on again pretty much as usual.

For the first and only time in my experience, we sighted St. Paul's
Rocks, a tiny group of jagged peaks protruding from the Atlantic nearly
on the Equator. Stupendous mountains they must be, rising almost sheer
for about four and a half miles from the ocean bed. Although they appear
quite insignificant specks upon the vast expanse of water, one could not
help thinking how sublime their appearance would be were they visible
from the plateau whence they spring. Their chief interest to us at the
time arose from the fact that, when within about three miles of them,
we were suddenly surrounded by a vast school of bonito, These fish,
so-named by the Spaniards from their handsome appearance, are a species
of mackerel, a branch of the SCOMBRIDAE family, and attain a size
of about two feet long and forty pounds weight, though their average
dimensions are somewhat less than half that. They feed entirely upon
flying-fish and the small leaping squid or cuttle-fish, but love to
follow a ship, playing around her, if her pace be not too great, for
days together. Their flesh resembles beef in appearance, and they are
warm-blooded; but, from their habitat being mid-ocean, nothing is known
with any certainty of their habits of breeding.

The orthodox method of catching them on board ship is to cover a
suitable hook with a piece of white rag a couple of inches long, and
attach it to a stout line. The fisherman then takes his seat upon the
jibboom end, having first, if he is prudent, secured a sack to the
jibstay in such a manner that its mouth gapes wide. Then he unrolls his
line, and as the ship forges ahead the line, blowing out, describes a
curve, at the end of which the bait, dipping to--the water occasionally,
roughly represents a flying-fish. Of course, the faster the ship is
going, the better the chance of deceiving the fish, since they have less
time to study the appearance of the bait. It is really an exaggerated
and clumsy form of fly-fishing, and, as with that elegant pastime, much
is due to the skill of the fisherman.

As the bait leaps from crest to crest of the wavelets thrust aside by
the advancing ship, a fish more adventurous or hungrier than the rest
will leap at it, and in an instant there is a dead, dangling weight of
from ten to forty pounds hanging at the end of your line thirty feet
below. You haul frantically, for he may be poorly hooked, and you cannot
play him. In a minute or two, if all goes well, he is plunged in the
sack, and safe. But woe unto you if you have allowed the jeers of your
shipmates to dissuade you from taking a sack out with you.

The struggles of these fish are marvellous, and a man runs great risk of
being shaken off the boom, unless his legs are firmly locked in between
the guys. Such is the tremendous vibration that a twenty-pound bonito
makes in a man's grip, that it can be felt in the cabin at the other and
of the ship; and I have often come in triumphantly with one, having lost
all feeling in my arms and a goodly portion of skin off my breast and
side, where I have embraced the prize in a grim determination to hold
him at all hazards, besides being literally drenched with his blood.

Like all our fishing operations on board the CACHALOT, this day's
fishing was conducted on scientific principles, and resulted in
twenty-five fine fish being shipped, which were a welcome addition to
our scanty allowance. Happily for us, they would not take the salt in
that sultry latitude soon enough to preserve them; for, when they can be
salted, they become like brine itself, and are quite unfit for food.
Yet we should have been compelled to eat salt bonito, or go without meat
altogether, if it had been possible to cure them.

We were now fairly in the "horse latitudes," and, much to our relief,
the rain came down in occasional deluges, permitting us to wash well
and often. I suppose the rains of the tropics have been often enough
described to need no meagre attempts of mine to convey an idea of them;
yet I have often wished I could make home-keeping friends understand how
far short what they often speak of as a "tropical shower" falls of the
genuine article. The nearest I can get to it is the idea of an ocean
suspended overhead, out, of which the bottom occasionally falls. Nothing
is visible or audible but the glare and roar of falling water, and a
ship's deck, despite the many outlets, is full enough to swim about in
in a very few minutes. At such times the whole celestial machinery
of rain-making may be seen in full working order. Five or six mighty
waterspouts in various stages of development were often within easy
distance of us; once, indeed, we watched the birth, growth, and death
of one less than a mile away. First, a big, black cloud, even among that
great assemblage of NIMBI, began to belly downward, until the centre
of it tapered into a stem, and the whole mass looked like a vast,
irregularly-moulded funnel. Lower and lower it reached, as if feeling
for a soil in which to grow, until the sea beneath was agitated
sympathetically, rising at last in a sort of pointed mound to meet the
descending column. Our nearness enabled us to see that both descending
and rising parts were whirling violently in obedience to some invisible
force, and when they had joined each other, although the spiral motion
did not appear to continue, the upward rush of the water through what
was now a long elastic tube was very plainly to be seen. The cloud
overhead grew blacker and bigger, until its gloom was terrible. The
pipe, or stem, got thinner gradually, until it became a mere thread;
nor, although watching closely, could we determine when the connection
between sea and sky ceased--one could not call it severed. The point
rising from the sea settled almost immediately amidst a small commotion,
as of a whirlpool. The tail depending from the cloud slowly shortened,
and the mighty reservoir lost the vast bulge which had hung so
threateningly above. Just before the final disappearance of the last
portion of the tube, a fragment of cloud appeared to break off. It fell
near enough to show by its thundering roar what a body of water it must
have been, although it looked like a saturated piece of dirty rag in its
descent.

For whole days and nights together we sometimes lay almost "as idle as
a painted ship upon a painted ocean," when the deep blue dome above
matched the deep blue plain below, and never a fleck of white appeared
in sky or sea. This perfect stop to our progress troubled none, although
it aggravates a merchant skipper terribly. As for the objects of our
search, they had apparently all migrated other-whither, for never a sign
of them did we see. Finbacks, a species of rorqual, were always pretty
numerous, and as if they knew how useless they were to us, came and
played around like exaggerated porpoises. One in particular kept us
company for several days and nights. We knew him well, from a great
triangular scar on his right side, near the dorsal fin. Sometimes he
would remain motionless by the side of the ship, a few feet below the
surface, as distinctly in our sight as a gold-fish in a parlour globe;
or he would go under the keel, and gently chafe his broad back to and
fro along it, making queer tremors run through the vessel, as if she
were scraping over a reef. Whether from superstition or not I cannot
tell, but I never saw any creature injured out of pure wantonness,
except sharks, while I was on board the CACHALOT. Of course, injuries to
men do not count. Had that finback attempted to play about a passenger
ship in such a fashion, all the loungers on board would have been
popping at him with their revolvers and rifles without ever a thought
of compunction; yet here, in a vessel whose errand was whale-fishing,
a whale enjoyed perfect immunity. It was very puzzling. At last my
curiosity became too great to hear any longer, and I sought my friend
Mistah Jones at what I considered a favourable opportunity. I found him
very gracious and communicative, and I got such a lecture on the natural
history of the cetacea as I have never forgotten--the outcome of a
quarter-century's experience of them, and afterwards proved by me to be
correct in every detail, which latter is a great deal more than can be
said of any written natural history that ever I came across. But I will
not go into that now. Leaning over the rail, with the great rorqual
laying perfectly still a few feet below, I was told to mark how slender
and elegant were his proportions. "Clipper-built," my Mentor termed him.
He was full seventy feet long, but his greatest diameter would not reach
ten feet. His snout was long and pointed, while both top and bottom of
his head were nearly flat. When he came up to breathe, which he did out
of the top of his head, he showed us that, instead of teeth, he had a
narrow fringe of baleen (whalebone) all around his upper jaws, although
"I kaint see whyfor, kase he lib on all sort er fish, s'long's dey
ain't too big. I serpose w'en he kaint get nary fish he do de same ez
de 'bowhead'--go er siftin eout dem little tings we calls whale-feed wiv
dat ar' rangement he carry in his mouf." "But why don't we harpoon him?"
I asked. Goliath turned on me a pitying look, as he replied, "Sonny,
ef yew wuz ter go on stick iron inter dat ar fish, yew'd fink de hole
bottom fell eout kerblunk. W'en I uz young 'n foolish, a finback range
'longside me one day, off de Seychelles. I just done gone miss' a spam
whale, and I was kiender mad,--muss ha' bin. Wall, I let him hab it blam
'tween de ribs. If I lib ten tousan year, ain't gwine ter fergit dat ar.
Wa'nt no time ter spit, tell ye; eberybody hang ober de side ob de boat.
Wiz--poof!--de line all gone. Clar to glory, I neber see it go. Ef it
hab ketch anywhar, nobody eber see US too. Fus, I t'ought I jump ober
de side--neber face de skipper any mo'. But he uz er good ole man, en
he only say, 'Don't be sech blame jackass any more.' En I don't." From
which lucid narration I gathered that the finback had himself to thank
for his immunity from pursuit. "'Sides," persisted Goliath, "wa' yew
gwine do wiv' him? Ain't six inch uv blubber anywhere 'bout his long
ugly carkiss; en dat, dirty lill' rag 'er whalebone he got in his mouf,
'taint worf fifty cents. En mor'n dat, we pick up, a dead one when I
uz in de ole RAINBOW--done choke hisself, I spec, en we cut him in. He
stink fit ter pison de debbil, en, after all, we get eighteen bar'l ob
dirty oil out ob him. Wa'nt worf de clean sparm scrap we use ter bile
him. G' 'way!" Which emphatic adjuration, addressed not to me, but to
the unconscious monster below, closed the lesson for the time.

The calm still persisted, and, as usual, fish began to abound,
especially flying-fish. At times, disturbed by some hungry bonito or
dolphin, a shoal of them would rise--a great wave of silver--and skim
through the air, rising and falling for perhaps a couple of hundred
yards before they again took to the water; or a solitary one of larger
size than usual would suddenly soar into the air, a heavy splash behind
him showing by how few inches he had missed the jaws of his pursuer.
Away he would go in a long, long curve, and, meeting the ship in his
flight, would rise in the air, turn off at right angles to his former
direction, and spin away again, the whir of his wing-fins distinctly
visible as well as audible. At last he would incline to the water, but
just as he was about to enter it there would be an eddy--the enemy
was there waiting--and he would rise twenty, thirty feet, almost
perpendicularly, and dart away fully a hundred yards on a fresh course
before the drying of his wing membranes compelled him to drop. In the
face of such a sight as this, which is of everyday occurrence in these
latitudes, how trivial and misleading the statements made by the natural
history books seem.

They tell their readers that the EXOCETUS VOLITANS "does not fly; does
not flutter its wings; can only take a prolonged leap," and so on. The
misfortune attendant upon such books seems, to an unlearned sailor like
myself, to be that, although posing as authorities, most of the authors
are content to take their facts not simply at second-hand, but even unto
twenty-second-hand. So the old fables get repeated, and brought up to
date, and it is nobody's business to take the trouble to correct them.

The weather continued calm and clear, and as the flying-fish were about
in such immense numbers, I ventured to suggest to Goliath that we might
have a try for some of them. I verily believe he thought I was mad. He
stared at me for a minute, and then, with an indescribable intonation,
said, "How de ol' Satan yew fink yew gwain ter get'm, hey? Ef yew spects
ter fool dis chile wiv any dem lime-juice yarns, 'bout lanterns 'n boats
at night-time, yew's 'way off." I guessed he meant the fable current
among English sailors, that if you hoist a sail on a calm night in a
boat where flying-fish abound, and hang a lantern in the middle of it,
the fish will fly in shoals at the lantern, strike against the sail, and
fall in heaps in the boat. It MAY be true, but I never spoke to anybody
who has seen it done, nor is it the method practised in the only place
in the world where flying-fishing is followed for a living. So I told
Mr. Jones that if we had some circular nets of small mesh made and
stretched on wooden hoops, I was sure we should be able to catch some.
He caught at the idea, and mentioned it to the mate, who readily gave
his permission to use a boat. A couple of "Guineamen" (a very large
kind of flying-fish, having four wings) flew on board that night, as if
purposely to provide us with the necessary bait.

Next morning, about four bells, the sea being like a mirror, unruffled
by a breath of wind, we lowered and paddled off from the ship about a
mile. When far enough away, we commenced operations by squeezing in the
water some pieces of fish that had been kept for the purpose until they
were rather high-flavoured. The exuding oil from this fish spread a
thin film for some distance around the boat, through which, as through a
sheet of glass, we could see a long way down. Minute specks of the bait
sank slowly through the limpid blue, but for at least an hour there
was no sign of life. I was beginning to fear that I should be called
to account for misleading all hands, when, to my unbounded delight,
an immense shoal of flying-fish came swimming round the boat, eagerly
picking up the savoury morsels. We grasped our nets, and, leaning over
the gunwale, placed them silently in the water, pressing them downward
and in towards the boat at the same time. Our success was great
and immediate. We lifted the wanderers by scores, while I whispered
imploringly, "Be careful not to scare them; don't make a sound." All
hands entered into the spirit of the thing with great eagerness. As for
Mistah Jones, his delight was almost more than he could bear. Suddenly
one of the men, in lifting his net, slipped on the smooth bottom of the
boat, jolting one of the oars. There was a gleam of light below as the
school turned--they had all disappeared instanter. We had been so busy
that we had not noticed the dimensions of our catch; but now, to our
great joy, we found that we had at least eight hundred fish nearly as
large as herrings. We at once returned to the ship, having been absent
only two hours, during which we had caught sufficient to provide all
hands with three good meals. Not one of the crew had ever seen or heard
of such fishing before, so my pride and pleasure may be imagined. A
little learning may be a dangerous thing at times, but it certainly
is often handy to have about you. The habit of taking notice
and remembering has often been the means of saving many lives in
suddenly-met situations of emergency, at sea perhaps more than anywhere
else, and nothing can be more useful to a sailor than the practice of
keeping his weather-eye open.

In Barbadoes there is established the only regular flying-fishery in the
world, and in just the manner I have described, except that the boats
are considerably larger, is the whole town supplied with delicious fish
at so trifling a cost as to make it a staple food among all classes.

But I find that I am letting this chapter run to an unconscionable
length, and it does not appear as if we were getting at the southward
very fast either. Truth to tell, our progress was mighty slow; but
we gradually crept across the belt of calms, and a week after our
never-to-be-forgotten haul of flying-fish we got the first of the
south-east trades, and went away south at a good pace--for us. We made
the Island of Trinidada with its strange conical-topped pillar, the
Ninepin Rock, but did not make a call, as the skipper was beginning to
get fidgety at not seeing any whales, and anxious to get down to where
he felt reasonably certain of falling in with them. Life had been
very monotonous of late, and much as we dreaded still the prospect of
whale-fighting (by "we," of course, I mean the chaps forward), it began
to lose much of its terror for us, so greatly did we long for a little
change. Keeping, as we did, out of the ordinary track of ships, we
hardly ever saw a sail. We had no recreations; fun was out of the
question; and had it not been for a Bible, a copy of Shakespeare, and a
couple of cheap copies of "David Copperfield" and "Bleak House," all of
which were mine, we should have had no books.





