CHAPTER XXVI. PADDY'S LATEST EXPLOIT

New Zealand is pre-eminently a country of grand harbours; but I think
those that are least used easily bear the palm for grandeur of scenery
and facility of access. The wonderful harbour, or rather series of
harbours, into which we were now entering for the first time, greatly
resembled in appearance a Norwegian fjord, not only in the character of
its scenery, but from the interesting, if disconcerting, fact that
the cliffs were so steep-to that in some places no anchorage is found
alongside the very land itself. There are, however, many places where
the best possible anchorage can be obtained, so securely sheltered that
a howling south-wester may be tearing the sea up by the roots outside,
and you will know nothing of it within, except what may be surmised from
the motion of the clouds overhead. It was an ideal place for a whaling
station, being right on the Solander.

We found it exceedingly convenient, and much nearer than Port William,
but, from the prevailing winds, difficult of access in nine cases out of
ten, especially when hampered with a whale. Upon cutting-in our
latest catch, an easy explanation of his passive attitude was at once
forthcoming. He had been attacked by some whale-ship, whose irons had
drawn, leaving deep traces of their presence; but during the battle he
had received SEVEN bombs, all of which had entered around his small,
but had not exploded. Their general effect had been, I should think,
to paralyze the great muscles of his flukes, rendering him unable to
travel; yet this could not have taken place until some time after he
had made good his escape from those aggressors. It was instructive, as
demonstrating what amount of injury these colossi really can survive,
and I have no doubt that, if he had been left alone, he would have
recovered his normal energy, and been as well as ever. From our point of
view, of course, what had happened was the best possible thing, for he
came almost as a gift--the second capture we had made on these grounds
of a like nature.

At the close of our operations the welcome news was made public that
four more fish like the present one would fill us bung-up, and that we
should then, after a brief visit to the Bluff, start direct for home.
This announcement, though expected for some time past, gave an amazing
fillip to everybody's interest in the work. The strange spectacle was
witnessed of all hands being anxious to quit a snug harbour for the sea,
where stern, hard wrestling with the elements was the rule. The captain,
well pleased with the eagerness manifested, had his boat manned for a
trip to the entrance of the harbour, to see what the weather was like
outside, since it was not possible to judge from where the ship lay. On
his return, he reported the weather rough, but moderating, and announced
his intention of weighing at daylight next morning. Satisfied that our
days in the southern hemisphere were numbered, and all anxiety to point
her head for home, this news was most pleasing, putting all of us in the
best of humours, and provoking quite an entertainment of song and dance
until nearly four bells.

During the grey of dawn the anchor was weighed. There was no breath of
wind from any quarter, so that it was necessary to lower boats and tow
the old girl out to her field of duty. Before she was fairly clear of
the harbour, though, there came a "snifter" from the hills that caught
her unprepared, making her reel again, and giving us a desperate few
minutes to scramble on board and hoist our boats up. As we drew out from
the land, we found that a moderate gale was blowing, but the sky was
clear, fathomless blue, the sun rose kindly, a heavenly dream of soft
delicate colour preceding him; so that, in spite of the strong breeze,
all looked promising for a good campaign. At first no sign could be seen
of any of the other ships, though we looked long and eagerly for them.
At last we saw them, four in all, nearly hull down to seaward, but
evidently coming in under press of sail. So slow, however, was their
approach that we had made one "leg" across the ground and halfway back
before they were near enough for us to descry the reason of their want
of speed. They had each got a whale alongside, and were carrying every
rag of canvas they could spread, in order to get in with their prizes.

Our old acquaintance, the CHANCE, was there, the three others being her
former competitors, except those who were disabled, still lying in Port
William. Slowly, painfully they laboured along, until well within the
mouth of the Straits, when, without any warning, the wind which had been
bringing them in suddenly flew round into the northward, putting them
at once in a most perilous position. Too far within the Straits to "up
helm" and run for it out to sea; not far enough to get anywhere that an
anchor might hold; and there to leeward, within less than a dozen miles,
loomed grim and gloomy one of the most terrific rock-bound coasts in the
world. The shift of wind had placed the CHANCE farther to leeward than
all the rest, a good mile and a half nearer the shore; and we could well
imagine how anxiously her movements were being watched by the others,
who, in spite of their jealousy of his good luck, knew well and
appreciated fully Paddy's marvellous seamanship, as well as his
unparalleled knowledge of the coast.

Having no whale to hamper our movements, besides being well to windward
of them all, we were perfectly comfortable as long as we kept to seaward
of a certain line and the gale was not too fierce, so for the present
all our attention was concentrated upon the labouring ships to leeward.
The intervention of the land to windward kept the sea from rising to
the awful height it attains under the pressure of a westerly, or a
south-westerly gale, when, gathering momentum over an area extending
right round the globe, it hurls itself upon those rugged shores. Still,
it was bad enough. The fact of the gale striking across the regular set
of the swell and current had the effect of making the sea irregular,
short, and broken, which state of things is considered worse, as far as
handling the ship goes, than a much heavier, longer, but more regular
succession of waves.

As the devoted craft drifted helplessly down upon that frowning barrier,
our excitement grew intense. Their inability to do anything but drift
was only too well known by experience to every one of us, nor would it
be possible for them to escape at all if they persisted in holding on
much longer. And it was easy to see why they did so. While Paddy held
on so far to leeward of them, and consequently in so much more imminent
danger than they were, it would be derogatory in the highest degree to
their reputation for seamanship and courage were they to slip and run
before he did. He, however, showed no sign of doing so, although
they all neared, with an accelerated drift, that point from whence
no seamanship could deliver them, and where death inevitable, cruel,
awaited them without hope of escape. The part of the coast upon which
they were apparently driving was about as dangerous and impracticable as
any in the world. A gigantic barrier of black, naked rock, extending for
several hundred yards, rose sheer from the sea beneath, like the side of
an ironclad, up to a height of seven or eight hundred feet. No outlying
spurs of submerged fragments broke the immeasurable landward rush of the
majestic waves towards the frowning face of this world-fragment.
Fresh from their source, with all the impetus accumulated in their
thousand-mile journey, they came apparently irresistible. Against this
perpendicular barrier they hurled themselves with a shock that vibrated
far inland, and a roar that rose in a dominating diapason over the
continuous thunder of the tempest-riven sea. High as was the summit
of the cliff, the spray, hurled upwards by the tremendous impact, rose
higher, so that the whole front of the great rock was veiled in filmy
wreaths of foam, hiding its solidity from the seaward view. At either
end of this vast, rampart nothing could be seen but a waste of breakers
seething, hissing, like the foot of Niagara, and effectually concealing
the CHEVAUX DE FRISE of rocks which produced such a vortex of tormented
waters.

Towards this dreadful spot, then, the four vessels were being
resistlessly driven, every moment seeing their chances of escape
lessening to vanishing-point. Suddenly, as if panic-stricken, the ship
nearest to the CHANCE gave a great sweep round on to the other tack, a
few fluttering gleams aloft showing that even in that storm they
were daring to set some sail. What the manoeuvre meant we knew very
well--they had cut adrift from their whale, terrified at last beyond
endurance into the belief that Paddy was going to sacrifice himself and
his crew in the attempt to lure them with him to inevitable destruction.
The other two did not hesitate longer. The example once set, they
immediately followed; but it was for some time doubtful in the
extreme whether their resolve was not taken too late to save them from
destruction. We watched them with breathless interest, unable for a long
time to satisfy ourselves that they were out of danger. But at last
we saw them shortening sail again--a sure sign that they considered
themselves, while the wind held in the same quarter, safe from going
ashore at any rate, although there was still before them the prospect of
a long struggle with the unrelenting ferocity of the weather down south.

Meanwhile, what of the daring Irishman and his old barrel of a ship?
The fugitives once safe off the land, all our interest centred in the
CHANCE. We watched her until she drew in so closely to the seething
cauldron of breakers that it was only occasionally we could distinguish
her outline; and the weather was becoming so thick and dirty, the
light so bad, that we were reluctantly compelled to lose sight of
her, although the skipper believed that he saw her in the midst of
the turmoil of broken water at the western end of the mighty mass of
perpendicular cliff before described. Happily for us, the wind veered to
the westward, releasing us from the prospect of another enforced visit
to the wild regions south of the island. It blew harder than ever; but
being now a fair wind up the Straits, we fled before it, anchoring again
in Port William before midnight. Here we were compelled to remain for
a week; for after the gale blew itself out, the wind still hung in the
same quarter, refusing to allow us to get back again to our cruising
station.

But on the second day of our enforced detention a ship poked her jibboom
round the west end of the little bay. No words could describe our
condition of spellbound astonishment when she rounded-to, cumbrously as
befitting a ship towing a whale, and revealed to us the well-remembered
outlines of the old CHANCE. It was like welcoming the first-fruits
of the resurrection; for who among sailor men, having seen a vessel
disappear from their sight, as we had, under such terrible conditions,
would ever have expected to see her again? She was hardly anchored
before our skipper was alongside, thirsting to satisfy his unbounded
curiosity as to the unheard-of means whereby she had escaped such
apparently inevitable destruction. I was fortunate enough to accompany
him, and hear the story at first-hand.

It appeared that none of the white men on board, except the redoubtable
Paddy himself, had ever been placed in so seemingly hopeless and
desperate a position before. Yet when they saw how calm and free from
anxiety their commander was, how cool and business-like the attitude
of all their dusky shipmates, their confidence in his ability and
resourcefulness kept its usual high level. It must be admitted that the
test such feelings were then subjected to was of the severest, for to
their eyes no possible avenue of escape was open. Along that glaring
line of raging, foaming water not a break occurred, not the faintest
indication of an opening anywhere wherein even so experienced a pilot
as Paddy might thrust a ship. The great black wall of rock loomed up
by their side, grim and pitiless as doom--a very door of adamant closed
against all hope. Nearer and nearer they drew, until the roar of the
baffled Pacific was deafening, maddening, in its overwhelming volume of
chaotic sound. All hands stood motionless, with eyes fixed in horrible
fascination upon the indescribable vortex to which they were being
irresistibly driven.

At last, just as the fringes of the back-beaten billows hissed up to
greet them, they felt her motion ease. Instinctively looking aft, they
saw the skipper coolly wave his hand, signing to them to trim the yards.
As they hauled on the weather braces, she plunged through the maelstrom
of breakers, and before they had got the yards right round they were on
the other side of that enormous barrier, the anchor was dropped, and all
was still. The vessel rested, like a bird on her nest, in a deep, still
tarn, shut in, to all appearance, on every side by huge rock barriers.
Of the furious storm but a moment before howling and raging all around
them, nothing remained but an all-pervading, thunderous hum, causing
the deck to vibrate beneath them, and high overhead the jagged, leaden
remnants of twisted, tortured cloud whirling past their tiny oblong of
sky. Just a minute's suspension of all faculties but wonder, then, in
one spontaneous, heartfelt note of genuine admiration, all hands burst
into a cheer that even overtopped the mighty rumble of the baffled sea.

Here they lay, perfectly secure, and cut in their whale as if in dock;
then at the first opportunity they ran out, with fearful difficulty, a
kedge with a whale-line attached, by which means they warped the vessel
out of her hiding-place--a far more arduous operation than getting in
had been. But even this did not exhaust the wonders of that occasion.
They had hardly got way upon her, beginning to draw out from the land,
when the eagle-eye of one of the Maories detected the carcass of a
whale rolling among the breakers about half a mile to the westward.
Immediately a boat was lowered, a double allowance of line put into
her, and off they went to the valuable flotsam. Dangerous in the highest
degree was the task of getting near enough to drive harpoons into the
body; but it was successfully accomplished, the line run on board, and
the prize hauled triumphantly alongside. This was the whale they had now
brought in. We shrewdly suspected that it must have been one of those
abandoned by the unfortunate vessels who had fled, but etiquette forbade
us saying anything about it. Even had it been, another day would have
seen it valueless to any one, for it was by no means otto of roses to
sniff at now, while they had certainly salved it at the peril of their
lives.

When we returned on board and repeated the story, great was the
amazement. Such a feat of seamanship was almost beyond belief; but we
were shut up to believing, since in no other way could the vessel's
miraculous escape be accounted for. The little, dumpy, red-faced figure,
rigged like any scarecrow, that now stood on his cutting-stage, punching
away vigorously at the fetid mass of blubber beneath him, bore no
outward visible sign of a hero about him; but in our eyes he was
transfigured--a being to be thought of reverently, as one who in all
those dualities that go to the making of a man had proved himself of the
seed royal, a king of men, all the more kingly because unconscious that
his deeds were of so exalted an order.

I am afraid that, to a landsman, my panegyric may smack strongly of
gush, for no one but a seaman can rightly appraise such doings as these;
but I may be permitted to say that, when I think of men whom I feel glad
to have lived to know, foremost among them rises the queer little figure
of Paddy Gilroy.





