CHAPTER II. PREPARING FOR ACTION

The hideous noise always considered necessary in those ships when
calling the watch, roused me effectively at midnight, "eight bells."
I hurried on deck, fully aware that no leisurely ten minutes would be
allowed here. "Lay aft the watch," saluted me as I emerged into the keen
strong air, quickening my pace according to where the mate stood waiting
to muster his men. As soon as he saw me, he said, "Can you steer?" in
a mocking tone; but when I quietly answered, "Yes, sir," his look of
astonishment was delightful to see. He choked it down, however, and
merely telling me to take the wheel, turned forrard roaring frantically
for his watch. I had no time to chuckle over what I knew was in store
for him, getting those poor greenies collected from their several holes
and corners, for on taking the wheel I found a machine under my hands
such as I never even heard of before.

The wheel was fixed upon the tiller in such a manner that the whole
concern travelled backwards and forwards across the deck in the maddest
kind of way. For the first quarter of an hour, in spite of the September
chill, the sweat poured off me in streams. And the course--well, if was
not steering, it was sculling; the old bumboat was wobbling all
around like a drunken tailor with two left legs. I fairly shook with
apprehension lest the mate should come and look in the compass. I had
been accustomed to hard words if I did not steer within half a point
each way; but here was a "gadget" that worked me to death, the result
being a wake like a letter S. Gradually I got the hang of the thing,
becoming easier in my mind on my own account. Even that was not an
unmixed blessing, for I had now some leisure to listen to the goings-on
around the deck.

Such brutality I never witnessed before. On board of English ships
(except men-of-war) there is practically no discipline, which is bad,
but this sort of thing was maddening. I knew how desperately ill all
those poor wretches were, how helpless and awkward they would be if
quite hale and hearty; but there was absolutely no pity for them, the
officers seemed to be incapable of any feelings of compassion whatever.
My heart sank within me as I thought of what lay before me, although
I did not fear that their treatment would also be mine, since I was
at least able to do my duty, and willing to work hard to keep out of
trouble. Then I began to wonder what sort of voyage I was in for, how
long it would last, and what my earnings were likely to be, none of
which things I had the faintest idea of.

Fortunately, I was alone in the world. No one, as far as I knew, cared
a straw what became of me; so that I was spared any worry on that head.
And I had also a very definite and well-established trust in God, which
I can now look back and see was as fully justified as I then believed
it to be. So, as I could not shut my ears to the cruelties being carried
on, nor banish thought by hard work, I looked up to the stately stars,
thinking of things not to be talked about without being suspected of
cant. So swiftly passed the time that when four bells struck: (two
o'clock) I could hardly believe my ears.

I was relieved by one of the Portuguese, and went forward to witness a
curious scene. Seven stalwart men were being compelled to march up and
down on that tumbling deck, men who had never before trodden anything
less solid than the earth.

The third mate, a waspish, spiteful little Yankee with a face like an
angry cat, strolled about among them, a strand of rope-yarns in his
hand, which he wielded constantly, regardless where he struck a man.
They fell about, sometimes four or five at once, and his blows flew
thick and fast, yet he never seemed to weary of his ill-doing. It made
me quite sick, and I longed to be aft at the wheel again. Catching sight
of me standing irresolute as to what I had better do, he ordered me on
the "look-out," a tiny platform between the "knight heads," just where
the bowsprit joins the ship. Gladly I obeyed him, and perched up there
looking over the wide sea, the time passed quickly away until eight
bells (four o'clock) terminated my watch. I must pass rapidly over the
condition of things in the fo'lk'sle, where all the greenies that were
allowed below, were groaning in misery from the stifling atmosphere
which made their sickness so much worse, while even that dreadful
place was preferable to what awaited them on deck. There was a
rainbow-coloured halo round the flame of the lamp, showing how very bad
the air was; but in spite of that I turned in and slept soundly till
seven bells (7.20 a.m.) roused us to breakfast.

American ships generally have an excellent name for the way they feed
their crews, but the whalers are a notable exception to that good rule.
The food was really worse than that on board any English ship I have
ever sailed in, so scanty also in quantity that it kept all the foremast
hands at starvation point. But grumbling was dangerous, so I gulped down
the dirty mixture mis-named coffee, ate a few fragments of biscuit, and
filled up (?) with a smoke, as many better men are doing this morning.
As the bell struck I hurried on deck--not one moment too soon--for as
I stepped out of the scuttle I saw the third mate coming forward with a
glitter in his eye that boded no good to laggards.

Before going any farther I must apologize for using so many capital I's,
but up till the present I had been the only available white member of
the crew forrard.

The decks were scrubbed spotlessly clean, and everything was neat and
tidy as on board a man-of-war, contrary to all usual notions of the
condition of a whaler. The mate was in a state of high activity, so
I soon found myself very busily engaged in getting up whale-lines,
harpoons, and all the varied equipment for the pursuit of whales. The
number of officers carried would have been a good crew for the ship, the
complete afterguard comprising captain, four mates, four harpooners or
boat-steerers, carpenter, cooper, steward and cook. All these worthies
were on deck and working with might and main at the preparations, so
that the incompetence of the crowd forrard was little hindrance. I was
pounced upon by "Mistah" Jones, the fourth mate, whom I heard addressed
familiarly as "Goliath" and "Anak" by his brother officers, and ordered
to assist him in rigging the "crow's-nest" at the main royal-mast head.
It was a simple affair. There were a pair of cross-trees fitted to the
mast, upon which was secured a tiny platform about a foot wide on each
side of the mast, while above this foothold a couple of padded hoops
like a pair of giant spectacles were secured at a little higher than
a man's waist. When all was fast one could creep up on the platform,
through the hoop, and, resting his arms upon the latter, stand
comfortably and gaze around, no matter how vigorously the old
barky plunged and kicked beneath him. From that lofty eyrie I had
a comprehensive view of the vessel. She was about 350 tons and full
ship-rigged, that is to say, she carried square sails on all three
masts. Her deck was flush fore and aft, the only obstructions being the
brick-built "try-works" in the waist, the galley, and cabin skylight
right aft by the taffrail. Her bulwarks were set thickly round with
clumsy looking wooden cranes, from which depended five boats. Two more
boats were secured bottom up upon a gallows aft, so she seemed to be
well supplied in that direction. Mistah Jones, finding I did not presume
upon his condescension, gradually unbent and furnished me with many
interesting facts about the officers. Captain Slocum, he said, was "de
debbil hisself, so jess yew keeps yer lamps trim' fer him, sonny, taint
helthy ter rile him." The first officer, or the mate as he is always
called PAR EXCELLENCE, was an older man than the captain, but a good
seaman, a good whaleman, and a gentleman. Which combination I found to
be a fact, although hard to believe possible at the time. The second
mate was a Portuguese about forty years of age, with a face like one of
Vandyke's cavaliers, but as I now learned, a perfect fiend when angered.
He also was a first-class whaleman, but an indifferent seaman. The third
mate was nothing much but bad temper--not much sailor, nor much whaler,
generally in hot water with the skipper, who hated him because he was an
"owner's man." "An de fourf mate," wound up the narrator, straightening
his huge bulk, "am de bes' man in de ship, and de bigges'. Dey aint
no whalemen in Noo Bedford caynt teach ME nuffin, en ef it comes ter
man-handlin'; w'y I jes' pick 'em two't a time 'n crack 'em togerrer
like so, see!" and he smote the palms of his great paws against each
other, while I nodded complete assent.

The weather being fine, with a steady N.E. wind blowing, so that the
sails required no attention, work proceeded steadily all the morning.
The oars were sorted, examined for flaws, and placed in the boats; the
whale-line, manilla rope like yellow silk, 1 1/2 inch round, was brought
on deck, stretched and coiled down with the greatest care into tubs,
holding, some 200 fathoms, and others 100 fathoms each. New harpoons
were fitted to poles of rough but heavy wood, without any attempt at
neatness, but every attention to strength. The shape of these weapons
was not, as is generally thought, that of an arrow, but rather like an
arrow with one huge barb, the upper part of which curved out from the
shaft. The whole of the barb turned on a stout pivot of steel, but was
kept in line with the shaft by a tiny wooden peg which passed through
barb and shaft, being then cut off smoothly on both sides. The point
of the harpoon had at one side a wedge-shaped edge, ground to razor
keenness, the other side was flat. The shaft, about thirty inches long,
was of the best malleable iron, so soft that it would tie into a knot
and straighten out again without fracture. Three harpoons, or "irons" as
they were always called, were placed in each boat, fitted one above the
other in the starboard bow, the first for use being always one unused
before, Opposite to them in the boat were fitted three lances for the
purpose of KILLING whales, the harpoons being only the means by which
the boat was attached to a fish, and quite useless to inflict a fatal
wound. These lances were slender spears of malleable iron about four
feet long, with oval or heart-shaped points of fine steel about two
inches broad, their edges kept keen as a surgeon's lancet. By means of
a socket at the other end they were attached to neat handles, or
"lance-poles," about as long again, the whole weapon being thus about
eight feet in length, and furnished with a light line, or "lance-warp,"
for the purpose of drawing it back again when it had been darted at a
whale.

Each boat was fitted with a centre-board, or sliding keel, which was
drawn up, when not in use, into a case standing in the boat's middle,
very much in the way. But the American whalemen regard these clumsy
contrivances as indispensable, so there's an end on't. The other
furniture of a boat comprised five oars of varying lengths from sixteen
to nine feet, one great steering oar of nineteen feet, a mast and two
sails of great area for so small a craft, spritsail shape; two tubs of
whale-line containing together 1800 feet, a keg of drinking water, and
another long narrow one with a few biscuits, a lantern, candles and
matches therein; a bucket and "piggin" for baling, a small spade, a flag
or "wheft," a shoulder bomb-gun and ammunition, two knives and two small
axes. A rudder hung outside by the stern.

With all this gear, although snugly stowed, a boat looked so loaded that
I could not help wondering how six men would be able to work in her; but
like most "deep-water" sailors, I knew very little about boating. I was
going to learn.

All this work and bustle of preparation was so rapidly carried on, and
so interesting, that before supper-time everything was in readiness to
commence operations, the time having gone so swiftly that I could hardly
believe the bell when it sounded four times, six o'clock.





