CHAPTER XX. "HUMPBACKING" AT VAU VAU

Another three weeks' cruising brought us to the end of the season on the
line, which had certainly not answered all our expectations, although
we had perceptibly increased the old barky's draught during our stay.
Whether from love of change or belief in the possibilities of a good
haul, I can hardly say, but Captain Count decided to make the best of
his way south, to the middle group of the "Friendly" Archipelago,
known as Vau Vau, the other portions being called Hapai and Tongataboo
respectively, for a season's "humpbacking." From all I could gather, we
were likely to have a good time there, so I looked forward to the visit
with a great deal of pleasurable anticipation.

We were bound to make a call at Vau Vau, in any case, to discharge our
Kanakas shipped at Honolulu, although I fervently hoped to be able to
keep my brave harpooner Samuela. So when I heard of our destination,
I sounded him cautiously as to his wishes in the matter, finding that,
while he was both pleased with and proud of his position on board,
he was longing greatly for his own orange grove and the embraces of a
certain tender "fafine" that he averred was there awaiting him. With
such excellent reasons for his leaving us, I could but forbear to
persuade him, sympathizing with him too deeply to wish him away from
such joys as he described to me.

So we bade farewell to the line grounds, and commenced another stretch
to the south, another milestone, as it were, on the long road home.
Prosaic and uneventful to the last degree was our passage, the only
incident worth recording being our "gamming" of the PASSAMAQUODDY,
of Martha's Vineyard, South Sea whaler; eighteen months out, with one
thousand barrels of sperm oil on board. We felt quite veterans alongside
of her crew, and our yarns laid over theirs to such an extent that they
were quite disgusted at their lack of experience. Some of them had known
our late skipper, but none of them had a good word for him, the old
maxim, "Speak nothing but good of the dead," being most flagrantly set
at nought. One of her crew was a Whitechapelian, who had been roving
about the world for a good many years.

Amongst other experiences, he had, after "jumping the bounty" two
or three times, found himself a sergeant in the Federal Army before
Gettysburg. During that most bloody battle, he informed me that a "Reb"
drew a bead on him at about a dozen yards' distance, and fired, He said
he felt just as if somebody had punched him in the chest, and knocked
him flat on his back on top of a sharp stone--no pain at all, nor any
further recollection of what had happened, until he found himself at the
base, in hospital. When the surgeons came to examine him for the bullet,
they found that it had struck the broad brass plate of his cross-belt
fairly in the middle, penetrating it and shattering his breast bone. But
after torturing him vilely with the probe, they were about to give up
the search in despair, when he told them he felt a pain in his back.
Examining the spot indicated by him, they found a bullet just beneath
the skin, which a touch with the knife allowed to tumble out. Further
examination revealed the strange fact that the bullet, after striking
his breast-bone, had glanced aside and travelled round his body just
beneath the skin, without doing him any further harm. In proof of his
story, he showed me the two scars and the perforated buckle-plate.

At another time, being in charge of a picket of Germans, he and his
command were captured by a party of Confederates, who haled him before
their colonel, a southern gentleman of the old school. In the course of
his interrogation by the southern officer, he was asked where he hailed
from. He replied, "London, England." "Then," said the colonel, "how is
it you find yourself fighting for these accursed Yankees?" The cockney
faltered out some feeble excuse or another, which his captor cut short
by saying, "I've a great respect for the English, and consequently I'll
let you go this time. But if ever I catch you again, you're gone up.
As for those d-----d Dutchmen, they'll be strung up inside of five
minutes." And they were.

So with yarn, song, and dance, the evening passed pleasantly away;
while the two old hookers jogged amicably along side by side, like two
market-horses whose drivers are having a friendly crack. Along about
midnight we exchanged crews again, and parted with many expressions of
good-will--we to the southward, she to the eastward, for some particular
preserve believed in by her commander.

In process of time we made the land of Vau Vau, a picturesque, densely
wooded, and in many places precipitous, group of islands, the approach
being singularly free from dangers in the shape of partly hidden reefs.
Long and intricate were the passages we threaded, until we finally came
to anchor in a lovely little bay perfectly sheltered from all winds. We
moored, within a mile of a dazzling white beach, in twelve fathoms. A
few native houses embowered in orange and cocoa-nut trees showed here
and there, while the two horns of the bay were steep-to, and covered
with verdure almost down to the water's edge. The anchor was hardly down
before a perfect fleet of canoes flocked around us, all carrying the
familiar balancing outrigger, without which those narrow dugouts cannot
possibly keep upright. Their occupants swarmed on board, laughing and
playing like so many children, and with all sorts of winning gestures
and tones besought our friendship. "You my flem?" was the one question
which all asked; but what its import might be we could not guess for
some time. By-and-by it appeared that when once you had agreed to accept
a native for your "flem," or friend, he from henceforward felt in duty
bound to attend to all your wants which it lay within his power to
supply. This important preliminary settled, fruit and provisions of
various kinds appeared as if by magic. Huge baskets of luscious oranges,
massive bunches of gold and green bananas, clusters of green cocoa-nuts,
conch-shells full of chillies, fowls loudly protesting against their
hard fate, gourds full of eggs, and a few vociferous swine--all came
tumbling on board in richest profusion, and, strangest thing of all,
not a copper was asked in return. I might have as truly said nothing
was asked, since money must have been useless here. Many women came
alongside, but none climbed on board. Surprised at this, I asked Samuela
the reason, as soon as I could disengage him for a few moments from the
caresses of his friends. He informed me that the ladies' reluctance to
favour us with their society was owing to their being in native dress,
which it is punishable to appear in among white men, the punishment
consisting of a rather heavy fine. Even the men and boys, I noticed,
before they ventured to climb on board, stayed a while to put on
trousers, or what did duty for those useful articles of dress. At any
rate, they were all clothed, not merely enwrapped with a fold or two of
"tapa," the native bark-cloth, but made awkward and ugly by dilapidated
shirts and pants.

She was a busy ship for the rest of that day. The anchor down, sails
furled and decks swept, the rest of the time was our own, and high jinks
were the result. The islanders were amiability personified, merry as
children, nor did I see or hear one quarrelsome individual among them.
While we were greedily devouring the delicious fruit, which was piled on
deck in mountainous quantities, they encouraged us, telling us that the
trees ashore were breaking down under their loads, and what a pity it
was that there were so few to eat such bountiful supplies.

We were, it appeared, the first whale-ship that had anchored there that
year, and, in that particular bay where we lay, no vessel had moored for
over two years. An occasional schooner from Sydney called at the "town"
about ten miles away, where the viceroy's house was, and at the present
time of speaking one of Godeffroi's Hamburg ships was at anchor there,
taking in an accumulation of copra from her agent's store. But the
natives all spoke of her with a shrug--"No like Tashman. Tashman no
good." Why, I could not ascertain.

Our Kanakas had promised to remain with us till our departure for
the south, so, hard as it seemed to them, they were not allowed to go
ashore, in case they might not come back, and leave us short-handed.
But as their relatives and friends could visit them whenever they felt
inclined, the restriction did not hurt them much. The next day, being
Sunday, all hands were allowed liberty to go ashore by turns (except the
Kanakas), with strict injunctions to molest no one, but to behave as if
in a big town guarded by policemen. As no money could be spent, none was
given, and, best of all, it was impossible to procure any intoxicating
liquor.

Our party got ashore about 9.30, but not a soul was visible either on
the beach or in the sun-lit paths which led through the forest inland.
Here and there a house, with doors wide open, stood in its little
cleared space, silent and deserted. It was like a country without
inhabitants. Presently, however, a burst of melody arrested us, and
borne upon the scented breeze came oh, so sweetly!--the well-remembered
notes of "Hollingside." Hurriedly getting behind a tree, I let myself
go, and had a perfectly lovely, soul-refreshing cry. Reads funny,
doesn't it? Sign of weakness perhaps. But when childish memories come
back upon one torrent-like in the swell of a hymn or the scent of the
hawthorn, it seems to me that the flood-gates open without you having
anything to do with it. When I was a little chap in the Lock Chapel
choir, before the evil days came, that tune was my favourite; and when
I heard it suddenly come welling up out of the depths of the forest,
my heart just stood still for a moment, and then the tears came. Queer
idea, perhaps, to some people; but I do not know when I enjoyed myself
so much as I did just then, except when a boy of sixteen home from a
voyage, and strolling along the Knightsbridge Road, I "happened" into
the Albert Hall. I did not in the least know what was coming; the
notices on the bills did not mean anything to me; but I paid my
shilling, and went up into the gallery. I had hardly edged myself into
a corner by the refreshment-stall, when a great breaker of sound
caught me, hurled me out of time, thought, and sense in one intolerable
ecstasy--"For unto us a Child is born; unto us a Son is given"--again
and again--billows and billows of glory. I gasped for breath, shook like
one in an ague fit; the tears ran down in a continuous stream; while
people stared amazed at me, thinking, I suppose, that I was another
drunken sailor. Well, I was drunk, helplessly intoxicated, but not
with drink, with something Divine, untellable, which, coming upon me
unprepared, simply swept me away with it into a heaven of delight, to
which only tears could testify.

But I am in the bush, whimpering over the tones of "Hollingside." As
soon as I had pulled myself together a bit, we went on again in the
direction of the sound, Presently we came to a large clearing, in the
middle of which stood a neat wooden, pandanus-thatched church. There
were no doors or windows to it, just a roof supported upon posts, but a
wide verandah ran all round, upon the edge of which we seated ourselves;
for the place was full--full to suffocation, every soul within miles,
I should think, being there. No white man was present, but the service,
which was a sort of prayer-meeting, went with a swing and go that
was wonderful to see. There was no perfunctory worship here; no one
languidly enduring it because it was "the right sort of thing to show up
at, you know;" but all were in earnest, terribly in earnest. When they
sang, it behoved us to get away to a little distance, for the vigour of
the voices, unless mellowed by distance, made the music decidedly harsh.
Every one was dressed in European clothing--the women in neat calico
gowns; but the men, nearly all of them, in woollen shirts, pilot-coats,
and trousers to match, and sea-boots! Whew! it nearly stifled me to look
at them. The temperature was about ninety degrees in the shade, with
hardly a breath of air stirring, yet those poor people, from some
mistaken notion of propriety, were sweating in torrents under that
Arctic rig. However they could worship, I do not know! At last the
meeting broke up. The men rushed out, tore off their coats, trousers,
and shirts, and flung themselves panting upon the grass, mother-naked,
except for a chaplet of cocoanut leaves, formed by threading them on a
vine-tendril, and hanging round the waist.

Squatting by the side of my "flem," whom I had recognized, I asked
him why ever he outraged all reason by putting on such clothes in
this boiling weather. He looked at me pityingly for a moment before he
replied, "You go chapella Belitani? No put bes' close on top?" "Yes,"
I said; "but in hot weather put on thin clothes; cold weather, put on
thick ones." "S'pose no got more?" he said, meaning, I presumed, more
than the one suit. "Well," I said, "more better stop 'way than look
like big fool, boil all away, same like duff in pot. You savvy duff?" He
smiled a wide comprehensive smile, but looked very solemn again,
saying directly, "You no go chapella; you no mishnally. No mishnally
[missionary=godly]; very bad. Me no close; no go chapella; vely bad.
Evelly tangata, evelly fafine, got close all same papalang [every man
and woman has clothes like a white man]; go chapella all day Sunday."
That this was no figure of speech I proved fully that day, for I declare
that the recess between any of the services never lasted more than an
hour. Meanwhile the worshippers did not return to their homes, for in
many cases they had journeyed twenty or thirty miles, but lay about
in the verdure, refreshing themselves with fruit, principally the
delightful green cocoa-nuts, which furnish meat and drink both--cool and
refreshing in the extreme, as well as nourishing.

We were all heartily welcome to whatever was going, but there was
a general air of restraint, a fear of breaking the Sabbath, which
prevented us from trespassing too much upon the hospitality of these
devout children of the sun. So we contented ourselves with strolling
through the beautiful glades and woods, lying down, whenever we felt
weary, under the shade of some spreading orange tree loaded with golden
fruit, and eating our fill, or rather eating until the smarting of our
lips warned us to desist. Here was a land where, apparently, all people
were honest, for we saw a great many houses whose owners were absent,
not one of which was closed, although many had a goodly store of such
things as a native might be supposed to covet. At last, not being able
to rid ourselves of the feeling that we were doing something wrong, the
solemn silence and Sundayfied air of the whole region seeming to forbid
any levity even in the most innocent manner, we returned on board again,
wonderfully impressed with what we had seen, but wondering what would
have happened if some of the ruffianly crowds composing the crews of
many ships had been let loose upon this fair island.

In the evening we lowered a stage over the bows to the water's edge, and
had a swimming-match, the water being perfectly delightful, after the
great heat of the day, in its delicious freshness; and so to bunk, well
pleased indeed with our first Sunday in Vau Vau.

I have no doubt whatever that some of the gentry who swear at large
about the evils of missionaries would have been loud in their disgust at
the entire absence of drink and debauchery, and the prevalence of what
they would doubtless characterize as adjective hypocrisy on the part of
the natives; but no decent man could help rejoicing at the peace, the
security, and friendliness manifested on every hand, nor help awarding
unstinted praise to whoever had been the means of bringing about so
desirable a state of things. I felt that their Sabbatarianism was
carried to excess; that they would have been better, not worse, for a
little less church, and a little more innocent fun; but ten thousand
times better thus than such scenes of lust let loose and abandoned
animalism as we witnessed at Honolulu. What pleased me mightily was
the absence of the white man with his air of superiority and sleek
overlordship. All the worship, all the management of affairs, was
entirely in the hands of the natives themselves, and excellently well
did they manage everything.

I shall never forget once going ashore in a somewhat similar place, but
very far distant, one Sunday morning, to visit the mission station. It
was a Church mission, and a very handsome building the church was. By
the side of it stood the parsonage, a beautiful bungalow, nestling in a
perfect paradise of tropical flowers. The somewhat intricate service was
conducted, and the sermon preached, entirely by natives--very creditably
too. After service I strolled into the parsonage to see the reverend
gentleman in charge, whom I found supporting his burden in a long chair,
with a tall glass of brandy and soda within easy reach, a fine cigar
between his lips, and a late volume of Ouida's in his hand. All very
pleasant and harmless, no doubt, but hardly reconcilable with the ideal
held up in missionary magazines. Yet I have no doubt whatever that this
gentleman would have been heartily commended by the very men who can
hardly find words harsh enough to express their opinion of missionaries
of the stamp of Paton, Williams, Moffat, and Mackenzie.

Well, it is highly probable--nay, almost certain, that I shall be
accused of drawing an idyllic picture of native life from first
impressions, which, if I had only had sufficient subsequent experience
among the people, I should have entirely altered. All I can say is, that
although I did not live among them ashore, we had a number of them on
board; we lay in the island harbour five months, during which I was
ashore nearly every day, and from habit I observed them very closely;
yet I cannot conscientiously alter one syllable of what I have written
concerning them. Bad men and women there were, of course, to be
found--as where not?--but the badness, in whatever form, was not allowed
to flaunt itself, and was so sternly discountenanced by public (entirely
native) opinion, that it required a good deal of interested seeking to
find.

But after all this chatter about my amiable friends, I find myself
in danger of forgetting the purpose of our visit. We lost no time in
preparation, since whaling of whatever sort is conducted in these ships
on precisely similar lines, but on Monday morning, at daybreak, after a
hurried breakfast, lowered all boats and commenced the campaign. We were
provided with boxes--one for each boat--containing a light luncheon, but
no ordered meal, because it was not considered advisable to in any way
hamper the boat's freedom to chase. Still, in consideration of its being
promptly dumped overboard on attacking a whale, a goodly quantity of
fruit was permitted in the boats.

In the calm beauty of the pearly dawn, with a gentle hush over all
nature, the lofty, tree-clad hills reflected with startling fidelity in
the glassy, many-coloured waters, the only sound audible the occasional
cra-a-ake of the advance-guard of a flight of fruit-bats (PECA) homeward
from their nocturnal depredations, we shipped our oars and started,
pulling to a certain position whence we could see over an immense area.
Immediately upon rounding the horn of our sheltered bay, the fresh
breeze of the south-east trades met us right on end with a vigour that
made a ten-mile steady pull against it somewhat of a breather. Arriving
at the station indicated by the chief, we set sail, and, separating as
far as possible without losing sight of each other, settled down for
the day's steady cruise. Anything more delightful than that excursion
to those who love seashore scenery combined with boat-sailing would be
difficult to name. Every variety of landscape, every shape of strait,
bay, or estuary, reefs awash, reefs over which we could sail, ablaze
with loveliness inexpressible; a steady, gentle, caressing breeze, and
overhead one unvarying canopy of deepest blue. Sometimes, when skirting
the base of some tremendous cliffs, great caution was necessary, for at
one moment there would obtain a calm, death-like in its stillness; the
next, down through a canyon cleaving the mountain to the water's edge
would come rushing with a shrill howl, a blast fierce enough to almost
lift us out of the water. Away we would scud with flying sheets dead
before it, in a smother of spray, but would hardly get full way on her
before it was gone, leaving us in the same hush as before, only a dark
patch on the water far to leeward marking its swift rush. These little
diversions gave us no uneasiness, for it was an unknown thing to make a
sheet fast in one of our boats, so that a puff of wind never caught us
unprepared.

On that first day we seemed to explore such a variety of stretches
of water that one would hardly have expected there could be any more
discoveries to make in that direction. Nevertheless, each day's cruise
subsequently revealed to us some new nook or other, some quiet haven or
pretty passage between islands that, until closely approached, looked
like one. When, at sunset, we returned to the ship, not having seen
anything like a spout, I felt like one who had been in a dream, the
day's cruise having surpassed all my previous experience. Yet it was but
the precursor of many such. Oftentimes I think of those halcyon days,
with a sigh of regret that they can never more be renewed to me; but I
rejoice to think that nothing can rob me of the memory of them.

Much to the discomfort of the skipper, it was four days before a
solitary spout was seen, and then it was so nearly dark that before the
fish could be reached it was impossible to distinguish her whereabouts.
A careful bearing was taken of the spot, in the hope that she might be
lingering in the vicinity next morning, and we hastened on board.

Before it was fairly light we lowered, and paddled as swiftly as
possible to the bay where we had last seen the spout overnight. When
near the spot we rested on our paddles a while, all hands looking out
with intense eagerness for the first sign of the whale's appearance.
There was a strange feeling among us of unlawfulness and stealth, as
of ambushed pirates waiting to attack some unwary merchantman, or
highwaymen waylaying a fat alderman on a country road. We spoke
in whispers, for the morning was so still that a voice raised but
ordinarily would have reverberated among the rocks which almost overhung
us, multiplied indefinitely. A turtle rose ghost-like to the surface
at my side, lifting his queer head, and, surveying us with stony gaze,
vanished as silently as he came.

What a sigh! One looked at the other inquiringly, but the repetition of
that long expiration satisfied us all that it was the placid breathing
of the whale we sought somewhere close at hand, The light grew rapidly
better, and we strained our eyes in every direction to discover the
whereabouts of our friend, but, for some minutes without result. There
was a ripple just audible, and away glided the mate's boat right for the
near shore. Following him with our eyes, we almost immediately beheld a
pale, shadowy column of white, shimmering against the dark mass of the
cliff not a quarter of a mile away. Dipping our paddles with the utmost
care, we made after the chief, almost holding our breath. His harpooner
rose, darted once, twice, then gave a yell of triumph that ran
re-echoing all around in a thousand eerie vibrations, startling the
drowsy PECA in myriads from where they hung in inverted clusters on the
trees above. But, for all the notice taken by the whale, she might never
have been touched. Close nestled to her side was a youngling of not
more, certainly, than five days old, which sent up its baby-spout
every now and then about two feet into the air. One long, wing-like fin
embraced its small body, holding it close to the massive breast of
the tender mother, whose only care seemed to be to protect her young,
utterly regardless of her own pain and danger. If sentiment were ever
permitted to interfere with such operations as ours, it might well have
done so now; for while the calf continually sought to escape from the
enfolding fin, making all sorts of puny struggles in the attempt, the
mother scarcely moved from her position, although streaming with blood
from a score of wounds. Once, indeed, as a deep-searching thrust
entered her very vitals, she raised her massy flukes high in air with
an apparently involuntary movement of agony; but even in that dire
throe she remembered the possible danger to her young one, and laid the
tremendous weapon as softly down upon the water as if it were a feather
fan.

So in the most perfect quiet, with scarcely a writhe, nor any sign of
flurry, she died, holding the calf to her side until her last
vital spark had fled, and left it to a swift despatch with a single
lance-thrust. No slaughter of a lamb ever looked more like murder. Nor,
when the vast bulk and strength of the animal was considered, could a
mightier example have been given of the force and quality of maternal
love.

The whole business was completed in half an hour from the first sight
of her, and by the mate's hand alone, none of the other boats needing
to use their gear. As soon as she was dead, a hole was bored through the
lips, into which a tow-line was secured, the two long fins were lashed
close into the sides of the animal by an encircling line, the tips of
the flukes were cut off, and away we started for the ship. We had an
eight-mile tow in the blazing sun, which we accomplished in a little
over eight, hours, arriving at the vessel just before two p.m. News of
our coming had preceded us, and the whole native population appeared to
be afloat to make us welcome. The air rang again with their shouts of
rejoicing, for our catch represented to them a gorgeous feast, such as
they had not indulged in for many a day. The flesh of the humpbacked
whale is not at all bad, being but little inferior to that of the
porpoise; so that, as these people do not despise even the coarse rank
flesh of the cachalot, their enthusiasm was natural. Their offers of
help were rather embarrassing to us, as we could find little room for
any of them in the boats, and the canoes only got in our way. Unable to
assist us, they vented their superfluous energies on the whale in the
most astounding aquatic antics imaginable--diving under it; climbing
on to it; pushing and rolling each other headlong over its broad back;
shrieking all the while with the frantic, uncontrollable laughter of
happy children freed from all restraint. Men, women, and children all
mixed in this wild, watery spree; and as to any of them getting drowned,
the idea was utterly absurd.

When we got it alongside, and prepared to cut in, all the chaps were
able to have a rest, there were so many eager volunteers to man the
windlass, not only willing but, under the able direction of their
compatriots belonging to our crew, quite equal to the work of heaving
in blubber. All their habitual indolence was cast aside. Toiling like
Trojans, they made the old windlass rattle again as they spun the brakes
up and down, every blanket-piece being hailed with a fresh volley of
eldritch shrieks, enough to alarm a deaf and dumb asylum.

With such ample aid, it was, as may be supposed a brief task to skin our
prize, although the strange arrangement of the belly blubber caused
us to lift some disappointing lengths. This whale has the blubber
underneath the body lying in longitudinal corrugations, which, when
hauled off the carcass at right angles to their direction, stretch
out flat to four or five times their normal area. Thus, when the
cutting-blocks had reached their highest limit, and the piece was
severed from the body, the folds flew together again leaving dangling
aloft but a miserable square of some four or five feet, instead of
a fine "blanket" of blubber twenty by five. Along the edges of these
RUGAE, as also upon the rim of the lower jaw, abundance of limpets and
barnacles had attached themselves, some of the former large as a horse's
hoof, and causing prodigious annoyance to the toiling carpenter, whose
duty it was to keep the spades ground. It was no unusual thing for a
spade to be handed in with two or three gaps in its edge half an inch
deep, where they had accidentally come across one of those big pieces
of flinty shell, undistinguishable from the grey substance of the belly
blubber.

But, in spite of these drawbacks, in less than ninety minutes the last
cut was reached, the vertebra severed, and away went the great mass of
meat, in tow of countless canoes, to an adjacent point, where, in eager
anticipation, fires were already blazing for the coming cookery. An
enormous number of natives had gathered from far and near, late arrivals
continually dropping in from all points of the compass with breathless
haste. No danger of going short need have troubled them, for, large as
were their numbers, the supply was evidently fully equal to all demands.
All night long the feast proceeded, and, even when morning dawned, busy
figures were still discernible coming and going between the reduced
carcass and the fires, as if determined to make an end of it before
their operations ceased.





