CHAPTER XXV. ON THE SOLANDER GROUNDS

Our opening day was an auspicious one. We had not been within the
cruising radius more than four hours before the long-silent; cry of
"Blo-o-o-w!" resounded from the mainmast head. It was a lone whale,
apparently of large size, though spouting almost as feebly as a calf.
But that, I was told by the skipper, was nothing to go by down here.
He believed right firmly that there were no small whales to be found in
these waters at all. He averred that in all his experience he had never
seen a cow-cachalot anywhere around Stewart's Island, although, as
usual, he did no theorizing as to the reason why.

Eagerly we took to the boats and made for our first fish, setting
alongside of him in less than half an hour from our first glimpse of his
bushy breath. As the irons sank into his blubber, he raised himself
a little, and exposed a back like a big ship bottom up. Verily, the
skipper's words were justified, for we had seen nothing bigger of the
whale-kind that voyage. His manner puzzled us not a little. He had not
a kick in him. Complacently, as though only anxious to oblige, he
laid quietly while we cleared for action, nor did he show any signs
of resentment or pain while he was being lanced with all the vigour
we possessed. He just took all our assaults with perfect quietude and
exemplary patience, so that we could hardly help regarding him with
great suspicion, suspecting some deep scheme of deviltry hidden by
this abnormally sheep-like demeanour. But nothing happened. In the same
peaceful way he died, without the slightest struggle sufficient to raise
even an eddy on the almost smooth sea.

Leaving the mate by the carcass, we returned on board, the skipper
hailing us immediately on our arrival to know what was the matter with
him. We, of course, did not know, neither did the question trouble us.
All we were concerned about was the magnanimous way in which he, so to
speak, made us a present of himself, giving us no more trouble to secure
his treasure than as if he had been a lifeless thing. We soon had him
alongside, finding, upon ranging him by the ship, that he was over
seventy feet long, with a breadth of bulk quite in proportion to such a
vast length.

Cutting-in commenced at once, for fine weather there was by no means to
be wasted, being of rare occurrence and liable at the shortest notice to
be succeeded by a howling gale. Our latest acquisition, however, was of
such gigantic proportions that the decapitation alone bade fair to take
us all night. A nasty cross swell began to get up, too--a combination of
north-westerly and south-westerly which, meeting at an angle where the
Straits began, raised a curious "jobble," making the vessel behave in
a drunken, uncertain manner. Sailors do not mind a ship rolling or
pitching, any more than a rider minds the motion of his horse; but when
she does both at once, with no approach to regularity in her movements,
it makes them feel angry with her. What, then, must our feelings
have been under such trying conditions, with that mountain of matter
alongside to which so much sheer hard labour had to be done, while the
sky was getting greasy and the wind beginning to whine in that doleful
key which is the certain prelude to a gale?

Everybody worked like Chinamen on a contract, as if there was no such
feeling as fatigue. Little was said, but we all realized that unless
this job was got over before what was brooding burst upon us, we should
certainly lose some portion of our hard-won whale. Still, our utmost
possible was all we could do; and when at daylight the head was hauled
alongside for cutting up, the imminent possibility of losing it, though
grievous to think of, worried nobody, for all had done their best. The
gale had commenced in business-like fashion, but the sea was horrible.
It was almost impossible to keep one's footing on the stage. At times
the whole mass of the head would be sucked down by the lee roll of
the ship, and go right under her keel, the fluke-chain which held it
grinding and straining as if it would tear the bows out of her. Then
when she rolled back again the head would rebound to the surface right
away from the ship, where we could not reach it to cut. Once or twice it
bounced up beneath our feet, striking the stage and lifting it with its
living load several inches, letting it fall again with a jerk that made
us all cling for dear life to our precarious perch.

In spite of these capers, we managed to get the junk off the head. It
was a tremendous lift for us; I hardly think we had ever raised such a
weight before. The skipper himself estimated it at fifteen tons, which
was no small load for the tackles in fine weather, but with the ship
tumbling about in her present fashion, it threatened to rip the mainmast
out by the roots--not, of course, the dead-weight strain; but when it
was nearly aboard, her sudden lee wallow sometimes floated the whole
mass, which the next instant, on the return roll, would be torn out of
water, with all the force of the ship suddenly rolling the other way.
Every splinter, every rope-yarn of her groaned again under this savage
treatment; but so splendid was her construction that she never made a
drop of water more than just sufficient to sweeten the limbers.

It was with great and genuine satisfaction that we saw it at last safely
lowered on deck and secured. But when we turned our attention to the
case, which, still attached to the skull, battered alongside, any chance
of saving it was at once seen to be hopeless. Indeed, as the old man
said, it was time for us to "up stick" and run for shelter. We had been
too fully occupied to notice the gradual increase of the wind; but when
we did, there was no gainsaying the fact that it was blowing a very
stiff breeze (ANGLICE, a violent gale). Fortunately for us, it was from
the westward, fair for the harbour of Port William, on the Stewart's
Island side of the Straits, so that we were free from the apprehension
of being blown out to sea or on a jagged lee shore.

While we were thus thinking during a brief pause to take breath, the old
packet herself solved our last difficulty in emphatic fashion. She
gave a tremendous lee lurch, which would inevitably have destroyed the
cutting stage if we had not hoisted it, driving right over the head,
which actually rose to the surface to windward, having passed under her
bottom. The weather roll immediately following was swift and sudden.
From the nature of things, it was evident that something must give way
this time. It did. For the first and only time in my experience,
the fluke-chain was actually torn through the piece to which it was
fast--two feet of solid gristle ripped asunder. Away went the head with
its L150 to L200 worth of pure spermaceti, disappearing from view almost
immediately.

It had no sooner gone than more sail was set, the yards were squared,
and the vessel kept away up the Straits for shelter. It was a big
improvement, for she certainly had begun to make dirty weather of
it, and no wonder. Now, however, running almost dead before the gale,
getting into smoother water at every fathom, she was steady as a rock,
allowing us to pursue our greasy avocation in comparative comfort. The
gale was still increasing, although now blowing with great fury; but, to
our satisfaction, it was dry and not too cold. Running before it,
too, lessened our appreciation of its force; besides which, we were
exceedingly busy clearing away the enormous mass of the junk, which,
draining continually, kept the decks running with oil.

We started to run up the Straits at about ten a.m. At two p.m. we
suddenly looked up from our toil, our attention called by a sudden lull
in the wind. We had rounded Saddle Point, a prominent headland, which
shut off from us temporarily the violence of the gale. Two hours later
we found ourselves hauling up into the pretty little harbour of Port
William, where, without taking more than a couple of hands off the work,
the vessel was rounded-to and anchored with quite as little fuss as
bringing a boat alongside a ship. It was the perfection of seamanship.

Once inside the bay, a vessel was sheltered from all winds, the land
being high and the entrance intricate. The water was smooth as a
mill-pond, though the leaden masses of cloud flying overhead and the
muffled roar of the gale told eloquently of the unpleasant state affairs
prevailing outside. Two whale-ships lay here--the TAMERLANE, of New
Bedford, and the CHANCE, of Bluff Harbour. I am bound to confess that
there was a great difference is appearance between the Yankee and the
colonial--very much in favour of the former. She was neat, smart, and
seaworthy, looking as if just launched; but the CHANCE looked like some
poor old relic of a bygone day, whose owners, unable to sell her, and
too poor to keep her in repair, were just letting her go while keeping
up the insurance, praying fervently each day that she might come to
grief, and bring them a little profit at last.

But although it is much safer to trust appearances in ships than in
men, any one who summed up the CHANCE from her generally outworn and
poverty-stricken looks would have been, as I was, "way off." Old she
was, with an indefinite antiquity, carelessly rigged, and vilely unkempt
as to her gear, while outside she did not seem to have had a coat
of paint for a generation. She looked what she really was--the sole
survivor of the once great whaling industry of New Zealand. For although
struggling bay whaling stations did exist in a few sheltered places far
away from the general run of traffic, the trade itself might truthfully
be said to be practically extinct. The old CHANCE alone, like some
shadow of the past, haunted Foveaux Straits, and made a better income
for her fortunate owners than any of the showy, swift coasting steamers
that rushed contemptuously past her on their eager way.

In many of the preceding pages I have, though possessing all an
Englishman's pride in the prowess of mine own people, been compelled
to bear witness to the wonderful smartness and courage shown by the
American whalemen, to whom their perilous calling seems to have become
a second nature. And on other occasions I have lamented that our own
whalers, either at home or in the colonies, never seemed to take so
kindly to the sperm whale fishery as the hardy "down Easters," who first
taught them the business; carried it on with increasing success,
in spite of their competition and the depredations of the ALABAMA;
flourished long after the English fishery was dead; and even now
muster a fleet of ships engaged in the same bold and hazardous calling.
Therefore, it is the more pleasant to me to be able to chronicle some of
the doings of Captain Gilroy, familiarly known as "Paddy," the master
of the CHANCE, who was unsurpassed as a whale-fisher or a seaman by any
Yankee that ever sailed from Martha's Vineyard.

He was a queer little figure of a man--short, tubby, with scanty red
hair, and a brogue thick as pea-soup. Eccentric in most things, he was
especially so in his dress, which he seemed to select on the principle
of finding the most unfitting things to wear. Rumour credited him with a
numerous half-breed progeny--certainly he was greatly mixed up with the
Maories, half his crew being made up of his dusky friends and relations
by MARRIAGE. Overflowing with kindliness and good temper, his ship was
a veritable ark of refuge for any unfortunate who needed help, which
accounted for the numerous deserters from Yankee whalers who were to be
found among his crew. Such whaling skippers as our late commander hated
him with ferocious intensity; and but for his Maori and half-breed
bodyguard, I have little doubt he would have long before been killed.
Living as he had for many years on that storm-beaten coast, he had
become, like his Maories, familiar with every rock and tree in fog or
clear, by night or day; he knew them, one might almost say, as the seal
knows them, and feared them as little. His men adored him. They believed
him capable of anything in the way of whaling, and would as soon have
thought of questioning the reality of daylight as the wisdom of his
decisions.

I went on board the evening of, our arrival, hearing some rumours of the
doings of the old CHANCE and her crew, also with the idea that perhaps
I might find some countrymen among his very mixed crowd. The first man I
spoke to was Whitechapel to the backbone, plainly to be spotted as such
as if it had been tattooed on his forehead. Making myself at home with
him, I desired to know what brought him so far from the "big smoke," and
on board a whaler of all places in the world. He told me he had been a
Pickford's van-driver, but had emigrated to New Zealand, finding that
he did not at all like himself in the new country. Trying to pick and
choose instead of manfully choosing a pick and shovel for a beginning,
he got hard up. During one of Captain Gilroy's visits to the Bluff,
he came across my ex-drayman, looking hungry and woebegone. Invited on
board to have a feed, he begged to be allowed to remain; nor, although
his assistance was not needed, was he refused. "An nar," he said, his
face glowing with conscious pride, "y'ort ter see me in a bloomin'
bowt. I ain't a-goain' ter say as I kin fling wun o' them 'ere bloomin'
'arpoones like ar bowt-steerers kin; but I kin do my bit o' grawft wiv
enny on 'em--don'tchu make no bloomin' herror." The glorious incongruity
of the thing tickled me immensely; but I laughed more heartily still
when on going below I was hailed as "Wot cher, chummy; 'ow yer hoppin'
up?" by another barbarian from the wilds of Spitalfields, who, from the
secure shelter of his cats'-meat round in 'Oxton, had got adrift, and,
after being severely buffeted by tempestuous ill-fortune, had finally
found himself in the comfortable old CHANCE, a haven of rest in the
midst of storms. There were sixteen white men on board the CHANCE,
including the skipper, drawn as usual from various European and American
sources, the rest of her large crew of over forty all told being made up
of Maories and half-breeds. One common interest united them, making them
the jolliest crowd I ever saw--their devotion to their commander. There
was here to be found no jealousy of the Maories being officers and
harpooners, no black looks or discontented murmuring; all hands seemed
particularly well satisfied with their lot in all its bearings; so that,
although the old tub was malodorous enough to turn even a pretty strong
stomach, it was a pleasure to visit her cheerful crowd for the sake of
their enlivening society.

Of course, under our present circumstances, with the debris of our
late enormous catch filling every available space and loudly demanding
attention, we had little time to spare for ship visiting. Some boat or
other from the two ships was continually alongside of us, though, for
until the gale abated they could not get out to the grounds again, and
time hung heavy on their hands. The TAMERLANE's captain avoided Paddy as
if he were a leper--hated the sight of him, in fact, as did most of his
CONFRERES; but our genial skipper, whose crew were every whit as well
treated and contented as the CHANCE's, and who therefore needed not to
dread losing them, met the little philanthropist on the most friendly
terms.

The first fine weather, which came four days after our arrival, both
our harbour mates cleared out. Characteristically, the CHANCE was away
first, before daylight had quite asserted itself, and while the bases of
the cliffs and tops of the rocks were as yet hidden in dense wreaths of
white haze. Paddy lolled on the taff-rail near the wheel, which was held
by an immense half-breed, who leant back and carried on a desultory,
familiar conversation with his skipper; the rest of the crew were
scattered about the decks, apparently doing what they liked in any
manner they chose. The anchor was being catted, sails going up, and
yards being trimmed; but, to observers like us, no guiding spirit was
noticeable. It seemed to work all right, and the old ark herself looked
as if she was as intelligent as any of them; but the sight was not an
agreeable one to men accustomed to discipline. The contrast when the
TAMERLANE came along an hour or so after was emphatic. Every man at
his post; every order carried out with the precision of clockwork;
the captain pacing the quarter-deck as if she were a line-of-battle
ship--here the airs put on were almost ludicrous in the other direction.
Although she was only "a good jump" long, as we say, whenever an order
was given, it was thundered out as if the men were a mile away each
officer appearing to vie with the others as to who could bellow the
loudest. That was carrying things to the opposite extreme, and almost
equally objectionable to merchant seamen.

We were thus left alone to finish our trying-out except for such company
as was afforded by the only resident's little schooner, in which he went
oyster-dredging. It was exceedingly comfortable in the small harbour,
and the fishing something to remember all one's life. That part of New
Zealand is famous for a fish something like a bream, but with a longer
snout, and striped longitudinally with black and yellow. I am ignorant
of any polysyllabic prefix for it, only knowing it by its trivial and
local appellation of the "trumpeter," from the peculiar sound it makes
when out of water. But no other fish out of the innumerable varieties
which I have sampled in all parts of the world could compare with the
trumpeter for flavour and delicacy. These qualities are well known to
the inhabitants of the large towns, who willingly pay high prices for
the scanty supply of these delicious fish which they are able to obtain.
Of other succulent fish there was a great variety, from the majestic
"grouper," running up to over a hundredweight, down to the familiar
flounder. Very little fishing could be done at night. Just as day was
dawning was the ideal time for this enticing sport. As soon as the first
few streaks of delicate light enlivened the dull horizon, a stray nibble
or two gladdened the patient fishermen; then as the light strengthened
the fun became general, and in about an hour enough fish would be caught
to provide all hands with for the day.

One morning, when a stark calm left, the surface of the bay as smooth
as a mirror, I was watching a few stealthily-gliding barracouta sneaking
about over the plainly visible bottom, though at a depth of seven or
eight fathoms. Ordinarily, these fish must be taken with a live bait;
but, remembering my experience with the dolphin, I determined to try a
carefully arranged strip of fish from one recently caught. In precisely
the same way as the dolphin, these long, snaky rascals carefully tested
the bait, lying still for sometimes as long as two minutes with the bait
in their mouths, ready to drop it out on the first intimation that it
was not a detached morsel. After these periods of waiting the artful
creature would turn to go, and a sudden jerk of the line then reminded
him that he was no longer a free agent, but mounting at headlong speed
to a strange bourne whence he never returned to tell the tale. My catch
that lovely morning scaled over a hundredweight in less than an hour,
none of the fish being less than ten pounds in weight.

The Maories have quite an original way of catching barracouta. They
prepare a piece of "rimu" (red pine) about three inches long, by an
inch broad, and a quarter of an inch thick. Through one end of this they
drive an inch nail bent upwards, and filed to a sharp point. The other
end is fastened to about a fathom of stout fishing-line, which is in
turn secured to the end of a five-foot pole. Seated in a boat with sail
set, they slip along until a school of barracouta is happened upon. Then
the peak of the sail is dropped, so as to deaden the boat's way, while
the fishermen ply their poles with a sidelong sweep that threshes the
bit of shining red through the water, making it irresistibly attractive
to a struggling horde of ravenous fish. One by one, as swiftly as the
rod can be wielded, the lithe forms drop off the barbless hook into the
boat, till the vigorous arm can no longer respond to the will of the
fisherman, or the vessel will hold no more.

Such were the goodly proportions of this first Solander whale of ours
that, in spite of the serious loss of the case, we made thirteen and a
half tuns of oil. When the fifteen huge casks containing it were stowed
in their final positions, they made an imposing show, inspiring all of
us with visions of soon being homeward bound. For the present we were,
perforce, idle; for the wind had set in to blow steadily and strongly
right up the Straits, preventing any attempts to get out while it
lasted. The time did not hang heavy on our hands, for the surrounding
country offered many attractions, which we were allowed to take full
advantage of. Spearing eels and flounders at night by means of a cresset
hung out over the boat's bow, as she was slowly sculled up the long,
shallow creeks, was a favourite form of amusement. Mr. Cross, the
resident, kindly allowed us to raid his garden, where the ripe fruit was
rotting by the bushel for want of consumers. We needed no pressing;
for fruit, since we left Vau Vau, of any kind had not come in our
way; besides, these were "homey"--currants, gooseberries,
strawberries--delightful to see, smell, and taste. So it came to pass
that we had a high old time, unmarred by a single regrettable incident,
until, after an enforced detention of twenty days, we were able to get
to sea again.

Halfway down the Straits we sighted the CHANCE, all hands ripping
the blubber off a sizeable whale in the same "anyhow" fashion as they
handled their ship. They were in high glee, giving us a rousing cheer as
we passed them on our westward course. Arriving on the ground, we found
a goodly company of fine ships, which I could not help thinking too many
for so small an area. During our absence, the TAMERLANE had been joined
by the ELIZA ADAMS, the MATILDA SAYER, the CORAL, and the RAINBOW; and
it was evident that no whale venturing within the radius of the Solander
in the daytime would stand much chance of escaping such a battery of
eager eyes. Only three days elapsed after our arrival when whales
were seen. For the first time, I realized how numerous those gigantic
denizens of the sea really are. As far as the eye could reach, extending
all round one-half of the horizon, the sea appeared to be alive with
spouts--all sperm whales, all bulls of great size. The value of this
incredible school must have been incalculable. Subsequent experience
satisfied me that such a sight was by no means uncommon here; in fact,
"lone whales" or small "pods" were quite the exception.

Well, we all "waded in," getting, some two, some one whale apiece,
according to the ability of the crews or the fortune of war. Only one
fell to our lot in the CACHALOT, but it was just as well. We had hardly,
got him fast by the fluke alongside when it began to pipe up from the
north-east. In less than one watch the sea was fairly smoking with the
fierceness of the wind. We were unable to get in anywhere, being, with a
whale alongside, about as handy as a barge loaded with a haystack; while
those unfortunate beggars that had two whales fast to them were utterly
helpless as far as independent locomotion went, unless they could run
dead before the wind. Every ship made all snug aloft, and hoisted the
boats to the top notch of the cranes, fully anticipating a long, hard
struggle with the elements before they got back to the cruising ground
again. Cutting-in was out of the question in such weather; the only
thing possible was to hope for a shift of wind before she got too far
out, or a break in the weather. Neither of these events was probable, as
all frequenters of South New Zealand know, bad weather having there an
unhappy knack of being as persistent as fine weather is brief.

Night drew on as our forlorn and heavily handicapped little fleet bore
steadily seaward with their burdens, the angry, ever-increasing sea,
battering at us vengefully, while the huge carcasses alongside tore and
strained at their fastenings as if they would rend the ships asunder.
Slowly our companions faded from sight as the murky sky shut down on us,
until in lonely helplessness we drifted on our weary way out into the
vast, inhospitable Southern Ocean. Throughout the dark and stormy night
our brave old ship held on her unwilling way right gallantly, making no
water, in spite of the fearful strain to which she was subjected, nor
taking any heavy sea over all. Morning broke cheerlessly enough. No
abatement in the gale or change in its direction; indeed, it looked like
lasting a month. Only one ship was visible far to leeward of us, and
she was hull down. Our whale was beginning to swell rapidly, already
floating at least three feet above the surface instead of just awash,
as when newly killed. The skipper eyed it gloomily, seeing the near
prospect of its entire loss, but he said nothing. In fact, very little
was said; but the stories we had heard in the Bay of Islands came
back to us with significant force now that their justification was so
apparent.

Hour after hour went by without any change whatever, except in the
whale, which, like some gradually filling balloon, rose higher and
higher, till at nightfall its bulk was appalling. All through the night
those on deck did little else but stare at its increasing size, which
when morning dawned again, was so great that the animal's bilge rode
level with the ship's rail, while in her lee rolls it towered above
the deck like a mountain. The final scene with it was now a question
of minutes only, so most of us, fascinated by the strange spectacle,
watched and waited. Suddenly, with a roar like the bursting of a dam,
the pent-up gases tore their furious way out of the distended carcass,
hurling the entrails in one horrible entanglement widespread over
the sea. It was well for us that it was to leeward and a strong gale
howling; for even then the unutterable foetor wrought its poisonous way
back through that fierce, pure blast, permeating every nook of the ship
with its filthy vapour till the stoutest stomach there protested in
unmistakable terms against such vile treatment. Knowing too well that
the blubber was now worthless, the skipper gave orders to cut the
corrupt mass adrift. This was speedily effected by a few strokes of
a spade through the small. Away went eight hundred pounds' worth of
oil--another sacrifice to the exigencies of the Solander, such as had
gained for it so evil a reputation.

Doubtless a similar experience had befallen all the other ships, so that
the aggregate loss must have run into thousands of pounds, every penny
of which might have been saved had steam been available.

That gale lasted, with a few short lulls, for five days longer. When at
last it took off, and was succeeded by fine weather, we were so far
to the southward that we might have fetched the Aucklands in another
twenty-four hours. But, to our great relief, a strong southerly breeze
set in, before which, under every rag of canvas, we sped north again.

Steady and reliable as ever, that good south wind carried us back to
our old cruising ground ere it blew itself out, and we resumed our usual
tactics as if nothing had happened, being none the worse as regards
equipment for our adventures. Not so fortunate our companions, who at
the same time as ourselves were thrust out into the vast Southern Ocean,
helplessly burdened and exposed defenceless to all the ferocity of that
devouring gale, Two of them were here prowling about, showing evident
signs of their conflict in the battered state of their hulls. The
glaring whiteness of new planking in many places along the bulwarks told
an eloquent story of seas bursting on board carrying all before them,
while empty cranes testified to the loss of a boat in both of them. As
soon as we came near enough, "gamming" commenced, for all of us were
anxious to know how each other had fared.

As we anticipated, every whale was lost that had been caught that day.
The disappointment was in nowise lessened by the knowledge that, with
his usual good fortune Captain Gilroy had not only escaped all the bad
weather, but while we were being threshed within an inch of our lives
down in the bitter south, he was calmly trying-out his whale (which we
had seen him with on our outward journey) in the sheltered haven of
Port William. Many and deep were the curses bestowed upon him by the
infuriated crews of those two ships, although he had certainly done
them no harm. But the sight of other people's good fortune is gall and
wormwood to a vast number of people, who seem to take it as a personal
injury done to themselves.

Only two days elapsed, however, before we again saw an immense school
of sperm whales, and each ship succeeded in securing one. We made no
attempt to get more this time, nor do I think either of the others did;
at any rate, one each was the result of the day's work. They were, as
usual, of huge size and apparently very fat. At the time we secured our
fish alongside, a fresh north-westerly wind was blowing, the weather
being clear and beautiful as heart could wish. But instead of commencing
at once to cut-in, Captain Count gave orders to pile on all sail and
keep her away up the Straits. He was evidently determined to take no
more chances, but, whenever opportunity offered, to follow the example
set by the wily old skipper of the CHANCE. The other ships both started
to cut-in at once, tempted, doubtless, by the settled appearance of the
weather, and also perhaps from their hardly concealed dislike of going
into port. We bowled along at a fine rate, towing our prize, that
plunged and rolled by our side in eccentric style, almost as if still
alive. Along about midnight we reached Saddle Point, where there was
some shelter from the sea which rolled up the wide open strait, and
there we anchored.

Leaving me and a couple of Kanakas on watch, the captain, and all hands
besides, went below for a little sleep. My instructions were to call the
captain if the weather got at all ugly-looking, so that we might run
in to Port William at once, but he did not wish to do so if our present
position proved sufficiently sheltered. He had not been below an hour
before there was a change for the worse. That greasy, filmy haze was
again drawn over the clear blue of the sky, and the light scud began to
fly overhead at an alarmingly rapid rate. So at four bells I called him
again. He came on deck at once, and after one look round ordered
the hands up to man the windlass. By eight bells (four a.m.) we were
rounding the frowning rocks at the entrance of Port William, and
threading our way between the closely-set, kelp-hidden dangers as if it
were broadest, dearest daylight. At 4.30 we let go the anchor again,
and all hands, except the regular "anchor-watch," bolted below to their
bunks again like so many rabbits.

It was very comfortable, cutting-in a sperm whale in harbour, after
the dire difficulty of performing the same operation in a seaway. And,
although it may seem strange, this was the first occasion that voyage
that I had had a really good opportunity of closely studying the whale's
anatomy. Consequently the work was exceedingly interesting, and, in
spite of the labour involved, I was almost sorry when the job was done.
Under the present favourable circumstances we were ready to cut the
carcass adrift shortly after midday, the head, of course, having
been taken off first. Just after we started to cut-in a boat appeared
alongside with six Maories and half-breeds on board. Their leader came
up and civilly asked the skipper whether he intended doing anything with
the carcass. Upon being promptly answered in the negative, he said that
he and his companions proposed hooking on to the great mass when we cut
it adrift, towing it ashore, and getting out of it what oil we had been
unable to extract, which at sea is always lost to the ship. He also
suggested that he would be prepared to take reasonable terms for such
oil, which we should be able to mingle with ours to our advantage. An
arrangement was speedily arrived at to give him L20 per tun for whatever
oil he made. They parted on the best of terms with each other, and as
soon as we cut the carcass loose the Maories made fast, to it, speedily
beaching it in a convenient spot near where they had previously erected
a most primitive try-works.

That afternoon, after the head was inboard, the skipper thought he would
go ashore and see how they were getting on. I was so fortunate as to
be able to accompany him. When we arrived at the spot, we found them
working as I have never seen men work, except perhaps the small riggers
that at home take a job--three or four of them--to bend or unbend a
big ship's sails for a lump sum to be paid when the work is done. They
attacked the carcass furiously, as if they had a personal enmity against
it, chopping through the massive bones and rending off huge lumps of
the flesh with marvellous speed. They had already laid open the enormous
cavity of the abdomen, and were stripping the interminable intestines
of their rich coating of fat. In the maw there were, besides a large
quantity of dismembered squid of great size, a number of fish, such as
rock-cod, barracouta, schnapper, and the like, whose presence there was
a revelation to me. How in the name of wonder so huge and unwieldy a
creature as the cachalot could manage to catch those nimble members
of the finny tribe, I could not for the life of me divine! Unless--and
after much cogitation it was the only feasible explanation that I could
see--as the cachalot swims about with his lower jaw hanging down in its
normal position, and his huge gullet gaping like some submarine cavern,
the fish unwittingly glide down it, to find egress impossible. This may
or may not be the case; but I, at any rate, can find no more reasonable
theory, for it is manifestly absurd to suppose the whale capable of
CATCHING fish in the ordinary sense, indicating pursuit.

Every part of the animal yielded oil. Even the bones, broken up into
pieces capable of entering the pot, were boiled; and by the time we had
finished our trying-out, the result of the Maories' labour was ready for
us. Less than a week had sufficed to yield them a net sum of six guineas
each, even at the very low rate for which they sold us the oil. Except
that it was a little darker in colour, a defect that would disappear
when mixed with our store, there was no difference between the products
that could be readily detected. And at the price we paid for it, there
was a clear profit of cent. per cent., even had we kept it separate and
sold it for what it was. But I suppose it was worth the Maories' while
thus to dispose of it and quickly realize their hard earnings.

So far, our last excursion had been entirely satisfactory. We had not
suffered any loss or endured any hardship; and if only such comfortable
proceedings were more frequent, the Solander ground would not have any
terrors for us at least. But one afternoon there crept in around the
eastern horn of the harbour three forlorn and half-dismantled vessels,
whose weather-worn crews looked wistfully at us engaged in clearing up
decks and putting away gear upon the finishing of our trying-out. Poor
fellows! they had seen rough times since that unforgettable evening when
we parted from them at the other end of the island, and watched them
slowly fade into the night. Two of them were so badly damaged that
no further fishing was possible for them until they had undergone a
thorough refit, such as they could not manage there. One was leaking
badly, the tremendous strain put upon her hull in the vain attempt to
hold on to the two whales she had during the gale having racked her
almost all to pieces. The third one was still capable of taking the
ground again, with sundry repairs such as could be effected by her crew.
But the general feeling among all three crews was that there was more
loss than gain to be expected here, in spite of the multitude of whales
visiting the place.

As if to fill up their cup, in came the old CHANCE again, this time with
a whale on each side. Captain Gilroy was on the house aft, his chubby
red face in a ruddy glow of delight, and his crew exuberant. When he
passed the American ships, as he was bound to do very closely, the
sight of their scowling faces seemed to afford him the most exquisite
amusement, and he laughed loud and long. His crew, on the impulse of the
moment, sprang to the rail and cheered with might and main. No one could
gainsay that they had good reason, but I really feared for a time that
we should have "ructions," As Paddy said, it was not wise or dignified
for those officers to be so angry with him on account of his success,
which he frankly owned was due almost entirely to the local knowledge he
possessed, gained in many years' study of the immediate neighbourhood.
He declared that, as far as the technical duties of whale-fishing went,
all the Americans could beat him hollow; but they ought to realize that
something else was needed here which no man could hope to have unless
he were content to remain on the coast altogether. With which words of
wisdom our skipper cordially agreed, bearing in mind his own exploits in
the bygone time around those rugged shores.

The strong breeze which brought Paddy and his whales home died down
that night, enabling us to start for the grounds again--a concession
gratefully received, for not the least of the hindrances felt there was
the liability to be "wind-bound" for a long time, while fine weather was
prevailing at the fishing grounds.

We made a fine passage down the Straits with a leading wind, finding our
two late companions still cruising, having managed to get their whales
aboard without mishap, and being somewhat inclined to chaff our old
man for running in. He gave a wink full of wisdom, as he replied, "I'm
pretty ole whale myself naouw; but I guess I ain't too old to learn; 'n
wut I learn I'm goin' ter use. See?" Of course the fine weather did not
last long--it never does; and seeing the gloomy masses of violet-edged
cumuli piling up on the southern horizon, we hugged the Solander Rock
itself pretty close, nor ventured far to seaward. Our two consorts,
on the contrary, kept well out and on the northern verge, as if they
intended the next gale that blew to get north, IF they could. The old
man's object in thus keeping in was solely in order that he might
be able to run for shelter; but, much to his delight and certainly
surprise, as we passed about a mile to the southward of the lonely,
towering crags of the great rock, there came from aloft the welcome cry
of "Sperm whale!"

There was only one, and he was uncomfortably near the rock; but such a
splendid chance was not to be missed, if our previous training was of
any avail. There was some speculation as to what he could be doing so
close inshore, contrary to the habit of this animal, who seems to be
only comfortable when in deep waters; but except a suggestion that
perhaps he had come in to scrape off an extra accumulation of barnacles,
nobody could arrive at any definite conclusion. When we reached him, we
found a frightful blind swell rolling, and it needed all our seamanship
to handle the boats so that they should not be capsized. Fortunately,
the huge rollers did not break, or we should hardly have got back
safely, whale or no whale.

Two irons were planted in him, of which he took not the slightest
notice. We had taken in sail before closing in to him on account of the
swell, so that we had only to go in and finish him at once, if he would
let us. Accordingly, we went in with a will, but for all sign of life
he showed he might as well have been stuffed. There he lay, lazily
spouting, the blood pouring, or rather spirting, from his numerous
wounds, allowing us to add to their number at our pleasure, and never
moving his vast body, which was gently swayed by the rolling sea. Seeing
him thus quiescent, the mate sent the other two boats back to the ship
with the good news, which the captain received with a grave smile
of content, proceeding at once to bring the ship as near as might be
consistent with her safety. We were now thoroughly sheltered from sight
of the other ships by the enormous mass of the island, so that they had
no idea of our proceedings.

Finding that it was not wise to take the ship in any closer, while we
were yet some distance from our prize, a boat was sent to Mr. Cruce with
the instructions that he was to run his line from the whale back to the
ship, if the creature was dead. He (the mate) replied that the whale
died as quietly as he had taken his wounds, and immediately started for
the ship. When he had paid out all his line, another boat bent on, until
we got the end on board. Then we merrily walked him up alongside, while
sufficient sail was kept drawing to prevent her being set in any nearer.
When he was fast, we crowded on all canvas to get away; for although the
sea was deep close up to the cliff, that swell was a very ugly feature,
and one which has been responsible for the loss of a great number
of ships in such places all over the world. Notwithstanding all our
efforts, we did get so near that every detail of the rock was clearly
visible to the naked eye, and we had some anxious minutes while the old
ship, rolling tremendously, crawled inch after inch along the awful side
of that sea-encircled pyramid.

At one point there was quite a cave, the floor of which would be some
twenty feet above high-water mark, and its roof about the same distance
higher. It appeared to penetrate some distance into the bowels of the
mountain, and was wide and roomy. Sea-birds in great numbers hovered
around its entrance, finding it, no doubt, an ideal nesting-place. It
appeared quite inaccessible, for even with a perfect calm the swell
dashed against the perpendicular face of the cliff beneath with a force
that would have instantly destroyed any vessel unfortunate enough to get
within its influence.

Slowly, slowly we forged past the danger; but the moment we opened out
the extremity of the island, a fresh breeze, like a saving hand, swept
across the bows, filling the head-sails and swinging the old vessel
away from the island in grand style. Another minute, and the other sails
filled also. We were safe, all hands breathing freely once more.

Now the wind hung far round to the eastward--far enough to frustrate
any design we might have had of going up the Straits again. The old
man, however, was too deeply impressed with the paramount necessity
of shelter to lightly give up the idea of getting in somewhere; so he
pointed her for Preservation Inlet, which was only some thirty miles
under her lee. We crowded all sail upon her in the endeavour to get in
before nightfall, this unusual proceeding bringing our two friends up
from to leeward with a run to see what we were after. Burdened as
we were, they sailed nearly two knots to our one, and consequently
intercepted us some while before we neared our port. Great was their
surprise to find we had a whale, and very anxious their queries as to
where the rest of the school had gone. Reassured that they had lost
nothing by not being nearer, it being a "lone" whale, off they went
again.

With all our efforts, evening was fast closing in when we entered the
majestic portals of Preservation Inlet, and gazed with deepest interest
upon its heavily wooded shores.





