CHAPTER IV. BAD WEATHER

Nautical routine in its essential details is much the same in all ships,
whether naval, merchant, or whaling vessels. But while in the ordinary
merchantman there are decidedly "no more cats than can catch mice,"
hardly, indeed, sufficient for all the mousing that should be done, in
men-of-war and whaleships the number of hands carried, being far more
than are wanted for everyday work, must needs be kept at unnecessary
duties in order that they may not grow lazy and discontented.

For instance, in the CACHALOT we carried a crew of thirty-seven all
told, of which twenty-four were men before the mast, or common seamen,
our tonnage being under 400 tons. Many a splendid clipper-ship carrying
an enormous spread of canvas on four masts, and not overloaded with 2500
tons of cargo on board, carries twenty-eight or thirty all told, or even
less than that. As far as we were concerned, the result of this was that
our landsmen got so thoroughly drilled, that within a week of leaving
port they hardly knew themselves for the clumsy clodhoppers they at
first appeared to be.

We had now been eight days out, and in our leisurely way were making
fair progress across the Atlantic, having had nothing, so far, but
steady breezes and fine weather. As it was late autumn the first week
in October--I rather wondered at this, for even in my brief experience I
had learned to dread a "fall" voyage across the "Western Ocean."

Gradually the face of the sky changed, and the feel of the air, from
balmy and genial, became raw and cheerless. The little wave tops broke
short off and blew backwards, apparently against the wind, while the
old vessel had an uneasy, unnatural motion, caused by a long, new swell
rolling athwart the existing set of the sea. Then the wind became fitful
and changeable, backing half round the compass, and veering forward
again as much in an hour, until at last in one tremendous squall
it settled in the N.W. for a business-like blow, Unlike the hurried
merchantman who must needs "hang on" till the last minute, only
shortening the sail when absolutely compelled to do so, and at the first
sign of the gales relenting, piling it on again, we were all snug long
before the storm burst upon us, and now rode comfortably under the
tiniest of storm staysails.

We were evidently in for a fair specimen of Western Ocean weather, but
the clumsy-looking, old-fashioned CACHALOT made no more fuss over it
than one of the long-winged sea-birds that floated around, intent only
upon snapping up any stray scraps that might escape from us. Higher rose
the wind, heavier rolled the sea, yet never a drop of water did we ship,
nor did anything about the deck betoken what a heavy gale was blowing.
During the worst of the weather, and just after the wind had shifted
back into the N.E., making an uglier cross sea than ever get up,
along comes an immense four-masted iron ship homeward bound. She was
staggering under a veritable mountain of canvas, fairly burying her bows
in the foam at every forward drive, and actually wetting the clews of
the upper topsails in the smothering masses of spray, that every few
minutes almost hid her hull from sight.

It was a splendid picture; but--for the time--I felt glad I was not on
board of her. In a very few minutes she was out of our ken, followed
by the admiration of all. Then came, from the other direction, a huge
steamship, taking no more notice of the gale than as if it were calm.
Straight through the sea she rushed, dividing the mighty rollers to the
heart, and often bestriding three seas at once, the centre one spreading
its many tons of foaming water fore and aft, so that from every orifice
spouted the seething brine. Compared with these greyhounds of the wave,
we resembled nothing so much as some old lightship bobbing serenely
around, as if part and parcel of the mid-Atlantic.

Our greenies were getting so well seasoned by this time that even this
rough weather did not knock any of them over, and from that time forward
they had no more trouble from sea-sickness.

The gale gradually blew itself out, leaving behind only a long and very
heavy swell to denote the deep-reaching disturbance that the ocean had
endured. And now we were within the range of the Sargasso Weed, that
mysterious FUCUS that makes the ocean look. like some vast hayfield, and
keeps the sea from rising, no matter how high the wind. It fell a dead
calm, and the harpooners amused themselves by dredging up great masses
of the weed, and turning out the many strange creatures abiding therein.
What a world of wonderful life the weed is, to be sure! In it the
flying fish spawn and the tiny cuttle-fish breed, both of them preparing
bounteous provision for the larger denizens of the deep that have
no other food. Myriads of tiny crabs and innumerable specimens of
less-known shell-fish, small fish of species as yet unclassified in
any work on natural history, with jelly-fish of every conceivable and
inconceivable shape, form part of this great and populous country in the
sea. At one haul there was brought on board a mass of flying-fish spawn,
about ten pounds in weight, looking like nothing so much as a pile of
ripe white currants, and clinging together in a very similar manner.

Such masses of ova I had often seen cast up among the outlying rocks on
the shores of the Caribbean Sea, when as a shipwrecked lad I wandered
idly about unburying turtle eggs from their snug beds in the warm sand,
and chasing the many-hued coral fish from one hiding-place to another.

While loitering in these smooth waters, waiting for the laggard wind, up
came a shoal of dolphin, ready as at all times to attach themselves for
awhile to the ship. Nothing is more singular than the manner in
which deep-sea fish will accompany a vessel that is not going too
fast--sometimes for days at a time. Most convenient too, and providing
hungry Jack with many a fresh mess he would otherwise have missed. Of
all these friendly fish, none is better known than the "dolphin," as
from long usage sailors persist in calling them, and will doubtless do
so until the end of the chapter. For the true dolphin (DELPHINIDAE) is
not a fish at all, but a mammal a warm-blooded creature that suckles
its young, and in its most familiar form is known to most people as
the porpoise. The sailor's "dolphin," on the other hand, is a veritable
fish, with vertical tail fin instead of the horizontal one which
distinguishes all the whale family, scales and gills.

It is well known to literature, under its sea-name, for its marvellous
brilliancy of colour, and there are few objects more dazzling than a
dolphin leaping out of a calm sea into the sunshine. The beauty of
a dying dolphin, however, though sanctioned by many generations of
writers, is a delusion, all the glory of the fish departing as soon as
he is withdrawn from his native element.

But this habit of digression grows upon one, and I must do my best to
check it, or I shall never get through my task.

To resume then: when this school of dolphin (I can't for the life of me
call them CORIPHAENA HIPPURIS) came alongside, a rush was made for the
"granes"--a sort of five-pronged trident, if I may be allowed a baby
bull. It was universally agreed among the fishermen that trying a hook
and line was only waste of time and provocative of profanity! since
every sailor knows that all the deep-water big fish require a living or
apparently living bait. The fish, however, sheered off, and would not be
tempted within reach of that deadly fork by any lure. Then did I cover
myself with glory. For he who can fish cleverly and luckily may be sure
of fairly good times in a whaler, although he may be no great things
at any other work. I had a line of my own, and begging one of the small
fish that had been hauled up in the Gulf weed, I got permission to go
aft and fish over the taffrail. The little fish was carefully secured
on the hook, the point of which just protruded near his tail. Then I
lowered him into the calm blue waters beneath, and paid out line very
gently, until my bait was a silvery spot about a hundred feet astern.
Only a very short time, and my hopes rose as I saw one bright gleam
after another glide past the keel, heading aft. Then came a gentle
drawing at the line, which I suffered to slip slowly through my fingers
until I judged it time to try whether I was right or wrong, A long hard
pull, and my heart beat fast as I felt the thrill along the line that
fishermen love. None of your high art here, but haul in hand over hand,
the line being strong enough to land a 250 pound fish. Up he came, the
beauty, all silver and scarlet and blue, five feet long if an inch, and
weighing 35 pounds. Well, such a lot of astonished men I never saw. They
could hardly believe their eyes. That such a daring innovation should
be successful was hardly to be believed, even with the vigorous evidence
before them. Even grim Captain Slocum came to look and turned upon me
as I thought a less lowering brow than usual, while Mr. Count, the mate,
fairly chuckled again at the thought of how the little Britisher had
wiped the eyes of these veteran fishermen. The captive was cut open,
and two recent flying-fish found in his maw, which were utilized for
new bait, with the result that there was a cheerful noise of hissing and
spluttering in the galley soon after, and a mess of fish for all hands.

Shortly afterwards a fresh breeze sprang up, which proved to be the
beginning of the N.E. trades, and fairly guaranteed us against any very
bad weather for some time to come.

Somehow or other it had leaked out that we were to cruise the Cape Verd
Islands for a spell before working south, and the knowledge seemed to
have quite an enlivening effect upon our Portuguese shipmates.

Most of them belonged there, and although there was but the faintest
prospect of their getting ashore upon any pretext whatever, the
possibility of seeing their island homes again seemed to quite transform
them. Hitherto they had been very moody and exclusive, never associating
with us on the white side, or attempting to be at all familiar. A mutual
atmosphere of suspicion, in fact, seemed to pervade our quarters, making
things already uncomfortable enough, still more so. Now, however, they
fraternized with us, and in a variety of uncouth ways made havoc of the
English tongue, as they tried to impress us with the beauty, fertility
and general incomparability of their beloved Cape Verds. Of the eleven
white men besides myself in the forecastle, there were a middle-aged
German baker, who had bolted from Buffalo; two Hungarians, who looked
like noblemen disguised--in dirt; two slab-sided Yankees of about 22
from farms in Vermont; a drayman from New York; a French Canadian
from the neighbourhood of Quebec; two Italians from Genoa; and two
nondescripts that I never found out the origin of. Imagine, then, the
babel of sound, and think--but no, it is impossible to think, what sort
of a jargon was compounded of all these varying elements of language.

One fortunate thing, there was peace below. Indeed, the spirit seemed
completely taken out of all of them, and by some devilish ingenuity
the afterguard had been able to sow distrust between them all, while
treating them like dogs, so that the miseries of their life were
never openly discussed. My position among them gave me at times some
uneasiness. Though I tried to be helpful to all, and was full of
sympathy for their undeserved sufferings, I could not but feel that they
would have been more than human had they not envied me my immunity from
the kicks and blows they all shared so impartially. However, there was
no help for it, so I went on as cheerily as I could.

A peculiarity of all these vessels, as I afterwards learned, was that no
stated allowance of anything was made. Even the water was not served out
to us, but was kept in a great scuttle-butt by the cabin door, to which
every one who needed a drink had to go, and from which none might be
carried away. No water was allowed for washing except from the sea; and
every one knows, or should know, that neither flesh nor clothes can be
cleansed with that. But a cask with a perforated top was lashed by the
bowsprit and kept filled with urine, which I was solemnly assured by
Goliath was the finest dirt-extractor in the world for clothes. The
officers did not avail themselves of its virtues though, but were
content with lye, which was furnished in plenty by the ashes from the
galley fire, where nothing but wood was used as fuel. Of course when
rain fell we might have a good wash, if it was night and no other work
was toward; but we were not allowed to store any for washing purposes.
Another curious but absolutely necessary custom prevailed in consequence
of the short commons under which we lived. When the portion of meat
was brought down in its wooden kid, or tub, at dinner-time, it was duly
divided as fairly as possible into as many parts as there were mouths.
Then one man turned his back on the carver, who holding up each portion,
called out, "Who's this for?" Whatever name was mentioned by the
arbitrator, that man owning it received the piece, and had perforce to
be satisfied therewith. Thus justice was done to all in the only way
possible, and without any friction whatever.

As some of us were without clothes except what we stood upright in, when
we joined, the "slop chest" was opened, and every applicant received
from the steward what Captain Slocum thought fit to let him have, being
debited with the cost against such wages as he might afterwards earn.
The clothes were certainly of fairly good quality, if the price was
high, and exactly suited to our requirements. Soap, matches, and tobacco
were likewise supplied on the same terms, but at higher prices than
I had ever heard of before for these necessaries. After much careful
inquiry I ascertained what, in the event of a successful voyage, we were
likely to earn. Each of us were on the two hundredth "lay" or share
at $200 per tun, which meant that for every two hundred barrels of oil
taken on board, we were entitled to one, which we must sell to the ship
at the rate of L40 per tun or L4 per barrel. Truly a magnificent outlook
for young men bound to such a business for three or four years.





