CHAPTER XIII. OFF TO THE JAPAN GROUNDS

Very tedious and trying was our passage northward, although every effort
was made by the skipper to expedite it. Nothing of advantage to our
cargo was seen for a long time, which, although apparently what was
to be expected, did not improve Captain Slocum's temper. But, to the
surprise of all, when we had arrived off the beautiful island of Hong
Kong, to which we approached closely, we "raised" a grand sperm whale.

Many fishing-junks were in sight, busily plying their trade, and at any
other time we should have been much interested in the quaint and cunning
devices by which the patient, wily Chinaman succeeds so admirably as
a fisherman. Our own fishing, for the time being, absorbed all our
attention--the more, perhaps, that we had for so long been unable to do
anything in that line. After the usual preliminaries, we were successful
in getting fast to the great creature, who immediately showed fight. So
skilful and wary did he prove that Captain Slocum, growing impatient at
our manoeuvring with no result, himself took the field, arriving on
the scene with the air of one who comes to see and conquer without more
delay. He brought with him a weapon which I have not hitherto mentioned,
because none of the harpooners could be induced to use it, and
consequently it had not been much in evidence. Theoretically, it was as
ideal tool for such work, its chief drawback being its cumbrousness. It
was known as "Pierce's darting gun," being a combination of bomb-gun and
harpoon, capable of being darted at the whale like a plain harpoon. Its
construction was simple; indeed, the patent was a very old one. A tube
of brass, thickening towards the butt, at which was a square chamber
firmly welded to a socket for receiving the pole, formed the gun itself.
Within the chamber aforesaid a nipple protruded from the base of the
tube, and in line with it. The trigger was simply a flat bit of steel,
like a piece of clock spring, which was held down by the hooked end of a
steel rod long enough to stick out beyond the muzzle of the gun three or
four inches, and held in position by two flanges at the butt and muzzle
of the barrel. On the opposite side of the tube were two more flanges,
close together, into the holes of which was inserted the end of a
specially made harpoon, having an eye twisted in its shank through which
the whale line was spliced. The whole machine was fitted to a neat pole,
and strongly secured to it by means of a "gun warp," or short piece of
thin line, by which it could be hauled back into the boat after being
darted at a whale. To prepare this weapon for use, the barrel was
loaded with a charge of powder and a bomb similar to those used in the
shoulder-guns, the point of which just protruded from the muzzle. An
ordinary percussion cap was placed upon the nipple, and the trigger
cocked by placing the trigger-rod in position. The harpoon, with the
line attached, was firmly set into the socketed flanges prepared for it,
and the whole arrangement was then ready to be darted at the whale in
the usual way.

Supposing the aim to be good and the force sufficient, the harpoon
would penetrate the blubber until the end of the trigger-rod was driven
backwards by striking the blubber, releasing the trigger and firing the
gun. Thus the whale would be harpooned and bomb-lanced at the same time,
and, supposing everything to work satisfactorily, very little more could
be needed to finish him. But the weapon was so cumbersome and awkward,
and the harpooners stood in such awe of it, that in the majority of
cases the whale was either missed altogether or the harpoon got such
slight hold that the gun did not go off, the result being generally
disastrous.

In the present case, however, the "Pierce" gun was in the hands of a man
by no means nervous, and above criticism or blame in case of failure. So
when he sailed in to the attack, and delivered his "swashing blow," the
report of the gun was immediately heard, proving conclusively that a
successful stroke had been made.

It had an instantaneous and astonishing effect. The sorely wounded
monster, with one tremendous expiration, rolled over and over swift as
thought towards his aggressor, literally burying the boat beneath his
vast bulk. Now, one would have thought surely, upon seeing this, that
none of that boat's crew would ever have been seen again. Nevertheless,
strange as it may appear, out of that seething lather of foam, all six
heads emerged again in an instant, but on the OTHER side of the great
creature. How any of them escaped instant violent death was, and from
the nature of the case must, ever remain, an unravelled mystery, for
the boat was crumbled into innumerable fragments, and the three hundred
fathoms of line, in a perfect maze of entanglement, appeared to be
wrapped about the writhing trunk of the whale. Happily, there were two
boats disengaged, so that they were able very promptly to rescue the
sufferers from their perilous position in the boiling vortex of foam by
which they were surrounded. Meanwhile, the remaining boat had an easy
task. The shot delivered by the captain had taken deadly effect, the
bomb having entered the creature's side low down, directly abaft the
pectoral fin. It must have exploded within the cavity of the bowels,
from its position, causing such extensive injuries as to make even that
vast animal's death but a matter of a few moments. Therefore, we did not
run any unnecessary risks, but hauled off to a safe distance and quietly
watched the death-throes. They were so brief, that in less than ten
minutes from the time of the accident we were busy securing the line
through the flukes of our prize.

The vessel was an unusually long time working up to us, so slow, in
fact, that Mr Count remarked, critically, "Shouldn't wonder if th' ole
man ain't hurt; they're taking things so all-fired easy." By the time
she had reached us, we had a good few visitors around us from the
fishing fleet, who caused us no little anxiety, The Chinese have no
prejudices; they would just as soon steal a whale as a herring, if the
conveyance could be effected without, more trouble or risk to their own
yellow skins. If it involved the killing of a few foreign devils--well,
so much to the good. The ship, however, arrived before the fishermen had
decided upon any active steps, and we got our catch alongside without
any delay. The truth of Mr. Count's forecast was verified to the hilt,
for we found that the captain was so badly bruised about the body that
he was unable to move, while one of the hands, a Portuguese, was injured
internally, and seemed very bad indeed. Had any one told us that morning
that we should be sorry to see Captain Slocum with sore bones, we should
have scoffed at the notion, and some of us would probably have said that
we should like to have the opportunity of making him smart. But under
the present circumstances, with some hundreds of perfectly ruthless
wretches hovering around us, looking with longing eyes at the treasure
we had alongside, we could not help remembering the courage and resource
so often shown by the skipper, and wished with all our hearts that we
could have the benefit of them now. As soon as dinner was over, we all
"turned to" with a will to get the whale cut in. None of us required
to be told that to lay all night with that whale alongside would be
extremely unhealthy for us, great doubt existing as to whether any of
us would see morning dawn again. There was, too, just a possibility
that when the carcass, stripped of its blubber, was cut adrift, those
ravenous crowds would fasten upon it, and let us go in peace.

All hands, therefore, worked like Trojans. There was no need to drive
us, nor was a single harsh word spoken. Nothing was heard but the almost
incessant clatter of the windlass pawls, abrupt monosyllabic orders, and
the occasional melancholy wail of a gannet overhead. No word had been
spoken on the subject among us, yet somehow we all realized that we were
working for a large stake no less than our lives. What! says somebody,
within a few miles of Hong Kong? Oh yes; and even within Hong Kong
harbour itself, if opportunity offers. Let any man go down the wharf at
Hong Kong after sunset, and hail a sampan from the hundreds there that
are waiting to be hired. Hardly will the summons have left his lips
before a white policeman will be at his side, note-book in hand,
inquiring his name and ship, and taking a note of the sampan's number,
with the time of his leaving the wharf. Nothing perfunctory about the
job either. Let but these precautions be omitted, and the chances that
the passenger (if he have aught of value about him) will ever arrive at
his destination are almost nil.

So good was the progress made that by five p.m. we were busy at the
head, while the last few turns of the windlass were being taken to
complete the skinning of the body. With a long pent-up shout that last
piece was severed and swung inboard, as the huge mass of reeking flesh
floated slowly astern. As it drifted away we saw the patient watchers
who had been waiting converging upon it from all quarters, and our hopes
rose high. But there was no slackening of our efforts to get in the
head. By the time it was dark we managed to get the junk on board, and
by the most extraordinary efforts lifted the whole remainder of the
head high enough to make sail and stand off to sea. The wind was off the
land, the water smooth, and no swell on, so we took no damage from that
tremendous weight surging by our side, though, had the worst come to the
worst, we could have cut it adrift.

When morning dawned we hove-to, the land being only dimly visible
astern, and finished taking on board our "head matter" without further
incident. The danger past, we were all well pleased that the captain was
below, for the work proceeded quite pleasantly under the genial rule of
the mate. Since leaving port we had not felt so comfortable, the work,
with all its disagreeables, seeming as nothing now that we could do it
without fear and trembling. Alas for poor Jemmy!--as we always persisted
in calling him from inability to pronounce his proper name--his case
was evidently hopeless. His fellows did their poor best to comfort his
fast-fleeting hours, one after another murmuring to him the prayers of
the Church, which, although they did not understand them, they evidently
believed most firmly to have some marvellous power to open the gates
of paradise and cleanse the sinner. Notwithstanding the grim fact
that their worship was almost pure superstition, it was far more in
accordance with the fitness of things for a dying man's surroundings
than such scenes as I have witnessed in the forecastles of merchant
ships when poor sailors lay a-dying. I remember well once, when I was
second officer of a large passenger ship, going in the forecastle as
she lay at anchor at St. Helena, to see a sick man. Half the crew were
drunk, and the beastly kennel in which they lived was in a thick fog of
tobacco-smoke and the stale stench of rum. Ribald songs, quarrelling,
and blasphemy made a veritable pandemonium of the place. I passed
quietly through it to the sick man's bunk, and found him--dead! He had
passed away in the midst of that, but the horror of it did not seem to
impress his bemused shipmates much.

Here, at any rate, there was quiet and decorum, while all that could
be done for the poor sufferer (not much, from ignorance of how he was
injured) was done. He was released from his pain in the afternoon of the
second day after the accident, the end coming suddenly and peacefully.
The same evening, at sunset, the body, neatly sewn up in canvas, with a
big lump of sandstone secured to the feet, was brought on deck, laid
on a hatch at the gangway, and covered with the blue, star-spangled
American Jack. Then all hands were mustered in the waist, the ship's
bell was tolled, and the ensign run up halfway.

The captain was still too ill to be moved, so the mate stepped forward
with a rusty old Common Prayer-book in his hands, whereon my vagrant
fancy immediately fastened in frantic endeavour to imagine how it came
to be there. The silence of death was over all. True, the man was but
a unit of no special note among us, but death had conferred upon him a
brevet rank, in virtue of which be dominated every thought. It seemed
strange to me that we who faced death so often and variously, until
natural fear had become deadened by custom, should, now that one of
our number lay a rapidly-corrupting husk before us, be so tremendously
impressed by the simple, inevitable fact. I suppose it was because
none of us were able to realize the immanence of Death until we saw
his handiwork. Mr. Count opened the book, fumbling nervously among the
unfamiliar leaves. Then he suddenly looked up, his weather-scarred face
glowing a dull brick-red, and said, in a low voice, "This thing's too
many fer me; kin any of ye do it? Ef not, I guess we'll hev ter take it
as read." There was no response for a moment; then I stepped forward,
reaching out my hand for the book. Its contents were familiar enough to
me, for in happy pre-arab days I had been a chorister in the old Lock
Chapel, Harrow Road, and had borne my part in the service so often that
I think even now I could repeat the greater part of it MEMORITER. Mr.
Count gave it me without a word, and, trembling like a leaf, I turned
to the "Burial Service," and began the majestic sentences, "I am the
Resurrection and the Life, saith the Lord." I did not know my own voice
as the wonderful words sounded clearly in the still air; but if ever a
small body of soul-hardened men FELT the power of God, it was then. At
the words, "We therefore commit his body to the deep," I paused, and,
the mate making a sign, two of the harpooners tilted the hatch, from
which the remains slid off into the unknown depths with a dull splash.
Several of the dead man's compatriots covered their faces, and murmured
prayers for the repose of his soul, while the tears trickled through
their horny fingers. But matters soon resumed their normal course; the
tension over, back came the strings of life into position again, to play
the same old tunes and discords once more.

The captured whale made an addition to our cargo of one hundred and ten
barrels--a very fair haul indeed. The harpooners were disposed to regard
this capture as auspicious upon opening the North Pacific, where, in
spite of the time we had spent, and the fair luck we had experienced in
the Indian Ocean, we expected to make the chief portion of our cargo.

Our next cruising-ground is known to whalemen as the "Coast of Japan"
ground, and has certainly proved in the past the most prolific fishery
of sperm whales in the whole world. I am inclined now to believe
that there are more and larger cachalots to be found in the Southern
Hemisphere, between the parallels of 33deg. and 50deg. South; but there
the drawback of heavy weather and mountainous seas severely handicaps
the fishermen.

It is somewhat of a misnomer to call the Coast of Japan ground by that
name, since to be successful you should not sight Japan at all, but keep
out of range of the cold current that sweeps right across the Pacific,
skirting the Philippines, along the coasts of the Japanese islands
as far as the Kuriles, and then returns to the eastward again to the
southward of the Aleutian Archipelago. The greatest number of whales are
always found in the vicinity of the Bonin and Volcano groups of islands,
which lie in the eddy formed by the northward bend of the mighty current
before mentioned. This wonderful ground was first cruised by a London
whale-ship, the SYREN, in 1819, when the English branch of the sperm
whale-fishery was in its prime, and London skippers were proud of the
fact that one of their number, in the EMILIA, had thirty-one years
before first ventured around Cape Horn in pursuit of the cachalot.

After the advent of the SYREN, the Bonins became the favourite
fishing-ground for both Americans and British, and for many years the
catch of oil taken from these teeming waters averaged four thousand
tuns annually. That the value of the fishery was maintained at so high a
level for over a quarter of a century was doubtless due to the fact that
there was a long, self-imposed close season, during which the whales
were quite unmolested. Nothing in the migratory habits of this whale, so
far as has ever been observed, would have prevented a profitable fishing
all the year round; but custom, stronger even than profit, ordained that
whale-ships should never stay too long upon one fishing-ground, but move
on farther until the usual round had been made, unless the vessel were
filled in the mean time.

Of course, there are whales whose habits lead them at certain seasons,
for breeding purposes, to frequent various groups of islands, but the
cachalot seems to be quite impartial in his preferences; if he "uses"
around certain waters, he is just as likely to be found there in July as
January.

The Bonins, too, form an ideal calling-place, from the whaling captain's
point of view. Peel Island, the principal one of the cluster, has
a perfect harbour in Port Lloyd, where a vessel can not only lie
in comfort, sheltered from almost every wind that blows, but where
provisions, wood, and water are plentiful. There is no inducement, or
indeed room, for desertion, and the place is healthy. It is colonized
by Japs from the kingdom so easily reached to the westward, and the busy
little people, after their manner, make a short stay very agreeable.

Once clear of the southern end of Formosa we had quite a rapid run to
the Bonins, carrying a press of sail day and night, as the skipper was
anxious to arrive there on account of his recent injuries. He was still
very lame, and he feared that some damage might have been done to him
of which he was ignorant. Besides, it was easy to see that he did not
altogether like anybody else being in charge of his ship, no matter how
good they were. Such was the expedition we made that we arrived at
Port Lloyd twelve days after clearing up our last whale. Very beautiful
indeed the islands, appeared, with their bold, steep sides clad in
richest green, or, where no vegetation appeared, worn into a thousand
fantastic shapes by the sea, or the mountain torrents carving away the
lava of which they were all composed. For the whole of the islands were
volcanic, and Port Lloyd itself is nothing more than the crater of a
vast volcano, which in some tremendous convulsion of nature has sunk
from its former high estate low enough to become a haven for ships.

I have said that it was a perfect harbour, but there is no doubt that
getting in or out requires plenty of nerve as well as seamanship. There
was so little room, and the eddying flows of wind under the high
land were so baffling, that at various times during our passage in it
appeared as if nothing could prevent us from getting stuck upon some of
the adjacent hungry-looking coral reefs. Nothing of the kind happened,
however, and we came comfortably to an anchor near three other
whale-ships which were already there. They were the DIEGO RAMIREZ, of
Nantucket; the CORONEL, of Providence, Rhode Island; and the GRAMPUS,
of New Bedford. These were the first whale-ships we had yet seen, and
it may be imagined how anxious we felt to meet men with whom we could
compare notes and exchange yarns. It might be, too, that we should get
some news of that world which, as far as we were concerned, might as
well have been at the other extremity of the solar system for the last
year, so completely isolated had we been.

The sails were hardly fast before a boat from each of the ships was
alongside with their respective skippers on board. The extra exertion
necessary to pilot the ship in had knocked the old man up, in his
present weak state, and he had gone below for a short rest; so the three
visitors dived down into the stuffy cabin, all anxious to interview
the latest comer. Considerate always, Mr. Count allowed us to have the
remainder of the day to ourselves, so we set about entertaining our
company. It was no joke twelve of them coming upon us all at once, and
babel ensued for a short time. They knew the system too well to expect
refreshments, so we had not to apologize for having nothing to set
before them. They had not come, however, for meat and drink, but for
talk. And talk we did, sometimes altogether, sometimes rationally; but I
doubt whether any of us had ever enjoyed talking so much before.





