CHAPTER X. A VISIT TO SOME STRANGE PLACES

We had now entered upon what promised to be the most interesting part of
our voyage. As a commercial speculation, I have to admit that the voyage
was to me a matter of absolute indifference. Never, from the first week
of my being on board, had I cherished any illusions upon that score, for
it was most forcibly impressed on my mind that, whatever might be the
measure of success attending our operations, no one of the crew forward
could hope to benefit by it. The share of profits was so small, and the
time taken to earn it so long, such a number of clothes were worn out
and destroyed by us, only to be replaced from the ship's slop-chest at
high prices, that I had quite resigned myself to the prospect of leaving
the vessel in debt, whenever that desirable event might happen. Since,
therefore, I had never made it a practice to repine at the inevitable,
and make myself unhappy by the contemplation of misfortunes I was
powerless to prevent, I tried to interest myself as far as was possible
in gathering information, although at that time I had no idea, beyond a
general thirst for knowledge, that what I was now learning would ever
be of any service to me. Yet I had been dull indeed not to have seen how
unique were the opportunities I was now enjoying for observation of some
of the least known and understood aspects of the ocean world and its
wonderful inhabitants, to say nothing of visits to places unvisited,
except by such free lances as we were, and about which so little is
really known.

The weather of the Mozambique Channel was fairly good, although subject
to electric storms of the most terrible aspect, but perfectly harmless.
On the second evening after rounding Cape St. Mary, we were proceeding,
as usual, under very scanty sail, rather enjoying the mild, balmy
air, scent-laden, from Madagascar. The moon was shining in tropical
splendour, paling the lustre of the attendant stars, and making the
glorious Milky Way but a faint shadow of its usual resplendent road.
Gradually from the westward there arose a murky mass of cloud, fringed
at its upper edges with curious tinted tufts of violet, orange, and
crimson. These colours were not brilliant, but plainly visible against
the deep blue sky. Slowly and solemnly the intruding gloom overspread
the sweet splendour of the shining sky, creeping like a death-shadow
over a dear face, and making the most talkative feel strangely quiet and
ill at ease. As the pall of thick darkness blotted out the cool light,
it seemed to descend until at last we were completely over-canopied by
a dome of velvety black, seemingly low enough to touch the mast-heads.
A belated sea-bird's shrill scream but emphasized the deep silence
which lent itself befittingly to the solemnity of nature. Presently thin
suggestions of light, variously tinted, began to thread the inky
mass. These grew brighter and more vivid, until at last, in fantastic
contortions, they appeared to rend the swart concave asunder, revealing
through the jagged clefts a lurid waste of the most intensely glowing
fire. The coming and going of these amazing brightnesses, combined with
the Egyptian dark between, was completely blinding. So loaded was the
still air with electricity that from every point aloft pale flames
streamed upward, giving the ship the appearance of a huge candelabrum
with innumerable branches. One of the hands, who had been ordered aloft
on some errand of securing a loose end, presented a curious sight.
He was bareheaded, and from his hair the all pervading fluid arose,
lighting up his features, which were ghastly beyond description. When he
lifted his hand, each separate finger became at once an additional point
from which light streamed. There was no thunder, but a low hissing and a
crackling which did not amount to noise, although distinctly audible to
all. Sensations most unpleasant of pricking and general irritation were
felt by every one, according to their degree of susceptibility.

After about an hour of this state of things, a low moaning of thunder
was heard, immediately followed by a few drops of rain large as dollars.
The mutterings and grumblings increased until, with one peal that made
the ship tremble as though she had just struck a rock at full speed,
down came the rain. The windows of heaven were opened, and no man might
stand against the steaming flood that descended by thousands of tons
per minute. How long it continued, I cannot say; probably, in its utmost
fierceness, not more than half an hour. Then it slowly abated, clearing
away as it did so the accumulation of gloom overhead, until, before
midnight had struck, all the heavenly host were shedding their beautiful
brilliancy upon us again with apparently increased glory, while the
freshness and invigorating feel of the air was inexpressibly delightful.

We did not court danger by hugging too closely any of the ugly reefs and
banks that abound in this notably difficult strait, but gave them all a
respectfully wide berth. It was a feature of our navigation that, unless
we had occasion to go near any island or reef for fishing or landing
purposes, we always kept a safe margin of distance away, which probably
accounts for our continued immunity from accident while in tortuous
waters. Our anchors and cables were, however, always kept ready for use
now, in case of an unsuspected current or sudden storm; but beyond that
precaution, I could see little or no difference in the manner of our
primitive navigation.

We met with no "luck" for some time, and the faces of the harpooners
grew daily longer, the great heat of those sultry waters trying all
tempers sorely. But Captain Slocum knew his business, and his scowling,
impassive face showed no signs of disappointment, or indeed any other
emotion, as day by day we crept farther north. At last we sighted the
stupendous peak of Comoro mountain, which towers to nearly nine thousand
feet from the little island which gives its name to the Comoro group
of four. On that same day a school of medium-sized sperm whales were
sighted, which appeared to be almost of a different race to those with
which we had hitherto had dealings. They were exceedingly fat and lazy,
moving with the greatest deliberation, and, when we rushed in among
them, appeared utterly bewildered and panic-stricken, knowing not which
way to flee. Like a flock of frightened sheep they huddled together,
aimlessly wallowing in each other's way, while we harpooned them with
the greatest ease and impunity. Even the "old man" himself lowered
the fifth boat, leaving the ship to the carpenter, cooper, cook, and
steward, and coming on the scene as if determined to make a field-day of
the occasion. He was no "slouch" at the business either. Not that there
was much occasion or opportunity to exhibit any prowess. The record of
the day's proceedings would be as tame as to read of a day's work in a
slaughter-house. Suffice it to say, that we actually killed six whales,
none of whom were less than fifty barrels, no boat ran out more than
one hundred fathoms of line, neither was a bomb-lance used. Not the
slightest casualty occurred to any of the boats, and the whole work of
destruction was over in less than four hours.

Then came the trouble. The fish were, of course somewhat widely
separated when they died, and the task of collecting all those immense
carcasses was one of no ordinary magnitude. Had it not been for the
wonderfully skilful handling of the ship, the task would, I should
think, have been impossible, but the way in which she was worked
compelled the admiration of anybody who knew what handling a ship meant.
Still, with all the ability manifested, it was five hours after the last
whale died before we had gathered them all alongside, bringing us to
four o'clock in the afternoon.

A complete day under that fierce blaze of the tropical sun, without
other refreshment than an occasional furtive drink of tepid water, had
reduced us to a pitiable condition of weakness, so much so that the
skipper judged it prudent, as soon as the fluke-chains were passed, to
give us a couple of hours' rest. As soon as the sun had set we were all
turned to again, three cressets were prepared, and by their blaze we
toiled the whole night through. Truth compels me to state, though, that
none of us foremast hands had nearly such heavy work as the officers on
the stage. What they had to do demanded special knowledge and skill; but
it was also terribly hard work, constant and unremitting, while we at
the windlass had many a short spell between the lifting of the pieces.
Even the skipper took a hand, for the first time, and right manfully did
he do his share.

By the first streak of dawn, three of the whales had been stripped of
their blubber, and five heads were bobbing astern at the ends of as many
hawsers. The sea all round presented a wonderful sight. There must have
been thousands of sharks gathered to the feast, and their incessant
incursions through the phosphorescent water wove a dazzling network of
brilliant tracks which made the eyes ache to look upon. A short halt was
called for breakfast, which was greatly needed, and, thanks to the cook,
was a thoroughly good one. He--blessings on him!--had been busy fishing,
as we drifted slowly, with savoury pieces of whale-beef for bait, and
the result was a mess of fish which would have gladdened the heart of an
epicure. Our hunger appeased, it was "turn to" again, for there was now
no time to be lost. The fierce heat soon acts upon the carcass of a
dead whale, generating an immense volume of gas within it, which, in a
wonderfully short space of time, turns the flesh putrid and renders the
blubber so rotten that it cannot be lifted, nor, if it could, would it
be of any value. So it was no wonder that our haste was great, or that
the august arbiter of our destinies himself condescended to take his
place among the toilers. By nightfall the whole of our catch was on
board, excepting such toll as the hungry hordes of sharks had levied
upon it in transit. A goodly number of them had paid the penalty of
their rapacity with their lives, for often one would wriggle his way
right up on to the reeking carcass, and, seizing a huge fragment of
blubber, strive with might and main to tear it away. Then the lethal
spade would drop upon his soft crown, cleaving it to the jaws, and with
one flap of his big tail he would loose his grip, roll over and over,
and sink, surrounded by a writhing crowd of his fellows, by whom he was
speedily reduced into digestible fragments.

The condition of the CACHALOT's deck was now somewhat akin to chaos.
From the cabin door to the tryworks there was hardly an inch of
available space, and the oozing oil kept some of us continually baling
it up, lest it should leak out through the interstices in the bulwarks.
In order to avoid a breakdown, it became necessary to divide the crew
into six-hour watches, as although the work was exceedingly urgent on
account of the weather, there were evident signs that some of the crew
were perilously near giving in. So we got rest none too soon, and the
good effects of it were soon apparent. The work went on with much more
celerity than one would have thought possible, and soon the lumbered-up
decks began to resume their normal appearance.

As if to exasperate the "old man" beyond measure on the third day of
our operations a great school of sperm whales appeared, disporting all
around the ship, apparently conscious of our helplessness to interfere
with them. Notwithstanding our extraordinary haul, Captain Slocum went
black with impotent rage, and, after glowering at the sportive monsters,
beat a retreat below, unable to bear the sight any longer. During his
absence we had a rare treat. The whole school surrounded the ship, and
performed some of the strangest evolutions imaginable. As if instigated
by one common impulse, they all elevated their massive heads above
the surface of the sea, and remained for some time in that position,
solemnly bobbing up and down amid the glittering wavelets like movable
boulders of black rock. Then, all suddenly reversed themselves, and,
elevating their broad flukes in the air, commenced to beat them slowly
and rhythmically upon the water, like so many machines. Being almost a
perfect calm, every movement of the great mammals could be plainly seen;
some of them even passed so near to us that we could see how the lower
jaw hung down, while the animal was swimming in a normal position.

For over an hour they thus paraded around us, and then, as if startled
by some hidden danger, suddenly headed off to the westward, and in a few
minutes were out of our sight.

We cruised in the vicinity of the Comoro Islands for two months, never
quite out of sight of the mountain while the weather was clear. During
the whole of that time we were never clear of oil on deck, one catch
always succeeding another before there had been time to get cleared
up. Eight hundred barrels of oil were added to our cargo, making the
undisciplined hearts of all to whom whaling was a novel employment beat
high with hopes of a speedy completion of the cargo, and consequent
return. Poor innocents that we were! How could we know any better?
According to Goliath, with whom I often had a friendly chat, this was
quite out of the ordinary run to have such luck in the "Channel."

"'Way back in de dark ages, w'en de whaleships war de pi'neers
ob commerce, 'n day wan't no worryin', poofity-plukity steamboats
a-poundin' along, 'nough ter galley ebery whale clean eout ob dere skin,
dey war plenty whaleships fill up in twelve, fifteen, twenty monf' after
leabin' home. 'N er man bed his pick er places, too--didn' hab ter go
moseyin erroun' like some ol' hobo lookin' fer day's work, 'n prayin'
de good Lord not ter let um fine it. No, sah; roun yer China Sea, coas'
Japan, on de line, off shore, Vasquez, 'mong de islan's, ohmos' anywhar,
you couldn' hardly git way from 'em. Neow, I clar ter glory I kaint
imagine WAR dey all gone ter, dough we bin eout only six seven monf' 'n
got over tousan bar'l below. But I bin two year on er voy'ge and
doan hardly SEE a sparm while, much less catch one. But"--and here he
whispered mysteriously--"dish yer ole man's de bery debbil's own chile,
'n his farder lookin' after him well--dat's my 'pinion. Only yew keep
yer head tight shut, an' nebber say er word, but keep er lookin', 'n
sure's death you'll see." This conversation made a deep and lasting
impression upon me, for I had not before heard even so much as a
murmur from an officer against the tyranny of the skipper. Some of the
harpooners were fluent enough, too.

Yet I had often thought that his treatment of them, considering the
strenuous nature of their toil, and the willingness with which they
worked as long as they had an ounce of energy left, was worth at least a
little kindness and courtesy on his part.

What the period may have been during which whales were plentiful here,
I do not know, but it was now May, and for the last few days we had not
seen a solitary spout of any kind. Preparations, very slight it is
true, were made for departure; but before we left those parts we made
an interesting call for water at Mohilla, one of the Comoro group,
which brought out, in unmistakable fashion, the wonderful fund of local
knowledge possessed by these men. At the larger ports of Johanna and
Mayotte there is a regular tariff of port charges, which are somewhat
heavy, and no whaleman would be so reckless as to incur these unless
driven thereto by the necessity of obtaining provisions; otherwise, the
islands offer great inducements to whaling captains to call, since none
but men hopelessly mad would venture to desert in such places. That
qualification is the chief one for any port to possess in the eyes of a
whaling captain.

Our skipper, however, saw no necessity for entering any port. Running up
under the lee of Mohilla, we followed the land along until we came to
a tiny bight on the western side of the island, an insignificant inlet
which no mariner in charge of a vessel like ours could be expected even
to notice, unless he were surveying. The approaches to this tiny harbour
(save the mark) were very forbidding. Ugly-looking rocks showed up here
and there, the surf over them frequently blinding the whole entry.
But we came along, in our usual leisurely fashion, under two topsails,
spanker, and fore-topmast staysail, and took that ugly passage like a
sailing barge entering the Medway. There was barely room to turn round
when we got inside, but all sail had been taken off her except the
spanker, so that her way was almost stopped by the time she was fairly
within the harbour. Down went the anchor, and she was fast--anchored for
the first time since leaving New Bedford seven months before. Here we
were shut out entirely from the outer world, for I doubt greatly whether
even a passing dhow could have seen us from seaward. We were not here
for rest, however, but wood and water; so while one party was supplied
with well-sharpened axes, and sent on shore to cut down such small trees
as would serve our turn, another party was busily employed getting out
a number of big casks for the serious business of watering. The cooper
knocked off the second or quarter hoops from each of these casks, and
drove them on again with two "beckets" or loops of rope firmly jammed
under each of them in such a manner that the loops were in line
with each other on each side of the bunghole. They were then lowered
overboard, and a long rope rove through all the beckets. When this was
done, the whole number of casks floated end to end, upright and secure.
We towed them ashore to where, by the skipper's directions, at about
fifty yards from high-water mark, a spring of beautiful water bubbled
out of the side of a mass of rock, losing itself in a deep crevice
below. Lovely ferns, rare orchids, and trailing plants of many kinds
surrounded this fairy-like spot in the wildest profusion, making a
tangle of greenery that we had considerable trouble to clear away.
Having done so, we led a long canvas hose from the spot whence the water
flowed down to the shore where the casks floated. The chief officer,
with great ingenuity, rigged up an arrangement whereby the hose, which
had a square month about a foot wide, was held up to the rock, saving us
the labour of bailing and filling by hand. So we were able to rest and
admire at our ease the wonderful variety of beautiful plants which grew
here so lavishly, unseen by mortal eye from one year's end to another.
I have somewhere read that the Creator has delight in the beautiful work
of His will, wherever it may be; and that while our egotism wonders at
the waste of beauty, as we call it, there is no waste at all, since the
Infinite Intelligence can dwell with complacency upon the glories of His
handiwork, perfectly fulfilling their appointed ends.

All too soon the pleasant occupation came to an end. The long row of
casks, filled to the brim and tightly bunged, were towed off by us to
the ship, and ranged alongside. A tackle and pair of "can-hooks" was
overhauled to the water and hooked to a cask. "Hoist away!" And as the
cask rose, the beckets that had held it to the mother-rope were cut,
setting it quite free to come on board, but leaving all the others still
secure. In this way we took in several thousand gallons of water in a
few hours, with a small expenditure of labour, free of cost; whereas,
had we gone into Mayotte or Johanna, the water would have been bad, the
price high, the labour great, with the chances of a bad visitation of
fever in the bargain.

The woodmen had a much more arduous task. The only wood they could find,
without cutting down big trees, which would have involved far too much
labour in cutting up, was a kind of iron-wood, which, besides being very
heavy, was so hard as to take pieces clean out of their axe-edges,
when a blow was struck directly across the grain. As none of them were
experts, the condition of their tools soon made their work very hard.
But that they had taken several axes in reserve, it is doubtful whether
they would have been able to get sufficient fuel for our purpose.
When they pitched the wood off the rocks into the harbour, it sank
immediately, giving them a great deal of trouble to fish it up again.
Neither could they raft it as intended, but were compelled to load it
into the boats and make several journeys to and fro before all they had
cut was shipped. Altogether, I was glad that the wooding had not fallen
to my share. On board the ship fishing had been going on steadily most
of the day by a few hands told off for the purpose. The result of their
sport was splendid, over two hundred-weight of fine fish of various
sorts, but all eatable, having been gathered in.

We lay snugly anchored all night, keeping a bright look-out for any
unwelcome visitors either from land or sea, for the natives are not to
be trusted, neither do the Arab mongrels who cruise about those waters
in their dhows bear any too good a reputation. We saw none, however,
and at daylight we weighed and towed the ship out to sea with the boats,
there being no wind. While busy at this uninteresting pastime, one of
the boats slipped away, returning presently with a fine turtle, which
they had surprised during his morning's nap. One of the amphibious
Portuguese slipped over the boat's side as she neared the sleeping
SPHARGA, and, diving deep, came up underneath him, seizing with crossed
hands the two hind flippers, and, with a sudden, dexterous twist, turned
the astonished creature over on his back. Thus rendered helpless, the
turtle lay on the surface feebly waving his flippers, while his captor,
gently treading water, held him in that position till the boat reached
the pair and took them on board. It was a clever feat, neatly executed,
as unlike the clumsy efforts I had before seen made with the same object
as anything could possibly be.

After an hour's tow, we had got a good offing, and a light air springing
up, we returned on board, hoisted the boats, and made sail to the
northward again.

With the exception of the numerous native dhows that crept lazily about,
we saw no vessels as we gradually drew out of the Mozambique Channel and
stood away towards the Line. The part of the Indian Ocean in which we
now found ourselves is much dreaded by merchantmen, who give it a wide
berth on account of the numerous banks, islets, and dangerous currents
with which it abounds. We, however, seemed quite at home here, pursuing
the even tenor of our usual way without any special precautions being
taken. A bright look-out, we always kept, of course--none of your drowsy
lolling about such as is all too common on the "fo'lk'sle head" of many
a fine ship, when, with lights half trimmed or not shown at all, she is
ploughing along blindly at twelve knots or so an hour. No; while we were
under way during daylight, four pairs of keen eyes kept incessant vigil
a hundred feet above the deck, noting everything, even to a shoal
of small fish, that crossed within the range of vision. At night we
scarcely moved, but still a vigilant lookout was always kept both fore
and aft, so that it would have been difficult for us to drift upon a
reef unknowingly.

Creeping steadily northward, we passed the Cosmoledo group of atolls
without paying them a visit, which was strange, as, from their
appearance, no better fishing-ground would be likely to come in our way.
They are little known, except to the wandering fishermen from Reunion
and Rodriguez, who roam about these islets and reefs, seeking anything
that may be turned into coin, from wrecks to turtle, and in nowise
particular as to rights of ownership. When between the Cosmoledos
and Astove, the next island to the northward, we sighted a "solitary"
cachalot one morning just as the day dawned. It was the first for some
time--nearly three weeks--and being all well seasoned to the work now,
we obeyed the call to arms with great alacrity. Our friend was making a
passage, turning neither to the right hand nor the left as he went. His
risings and number of spouts while up, as well as the time he remained
below, were as regular as the progress of a clock, and could be counted
upon with quite as much certainty.

Bearing in mind, I suppose, the general character of the whales we had
recently met with, only two boats were lowered to attack the new-comer,
who, all unconscious of our coming, pursued his leisurely course
unheeding.

We got a good weather gage of him, and came flying on as usual getting
two irons planted in fine style. But a surprise awaited us. As we
sheered up into the wind away from him, Louis shouted, "Fightin' whale,
sir; look out for de rush!" Look out, indeed? Small use in looking out
when, hampered as we always were at first with the unshipping of the
mast, we could do next to nothing to avoid him. Without any of the
desperate flounderings generally indulged in on first feeling the iron,
he turned upon us, and had it not been that he caught sight of the
second mate's boat, which had just arrived, and turned his attentions
to her, there would have been scant chance of any escape for us. Leaping
half out of water, he made direct for our comrades with a vigour and
ferocity marvellous to see, making it a no easy matter for them to avoid
his tremendous rush. Our actions, at no time slow, were considerably
hastened by this display of valour, so that before he could turn his
attentions in our direction we were ready for him. Then ensued a really
big fight, the first, in fact, of my experience, for none of the other
whales had shown any serious determination to do us an injury, but had
devoted all their energies to attempts at escape. So quick were the
evolutions, and so savage the appearance of this fellow, that even
our veteran mate looked anxious as to the possible result. Without
attempting to "sound," the furious monster kept mostly below the
surface; but whenever he rose, it was either to deliver a fearful blow
with his tail, or, with jaws widespread, to try and bite one of our
boats in half. Well was it for us that he was severely handicapped by
a malformation of the lower jaw. At a short distance from the throat
it turned off nearly at right angles to his body, the part that thus
protruded sideways being deeply fringed with barnacles, and plated with
big limpets.

Had it not been for this impediment, I verily believe he would have
beaten us altogether. As it was, he worked us nearly to death with his
ugly rushes. Once he delivered a sidelong blow with his tail, which, as
we spun round, shore off the two oars on that side as if they had been
carrots. At last the second mate got fast to him, and then the character
of the game changed again. Apparently unwearied by his previous
exertions, he now started off to windward at top speed, with the
two boats sheering broadly out upon either side of his foaming wake.
Doubtless because he himself was much fatigued, the mate allowed him to
run at his will, without for the time attempting to haul any closer to
him, and very grateful the short rest was to us. But he had not gone
a couple of miles before he turned a complete somersault in the water,
coming up BEHIND us to rush off again in the opposite direction at
undiminished speed. This move was a startler. For the moment it seemed
as if both boats would be smashed like egg-shells against each other,
or else that some of us would be impaled upon the long lances with which
each boat's bow bristled. By what looked like a handbreadth, we cleared
each other, and the race continued. Up till now we had not succeeded
in getting home a single lance, the foe was becoming warier, while the
strain was certainly telling upon our nerves. So Mr. Count got out his
bomb-gun, shouting at the same time to Mr. Cruce to do the same. They
both hated these weapons, nor ever used them if they could help it; but
what was to be done?

Our chief had hardly got his gun ready, before we came to almost a
dead stop. All was silent for just a moment; then, with a roar like a
cataract, up sprang the huge creature, head out, jaw wide open, coming
direct for us. As coolly as if on the quarter-deck, the mate raised his
gun, firing the bomb directly down the great livid cavern of a throat
fronting him. Down went that mountainous head not six inches from us,
but with a perfectly indescribable motion, a tremendous writhe, in fact;
up flew the broad tail in air, and a blow which might have sufficed
to stave in the side of the ship struck the second mate's boat fairly
amidships. It was right before my eyes, not sixty feet away, and the
sight will haunt me to my death. The tub oarsman was the poor German
baker, about whom I have hitherto said nothing, except to note that he
was one of the crew. That awful blow put an end summarily to all his
earthly anxieties. As it shore obliquely through the centre of the boat,
it drove his poor body right through her timbers--an undistinguishable
bundle of what was an instant before a human being. The other members of
the crew escaped the blow, and the harpooner managed to cut the line, so
that for the present they were safe enough, clinging to the remains of
their boat, unless the whale should choose to rush across them.

Happily, his rushing was almost over. The bomb fired by Mr. Count, with
such fatal result to poor Bamberger, must have exploded right in the
whale's throat. Whether his previous titanic efforts had completely
exhausted him, or whether the bomb had broken his massive backbone, I do
not know, of course, but he went into no flurry, dying as peacefully as
his course had been furious. For the first time in my life, I had been
face to face with a violent death, and I was quite stunned with the
awfulness of the experience. Mechanically, as it seemed to me, we
obeyed such orders as were given, but every man's thoughts were with the
shipmate so suddenly dashed from amongst us. We never saw sign of him
again.

While the ship was running down to us, another boat had gone to rescue
the clinging crew of the shattered boat, for the whole drama had been
witnessed from the ship, although they were not aware of the death of
the poor German. When the sad news was told on board, there was a deep
silence, all work being carried on so quietly that we seemed like a crew
of dumb men. With a sentiment for which I should not have given our grim
skipper credit, the stars and stripes were hoisted half-mast, telling
the silent sky and moaning sea, sole witnesses besides ourselves, of the
sudden departure from among us of our poor shipmate. We got the whale
cut in as usual without any incident worth mentioning, except that the
peculiar shape of the jaw made it an object of great curiosity to all
of us who were new to the whale-fishing. Such malformations are not very
rare. They are generally thought to occur when the animal is young, and
its bones soft; but whether done in fighting with one another, or
in some more mysterious way, nobody knows. Cases have been known, I
believe, where the deformed whale does not appear to have suffered from
lack of food in consequence of his disability; but in each of the three
instances which have come under my own notice, such was certainly not
the case. These whales were what is termed by the whalers "dry-skins;"
that is, they were in poor condition, the blubber yielding less than
half the usual quantity of oil. The absence of oil makes it very hard
to cut up, and there is more work in one whale of this kind than in two
whose blubber is rich and soft. Another thing which I have also noticed
is, that these whales were much more difficult to tackle than others,
for each of them gave us something special to remember them by. But I
must not get ahead of my yarn.

The end of the week brought us up to the Aldabra Islands, one of
the puzzles of the world. For here, in these tiny pieces of earth,
surrounded by thousands of miles of sea, the nearest land a group of
islets like unto them, is found the gigantic tortoise, and in only one
other place in the wide world, the Galapagos group of islands in the
South Pacific. How, or by what strange freak of Dame Nature these
curious reptiles, sole survivals of another age, should come to be
found in this lonely spot, is a deep mystery, and one not likely to be
unfolded now. At any rate, there they are, looking as if some of them
might be coeval with Noah, so venerable and storm-beaten do they appear.

We made the island early on a Sunday morning, and, with the usual
celerity, worked the vessel into the fine harbour, called, from one
of the exploring ships, Euphrates Bay or Harbour. The anchor down, and
everything made snug below and aloft, we were actually allowed a run
ashore free from restraint. I could hardly believe my ears. We had got
so accustomed to our slavery that liberty was become a mere name; we
hardly knew what to do with it when we got it. However, we soon got used
(in a very limited sense) to being our own masters, and, each following
the bent of his inclinations, set out for a ramble. My companion and I
had not gone far, when we thought we saw one of the boulders, with which
the island was liberally besprinkled, on the move. Running up to examine
it with all the eagerness of children let out of school, we found it to
be one of the inhabitants, a monstrous tortoise. I had some big turtle
around the cays of the Gulf of Mexico, but this creature dwarfed them
all. We had no means of actually measuring him, and had to keep clear
of his formidable-looking jaws, but roughly, and within the mark, he was
four feet long by two feet six inches wide. Of course he was much more
dome-shaped than the turtle are, and consequently looked a great deal
bigger than a turtle of the same measurement would, besides being much
thicker through. As he was loth to stay with us, we made up our minds to
go with him, for he was evidently making for some definite spot, by the
tracks he was following, which showed plainly how many years that same
road had been used. Well, I mounted on his back, keeping well astern,
out of the reach of that serious-looking head, which having rather a
long neck, looked as if it might be able to reach round and take a
piece out of a fellow without any trouble. He was perfectly amicable,
continuing his journey as if nothing had happened, and really getting
over the ground at a good rate, considering the bulk and shape of him.
Except for the novelty of the thing, this sort of ride had nothing to
recommend it; so I soon tired of it, and let him waddle along in peace.
By following the tracks aforesaid, we arrived at a fine stream of water
sparkling out of a hillside, and running down a little ravine. The sides
of this gully were worn quite smooth by the innumerable feet of the
tortoises, about a dozen of which were now quietly crouching at the
water's edge, filling themselves up with the cooling fluid. I did not
see the patriarch upon whom a sailor once reported that he had read the
legend carved, "The Ark, Captain Noah, Ararat for orders"; perhaps he
had at last closed his peaceful career. But strange, and quaint as this
exhibition of ancient reptiles was, we had other and better employment
for the limited time at our disposal. There were innumerable curious
things to see, and, unless we were to run the risk of going on board
again and stopping there, dinner must be obtained. Eggs of various
kinds were exceedingly plentiful; in many places the flats were almost
impassable for sitting birds, mostly "boobies."

But previous experience of boobies' eggs in other places had not
disposed me to seek them where others were to be obtained, and as I had
seen many of the well-known frigate or man-o'-war birds hovering
about, we set out to the other side of the island in search of the
breeding-place.

These peculiar birds are, I think, misnamed. They should be called
pirate or buccaneer birds, from their marauding habits. Seldom or never
do they condescend to fish for themselves, preferring to hover high in
the blue, their tails opening and closing like a pair of scissors
as they hang poised above the sea. Presently booby--like some honest
housewife who has been a-marketing--comes flapping noisily home, her maw
laden with fish for the chicks. Down comes the black watcher from above
with a swoop like an eagle. Booby puts all she knows into her flight,
but vainly; escape is impossible, so with a despairing shriek she
drops her load. Before it has touched the water the graceful thief has
intercepted it, and soared slowly aloft again, to repeat the performance
as occasion serves.

When we arrived on the outer shore of the island, we found a large
breeding-place of these birds, but totally different to the haunt of
the boobies. The nests, if they might be so called, being at best a few
twigs, were mostly in the hollows of the rocks, the number of eggs
being two to a nest, on an average. The eggs were nearly as large as a
turkey's. But I am reminded of the range of size among turkeys' eggs,
so I must say they were considerably larger than a small turkey's egg.
Their flavour was most delicate, as much so as the eggs of a moor-fed
fowl. We saw no birds sitting, but here and there the gaunt skeleton
forms of birds, who by reason of sickness or old age were unable to
provide for themselves, and so sat waiting for death, appealed most
mournfully to us. We went up to some of these poor creatures, and ended
their long agony; but there were many of them that we were obliged to
leave to Nature.

We saw no animals larger than a rat, but there were a great many
of those eerie-looking land-crabs, that seemed as if almost humanly
intelligent as they scampered about over the sand or through the
undergrowth, busy about goodness knows what. The beautiful cocoa-nut
palm was plentiful, so much so that I wondered why there were no
settlers to collect "copra," or dried cocoa-nut, for oil. My West Indian
experience came in handy now, for I was able to climb a lofty tree in
native fashion, and cut down a grand bunch of green nuts, which form one
of the most refreshing and nutritious of foods, as well as a cool and
delicious drink. We had no line with us, so we took off our belts,
which, securely joined together, answered my purpose very well. With
them I made a loop round the tree and myself; then as I climbed I pushed
the loop up with me, so that whenever I wanted a rest, I had only to
lean back in it, keeping my knees against the trunk, and I was almost as
comfortable as if on the ground.

After getting the nuts, we made a fire and roasted some of our eggs,
which, with a biscuit or two, made a delightful meal. Then we fell
asleep under a shady tree, upon some soft moss; nor did we wake again
until nearly time to go on board. A most enjoyable swim terminated our
day's outing, and we returned to the beach abreast of the ship very
pleased with the excursion.

We had no adventures, found no hidden treasure or ferocious animals, but
none the less we thoroughly enjoyed ourselves. While we sat waiting for
the boat to come and fetch us off, we saw a couple of good-sized turtle
come ashore quite close to us. We kept perfectly still until we were
sure of being able to intercept them. As soon as they had got far enough
away from their native element, we rushed upon them, and captured them
both, so that when the boat arrived we were not empty-handed. We had
also a "jumper," or blouse, full of eggs, and a couple of immense
bunches of cocoa-nuts. When we got on board we felt quite happy, and,
for the first time since leaving America, we had a little singing. Shall
I be laughed at when I confess that our musical efforts were confined
to Sankey's hymns? Maybe, but I do not care. Cheap and clap-trap as the
music may be, it tasted "real good," as Abner said, and I am quite sure
that that Sunday night was the best that any of us had spent for a very
long time.

A long, sound sleep was terminated at dawn, when we weighed and stood
out through a narrow passage by East Island, which was quite covered
with fine trees--of what kind I do not know, but they presented a
beautiful sight. Myriads of birds hovered about, busy fishing from the
countless schools that rippled the placid sea. Beneath us, at twenty
fathoms, the wonderful architecture of the coral was plainly visible
through the brilliantly-clear sea, while, wherever the tiny builders had
raised their fairy domain near the surface, an occasional roller would
crown it with a snowy garland of foam--a dazzling patch of white against
the sapphire sea. Altogether, such a panorama was spread out at our
feet, as we stood gazing from the lofty crow's-nest, as was worth a year
or two of city life to witness. I could not help pitying my companion,
one of the Portuguese harpooners, who stolidly munched his quid with no
eyes for any of these glorious pictures, no thought of anything but a
possible whale in sight.

My silent rhapsodies were rudely interrupted by something far away on
the horizon. Hardly daring to breathe, I strained my eyes, and--yes,
it was--"Ah blow-w-w-w!" I bellowed at the top of my lung-power, never
before had I had the opportunity of thus distinguishing myself, and I
felt a bit sore about it.

There was a little obliquity about the direction of the spout that made
me hopeful, for the cachalot alone sends his spout diagonally upward,
all the others spout vertically. It was but a school of kogia, or
"short-headed" cachalots; but as we secured five of them, averaging
seven barrels each, with scarcely any trouble, I felt quite pleased with
myself. We had quite an exciting bit of sport with them, they were so
lively; but as for danger--well, they only seemed like big "black fish"
to us now, and we quite enjoyed the fun. They were, in all respects,
miniature sperm whales, except that the head was much shorter and
smaller in proportion to the body than their big relations.





