CHAPTER XXVII. PORT PEGASUS

The wind still holding steadily in the old quarter, our skipper got very
restless. He recalled his former exploits, and, firing at the thought,
decided then and there to have a trip round to Port Pegasus, in the hope
that he might meet with some of his former good luck in the vicinity of
that magnificent bay. With the greatest alacrity we obeyed his summons,
handling the old barky as if she were a small boat, and the same
morning, for the first time, ran out of the Straits to the eastward
past Ruapuke Island. Beautiful weather prevailed, making our trip a
delightful one, the wonderful scenery of that coast appealing to even
the most callous or indifferent among us. We hugged the land closely,
the skipper being familiar with all of it in a general way, so that none
of its beauties were lost to us. The breeze holding good, by nightfall
we had reached our destination, anchoring in the north arm near a
tumbling cascade of glittering water that looked like a long feather
laid on the dark-green slope of the steep hill from which it gushed.

We had not been long at anchor before we had visitors--half-breed
Maories, who, like the Finns and Canadians, are farmers, fishermen,
sailors, and shipwrights, as necessity arises. They brought us
potatoes--most welcome of all fruit to the sailor--cabbages, onions, and
"mutton birds." This latter delicacy is a great staple of their flesh
food, but is one of the strangest dishes imaginable. When it is being
cooked in the usual way, i.e. by grilling, it smells exactly like a
piece of roasting mutton; but it tastes, to my mind, like nothing else
in the world so much as a kippered herring. There is a gastronomical
paradox, if you like. Only the young birds are taken for eating. They
are found, when unfledged, in holes of the rocks, and weigh sometimes
treble as much as their parents. They are exceedingly fat; but this
substance is nearly all removed from their bodies before they are
hung up in the smoke-houses. They are split open like a haddock, and
carefully smoked, after being steeped in brine. Baskets, something like
exaggerated strawberry pottles of the old conical shape, are prepared,
to hold each about a dozen birds. They are lined with leaves, then
packed with the birds, the melted fat being run into all the interstices
until the basket is full. The top is then neatly tied up with more
leaves, and, thus preserved, the contents will keep in cool weather an
indefinite length of time.

Captain Count was soon recognized by some of his old friends, who were
delighted to welcome him again. Their faces fell, however, when he told
them that his stay was to be very brief, and that he only required four
good-sized fish to fill up. Inquiry as to the prevalence of sperm whales
in the vicinity elicited the news that they were as plentiful as they
had ever been--if anything, more so, since the visits of the whalers had
become fewer. There were a couple of "bay" whaling stations existing;
but, of course, their success could not be expected to be great among
the cachalots, who usually keep a respectful distance from harbours,
while they had driven the right whales away almost entirely.

No one could help being struck by the manly bearing, splendid physique,
and simple manners of the inhabitants. If ever it falls to the lot of
any one, as I hope it will, to establish a sperm whale fishery in these
regions, there need be no lack of workers while such grand specimens
of manhood abound there as we saw--all, moreover, fishermen and whalers
from their earliest days.

We did not go far afield, but hovered within ten or fifteen miles of the
various entrances, so as not to be blown off the land in case of sudden
bad weather. Even with that timid offing, we were only there two days,
when an enormous school of sperm whales hove in sight. I dare not say
how many I believe there were, and my estimate really might be biassed;
but this I know, that in no given direction could one look to seaward
and not see many spouts.

We got among them and had a good time, being more hampered by the
curiosity of the unattached fish than by the pugnacity of those under
our immediate attention. So we killed three, and by preconcerted signal
warned the watchers on the lofty points ashore of our success. As
speedily as possible off came four boats from the shore stations, and
hooked on to two of our fish, while we were busy with the third. The
wind being off shore, what there was of it, no time was to be lost, in
view of the well-known untrustworthiness of the weather; so we started
to cut-in at once, while the shore people worked like giants to tow
the other two in. Considering the weakness of their forces, they made
marvellous progress; but seeing how terribly exhausting the toil was,
one could not help wishing them one of the small London tugs, familiarly
known as "jackals," which would have snaked those monsters along at
three or four knots an hour.

However, all went well; the usual gale did blow but not till we had
got the last piece aboard and a good "slant" to run in, arriving at our
previous moorings at midnight. In the morning the skipper went down in
his boat to visit the stations, and see how they had fared. Old hand as
he was, I think he was astonished to see what progress those fellows had
made with the fish. They did not reach the stations till after midnight,
but already they had the whales half flenched, and, by the way they were
working, it looked as if they would be through with their task as soon
as we were with ours. Their agreement with the skipper was to yield us
half the oil they made, and, if agreeable to them, we would take their
moiety at L40 per tun. Consequently they had something to work for, even
though there were twenty of them to share the spoil. They were a
merry party, eminently good tempered, and working as though one spirit
animated them all. If there was a leader of the band, he did his office
with great subtilty, for all seemed equal, nor did any appear to need
directing what to do. Fired by their example, we all worked our hardest;
but they beat us by half a day, mainly, I think, by dint of working
nearly all the time with scarce any interval for sleep. True, they were
bound to take advantage of low water when their huge prize was high and
dry--to get at him easily all round. Their method was of the simplest.
With gaff-hooks to haul back the pieces, and short-handled spades for
cutting, they worked in pairs, taking off square slabs of blubber about
a hundredweight each. As soon as a piece was cut off, the pair tackled
on to it, dragging it up to the pots, where the cooks hastily sliced it
for boiling, interspersing their labours with attention to the simmering
cauldrons.

Their efforts realized twenty-four tuns of clear oil and spermaceti,
of which, according to bargain, we took twelve, the captain buying the
other twelve for L480, as previously arranged. This latter portion,
however, was his private venture, and not on ship's account, as he
proposed selling it at the Bluff, when we should call there on our way
home. So that we were still two whales short of our quantity. What a
little space it did seem to fill up! Our patience was sorely tested,
when, during a whole week following our last haul, we were unable to put
to sea. In vain we tried all the old amusements of fishing, rambling,
bathing, etc.; they had lost their "bite;" we wanted to get home. At
last the longed-for shift of wind came and set us free. We had hardly
got well clear of the heads before we saw a school of cachalots away on
the horizon, some twelve miles off the land to the southward. We made
all possible sail in chase, but found, to our dismay, that they were
"making a passage," going at such a rate that unless the wind freshened
we could hardly hope to come up with them. Fortunately, we had all day
before us, having quitted our moorings soon after daylight; and unless
some unforeseen occurrence prevented us from keeping up our rate of
speed, the chances were that some time before dark they would ease
up and allow us to approach them. They were heading to the westward,
perhaps somewhat to the northward withal, to all appearance making
for the Solander. Hour after hour crawled by, while we still seemed to
preserve our relative distance, until we had skirted the southern shore
of the island and entered the area, of our old fishing ground. Two
vessels were cruising thereon, well to the northward, and we thought
with glee of the excitement that would seize them did they but gain an
inkling of our chase.

To our great delight, what we had hoped, but hardly dared expect, came
to pass. The school, as if with one impulse, hauled up on their course
four points, which made them head direct for the western verge of the
Solander ground, and--what was more important to us--made our coming up
with them a matter of a short time. We made the customary signals with
the upper sails to our friends to the northward, who recognized them
immediately, and bore down towards us. Not only had the school shifted
their course, but they had slackened speed; so that by four o'clock we
were able to lower for them at less than a mile distance.

It was an ideal whaling day--smooth water, a brisk breeze, a brilliant
sun, and plenty of whales. I was, as became my position, in the rear
when we went into action, and hardly hoped for an opportunity of doing
much but dance attendance upon my seniors. But fortune favoured me.
Before I had any idea whether the chief was fast or not, all other
considerations were driven clean out of my head by the unexpected
apparition of a colossal head, not a ship's length away, coming straight
for us, throwing up a swell in front of him like an ironclad. There was
barely time to sheer to one side, when the giant surged past us in a
roar of foaming sea, the flying flakes of which went right over us.
Samuela was "all there," though, and as the great beast passed he
plunged a harpoon into him with such force and vigour that the very
socket entered the blubber it needed all the strength I could muster,
even with such an aid as the nineteen-feet steer-oar, to swing the boat
right round in his wake, and prevent her being capsized by his headlong
rush.

For, contrary to the usual practice, he paused not an instant, but
rather quickened his pace, as if spurred. Heavens, how he went! The
mast and sail had to come down--and they did, but I hardly know how.
The spray was blinding, coming in sheets over the bows, so that I could
hardly see how to steer in the monster's wake. He headed straight for
the ship, which lay-to almost motionless, filling me with apprehension
lest he should in his blind flight dash that immense mass of solid
matter into her broadside, and so put an inglorious end to all our
hopes. What their feelings on board must have been, I can only imagine,
when they saw the undeviating rush of the gigantic creature straight for
them. On he went, until I held my breath for the crash, when at the
last moment, and within a few feet of the ship's side, he dived, passing
beneath the vessel. We let go line immediately, as may be supposed; but
although we had been towing with quite fifty fathoms drift, our speed
had been so great that we came up against the old ship with a crash
that very nearly finished us. He did not run any further just then, but
sounded for about two hundred and fifty fathoms, rising to the surface
in quite another mood. No more running away from him. I cannot say I
felt any of the fierce joy of battle at the prospect before me. I had a
profound respect for the fighting qualities of the sperm whale, and, to
tell the truth, would much rather have run twenty miles behind him than
have him turn to bay in his present parlous humour. It was, perhaps,
fortunate for me that there was a crowd of witnesses, the other ships
being now quite near enough to see all that was going on, since the
feeling that my doings were full in view of many experts and veterans
gave me a determination that I would not disgrace either myself or my
ship; besides, I felt that this would probably be our last whale this
voyage, if I did not fail, and that was no small thing to look forward
to.

All these things, so tedious in the telling, flashed through my mind,
while, with my eyes glued to the huge bulk of my antagonist or the
hissing vortices above him when he settled, I manoeuvred my pretty craft
with all the skill I could summon. For what seemed a period of about
twenty minutes we dodged him as he made the ugliest rushes at us. I
had not yet changed ends with Samuela, as customary, for I felt it
imperative to keep the helm while this game was being played. My trusty
Kanaka, however, had a lance ready, and I knew, if he only got the ghost
of a chance, no man living would or could make better use of it.

The whole affair was growing monotonous as well as extremely wearying.
Perhaps I was a little off my guard; at any rate, my heart almost leaped
into my mouth when just after an ugly rush past us, which I thought had
carried him to a safe distance, he stopped dead, lifted his flukes, and
brought them down edgeways with a vicious sweep that only just missed
the boat's gunwale and shore off the two oars on that side as if they
had been carrots. This serious disablement would certainly have led to
disaster but for Samuela. Prompt and vigorous, he seized the opportune
moment when the whale's side was presented just after the blow, sending
his lance quivering home all its length into the most vital part of
the leviathan's anatomy. Turning his happy face to me, he shouted
exultingly, "How's dat fer high?"--a bit of slang he had picked up, and
his use of which never failed to make me smile. "High" it was indeed--a
master-stroke. It must have pierced the creature's heart, for he
immediately began to spout blood in masses, and without another wound
went into his flurry and died.

Then came the reaction. I must have exerted myself beyond what I had
any idea of, for to Samuela I was obliged to delegate the task of
fluke-boring, while I rested a little. The ship was soon alongside,
though, and the whale secured. There was more yet to be done before
we could rest, in spite of our fatigue. The other boats had been so
successful that they had got two big fish, and what we were to do with
them was a problem not easily solvable. By dint of great exertion, we
managed to get another whale alongside, but were fain to come to
some arrangement with the ELIZA ADAMS, one of the ships that had been
unsuccessful, to take over our other whale on an agreement to render
us one-third of the product either in Port William or at home, if she
should not find us is the former place.

Behold us, then, in the gathering dusk with a whale on either side,
every stitch of canvas we could show set and drawing, straining every
nerve to get into the little port again, with the pleasant thought that
we were bringing with us all that was needed to complete our well-earned
cargo. Nobody wanted to go below; all hands felt that it was rest enough
to hang over the rail on either side and watch the black masses as they
surged through the gleaming sea. They represented so much to us. Very
little was said, but all hearts were filled with a deep content, a sense
of a long season of toil fitly crowned with complete success; nor was
any depression felt at the long, long stretch of stormy ocean between
us and our home port far away in the United States. That would doubtless
come by-and-by, when within less than a thousand miles of New Bedford;
but at present all sense of distance from home was lost in the
overmastering thought that soon it would be our only business to get
there as quickly as possible, without any avoidable loitering on the
road.

We made an amazing disturbance in the darkness of the sea with our
double burthen, so much so that one of the coasting steamers changed
her course a bit to range up by our side in curiosity. We were scarcely
going two and a half knots, in spite of the row we made, and there
was hardly room for wonder at the steamboat captain's hail, "Want any
assistance?" "No, thank you," was promptly returned, although there was
little doubt that all hands would have subscribed towards a tow into
port, in case the treacherous weather should, after all, play us a dirty
trick. But it looked as if our troubles were over. No hitch occurred
in our steady progress, slow though it necessarily was, and as morning
lifted the heavy veil from the face of the land, we arrived at our
pretty little haven, and quietly came to an anchor. The CHANCE was in
port wind-bound, looking, like ourselves, pretty low in the water. No
sooner did Paddy hear the news of our arrival in such fine trim than
he lowered his boat and hurried on board of us, his face beaming with
delight. Long and loud were his congratulations, especially when he
heard that we should now be full. Moreover, he offered--nor would he
take any denial--to come with the whole of his crew and help us finish.

For the next four days and nights, during which the wind prevented the
CHANCE from leaving us, our old ship was a scene of wild revelry, that
ceased not through the twenty-four hours--revelry entirely unassisted
by strong waters, too, the natural ebullient gaiety of men who were
free from anxiety on any account whatever, rejoicing over the glad
consummation of more than two years toil, on the one hand; on the other,
a splendid sympathy in joy manifested by the satisfied crew under the
genial command of Captain Gilroy. With their cheerful help we made
wonderful progress; and when at last the wind hauled into a favourable
quarter, and they were compelled to leave us, the back of our work was
broken, only the tedious task of boiling being left to finish.

Never, I am sure, did two ships' companies part with more hearty
good-will than ours. As the ungainly old tub surged slowly out of the
little harbour, her worn-out and generally used-up appearance would have
given a Board of Trade Inspector the nightmare; the piratical looks of
her crowd were enough to frighten a shipload of passengers into fits;
but to us who had seen their performances in all weathers, and under all
circumstances, accidental externals had no weight in biassing our high
opinion of them all. Good-bye, old ship; farewell, jolly captain and
sturdy crew; you will never be forgotten any more by us while
life lasts, and in far other and more conventional scenes we shall
regretfully remember the free-and-easy time we shared with you. So she
slipped away round the point and out of our lives for ever.

By dint of steady hard work we managed to get the last of our greasy
work done in four days more, then faced with a will the job of stowing
afresh the upper tiers of casks, in view of our long journey home. The
oil bought by the skipper on private venture was left on deck, secured
to the lash-rail, for discharging at the Bluff, while our stock of
water-casks were carefully overhauled and recoopered prior to being
stowed in their places below. Of course, we had plenty of room in the
hold, since no ship would carry herself full of casks of oil; but I
doubt whether, if we had borne a "Plimsoll's mark," it would not have
been totally submerged, so deep did we lie. Wooding and watering came
next--a different affair to our casual exercises in those directions
before. Provision had to be made now for a possible four or five months'
passage, during which we hoped to avoid any further calls, so that
the accumulation of firewood alone was no small matter. We cleared the
surrounding neighbourhood of potatoes at a good price, those useful
tubers being all they could supply us with for sea-stock, much to their
sorrow.

Then came the most unpleasant part of the whole business--for me. It had
been a part of the agreement made with the Kanakas that they were not to
be taken home with us, but returned to their island upon the termination
of the whaling. Now, the time had arrived when we were to part, and
I must confess that I felt very sorry to leave them. They had proved
docile, useful, and cheerful; while as for my harpooner and his mate
Polly, no man could have wished for smarter, better, or more faithful
helpers than they were. Strong as their desire was to return to their
homes, they too felt keenly the parting with us; for although they
had unavoidably suffered much from the inclemency of the weather--so
different from anything they had ever previously experienced--they had
been kindly treated, and had moved on precisely the same footing as the
rest of the crew. They wept like little children when the time arrived
for them to leave us, declaring that if ever we came to their island
again they would use all their endeavours to compel us to remain,
assuring us that we should want for nothing during the rest of our
lives, if we would but take up our abode with them. The one exception
to all this cordiality was Sam. His ideas were running in quite other
channels. To regain his lost status as ruler of the island, with all
the opportunities for indulging his animal propensities which such
a position gave him, was the problem he had set himself, and to the
realization of these wishes he had determinedly bent all his efforts.

Thus he firmly declined the offer of a passage back in the ELIZA ADAMS,
which our captain secured for all the Kanakas; preferring to be landed
at the Bluff, with the goodly sum of money to which he was entitled,
saying that he had important business to transact in Sydney before he
returned. This business, he privately informed me, was the procuring of
arms and ammunition wherewith to make war upon his rival. Of course we
could not prevent him, although it did seem an abominable thing to let
loose the spirit of slaughter among those light-hearted natives just
to satisfy the ambition of an unscrupulous negro. But, as I have before
noticed, from information received many years after I learned that he
had been successful in his efforts, though at what cost to life I do not
know.

So our dusky friends left us, with a good word from every one, and went
on board the ELIZA ADAMS, whose captain promised to land them at Futuna,
within six months. How he carried out his promise, I do not know; but,
for the poor fellows' sakes, I trust he kept his word.




