CHAPTER XXII. FAREWELL TO VAU VAU

Taking it all round, our visit to the Friendly Islands had not been
particularly fortunate up till the time of which I spoke at the
conclusion of the last chapter. Two-thirds of the period during which
the season was supposed to last had expired, but our catch had not
amounted to more than two hundred and fifty barrels of oil. Whales had
been undoubtedly scarce, for our ill-success on tackling bulls was
not at all in consequence of our clumsiness, these agile animals being
always a handful, but due to the lack of cows, which drove us to take
whatever we could get, which, as has been noted, was sometimes a severe
drubbing. Energy and watchfulness had been manifested in a marked degree
by everybody, and when the news circulated that our stay was drawing to
a close, there was, if anything, an increase of zeal in the hope that we
might yet make a favourable season.

But none of these valuable qualities exhibited by us could make up for
the lack of "fish" which was lamentably evident. It was not easy to
understand why, because these islands were noted as a breeding-place for
the humpbacked whale. Yet for years they had not been fished, so that a
plausible explanation of the paucity of their numbers as a consequence
of much harassing could not be reasonably offered. Still, after
centuries of whale-fishing, little is known of the real habits of
whales, Where there is abundance of "feed," in the case of MYSTICETA it
may be reasonably inferred that whales may be found in proportionately
greater numbers. With regard to the wider-spread classes of the
great marine mammalia, beyond the fact, ascertained from continued
observation, that certain parts of the ocean are more favoured by them
than others, there is absolutely no data to go upon as to why at times
they seem to desert their usual haunts and scatter themselves far and
wide.

The case of the cachalot is still more difficult. All the BALAENAE seem
to be compelled, by laws which we can only guess at, to frequent the
vicinity of land possessing shallows at their breeding times, so that
they may with more or less certainty be looked for in such places at
the seasons which have been accurately fixed. They may be driven to seek
other haunts, as was undoubtedly the case at Vau Vau in a great measure,
by some causes unknown, but to land they must come at those times. The
sperm whale, however, needs no shelter at such periods, or, at any rate,
does not avail herself of any. They may often be seen in the vicinity of
land where the water is deep close to, but seldom with calves. Schools
of cows with recently born young gambolling about them are met with
at immense distances from land, showing no disposition to seek shelter
either. For my part, I firmly believe that the cachalot is so terrible a
foe, that the great sharks who hover round a gravid cow of the BALAENAE,
driving her in terror to some shallow spot where she may hope to protect
her young, never dare to approach a sperm cow on kidnapping errands, or
any other if they can help it, until their unerring guides inform them
that life is extinct. When a sperm whale is in health, nothing that
inhabits the sea has any chance with him; neither does he scruple to
carry the war into the enemy's country, since all is fish that comes
to his net, and a shark fifteen feet in length has been found in the
stomach of a cachalot.

The only exception he seems to make is in the case of man. Instances
have several--nay, many times occurred where men have been slain by the
jaws of a cachalot crushing the boat in which they were; but their death
was of course incidental to the destruction of the boat. Never, as far
as I have been able to ascertain, has a cachalot attacked a man swimming
or clinging to a piece of wreckage, although such opportunities occur
innumerably. I have in another place told the story of how I once saw a
combat between a bull-cachalot and so powerful a combination of enemies
that even one knowing the fighting qualities of the sperm whale would
have hesitated to back him to win, but the yarn will bear repetition.

Two "killers" and a sword-fish, all of the largest size. Description of
these warriors is superfluous, since they are so well known to museums
and natural histories; but unless one has witnessed the charge of
a XIPHIAS, he cannot realize what a fearful foe it is. Still, as a
practice, these creatures leave the cachalot respectfully alone, knowing
instinctively that he is not their game. Upon this memorable occasion,
however I guess the two ORCAS were starving, and they had organized
a sort of forlorn hope with the XIPHIAS as an auxiliary who might be
relied upon to ensure success if it could be done. Anyhow, the syndicate
led off with their main force first; for while the two killers hung on
the cachalot's flanks, diverting his attention, the sword-fish, a giant
some sixteen feet long, launched himself at the most vulnerable part of
the whale, for all the world like a Whitehead torpedo. The wary eye
of the whale saw the long, dark mass coming, and, like a practised
pugilist, coolly swerved, taking for the nonce no notice of those
worrying wolves astern. The shock came; but instead of the sword
penetrating three, or maybe four feet just where the neck (if a whale
has any neck) encloses the huge heart, it met the mighty, impenetrable
mass of the head, solid as a block of thirty tons of india-rubber.

So the blow glanced, revealing a white streak running diagonally across
the eye, while the great XIPHIAS rolled helplessly over the top of that
black bastion. With a motion so rapid that the eye could scarcely follow
it, the whale turned, settling withal, and, catching the momentarily
motionless aggressor in the lethal sweep of those awful shears, crunched
him in two halves, which writhing sections he swallowed SERIATIM. And
the allied forces aft--what of them? Well, they had been rash--they
fully realized that fact, and would have fled, but one certainly found
that he had lingered on the scene too long. The thoroughly-roused
leviathan, with a reversal of his huge bulk that made the sea boil like
a pot, brandished his tail aloft and brought it down upon the doomed
"killer," making him at once the "killed." He was crushed like a shrimp
under one's heel.

The survivor fled--never faster--for an avalanche of living, furious
flesh was behind him, and coming with enormous leaps half out of the sea
every time. Thus they disappeared, but I have no doubts as to the issue.
Of one thing I am certain--that, if any of the trio survived, they never
afterwards attempted to rush a cachalot.

Strange to say, the sperm whale does not appear to be a fond mother. At
the advent of danger she often deserts her offspring and in such cases
it is hardly conceivable that she ever finds it again. It is true that
she is not gifted with such long "arms" as the BALAENAE wherewith to
cuddle her young one to her capacious bosom while making tracks from
her enemies; nor is she much "on the fight," not being so liberally
furnished with jaw as the fierce and much larger bull--for this is
the only species of whale in which there exists a great disproportion
between the sexes in point of size. Such difference as may obtain
between the MYSTICETA is slightly in favour of the female. I never heard
of a cow-cachalot yielding more than fifty barrels of oil; but I have
both heard of, and seen, bulls carrying one hundred and fifty. One
individual taken by us down south was seventy feet long, and furnished
us with more than the latter amount; but I shall come to him by-and-by.
Just one more point before leaving this (to me) fascinating subject for
the present.

To any one studying the peculiar configuration of a cachalot's mouth, it
would appear a difficult problem how the calf could suck. Certainly it
puzzled me more than a little. But, when on the "line" grounds we got
among a number of cows one calm day, I saw a little fellow about fifteen
feet long, apparently only a few days old, in the very act. The mother
lay on one side, with the breast nearly at the waters edge; while the
calf, lying parallel to its parent, with its head in the same direction,
held the teat sideways in the angle of its jaw, with its snout
protruding from the surface. Although we caught several cow-humpbacks
with newly born calves, I never had an opportunity of seeing THEM suck.

Gradually our pleasant days at Vau Vau drew to a close. So quiet and
idyllic had the life been, so full of simple joys, that most of us, if
not all, felt a pang at the thought of our imminent departure from
the beautiful place. Profitable, in a pecuniary sense, the season had
certainly failed to be, but that was the merest trifle compared with
the real happiness and peace enjoyed during our stay. Even the terrible
tragedy which had taken one of our fellows from us could not spoil the
actual enjoyment of our visit, sad and touching as the event undoubtedly
was. There was always, too, a sufficiently arduous routine of necessary
duties to perform, preventing us from degenerating into mere lotus
eaters in that delicious afternoon-land. Nor even to me, friendless
nomad as I was, did the thought ever occur, "I will return no more."

But these lovely days spent in softly gliding over the calm, azure
depths, bathed in golden sunlight, gazing dreamily down at the
indescribable beauties of the living reefs, feasting daintily on
abundance of never-cloying fruit, amid scenes of delight hardly to be
imagined by the cramped mind of the town dweller; islands, air, and sea
all shimmering in an enchanted haze, and silence scarcely broken by
the tender ripple of the gently-parted waters before the boat's steady
keel--though these joys have all been lost to me, and I in "populous
city pent" endure the fading years, I would not barter the memory of
them for more than I can say, so sweet it is to me. And, then, our
relations with the natives had been so perfectly amicable, so free from
anything to regret. Perhaps this simple statement will raise a cynical
smile upon the lips of those who know Tahati, the New Hebrides, and
kindred spots with all their savage, bestial orgies of alternate
unbridled lust and unnamable cruelty. Let it be so. For my part, I
rejoice that I have no tale of weeks of drunkenness, of brutal rape,
treacherous murder, and almost unthinkable torture to tell.

For of such is the paradise of the beach-comber, and the hell of the
clean man. Not that I have been able to escape it altogether. When I say
that I once shipped, unwittingly, as sailing-master of a little white
schooner in Noumea, bound to Apia, finding when too late that she was a
"blackbirder"--"labour vessel," the wise it call--nothing more will be
needed to convince the initiated that I have moved in the "nine circles"
of Polynesia.

Some time before the day fixed for our departure, we were busy storing
the gifts so liberally showered upon us by our eager friends. Hundreds
of bunches of bananas, many thousands of oranges, yams, taro, chillies,
fowls, and pigs were accumulated, until the ship looked like a huge
market-boat. But we could not persuade any of the natives to ship with
us to replace those whoso contract was now expiring. Samuela and Polly
were, after much difficulty, prevailed upon by me to go with us to
New Zealand, much to my gratification; but still we were woefully
short-handed, At last, seeing that there was no help for it, the skipper
decided to run over to Futuna, or Horn Island, where he felt certain of
obtaining recruits without any trouble. He did so most unwillingly, as
may well be believed, for the newcomers would need much training, while
our present Kanaka auxiliaries were the smartest men in the ship.

The slop-chest was largely drawn upon, to the credit of the crew,
who wished in some tangible way to show their appreciation of the
unremitting kindness shown them by their dusky friends. Not a whisper
had been uttered by any native as to desire of remuneration for what
he had given. If they expected a return, they certainly exercised great
control over themselves in keeping their wishes quiet. But when they
received the clothing, all utterly unsuited to their requirements as it
was, their beaming faces eloquently proclaimed the reality of their joy.
Heavy woollen shirts, thick cloth trousers and jackets, knitted socks;
but acceptable beyond all was a pilot-suit--warm enough for the Channel
in winter. Happy above all power of expression was he who secured
it. With an eared cloth cap and a pair of half boots, to complete
his preposterous rig, no Bond Street exquisite could feel more calmly
conscious of being a well-dressed man than he. From henceforth he would
be the observed of all observers at chapel on Sunday, exciting
worldly desires and aspirations among his cooler but coveting
fellow-worshippers.

The ladies fared very badly, until the skipper, with a twinkling eye,
announced that he had "dug up" some rolls of "cloth" (calico), which
he was prepared to supply us with at reasonable rates. Being of rather
pretty pattern, it went off like hot pies, and as the "fathoms" of
gaudy, flimsy material were distributed to the delighted fafines, their
shrill cries of gratitude were almost deafening.

Inexorable time brought round the morning of our departure. Willing
hands lifted our anchor, and hoisted the sails, so that we had nothing
to do but look on. A scarcely perceptible breeze, stealing softly over
the tree-tops, filled our upper canvas, sparing us the labour of towing
her out of the little bay where we had lain so long, and gradually
wafted us away from its lovely shores, amid the fast-flowing tears of
the great crowd. With multitudinous cries of "Ofa, al-ofa, papalang"
ringing in our ears ("Good-bye; good-bye, white man"), we rounded the
point, and, with increasing pace, bore away through the outlying islands
for the open sea. There was a strong trade blowing, making the old
barky caper like a dancing-master, which long unfamiliar motion almost
disagreed with some of us, after our long quiet. Under its hastening
influence we made such good time that before dinner Vau Vau had faded
into nothingness, mingling like the clouds with the soft haze on the
horizon, from henceforth only a memory.

We were not a very cheerful crowd that night, most of us being busy with
his own reflections. I must confess that I felt far greater sorrow at
leaving Vau Vau than ever I did at leaving England; because by the time
I was able to secure a berth, I have usually drunk pretty deep of the
bitter cup of the "outward bounder," than whom there is no more forlorn,
miserable creature on earth. No one but the much abused boarding-master
will have anything to do with him, and that worthy is generally careful
to let him know that he is but a hanger-on, a dependant on sufferance
for a meal, and that his presence on shore is an outrage. As for the
sailors' homes, I have hardly patience to speak of them. I know the
sailor is usually a big baby that wants protecting against himself, and
that once within the four walls of the institution he is safe; but right
there commendation must end. Why are good folks ashore systematically
misled into the belief that the sailor is an object of charity, and that
it is necessary to subscribe continually and liberally to provide him
with food and shelter when ashore? Most of the contributors would be
surprised to know that the cost of board and lodging at the "home" is
precisely the same as it is outside, and much higher than a landsman of
the same grade can live for in better style. With the exception of the
sleeping accommodation, most men prefer the boarding-house, where, if
they preserve the same commercial status which is a SINE QUA NON at the
"home," they are treated like gentlemen; but in what follows lies
the essential difference, and the reason for this outburst of mine,
smothered in silence for years. An "outward bounder"--that is, a man
whose money is exhausted and who is living upon the credit; of his
prospective advance of pay--is unknown at the "home." No matter what the
condition of things is in the shipping world; though the man may have
fought with energy to get his discharge accepted among the crowd at
the "chain-locker;" though he be footsore and weary with "looking for a
ship," when his money is done, out into the street he must go, if haply
he may find a speculative boarding-master to receive him. This act,
although most unlikely in appearance, is often performed; and though the
boarding-master, of course, expects to recoup himself out of the man's
advance note, it is none the less as merciful as the action of the
"home" authorities is merciless. Of course a man may go to the "straw
house," or, as it is grandiloquently termed, the "destitute seaman's
asylum," where for a season he will be fed on the refuse from the
"home," and sheltered from the weather. But the ungrateful rascals do
not like the "straw house," and use very bad language about it.

The galling thing about the whole affair is that the "sailors' home"
figures in certain official publications as a charity, which must be
partially supported by outside contributions. It may be a charitable
institution, but it certainly is not so to the sailor, who pays fully
for everything he receives. The charity is bestowed upon a far different
class of people to merchant Jack. Let it be granted that a man is sober
and provident, always getting a ship before his money is all gone, he
will probably be well content at the home, although very few seamen like
to be reminded ashore of their sea routine, as the manner of the home
is. If the institution does not pay a handsome dividend, with its
clothing shops and refreshment bars, as well as the boarding-house
lousiness on such a large scale, only one inference can be fairly
drawn--there must be something radically wrong with the management.

After this burst of temper, perhaps I had better get back to the subject
in hand. It was, I suppose, in the usual contrary nature of things that,
while we were all in this nearly helpless condition, one evening just
before sunset, along comes a sperm whale. Now, the commonest prudence
would have suggested letting him severely alone, since we were not only
short-handed, but several of our crew were completely crippled by large
boils; but it would have been an unprecedented thing to do while there
was any room left in the hold. Consequently we mustered the halt and the
lame, and manned two boats--all we could do--leaving the almost useless
cripples to handle the ship. Not to displace the rightful harpooner, I
took an oar in one of them, headed by the captain.

At first my hopes were high that we should not succeed in reaching the
victim before dark, but I was grievously disappointed in this. Just as
the whale was curving himself to sound, we got fairly close, and the
harpooner made a "pitch-pole" dart; that is, he hurled his weapon into
the air, where it described a fine curve, and fell point downward on
the animal's back just as he was disappearing. He stopped his descent
immediately, and turned savagely to see what had struck him so
unexpectedly. At that moment the sun went down.

After the first few minutes' "kick-up," he settled down for a steady
run, but not before the mate got good and fast to him likewise. Away we
went at a rare rate into the gathering gloom of the fast-coming night.
Now, had it been about the time of full moon or thereabouts, we should
doubtless have been able, by the flood of molten light she sends down in
those latitudes, to give a good account of our enemy; but alas for us,
it was not. The sky overhead was a deep blue-black, with steely sparkles
of starlight scattered all over it, only serving to accentuate the
darkness. After a short time our whale became totally invisible, except
for the phosphoric glare of the water all around him as he steadily
ploughed his way along. There was a good breeze blowing, which soon
caused us all to be drenched with the spray, rendering the general
effect of things cold as well as cheerless. Needless to say, we strove
with all our might to get alongside of him, so that an end might be put
to so unpleasant a state of affairs; but in our crippled condition it
was not at all easy to do so.

We persevered, however, and at last managed to get near enough for the
skipper to hurl a lance into the brightness of which the whale formed
the centre. It must have touched him, for he gave a bound forward and
disappeared. We suddenly came to a standstill, but in a moment were
whirled round as if on a pivot, and away we went in the opposite
direction. He had turned a complete somersault in the water beneath us,
giving us a "grue" as we reflected what would have happened had he then
chosen to come bounding to the surface. This manoeuvre seemed to please
him mightily, for he ran at top speed several minutes, and then repeated
it. This time he was nearly successful in doing us some real harm, for
it was now so dark that we could hardly see the other boat's form as
she towed along parallel to us about three or four lengths away. The two
boats swung round in a wide circle, rushing back at each other out of
the surrounding darkness as if bent on mutual destruction. Only by the
smartest manipulation was a collision avoided, which, as each boat's
bows bristled with lances and harpoons, would have been a serious matter
for some of us. However, the whale did not have it all his own way, for
the skipper, having charged his bomb-gun, patiently laid for him, and
fired. It was rather a long shot, but it reached him, as we afterwards
ascertained, making an ugly wound in the small near his tail.

Its effect upon him was startling and immediate. He rushed off at so
furious a rate dead to windward that for a great while we had all our
work cut out to keep her free by baling. The sea had risen a little, and
as we leapt from one wave to another the spray flew over us in an almost
continuous cloud. Clearly our situation was a parlous one. We could not
get near him; we were becoming dangerously enfeebled, and he appeared to
be gaining strength instead of losing it. Besides all this, none of us
could have the least idea of how the ship now bore from us, our only
comfort being that, by observation of the Cross, we were not making a
direct course, but travelling on the circumference of an immense
circle. Whatever damage we had done to him so far was evidently quite
superficial, for, accustomed as we were to tremendous displays of vigour
on the part of these creatures, this specimen fairly surprised us.

The time could only be guessed at; but, judging from our feelings, it
might have been two or three nights long. Still, to all things an end,
so in the midst of our dogged endurance of all this misery we felt
the pace give, and took heart of grace immediately. Calling up all our
reserves, we hauled up on to him, regardless of pain or weariness.
The skipper and mate lost no opportunities of lancing, once they
were alongside, but worked like heroes, until a final plunging of
the fast-dying leviathan warned us to retreat. Up he went out of the
glittering foam into the upper darkness, while we held our breath at the
unique sight of a whale breaching at night. But when he fell again the
effect was marvellous. Green columns of water arose on either side
of the descending mass as if from the bowels of the deep, while
their ghostly glare lit up the encircling gloom with a strange, weird
radiance, which reflected in our anxious faces, made us look like an
expedition from the FLYING DUTCHMAN. A short spell of gradually quieting
struggle succeeded as the great beast succumbed, until all was still
again, except the strange, low surge made by the waves as they broke
over the bank of flesh passively obstructing their free sweep.

While the final touch was being given to our task--i.e. the hole-boring
through the tail-fin--all hands lay around in various picturesque
attitudes, enjoying a refreshing smoke, care forgetting. While thus
pleasantly employed, sudden death, like a bolt from the blue, leapt into
our midst in a terrible form. The skipper was labouring hard at his task
of cutting the hole for the tow-line, when without warning the great fin
swung back as if suddenly released from tremendous tension. Happily for
us, the force of the blow was broken by its direction, as it struck the
water before reaching the boat's side, but the upper lobe hurled the
boat-spade from the captain's hands back into our midst, where it struck
the tub oarsman, splitting his head in two halves. The horror of the
tragedy, the enveloping darkness, the inexplicable revivifying of the
monster, which we could not have doubted to be dead, all combined to
stupefy and paralyze us for the time. Not a sound was heard in our boat,
though the yells of inquiry from our companion craft arose in increasing
volume. It was but a brief accession of energy, only lasting two or
three minutes, when the whale collapsed finally. Having recovered from
our surprise, we took no further chances with so dangerous an opponent,
but bored him as full of holes as a colander.

Mournful and miserable were the remaining hours of our vigil. We sat
around poor Miguel's corpse with unutterable feelings, recalling all
the tragical events of the voyage, until we reached the nadir of
despondency. With the rosy light of morning came more cheerful feelings,
heightened by the close proximity of the ship, from which it is probable
we had never been more than ten miles distant during the whole night.
She had sighted us with the first light, and made all sail down to us,
all hands much relieved at our safety. We were so sorely exhausted that
we could hardly climb on board; and how we hoisted the boats I hardly
know. The whale was secured by the efforts of the cripples we had left
on board, while we wayfarers, after a good meal, were allowed four
hours' sound, sweet sleep.

When we returned to our duties, the first thing that awaited us was
the burial of the poor body. Very reverently were the last sad offices
performed, the flag hoisted half-mast, the bell solemnly tolled. Then we
gathered at the gangway while the eternal words of hope and consolation
were falteringly read, and with a sudden plunge the long, straight
parcel slid off the hatch into the vast tomb ever ready for the dead
sailor.

Our dead out of sight, work claimed all our attention and energy, wiping
with its benificent influence all gloomy musings over the inevitable,
and replacing them with the pressing needs of life. The whale was not
a large one, but peculiar to look at. Like the specimen that fought so
fiercely with us in the Indian Ocean, its jaw was twisted round in a
sort of hook, the part that curved being so thickly covered with
long barnacles as to give the monster a most eerie look. One of the
Portuguese expressed his decided opinion that we had caught Davy Jones
himself, and that, in consequence, we should have no more accidents.
It was impossible not to sympathize with the conceit, for of all the
queer-looking monstrosities ever seen, this latest acquisition of ours
would have taken high honours. Such malformations of the lower mandible
of the cachalot have often been met with, and variously explained; but
the most plausible opinion seems to be that they have been acquired when
the animal is very young and its bones not yet indurated, since it
is impossible to believe that an adult could suffer such an accident
without the broken jaw drooping instead of being turned on one side.

The yield of oil was distressingly scanty, the whale being what is
technically known as a "dry skin." The blubber was so hard and tough
that we could hardly cut it up for boiling, and altogether it was one of
the most disappointing affairs we had yet dealt with. This poorness of
blubber was, to my mind, undoubtedly due to the difficulty the animal
must have had in obtaining food with his disabling defect of jaw.
Whatever it was, we were heartily glad to see the last of the beast,
fervently hoping we should never meet with another like him.

During the progress of these melancholy operations we had drifted a
considerable distance out of our course, no attention being paid, as
usual, to the direction of our drift until the greasy work was
done. Once the mess was cleared away, we hauled up again for our
objective--Futuna--which, as it was but a few hours' sail distant, we
hoped to make the next day.





