CHAPTER XXI. PROGRESS OF THE "HUMPBACK" SEASON

It will probably be inferred from the foregoing paragraph that we were
little troubled with visits from the natives next day; but it would be
doing them an injustice if I omitted to state that our various "flems"
put in an appearance as usual with their daily offerings of fruit,
vegetables, etc. They all presented a somewhat jaded and haggard look,
as of men who had dined not wisely but too well, nor did the odour of
stale whale-meat that clung to them add to their attractions. Repentance
for excesses or gluttony did not seem to trouble them, for they
evidently considered it would have been a sin not to take with both
hands the gifts the gods had so bountifully provided. Still, they did
not stay long, feeling, no doubt, sore need of a prolonged rest after
their late arduous exertions; so, after affectionate farewells, they
left us again to our greasy task of trying-out.

The cow proved exceedingly fat, making us, though by no means a large
specimen, fully fifty barrels of oil. The whalebone (baleen) was so
short as to be not worth the trouble of curing, so, with the exception
of such pieces as were useful to the "scrimshoners" for ornamenting
their nicknacks, it was not preserved. On the evening of the third
day the work was so far finished that we were able to go ashore for
clothes-washing, which necessary process was accompanied with a good
deal of fun and hilarity. In the morning cruising was resumed again.

For a couple of days we met with no success, although we had a very
aggravating chase after some smart bulls we fell in with, to our mutual
astonishment, just as we rounded a point of the outermost island. They
were lazily sunning themselves close under the lee of the cliffs, which
at that point were steep-to, having a depth of about twenty fathoms
close alongside. A fresh breeze was blowing, so we came round the point
at a great pace, being almost among them before they had time to escape.
They went away gaily along the land, not attempting to get seaward,
we straining every nerve to get alongside of them. Whether they were
tantalizing us or not, I cannot say, but certainly it looked like it. In
spite of their well-known speed, we were several times so close in their
wake that the harpooners loosed the tacks of the jibs to get a clear
shot; but as they did so the nimble monsters shot ahead a length or
two, leaving us just out of reach. It was a fine chase while it lasted,
though annoying; yet one could hardly help feeling amused at the way
they wallowed along--just like a school of exaggerated porpoises. At
last, after nearly two hours of the fun, they seemed to have had enough
of it, and with one accord headed seaward at a greatly accelerated pace,
as who should say, "Well, s' long, boys; company's very pleasant and
all that, but we've got important business over at Fiji, and can't stay
fooling around here any longer." In a quarter of an hour they were out
of sight, leaving us disgusted and outclassed pursuers sneaking back
again to shelter, feeling very small. Not that we could have had much
hope of success under the circumstances, knowing the peculiar habits of
the humpback and the almost impossibility of competing with him in the
open sea; but they had lured us on to forget all these things in the
ardour of the chase, and then exposed our folly.

Then ensued a week or two of uneventful cruising, broken only by
the capture of a couple of cows--one just after the fruitless chase
mentioned above, and one several days later. These events, though
interesting enough to us, were marked by no such deviation from the
ordinary course as to make them worthy of special attention; nor do I
think that the cold-blooded killing of a cow-whale, who dies patiently
endeavouring to protect her young, is a subject that lends itself to
eulogium.

However, just when the delightful days were beginning to pall upon us,
a real adventure befell us, which, had we been attending strictly to
business, we should not have encountered. For a week previous we had
been cruising constantly without ever seeing a spout, except those
belonging to whales out at sea, whither we knew it was folly to
follow them. We tried all sorts of games to while away the time, which
certainly did hang heavy, the most popular of which was for the whole
crew of the boat to strip, and, getting overboard, be towed along at the
ends of short warps, while I sailed her. It was quite mythological--a
sort of rude reproduction of Neptune and his attendant Tritons. At last,
one afternoon as we were listlessly lolling (half asleep, except the
look-out man) across the thwarts, we suddenly came upon a gorge between
two cliffs that we must have passed before several times unnoticed. At
a certain angle it opened, disclosing a wide sheet of water, extending a
long distance ahead. I put the helm up, and we ran through the passage,
finding it about a boat's length in width and several fathoms deep,
though overhead the cliffs nearly came together in places. Within, the
scene was very beautiful, but not more so than many similar ones we had
previously witnessed. Still, as the place was new to us, our languor was
temporarily dispelled, and we paddled along, taking in every feature of
the shores with keen eyes that let nothing escape. After we had gone
on in this placid manner for maybe an hour, we suddenly came to a
stupendous cliff--that is, for those parts--rising almost sheer from the
water for about a thousand feet. Of itself it would not have arrested
our attention, but at its base was a semicircular opening, like the
mouth of a small tunnel. This looked alluring, so I headed the boat for
it, passing through a deep channel between two reefs which led straight
to the opening. There was ample room for us to enter, as we had lowered
the mast; but just as we were passing through, a heave of the unnoticed
swell lifted us unpleasantly near the crown of this natural arch.
Beneath us, at a great depth, the bottom could be dimly discerned, the
water being of the richest blue conceivable, which the sun, striking
down through, resolved into some most marvellous colour-schemes in the
path of its rays. A delicious sense of coolness, after the fierce heat
outside, saluted us as we entered a vast hall, whose roof rose to a
minimum height of forty feet, but in places could not be seen at all.
A sort of diffused light, weak, but sufficient to reveal the general
contour of the place, existed, let in, I supposed, through some unseen
crevices in the roof or walls. At first, of course, to our eyes fresh
from the fierce glare outside, the place seemed wrapped in impenetrable
gloom, and we dared not stir lest we should run into some hidden
danger. Before many minutes, however, the gloom lightened as our pupils
enlarged, so that, although the light was faint, we could find our way
about with ease. We spoke in low tones, for the echoes were so numerous
and resonant that even a whisper gave back from those massy walls in a
series of recurring hisses, as if a colony of snakes had been disturbed.

We paddled on into the interior of this vast cave, finding everywhere
the walls rising sheer from the silent, dark waters, not a ledge or a
crevice where one might gain foothold. Indeed, in some places there was
a considerable overhang from above, as if a great dome whose top was
invisible sprang from some level below the water. We pushed ahead until
the tiny semicircle of light through which we had entered was only
faintly visible; and then, finding there was nothing to be seen except
what we were already witnessing, unless we cared to go on into the thick
darkness, which extended apparently into the bowels of the mountain, we
turned and started to go back. Do what we would, we could not venture to
break the solemn hush that surrounded us as if we were shut within the
dome of some vast cathedral in the twilight, So we paddled noiselessly
along for the exit, till suddenly an awful, inexplicable roar set all
our hearts thumping fit to break our bosoms. Really, the sensation was
most painful, especially as we had not the faintest idea whence the
noise came or what had produced it. Again it filled that immense cave
with its thunderous reverberations; but this time all the sting
was taken out of it, as we caught sight of its author. A goodly
bull-humpback had found his way in after us, and the sound of his spout,
exaggerated a thousand times in the confinement of that mighty cavern,
had frightened us all so that we nearly lost our breath. So far, so
good; but, unlike the old nigger, though we were "doin' blame well," we
did not "let blame well alone." The next spout that intruder gave,
he was right alongside of us. This was too much for the semi-savage
instincts of my gallant harpooner, and before I had time to shout a
caution he had plunged his weapon deep into old Blowhard's broad back.

I should like to describe what followed, but, in the first place, I
hardly know; and, in the next, even had I been cool and collected, my
recollections would sound like the ravings of a fevered dream. For of
all the hideous uproars conceivable, that was, I should think, about the
worst. The big mammal seemed to have gone frantic with the pain of his
wound, the surprise of the attack, and the hampering confinement in
which he found himself. His tremendous struggles caused such a commotion
that our position could only be compared to that of men shooting Niagara
in a cylinder at night. How we kept afloat, I do not know. Some one
had the gumption to cut the line, so that by the radiation of the
disturbance we presently found ourselves close to the wall, and trying
to hold the boat in to it with our finger-tips. Would he never be quiet?
we thought, as the thrashing, banging, and splashing still went on with
unfailing vigour. At last, in, I suppose, one supreme effort to escape,
he leaped clear of the water like a salmon. There was a perceptible
hush, during which we shrank together like unfledged chickens on a
frosty night; then, in a never-to-be-forgotten crash that ought to
have brought down the massy roof, that mountainous carcass fell. The
consequent violent upheaval of the water should have smashed the boat
against the rocky walls, but that final catastrophe was mercifully
spared us. I suppose the rebound was sufficient to keep us a safe
distance off.

A perfect silence succeeded, during which we sat speechless, awaiting
a resumption of the clamour. At last Abner broke the heavy silence by
saying, "I doan' see the do'way any mo' at all, sir." He was right. The
tide had risen, and that half-moon of light had disappeared, so that we
were now prisoners for many hours, it not being at all probable that we
should be able to find our way out during the night ebb. Well, we
were not exactly children, to be afraid of the dark, although there is
considerable difference between the velvety darkness of a dungeon and
the clear, fresh night of the open air. Still, as long as that beggar of
a whale would only keep quiet or leave the premises, we should be fairly
comfortable. We waited and waited until an hour had passed, and then
came to the conclusion that our friend was either dead or gone out, as
he gave no sign of his presence.

That being settled, we anchored the boat, and lit pipes, preparatory to
passing as comfortable a night as might be under the circumstances, the
only thing troubling me being the anxiety of the skipper on our behalf.
Presently the blackness beneath was lit up by a wide band of phosphoric
light, shed in the wake of no ordinary-sized fish, probably an immense
shark. Another and another followed in rapid succession, until the
depths beneath were all ablaze with brilliant foot-wide ribands of green
glare, dazzling to the eye and bewildering to the brain. Occasionally,
a gentle splash or ripple alongside, or a smart tap on the bottom of
the boat, warned us how thick the concourse was that had gathered below.
Until that weariness which no terror is proof against set in, sleep was
impossible, nor could we keep our anxious gaze from that glowing inferno
beneath, where one would have thought all the population of Tartarus
were holding high revel. Mercifully, at last we sank into a fitful
slumber, though fully aware of the great danger of our position. One
upward rush of any of those ravening monsters, happening to strike the
frail shell of our boat, and a few fleeting seconds would have sufficed
for our obliteration as if we had never been.

But the terrible night passed away, and once more we saw the tender,
irridescent light stream into that abode of dread. As the day
strengthened, we were able to see what was going on below, and a grim
vision it presented. The water was literally alive with sharks of
enormous size, tearing with never ceasing energy at the huge carcass of
the whale lying on the bottom, who had met his fate in a singular but
not unheard-of way. At that last titanic effort of his he had rushed
downward with such terrific force that, striking his head on the bottom,
he had broken his neck. I felt very grieved that we had lost the chance
of securing him; but it was perfectly certain that before we could get
help to raise him, all that would be left of his skeleton would be quite
valueless to us. So with such patience as we could command we waited
near the entrance until the receding ebb made it possible for us to
emerge once more into the blessed light of day. I was horrified at the
haggard, careworn appearance of my crew, who had all, excepting the two
Kanakas, aged perceptibly during that night of torment. But we lost
no time in getting back to the ship, where I fully expected a severe
wigging for the scrape my luckless curiosity had led me into. The
captain, however, was very kind, expressing his pleasure at seeing us
all safe back again, although he warned me solemnly against similar
investigations in future. A hearty meal and a good rest did wonders in
removing the severe effects of our adventure, so that by next morning we
were all fit and ready for the days work again.

It certainly seemed as if I was in for a regular series of troubles.
After cruising till nearly two p.m., we fell in with the mate's boat,
and were sailing quietly along side by side, when we suddenly rounded a
point and ran almost on top of a bull-humpback that was basking in the
beautiful sunshine. The mate's harpooner, a wonderfully smart fellow,
was not so startled as to lose his chance, getting an iron well home
before the animal realized what had befallen him. We had a lovely fight,
lasting over an hour, in which all the marvellous agility with which
this whale is gifted was exerted to the full in order to make his
escape. But with the bottom not twenty fathoms away, we were sure of
him. With all his supple smartness, he had none of the dogged savagery
of the cachalot about him, nor did we feel any occasion to beware of
his rushes, rather courting them, so as to finish the game as quickly as
possible.

He was no sooner dead than we hurried to secure him, and had actually
succeeded in passing the tow-line through his lips, when, in the
trifling interval that passed while we were taking the line aft to begin
towing, he started to sink. Of course it was, "let go all!" If you
can only get the slightest way on a whale of this kind, you are almost
certain to be able to keep him afloat, but once he begins to sink you
cannot stop him. Down he went, till full twenty fathoms beneath us he
lay comfortably on the reef, while we looked ruefully at one another.
We had no gear with us fit to raise him, and we were ten miles from the
ship; evening was at hand, so our prospects of doing anything that night
were faint.

However, the mate decided to start off for home at once, leaving us
there, but promising to send back a boat as speedily as possible with
provisions and gear for the morning. There was a stiff breeze blowing,
and he was soon out of sight; but we were very uncomfortable. The boat,
of course, rode like a duck, but we were fully exposed to the open sea;
and the mighty swell of the Pacific, rolling in over those comparatively
shallow grounds, sometimes looked dangerously like breaking. Still, it
was better than the cave, and there was a good prospect of supper. Long
before we expected her, back came the boat, bringing bountiful provision
of yams, cold pork and fruit--a regular banquet to men who were fasting
since daylight. A square meal, a comforting pipe, and the night's vigil,
which had looked so formidable, no longer troubled us, although, to tell
the truth, we were heartily glad when the dawn began to tint the east
with pale emerald and gold. We set to work at once, getting the huge
carcass to the surface without as much labour as I had anticipated. Of
course all hands came to the rescue.

But, alas for the fruit of our labours! Those hungry monsters had
collected in thousands, and, to judge from what we were able to see of
the body, they had reduced its value alarmingly. However, we commenced
towing, and were getting along fairly well, when a long spur of reef to
leeward of us, over which the sea was breaking frightfully, seemed to be
stretching farther out to intercept us before we could get into smooth
water. The fact soon faced us that we were in the remorseless grip of a
current that set right over that reef, and against its steady stream all
our efforts were the merest triviality. Still, we hung on, struggling
desperately to keep what we had earned, until so close to the roaring,
foaming line of broken water, that one wave breaking farther out than
the rest very nearly swamped us all. One blow of an axe, one twirl of
the steer-oars, and with all the force we could muster we were pulling
away from the very jaws of death, leaving our whale to the hungry
crowds, who would make short work of him. Downcast indeed, at our bad
luck, we returned on board, disappointing the skipper very much with our
report. Like the true gentleman he was, though, recognizing that we had
done our best, he did not add to the trouble by cursing us all for a set
of useless trash, as his predecessor would have done; on the contrary, a
few minutes after the receipt of the bad news his face was as bright as
ever, his laugh as hearty as if there was no such thing as a misfortune
in the world.

And now I must come to what has been on my mind so long--a tragedy that,
in spite of all that had gone before, and of what came after, is the
most indelible of all the memories which cling round me of that eventful
time. Abner Cushing, the Vermonter had declared at different times that
he should never see his native Green Mountain again. Since the change
in our commander, however, he had been another man--always silent and
reserved, but brighter, happier, and with a manner so improved as to
make it hard to recognize him for the same awkward, ungainly slab of a
fellow that had bungled everything he put his hand to. Taking stock of
him quietly during our day-long leisurely cruises in the boat, I often
wondered whether his mind still kept its gloomy forebodings, and brooded
over his tragical life-history. I never dared to speak to him on the
subject, for fear of arousing what I hoped was growing too faint for
remembrance. But at times I saw him in the moonlit evenings sitting on
the rail alone, steadfastly gazing down into the star-besprent waters
beneath him, as if coveting their unruffled peace.

Two-thirds of our stay in the islands had passed away, when, for a
wonder, the captain took it into his head to go up to the chief village
one morning. So he retained me on board, while the other three boats
left for the day's cruise as usual. One of the mate's crew was sick, and
to replace him he took Abner out of my boat. Away they went; and shortly
after breakfast-time I lowered, received the captain on board, and
we started for the capital. Upon our arrival there we interviewed the
chief, a stout, pleasant-looking man of about fifty, who was evidently
held in great respect by the natives, and had a chat with the white
Wesleyan missionary in charge of the station. About two p.m., after
the captain's business was over, we were returning under sail, when we
suddenly caught sight of two of our boats heading in towards one of the
islands. We helped her with the paddles to get up to them, seeing as we
neared them the two long fins of a whale close ahead of one of them.
As we gazed breathlessly at the exciting scene, we saw the boat rush in
between the two flippers, the harpooner at the same time darting an iron
straight down. There was a whirl in the waters, and quick as thought
the vast flukes of the whale rose in the air, recurving with a sidelong
sweep as of some gigantic scythe. The blow shore off the bow of the
attacking boat as if it had been an egg-shell.

At the same moment the mate stooped, picked up the tow-line from its
turn round the logger-head, and threw it forward from him. He must have
unconsciously given a twist to his hand, for the line fell in a kink
round Abner's neck just as the whale went down with a rush. Struggling,
clutching at the fatal noose, the hapless man went flying out through
the incoming sea, and in one second was lost to sight for ever. Too
late, the harpooner cut the line which attached the wreck to the
retreating animal, leaving the boat free, but gunwale under. We
instantly hauled alongside of the wreck and transferred her crew, all
dazed and horror-stricken at the awful death of their late comrade.

I saw the tears trickle down the rugged, mahogany-coloured face of the
captain, and honoured him for it, but there was little time to waste in
vain regrets. It was necessary to save the boat, if possible, as we were
getting short of boat-repairing material; certainly we should not have
been able to build a new one. So, drawing the two sound boats together,
one on either side of the wreck, we placed the heavy steering oars
across them from side to side. We then lifted the battered fore part
upon the first oar, and with a big effort actually succeeded in lifting
the whole of the boat out of water upon this primitive pontoon. Then,
taking the jib, we "frapped" it round the opening where the bows had
been, lashing it securely in that position. Several hands were told off
to jump into her stern on the word, and all being ready we launched her
again. The weight of the chaps in her stern-sheets cocked her bows
right out of water, and in that position we towed her back to the ship,
arriving safely before dusk.

That evening we held a burial service, at which hundreds of natives
attended with a solemnity of demeanour and expressions of sorrow that
would not have been out of place at the most elaborate funeral in
England or America. It was a memorable scene. The big cressets were
lighted, shedding their wild glare over the dark sea, and outlining
the spars against the moonless sky with startling effect. When we
had finished the beautiful service, the natives, as if swayed by an
irresistible impulse, broke into the splendid tune St. Ann's; and
I afterwards learned that the words they sang were Dr. Watts'
unsurpassable rendering of Moses' pean of praise, "O God, our help in
ages past." No elaborate ceremonial in towering cathedral could begin to
compare with the massive simplicity of poor Abner's funeral honours, the
stately hills for many miles reiterating the sweet sounds, and carrying
them to the furthest confines of the group.

Next day was Sunday, and, in pursuance of a promise given some time
before, I went ashore to my "flem's" to dinner, he being confined to the
house with a hurt leg. It was not by any means a festive gathering, for
he was more than commonly taciturn; his daughter Irene, a buxom lassie
of fourteen, who waited on us, appeared to be dumb; and his wife was "in
the straw." These trifling drawbacks, however, in nowise detracted from
the hospitality offered. The dining-room was a large apartment furnished
with leaves, the uprights of cocoa-nut tree, the walls and roof of
pandanus leaf. Beneath the heaps of leaves, fresh and sweet-scented, was
the earth. The inner apartment, or chamber of state, had a flooring of
highly-polished planks, and contained, I presume, the household gods;
but as it was in possession of my host's secluded spouse, I did not
enter.

A couch upon a pile of leaves was hastily arranged, upon which I was
bidden to seat myself, while a freshly cut cocoa-nut of enormous size
was handed to me, the soft top sliced off so that I might drink its
deliciously cool contents. These nuts must grow elsewhere, but I have
never before or since seen any so large. When green--that is, before
the meat has hardened into indigestible matter--they contain from three
pints to two quarts of liquid, at once nourishing, refreshing, and
palatable. The natives appeared to drink nothing else, and I never saw a
drop of fresh water ashore during our stay.

Taking a huge knife from some hiding-place, Irene handed it to her
father, who at once commenced to dig in the ground by his side, while
I looked on wondering and amused. Presently he fished up a bundle of
leaves bound with a vine-tendril, which he laid carefully aside. More
digging brought to light a fine yam about three pounds in weight, which,
after carefully wiping the knife on some leaves, he proceeded to peel.
It was immediately evident that the yam was perfectly cooked, for it
steamed as he removed the skin, revealing the inside as white as milk.
Some large, round leaves were laid in front of me, and the yam placed
upon them. Then mine host turned his attention to the bundle first
unearthed, which concealed a chicken, so perfectly done that, although
the bones drew out of the meat as if it had been jelly, it was full of
juice and flavour; and except for a slight foreign twang, referrible,
doubtless, to the leaves in which it had been enwrapped, I do not think
it could have been possible to cook anything in a better way, or one
more calculated to retain all the natural juices of the meat. The fowl
was laid beside the yam, another nut broached; then, handing me the big
knife, my "flem" bade me welcome, informing me that I saw my dinner.
As nothing would induce him to join me, the idea being contrary to
his notions of respect due to a guest, I was fain to fall to, and an
excellent meal I made. For dessert, a basketful of such oranges freshly
plucked as cannot be tasted under any other conditions, and crimson
bananas, which upon being peeled, looked like curved truncheons of
golden jelly, after tasting which I refused to touch anything else.

A corn-cob cigarette closed the banquet, After expressing my thanks,
I noticed that the pain of his leg was giving my friend considerable
uneasiness, which he was stolidly enduring upon my account rather than
appear discourteously anxious to get rid of me. So, with the excuse
that I must needs be going, having another appointment, I left the good
fellow and strolled around to the chapel, where I sat enjoying the sight
of those simple-minded Kanakas at their devotions till it was time to
return on board. Before closing this chapter, I would like, for the
benefit of such of my readers who have not heard yet of Kanaka cookery,
to say that it is simplicity itself. A hole is scooped in the earth, in
which a fire is made (of wood), and kept burning until a fair-sized
heap of glowing charcoal remains. Pebbles are then thrown in until the
charcoal is covered. Whatever is to be cooked is enveloped in leaves,
placed upon the pebbles, and more leaves heaped upon it. The earth is
then thrown back into the cavity, and well stamped down. A long time is,
of course, needed for the viands to get cooked through; but so subtle is
the mode that overdoing anything is almost an impossibility. A couple of
days may pass from the time of "putting down" the joint, yet when it
is dug up it will be smoking hot, retaining all its juices, tender as
jelly, but, withal, as full of flavour as it is possible for cooked meat
to be. No matter how large the joint is, or how tough the meat, this
gentle suasion will render it succulent and tasty; and no form of
civilized cookery can in the least compare with it.





