CHAPTER XXIII. AT FUTUNA, RECRUITING

Sure enough, in accordance with our expectations, break of day revealed
the twin masses of Futuna ahead, some ten or fifteen miles away. With
the fine, steady breeze blowing, by breakfast-time we were off the
entrance to a pretty bight, where sail was shortened and the ship
hove-to. Captain Count did not intend to anchor, for reasons of his
own, he being assured that there was no need to do so. Nor was there.
Although the distance from the beach was considerable, we could see
numbers of canoes putting off, and soon they began to arrive. Now, some
of the South Sea Islands are famous for the elegance and seaworthiness
of their canoes; nearly all of them have a distinctly definite style
of canoe-building; but here at Futuna was a bewildering collection of
almost every type of canoe in the wide world. Dugouts, with outriggers
on one side, on both sides, with none at all; canoes built like boats,
like prams, like irregular egg-boxes, many looking like the first boyish
attempt to knock something together that would float; and--not to
unduly prolong the list by attempted classification of these unclassed
craft--CORACLES. Yes; in that lonely Pacific island, among that motley
crowd of floating nondescripts, were specimens of the ancient coracle
of our own islands, constructed in exactly the same way; that is, of
wicker-work, covered with some waterproof substance, whether skin or
tarpaulin. But the ingenious Kanaka, not content with his coracles,
had gone one better, and copied them in dugouts of solid timber. The
resultant vessel was a sort of cross between a butcher's tray and a
wash-basin--

"A thing beyond Conception: such a wretched wherry, Perhaps ne'er
ventured on a pond, Or crossed a ferry."

The proud possessors of the coracles, both wicker and wood, must have
been poor indeed, for they did not even own a paddle, propelling their
basins through the water with their hands. It may be imagined what a
pace they put on! At a little distance they were very puzzling, looking
more like a water-beetle grown fat and lazy than aught else.

And so, in everything floatable, the whole male population of that part
of the coast came to visit us. We were speedily the centre of a great
crowd of canoes, some of which were continually capsizing and spilling
their occupants, who took no more notice of such incidents than one
would of a sneeze. Underneath a canoe, or on top, made but little
difference to these amphibious creatures. They brought nothing with
them to trade; in fact, few of their vessels were capable of carrying
anything that could not swim and take care of itself. As they came
on board, each crossed himself more or less devoutly, revealing the
teaching of a Roman Catholic mission; and as they called to one another,
it was not hard to recognize, even in their native garb, such names as
Erreneo (Irenaeus), Al'seo (Aloysius), and other favourite cognomens of
saints.

A laughing chattering good-tempered crowd they were--just like a bevy of
children breaking up, and apparently destitute of the slightest sense
of responsibility. They spoke a totally different dialect, or maybe
language, to that of Vau Vau, for it was only an isolated word here and
there that Samuela could make out. But presently, going forward through
the crowd that thronged every part of the deck, I saw a man leaning
nonchalantly against the rail by the fore-rigging, who struck me at
once as being an American negro. The most casual observer would not
have mistaken him for a Kanaka of those latitudes, though he might
have passed as a Papuan. He was dressed in all the dignity of a woollen
shirt, with a piece of fine "tapa" for a waistcloth, feet and legs bare.
Around his neck was a necklace composed of a number of strings of blue
and white beads plaited up neatly, and carrying as a pendant a George
shilling. Going up to him, I looked at the coin, and said, "Belitani
money?" "Oh yes," he said, "that's a shilling of old Georgey Fourf,"
in perfectly good English, but with an accent which quite confirmed my
first idea. I at once invited him aft to see the skipper, who was very
anxious to find an interpreter among the noisy crowd, besides being
somewhat uneasy at having so large a number on board.

To the captain's interrogations he replied that he was "Tui
Tongoa"--that is, King of Tonga, an island a little distance away--but
that he was at present under a cloud, owing to the success of a usurper,
whom he would reckon with by-and-by.

In the mean time he would have no objection to engaging himself with
us as a harpooner, and would get us as many men as we wanted, selecting
from among the crowd on board, fellows that would, he knew, be useful to
us.

A bargain was soon struck, and Tui entered upon his self-imposed task.
It was immediately evident that he had a bigger contract on hand than he
had imagined. The natives, who had previously held somewhat aloof from
him in a kind of deferential respect, no sooner got wind of the fact
that we needed some of them than they were seized with a perfect frenzy
of excitement. There were, I should think, at least a hundred and fifty
of them on board at the time. Of this crowd, every member wanted to be
selected, pushing his candidature with voice and gesture as vigorously
as he knew how. The din was frightful. Tui, centre of the frantic mob,
strove vainly to make himself heard, to reduce the chaos to some sort
of order, but for a great while it was a hopeless attempt. At last,
extricating himself from his importunate friends, he gained the
captain's side. Panting, almost breathless, with sweat streaming off
him, he gasped out, "Oh, cap'n, dese yer darn niggers all gone mad!
Dribe 'em oberbord; clar 'em out, 'n I'll stan' by to grab some o' der
likely ones as de res' scatter." "But what about the wages?" said the
skipper. "I'm not goin' ter give 'em whatever they like to ask." "You
leab it ter me, cap'n. I bet you'll be satisfy. Anyhow, dishyers no
time fer tradin'; de blame niggers all off dere coco-nuts. Anybody fink
you'se payin' off 'stead o' shippin', an' deyse all afraid dey won't get
'nough."

Unpleasant as the job was to all of us, it had to be done; so we armed
ourselves with ropes'-ends, which we flourished threateningly, avoiding
where possible any actual blows. Many sprang overboard at once, finding
their way ashore or to their canoes as best they could. The majority,
however, had to swim, for we now noticed that, either in haste or from
carelessness, they had in most cases omitted to fasten their canoes
securely when coming alongside, so that many of them were now far out
to sea. The distance to shore being under three miles, that mattered
little, as far as their personal safety was concerned.

This summary treatment was eminently successful, quiet being rapidly
restored, so that Tui was able to select a dozen men, who he declared
were the best in the islands for our purpose. Although it seems somewhat
premature to say so, the general conduct of the successful candidates
was so good as to justify Tui fully in his eulogium. Perhaps his
presence had something to do with it?

We now had all that we came for, so that we were anxious to be off. But
it was a job to get rid of the visitors still remaining on board.
They stowed themselves away in all manner of corners, in some cases
ludicrously inadequate as hiding-places, and it was not until we were
nearly five miles from the land that the last of them plunged into
the sea and struck out for home. It was very queer. Ignorant of our
destination, of what would be required of them; leaving a land of ease
and plenty for a certainty of short commons and hard work, without
preparation or farewells, I do not think I ever heard of such a strange
thing before. Had their home been famine or plague-stricken, they could
not have evinced greater eagerness to leave it, or to face the great
unknown.

As we drew farther off the island the wind freshened, until we had a
good, whole-sail breeze blustering behind us, the old ship making, with
her usual generous fuss, a tremendous rate of seven knots an hour. Our
course was shaped for the southward, towards the Bay of Islands, New
Zealand. In that favourite haunt of the South-seaman we were to wood and
water, find letters from home (those who had one), and prepare for the
stormy south.

Obviously the first thing to be done for our new shipmates was to clothe
them. When they arrived on board, all, with the single exception of Tui,
were furnished only with a "maro" of "tapa," scanty in its proportions,
but still enough to wrap round their loins. But when they were accepted
for the vacant positions on board, they cast off even the slight apology
for clothing which they had worn, flinging the poor rags to their
retreating and rejected compatriots. Thus they were strutting about, in
native majesty unclad, which, of course, could not be endured among even
so unconventional a crowd as we were. So they were mustered aft, and,
to their extravagant delight, a complete rig-out was handed to each of
them, accompanied by graphic instructions how to dress themselves. Very
queer they looked when dressed, but queerer still not long afterwards,
when some of them, galled by the unaccustomed restraint of the trousers,
were seen prowling about with shirts tied round their waists by the
sleeves, and pants twisted turban-wise about their heads. Tui was
called, and requested to inform them that they must dress properly,
after the fashion of the white man, for that any impromptu improvements
upon our method of clothes-wearing could not be permitted. As they were
gentle, tractable fellows, they readily obeyed, and, though they must
have suffered considerably, there were no further grounds for complaint
on the score of dress.

It has been already noticed that they were Roman Catholics--all except
Tui, who from his superior mental elevation looked down upon their
beliefs with calm contempt, although really a greater heathen than any
of them had ever been. It was quite pathetic to see how earnestly they
endeavoured to maintain the form of worship to which they had been
accustomed, though how they managed without their priest, I could not
find out. Every evening they had prayers together, accompanied by many
crossings and genuflexions, and wound up by the singing of a hymn in
such queer Latin that it was almost unrecognizable. After much wondering
I did manage to make out "O Salutaris Hostia!" and "Tantum Ergo," but
not until their queer pronunciation of consonants had become familiar.
Some of the hymns were in their own tongue, only one of which I call now
remember. Phonetically, it ran thus--

"Mah-lee-ah, Kollyeea leekee; Obselloh mo mallamah. Alofah, keea ma toh;
Fah na oh, Mah lah ee ah"--

which I understood to be a native rendering of "O Stella Maris!" It was
sung to the well-known "Processional" in good time, and on that account,
I suppose, fixed itself in my memory.

Whenever any of them were ordered aloft, they never failed to cross
themselves before taking to the rigging, as if impressed with a sense
of their chance of not returning again in safety. To me was given the
congenial task of teaching them the duties required, and I am bound to
admit that they were willing, biddable, and cheerful learners. Another
amiable trait in their characters was especially noticeable: they always
held everything in common. No matter how small the portion received by
any one, it was scrupulously shared with the others who lacked, and this
subdivision was often carried to ludicrous lengths.

As there was so reason to hurry south, we, took a short cruise on the
Vasquez ground, more, I think, for the purpose of training our recruits
than anything else. As far as the results to our profit were concerned,
we might almost as well have gone straight on, for we only took one
small cow-cachalot. But the time spent thus cruising was by no means
wasted. Before we left finally for New Zealand, every one of those
Kanakas was as much at home in the whale-boats as he would have been in
a canoe. Of course they were greatly helped by their entire familiarity
with the water, which took from them all that dread of being drowned
which hampers the white "greenie" so sorely, besides which, the absolute
confidence they had in our prowess amongst the whales freed them from
any fear on that head.

Tui proved himself to be a smart harpooner, and was chosen for the
captain's boat. During our conversations, I was secretly amused to hear
him allude to himself as Sam, thinking how little it accorded with his
SOI-DISANT Kanaka origin. He often regaled me with accounts of his royal
struggles to maintain his rule, all of which narrations I received with
a goodly amount of reserve, though confirmed in some particulars by
the Kanakas, when I became able to converse with them. But I was hardly
prepared to find, as I did many years after, upon looking up some detail
in Findlay's "South Pacific Directory," this worthy alluded to as "the
celebrated Sam," in a brief account of Futuna. There he was said to be
king of the twin isles; so I suppose he found means to oust his rival,
and resume his sovereignty; though, how an American negro, as Sam
undoubtedly was, ever managed to gain such a position, remains to me
an unfathomable mystery. Certainly he did not reveal any such masterful
attributes as one would have expected in him, while he served as
harpooner on board the CACHALOT.

Gradually we crept south, until one morning we sighted the towering
mass of Sunday Island, the principal member of the small Kermadec
group, which lies nearly on the prime meridian of one hundred and eighty
degrees, and but a short distance north of the extremity of New Zealand.
We had long ago finished the last of our fresh provisions, fish had
been very scarce, so the captain seized the opportunity to give us a
run ashore, and at the same time instructed us to do such foraging as we
could. It was rumoured that there were many wild pigs to be found,
and certainly abundance of goats; but if both these sources of supply
failed, we could fall back on fish, of which we were almost sure to get
a good haul.

The island is a stupendous mass of rock, rising sheer from the waves, in
some places to a height of fifteen hundred feet. These towering cliffs
are clothed with verdure, large trees clinging to their precipitous
sides in a marvellous way. Except at one small bight, known as Denham
Bay, the place is inaccessible, not only from the steepness of its
cliffs, but because, owing to its position, the gigantic swell of the
South Pacific assails those immense bastions with a force and volume
that would destroy instantly any vessel that unfortunately ventured
too near. Denham Bay, however, is in some measure protected by reefs
of scattered boulders, which break the greatest volume of the oncoming
rollers. Within those protecting barriers, with certain winds, it is
possible to effect a landing with caution; but even then no tyro in
boat-handling should venture to do so, as the experiment would almost
certainly be fatal to boat and crew.

We hove-to off the little bay, the waters of which looked placid enough
for a pleasure-party, lowered two boats well furnished with fishing gear
and such other equipment as we thought would be needed, and pulled away
for the landing-place. As we drew near the beach, we found that, in
spite of the hindrance to the ocean swell afforded by the reefs, it
broke upon the beach in rollers of immense size. In order to avoid any
mishap, then, we turned the boats' heads to seaward, and gently backed
towards the beach, until a larger breaker than usual came thundering in.
As it rushed towards us, we pulled lustily to meet it, the lovely craft
rising to its foaming crest like sea-birds. Then, as soon as we were on
its outer slope, we reversed the stroke again, coming in on its mighty
shoulders at racing speed. The instant our keels touched the beach we
all leapt out, and exerting every ounce of strength we possessed, ran
the boats up high and dry before the next roller had time to do
more than hiss harmlessly around our feet. It was a task of uncommon
difficulty, for the shore was wholly composed of loose lava and
pumice-stone grit, into which we sank ankle-deep at every step, besides
being exceedingly steep.

We managed, however, to escape without any mishap, for the drenching
was a boon to our burnt-up skins. Off we started along the level land,
which, as far as I could judge, extended inland for perhaps a mile and
a half by about two miles wide. From this flat shelf the cliffs
rose perpendicularly, as they did from the sea. Up their sides were
innumerable goat-tracks, upon some of which we could descry a few
of those agile creatures climbing almost like flies. The plateau was
thickly wooded, many of the trees having been fruit-bearing once, but
now, much to our disappointment, barren from neglect.

A ruined house, surrounded by other vestiges of what had once been a
homestead, stood in the middle of this piece of land. Feeling curious to
know what the history of this isolated settlement might be, I asked
the mate if he knew anything of it. He told me that an American named
Halstead, with his family, lived here for years, visited only by an
occasional whaler, to whom they sold such produce as they might have and
be able to spare at the time. What their previous history had been, or
why they thus chose to cut themselves off from the world, he did not
know; but they seemed contented enough with their tiny kingdom, nor had
any wish to leave it. But it came to pass that one night they felt
the sure and firm-set earth trembling convulsively beneath their feet.
Rushing out of their house, they saw the heavens bespread with an awful
pall of smoke, the under-side of which was glowing with the reflected
fires of some vast furnace. Their terror was increased by a smart shower
of falling ashes and the reverberations of subterranean thunders. At
first they thought of flight in their boat, not reckoning the wide
stretch of sea which rolled between them and the nearest land, but
the height and frequency of the breakers then prevailing made that
impossible.

Their situation was pitiable in the extreme. During the years of peace
and serenity they had spent here, no thought of the insecurity of their
tenure had troubled them. Though they had but been dwellers on the
threshold of the mountain, as it were, and any extension of their
territory impossible by reason of the insurmountable barrier around
them, they had led an untroubled life, all unknowing of the fearful
forces beneath their feet. But now they found the foundations of the
rocks beneath breaking up; that withering, incessant shower of ashes
and scoriae destroyed all their crops; the mild and delicate air changed
into a heavy, sulphurous miasma; while overhead the beneficent face of
the bright-blue sky had become a horrible canopy of deadly black, about
which played lurid coruscations of infernal fires.

What they endured throughout those days and nights of woe, could never
be told. They fled from the home they had reared with such abundance of
loving labour, taking refuge in a cave; for not even the knowledge that
the mountain itself seemed to be in the throes of dissolution could
entirely destroy their trust in those apparently eternal fastnesses.
Here their eldest son died, worried to death by incessant terror. At
last a passing whaler, remembering them and seeing the condition of
things, had the humanity and courage to stand in near enough to see
their agonized signals of distress. All of them, except the son buried
but a day or two before, were safely received and carried away, leaving
the terrible mountain to its solitude.

As I listened, I almost involuntarily cast my eyes upwards; nor was I at
all surprised to see far overhead a solitary patch of smoky cloud, which
I believe to have been a sure indication that the volcano was still
liable to commence operations at any time.

So far, we had not happened upon any pigs, or goats either, although we
saw many indications of the latter odoriferous animal. There were few
sea-birds to be seen, but in and out among the dense undergrowth ran
many short-legged brown birds, something like a partridge--the same, I
believe, as we afterwards became familiar with in Stewart's Island by
the name of "Maori hens." They were so tame and inquisitive that we had
no difficulty in securing a few by the simple process of knocking
them over with sticks. From the main branch of a large tree hung a big
honey-comb, out of which the honey was draining upon the earth. Around
it buzzed a busy concourse of bees, who appeared to us so formidable
that we decided to leave them to the enjoyment of their sweet store, in
case we should invite an attack.

So far, our rambling had revealed nothing of any service to us; but just
then, struck by the appearance of a plant which was growing profusely
in a glade we were passing over, I made bold to taste one of the leaves.
What the botanical name of the vegetable is, I do not know; but, under
the designation of "Maori cabbage," it is well known in New Zealand. It
looks like a lettuce, running to seed; but it tastes exactly like young
turnip-tops, and is a splendid anti-scorbutic. What its discovery
meant to us, I can hardly convey to any one who does not know what an
insatiable craving for potatoes and green vegetables possesses seamen
when they have for long been deprived of these humble but necessary
articles of food. Under the circumstances, no "find" could have given us
greater pleasure--that is, in the food line--than this did.

Taking it all round, however, the place as a foraging ground was not a
success. We chased a goat of very large size, and beard voluminous as
a Rabbi's, into a cave, which may have been the one the Halsteads took
shelter in, for we saw no other. One of the Kanakas volunteered to go in
after him with a line, and did so. The resultant encounter was the
best bit of fun we had had for many a day. After a period of darksome
scuffling within, the entangled pair emerged, fiercely wrestling, Billy
being to all appearance much the fresher of the two. Fair play seemed to
demand that we should let them fight it out; but, sad to say, the
other Kanakas could not see things in that light, and Billy was
soon despatched. Rather needless killing, too; for no one, except at
starvation-point, could have eaten the poor remains of leathery flesh
that still decorated that weather-beaten frame.

But this sort of thing was tiring and unprofitable. The interest of
the place soon fizzled out, when it was found there was so little worth
taking away; so, as the day was getting on, it was decided to launch off
and start fishing. In a few minutes we were afloat again, and anchored,
in about four fathoms, in as favourable a spot for our sport as ever
I saw. Fish swarmed about us of many sorts, but principally of the
"kauwhai," a kind of mullet very plentiful about Auckland, and averaging
five or six pounds. Much to my annoyance, we had not been able to get
any bait, except a bit of raw salt-pork, which hardly any fish but the
shark tribe will look at. Had I known or thought of it, a bit of goat
would have been far more attractive.

However, as there was no help for it, we baited up and started. "Nary
nibble ermong 'em!" growled Sam, as we sat impatiently waiting for a
bite. When we hauled up to see what was wrong, fish followed the hook up
in hundreds, letting us know plainly as possible that they only wanted
something tasty. It was outrageous, exasperating beyond measure! At last
Samuela grew so tired of it that he seized his harpoon, and hurled it
into the middle of a company of kauwhai that were calmly nosing around
the bows. By the merest chance he managed to impale one of them upon the
broad point. It was hardly in the boat before I had seized it, scaled
it, and cut it into neat little blocks. All hands rebaited with it, and
flung out again. The change was astounding. Up they came, two at a
time, dozens and dozens of them kauwhai, cavalle, yellow-tail,
schnapper--lovely fish of delicious flavour and goodly size. Then one of
us got a fish which made him yell, "Shark! shark!" with all his might.
He had a small line of American cotton, staunch as copper wire,
but dreadfully cutting to the hands. When he took a turn round the
logger-head, the friction of the running line cut right into the white
oak, but the wonderful cord and hook still held their own. At last the
monster yielded, coming in at first inch by inch, then more rapidly,
till raised in triumph above the gunwhale--a yellow-tail six feet long.
I have caught this splendid fish (ELAGATIS BIPINNULATIS) many times
before and since then, but never did I see such a grand specimen as this
one--no, not by thirty or forty pounds. Then I got a giant cavalle. His
broad, shield-like body blazed hither and thither as I struggled to ship
him, but it was long ere he gave in to superior strength and excellence
of line and hook.

Meanwhile, the others had been steadily increasing our cargo, until,
feeling that we had quite as much fish as would suffice us, besides
being really a good load, I suggested a move towards the ship. We were
laying within about half a mile of the shore, where the extremity of the
level land reached the cliffs. Up one of the well-worn tracks a fine,
fat goat was slowly creeping, stopping every now and then to browse upon
the short herbage that clung to the crevices of the rock. Without saying
a word, Polly the Kanaka slipped over the side, and struck out with
swift overhead strokes for the foot of the cliff. As soon as I saw what,
he was after, I shouted loudly for him to return, but he either could
not or would not hear me. The fellow's seal-like ability as a swimmer
was, of course, well known to me, but I must confess I trembled for
his life in such a weltering whirl of rock-torn sea as boiled among the
crags at the base of that precipice. He, however, evidently knew what
he was going to do, and, though taking risks which would have certainly
been fatal to an ordinary swimmer, was quite unafraid of the result.

We all watched him breathlessly as he apparently headed straight for
the biggest outlying rock--a square, black boulder about the size of an
ordinary railway car. He came up to it on the summit of a foaming
wave; but just as I looked for him to be dashed to pieces against its
adamantine sides, he threw his legs into the air and disappeared. A
stealthy, satisfied smile glowed upon Samuela's rugged visage, and, as
he caught my eye, he said jauntily, "Polly savee too much. Lookee him
come on top one time!" I looked, and sure enough there was the daring
villain crawling up among the kelp far out of reach of the hungry
rollers. It was a marvellous exhibition of coolness and skill.

Without waiting an instant, he began to stalk the goat, dodging amongst
the bushes with feet that clung to the steep sides of the cliff as well
as the animal's. Before he could reach her, she had winded him, and was
off up the track. He followed, without further attempt to hide himself;
but, despite his vigour and ability, would, I fancy, have stood a
microscopic chance of catching her had she not been heavy with kid. As
it was, he had all his work cut out for him. When he did catch her, she
made so fierce it struggle for life and liberty that, in the endeavour
to hold her, he missed his insecure foothold, and the pair came tumbling
over and over down the cliff in a miniature avalanche of stones and
dust. At the bottom they both lay quiet for a time; while I anxiously
waited, fearing the rash fool was seriously injured; but in a minute or
two he was on his feet again.

Lashing the goat to his body, and ignoring her struggles, he crawled
out as far among the rocks as he could; then, at the approach of a big
breaker, he dived to meet it, coming up outside its threatening top like
a life-buoy. I pulled in, as near as I could venture, to pick him
up, and in a few minutes had him safely on board again, but suffering
fearfully. In his roll down the cliff he had been without his trousers,
which would have been some protection to him. Consequently, his thighs
were deeply cut and torn in many places, while the brine entering so
many wounds, though a grand styptic, must have tortured him unspeakably.
At any rate, though he was a regular stoic to bear pain, he fainted
while I was "dressing him down" in the most vigorous language I could
command for his foolhardy trick. Then we all realized what he must
be going through, and felt that he was getting all the punishment he
deserved, and more. The goat, poor thing! seemed none the worse for her
rough handling.

The mate gave the signal to get back on board just as Polly revived, so
there were no inconvenient questions asked, and we returned alongside in
triumph, with such a cargo of fish as would have given us a good month's
pay all round could we have landed them at Billingsgate. Although
the mate had not succeeded as well as we, the catch of the two boats
aggregated half a ton, not a fish among the lot less than five pounds
weight, and one of a hundred and twenty--the yellow-tail aforesaid. As
soon as we reached the ship, the boats were run up, sails filled, and
away we lumbered again towards New Zealand.

As the great mass of that solitary mountain faded away in the gathering
shades of evening, it was impossible to help remembering the sufferings
of that afflicted family, confined to those trembling, sulphurous,
ash-bestrewn rocks, amid gloom by day, and unnatural glare by night, for
all that weary while. And while I admit that there is to some people a
charm in being alone with nature, it is altogether another thing when
your solitude becomes compulsory, your paradise a prison from which you
cannot break away. There are many such nooks scattered about the ocean,
where men have hidden themselves away from the busy world, and been
forgotten by it; but few of them, I fancy, offer such potentialities of
terror as Sunday Island.

We had hardly lost sight of the land, when Polly's capture gave birth
to a kid. This event was the most interesting thing that had happened
on board for a great while, and the funny little visitor would have
run great risk of being completely spoiled had he lived. But, to our
universal sorrow, the mother's milk failed--from want of green food, I
suppose--and we were obliged to kill the poor little chap to save him
from being starved to death. He made a savoury mess for some
whose appetite for flesh-meat was stronger than any sentimental
considerations.

To an ordinary trader, the distance between the Kermadecs and the Bay of
Islands, New Zealand, roughly represents a couple of days' sail; but to
us, who were apparently incapable of hurry under any circumstances, it
meant a good week's bludgeoning the protesting waves before the grim
outliers of the Three Kings came into view. Even then, although the
distance was a mere bagatelle, it was another two days before we arrived
off that magnificent harbour where reposes the oldest township in New
Zealand--Russell, where rest the mortal remains of the first really
Pakeha Maori, but which, for some unaccountable reason, is still left
undeveloped and neglected, visited only by the wandering whalers (in
ever-decreasing numbers) and an occasional trim, business-like, and
gentlemanly man-o'-war, that, like a Guardsman strolling the West End in
mufti, stalks the sea with never an item of her smart rig deviating by a
shade from its proper set or sheer.





