CHAPTER XVI. "BOWHEAD" FISHING

Day and night being now only distinguishable by the aid of the clock,
a constant look-out aloft was kept all through the twenty-four hours,
watch and watch, but whales were apparently very scarce. We did a good
deal of "pelagic" sealing; that is, catching seals swimming. But the
total number obtained was not great, for these creatures are only
gregarious when at their rocky haunts during the breeding season, or
among the ice just before that season begins. Our sealing, therefore,
was only a way of passing the time in the absence of nobler game, to be
abandoned at once with whales in sight.

It was on the ninth or tenth morning after our arrival on the grounds
that a bowhead was raised, And two boats sent after him. It was my
first sight of the great MYSTICETUS, and I must confess to being much
impressed by his gigantic bulk. From the difference in shape, he looked
much larger than the largest sperm whale we had yet seen, although we
had come across some of the very biggest specimens of cachalot.

The contrast between the two animals is most marked, so much so, in
fact, that one would hardly credit them with belonging to the same
order. Popular ideas of the whale are almost invariably taken from the
MYSTICETUS, so that the average individual generally defines a whale
as a big fish which spouts water out of the top of his head, and cannot
swallow a herring. Indeed, so lately as last year a popular M.P.,
writing to one of the religious papers, allowed himself to say that
"science will not hear of a whale with a gullet capable of admitting
anything larger than a man's fist"--a piece of crass ignorance, which is
also perpetrated in the appendix to a very widely-distributed edition of
the Authorized Version of the Bible. This opinion, strangely enough, is
almost universally held, although I trust that the admirable models now
being shown in our splendid Natural History Museum at South Kensington
will do much to remove it. Not so many people, perhaps, believe that a
whale is a fish, instead of a mammal, but few indeed are the individuals
who do not still think that a cetacean possesses a sort of natural
fountain on the top of its head, whence, for some recondite reason, it
ejects at regular intervals streams of water into the air.

But a whale can no more force water through its spiracle or blow-hole
than you or I through our nostrils. It inhales, when at the surface,
atmospheric air, and exhales breath like ours, which, coming warm into a
cooler medium, becomes visible, as does our breath on a frosty morning.

Now, the MYSTICETUS carries his nostrils on the summit of his head, or
crown, the orifice being closed by a beautifully arranged valve when the
animal is beneath the water. Consequently, upon coming to the surface
to breathe, he sends up a jet of visible breath into the air some ten
or twelve feet. The cachalot, on the other hand, has the orifice at the
point of his square snout, the internal channel running in a slightly
diagonal direction downwards, and back through the skull to the lungs.
So when he spouts, the breath is projected forward diagonally, and, from
some peculiarity which I do not pretend to explain, expends itself in a
short, bushy tuft of vapour, very distinct from the tall vertical spout
of the bowhead or right whale.

There was little or no wind when we sighted the individual I am now
speaking of, so we did not attempt to set sail, but pulled straight
for him "head and head." Strange as it may appear, the MYSTICETUS'
best point of view is right behind, or "in his wake," as we say; it is
therefore part of the code to approach him from right ahead, in which
direction he cannot see at all. Some time before we reached him he
became aware of our presence, showing by his uneasy actions that he had
his doubts about his personal security. But before he had made up his
mind what to do we were upon him, with our harpoons buried in his back.
The difference in his behaviour to what we had so long been accustomed
to was amazing. He did certainly give a lumbering splash or two with his
immense flukes, but no one could possibly have been endangered by them.
The water was so shallow that when he sounded it was but for a very few
minutes; there was no escape for him that way. As soon as he returned
to the surface he set off at his best gait, but that was so slow that
we easily hauled up close alongside of him, holding the boats in that
position without the slightest attempt to guard ourselves from reprisals
on his part, while the officers searched his vitals with the lances as
if they were probing a haystack.

Really, the whole affair was so tame that it was impossible to get up
any fighting enthusiasm over it; the poor, unwieldy creature died meekly
and quietly as an overgrown seal. In less than an hour from the time of
leaving the ship we were ready to bring our prize alongside.

Upon coming up to the whale, sail was shortened, and as soon as the
fluke-chain was passed we anchored. It was, I heard, our skipper's boast
that he could "skin a bowhead in forty minutes;" and although we were
certainly longer than that, the celerity with which what seemed a
gigantic task was accomplished was marvellous. Of course, it was all
plain-sailing, very unlike the complicated and herculean task inevitable
at the commencement of cutting-in a sperm whale.

Except for the head work, removing the blubber was effected in precisely
the same way as in the case of the cachalot. There was a marked
difference between the quantity of lard enveloping this whale and those
we had hitherto dealt with. It was nearly double the thickness, besides
being much richer in oil, which fairly dripped from it as we hoisted
in the blanket-pieces. The upper jaw was removed for its long plates of
whalebone or baleen--that valuable substance which alone makes it worth
while nowadays to go after the MYSTICETUS, the price obtained for the
oil being so low as to make it not worth while to fit out ships to go in
search of it alone. "Trying-out" the blubber, with its accompaniments,
is carried on precisely as with the sperm whale. The resultant oil, when
recent, is of a clear white, unlike the golden-tinted fluid obtained
from the cachalot. As it grows stale it developes a nauseous smell,
which sperm does not, although the odour of the oil is otto of roses
compared with the horrible mass of putridity landed from the tanks of a
Greenland whaler at the termination of a cruise. For in those vessels,
the fishing-time at their disposal being so brief, they do not wait to
boil down the blubber, but, chopping it into small pieces, pass it below
as it is into tanks, to be rendered down by the oil-mills ashore on the
ship's return.

This first bowhead yielded us eighteen tuns of oil and a ton of baleen,
which made the catch about equal in value to that of a seven-tun
cachalot. But the amount of labour and care necessary in order to
thoroughly dry and cleanse the baleen was enormous; in fact, for months
after we began the bowhead fishery there was almost always something
being done with the wretched stuff--drying, scraping, etc.--which, as it
was kept below, also necessitated hoisting it up on deck and getting it
down again.

After this beginning, it was again a considerable time before we sighted
any more; but when we did, there were quite a number of them--enough
to employ all the boats with one each. I was out of the fun this time,
being almost incapable of moving by reason of several boils on my
legs--the result, I suppose, of a long abstinence from fresh vegetables,
or anything to supply their place.

As it happened, however, I lost no excitement by remaining on board;
for while all the boats were away a large bowhead rose near the ship,
evidently being harassed in some way by enemies, which I could not at
first see. He seemed quite unconscious of his proximity to the ship,
though, and at last came so near that the whole performance was as
visible as if it had been got up for my benefit. Three "killers" were
attacking him at once, like wolves worrying a bull, except that his
motions were far less lively than those of any bull would have been.

The "killer," or ORCA GLADIATOR, is a true whale, but, like the
cachalot, has teeth. He differs from that great cetacean, though, in a
most important particular; i.e. by having a complete set in both upper
and lower jaws, like any other carnivore. For a carnivore indeed is he,
the very wolf of the ocean, and enjoying, by reason of his extraordinary
agility as well as comparative worthlessness commercially, complete
immunity from attack by man. By some authorities he is thought to be
identical with the grampus, but whalers all consider the animals quite
distinct. Not having had very long acquaintance with them both, I cannot
speak emphatically upon this difference of opinion; so far as personal
observation goes, I agree with the whalers in believing that there is
much variation both of habits and shape between them.

But to return to the fight. The first inkling I got of what was really
going on was the leaping of a killer high into the air by the side of
the whale, and descending upon the victim's broad, smooth back with a
resounding crash. I saw that the killer was provided with a pair of
huge fins--one on his back, the other on his belly--which at first sight
looked as if they were also weapons of offence. A little observation
convinced me that they were fins only. Again and again the aggressor
leaped into the air, falling each time on the whale's back, as if to
beat him into submission.

The sea around foamed and boiled like a cauldron, so that it was only
occasional glimpses I was able to catch of the two killers, until
presently the worried whale lifted his head clear out of the surrounding
smother, revealing the two furies hanging--one on either side--to his
lips, as if endeavouring to drag his mouth open--which I afterwards saw
was their principal object, as whenever during the tumult I caught sight
of them, they were still in the same position. At last the tremendous
and incessant blows, dealt by the most active member of the trio, seemed
actually to have exhausted the immense vitality of the great bowhead,
for he lay supine upon the surface. Then the three joined their forces,
and succeeded in dragging open his cavernous mouth, into which they
freely entered, devouring his tongue. This, then, had been their sole
object, for as soon as they had finished their barbarous feast they
departed, leaving him helpless and dying to fall an easy prey to our
returning boats.

Thus, although the four whales captured by the boats had been but small,
the day's take, augmented by so great a find, was a large one, and it
was a long time before we got clear of the work it entailed.

From that time forward we saw no whales for six weeks, and, from the
reports we received from two whalers we "gammed," it appeared that we
might consider ourselves most fortunate in our catch, since they, who
had been longer on the ground than ourselves, had only one whale apiece.

In consequence of this information, Captain Slocum decided to go south
again, and resume the sperm whaling in the North Pacific, near the
line--at least so the rumour ran; but as we never heard anything
definitely, we could not feel at all certain of our next destination.

Ever since the fracas at the Bonins between Goliath and his watch,
the relations between Captain Slocum and the big negro had been
very strained. Even before the outbreak, as I have remarked upon one
occasion, it was noticeable that little love was lost between them. Why
this was so, without anything definite to guide one's reasoning, was
difficult to understand, for a better seaman or a smarter whaleman than
Mistah Jones did not live--of that every one was quite sure. Still,
there was no gainsaying the fact that, churlish and morose as our
skipper's normal temper always was, he was never so much so as in
his behaviour towards his able fourth mate, who, being a man of fine,
sensitive temper, chafed under his unmerited treatment so much as to
lose flesh, becoming daily more silent, nervous, and depressed. Still,
there had never been an open rupture, nor did it appear as if there
would be, so great was the power Captain Slocum possessed over the will
of everybody on board.

One night, however, as we were nearing the Kuriles again, on our way
south, leaving the Sea of Okhotsk, I was sitting on the fore side of the
try-works alone, meditating upon what I would do when once I got
clear of this miserable business. Futile and foolish, no doubt, my
speculations were, but only in this way could I forget for a while my
surroundings, since the inestimable comfort of reading was denied me.
I had been sitting thus absorbed in thought for nearly an hour, when
Goliath came and seated himself by my side. We had always been great
friends, although, owing to the strict discipline maintained on board,
it was not often we got a chance for a "wee bit crack," as the Scotch
say. Besides, I was not in his watch, and even now he should rightly
have been below. He sat for a minute or two silent; then, as if
compelled to speak, he began in low, fierce whispers to tell me of his
miserable state of mind. At last, after recapitulating many slights
and insults he had received silently from the captain, of which I had
previously known nothing, he became strangely calm. In tones quite
unlike his usual voice, he said that he was not an American-born negro,
but a pure African, who had been enslaved in his infancy, with his
mother, somewhere in the "Hinterland" of Guinea. While still a child,
his mother escaped with him into Liberia, a where he had remained till
her death, She was, according to him, an Obeah woman of great power,
venerated exceedingly by her own people for her prophetic abilities.
Before her death, she had told him that he would die suddenly,
violently, in a struggle with a white man in a far-off country, but that
the white man would die too by his hand. She had also told him that he
would be a great traveller and hunter upon the sea. As he went on, his
speech became almost unintelligible, being mingled with fragments of a
language I had never heard before; moreover, he spoke as a man who is
only half awake. A strange terror got hold of me, for I began to think
he was going mad, and perhaps about to run a-mok, as the Malays do when
driven frantic by the infliction of real or fancied wrongs.

But he gradually returned to his old self, to my great relief, and I
ventured somewhat timidly to remind him of the esteem in which he was
held by all hands; even the skipper, I ventured to say, respected him,
although, from some detestable form of ill-humour, he had chosen to
be so sneering and insulting towards him. He shook his head sadly, and
said, "My dear boy, youse de only man aboard dis ship--wite man, dat
is--dat don't hate an' despise me becawse ob my colour, wich I cain't
he'p; an' de God you beliebe in bless you fer dat. As fer me, w'at I
done tole you's true,'n befo' bery little w'ile you see it COME true.
'N w'en DAT happens w'at's gwine ter happen, I'se real glad to tink it
gwine ter be better fer you--gwine ter be better fer eberybody 'bord de
CACH'LOT; but I doan keer nuffin 'bout anybody else. So long." He held
out his great black hand, and shook mine heartily, while a big tear
rolled down his face and fell on the deck. And with that he left me a
prey to a very whirlpool of conflicting thoughts and fears.

The night was a long and weary one--longer and drearier perhaps because
of the absence of the darkness, which always made it harder to sleep.
An incessant day soon becomes, to those accustomed to the relief of the
night, a burden grievous to be borne; and although use can reconcile
us to most things, and does make even the persistent light bearable,
in times of mental distress or great physical weariness one feels
irresistibly moved to cry earnestly, "Come, gentle night."

When I came on deck at eight bells, it was a stark calm. The watch,
under Mistah Jones' direction, were busy scrubbing decks with the usual
thoroughness, while the captain, bare-footed, with trouser-legs and
shirt-sleeves rolled up, his hands on his hips and a portentous frown on
his brow, was closely looking on. As it was my spell at the crow's-nest,
I made at once for the main-rigging, and had got halfway to the top,
when some unusual sounds below arrested me.

All hands were gathered in the waist, a not unusual thing at the
changing of the watch. In the midst of them, as I looked down, two men
came together in a fierce struggle. They were Goliath and the skipper.
Captain Slocum's right hand went naturally to his hip pocket, where he
always carried a revolver; but before he could draw it, the long, black
arms of his adversary wrapped around him, making him helpless as a babe.
Then, with a rush that sent every one flying out of his way, Goliath
hurled himself at the bulwarks, which were low, the top of the rail
about thirty-three inches from the deck. The two bodies struck the rail
with a heavy thud, instantly toppling overboard. That broke the spell
that bound everybody, so that there was an instantaneous rush to the
side. Only a hardly noticeable ripple remained on the surface of the
placid sea.

But, from my lofty perch, the whole of the ghastly struggle had been
visible to the least detail. The two men had struck the water locked in
closest embrace, which relaxed not even when far below the surface. When
the sea is perfectly smooth, objects are visible from aloft at several
feet depth, though apparently diminished in size. The last thing I saw
was Captain Slocum's white face, with its starting black eyes looking
their last upon the huge, indefinite hull of the ship whose occupants he
had ruled so long and rigidly.

The whole tragedy occupied such a brief moment of time that it was
almost impossible to realize that it was actual. Reason, however, soon
regained her position among the officers, who ordered the closest watch
to be kept from aloft, in case of the rising of either or both of the
men. A couple of boats were swung, ready to drop on the instant. But,
as if to crown the tragedy with completeness, a heavy squall, which
had risen unnoticed, suddenly burst upon the ship with great fury, the
lashing hail and rain utterly obscuring vision even for a few yards.
So unexpected was the onset of this squall that, for the only time that
voyage, we lost some canvas through not being able to get it in quick
enough. The topgallant halyards were let go; but while the sails were
being clewed up, the fierce wind following the rain caught them from
their confining gear, rending them into a thousand shreds. For an hour
the squall raged--a tempest in brief--then swept away to the south-east
on its furious journey, leaving peace again. Needless perhaps to say,
that after such a squall it was hopeless to look for our missing ones.
The sudden storm had certainly driven us several miles away front the
spot where they disappeared, and, although we carefully made what haste
was possible back along the line we were supposed to have come, not
a vestige of hope was in any one's mind that we should ever see them
again.

Nor did we. Whether that madness, which I had feared was coming upon
Goliath during our previous night's conversation, suddenly overpowered
him and impelled him to commit the horrible deed, what more had
passed between him and the skipper to even faintly justify so awful a
retaliation--these things were now matters of purest speculation. As if
they had never been, the two men were blotted out--gone before God in
full-blown heat of murder and revengeful fury.

On the same evening Mr. Count mustered all hands on the quarter-deck,
and addressed us thus: "Men, Captain Slocum is dead, and, as a
consequence, I command the ship. Behave yourself like men, not presuming
upon kindness or imagining that I am a weak, vacillating old man with
whom you can do as you like, and you will find in me a skipper who will
do his duty by you as far as lies in his power, nor expect more from you
than you ought to render. If, however, you DO try any tricks, remember
that I am an old hand, equal to most of the games that men get up to.
I do want--if you will help me--to make this a comfortable as well as a
successful ship. I hope with all my heart we shall succeed."

In answer to this manly and affecting little speech, which confirmed
my previous estimate of Captain Count's character, were he but free to
follow the bent of his natural, kindly inclinations, and which I have
endeavoured to translate out of his usual dialect, a hearty cheer
was raised by all hands, the first ebullition of general good feeling
manifested throughout the voyage. Hearts rose joyfully at the prospect
of comfort to be gained by thoughtfulness on the part of the commander;
nor from that time forward did any sign of weariness of the ship or
voyage show itself among us, either on deck or below.

The news soon spread among us that, in consequence of the various losses
of boats and gear, the captain deemed it necessary to make for Honolulu,
where fresh supplies could readily be obtained. We had heard many
glowing accounts from visitors, when "gamming," of the delights of this
well-known port of call for whalers, and under our new commander we had
little doubt that we should be allowed considerable liberty during our
stay. So we were quite impatient to get along fretting considerably at
the persistent fogs which prevented our making much progress while in
the vicinity of the Kuriles. But we saw no more bowheads, for which none
of us forward were at all sorry. We had got very tired of the stink
of their blubber, and the never-ending worry connected with the
preservation of the baleen; besides, we had not yet accumulated any
fund of enthusiasm about getting a full ship, except as a reason for
shortening the voyage, and we quite understood that what black oil we
had got would be landed at Hawaii, so that our visit to the Okhotsk Sea,
with its resultant store of oil, had not really brought our return home
any nearer, as we at first hoped it would.

A great surprise was in store for me. I knew that Captain Count was
favourably inclined towards me, for he had himself told me so, but
nothing was further from my thoughts than promotion. However, one Sunday
afternoon, when we were all peacefully enjoying the unusual rest (we
had no Sundays in Captain Slocum's time), the captain sent for me. He
informed me that, after mature consideration, he had chosen me to fill
the vacancy made by the death of Mistah Jones. Mr. Cruce was now mate;
the waspish little third had become second; Louis Silva, the captain's
favourite harpooner was third; and I was to be fourth. Not feeling at
all sure of how the other harpooners would take my stepping over their
heads, I respectfully demurred to the compliment offered me, stating
my reasons. But the captain said he had fully made up his mind,
after consultation with the other officers, and that I need have no
apprehension on the score of the harpooners' jealousy; that they
had been spoken to on the subject, and they were all agreed that the
captain's choice was the best, especially as none of them knew anything
of navigation, or could write their own names.

In consequence of there being none of the crew fit to take a harpooner's
place, I was now really harpooner of the captain's boat, which he
would continue to work, when necessary, until we were able to ship a
harpooner, which he hoped to do at Hawaii.

The news of my promotion was received in grim silence by the Portuguese
forward, but the white men all seemed pleased. This was highly
gratifying to me, for I had tried my best to be helpful to all, as far
as my limited abilities would let me; nor do I think I had an enemy
in the ship. Behold me, then, a full-blown "mister," with a definite
substantial increase in my prospects of pay of nearly one-third,
in addition to many other advantages, which, under the new captain,
promised exceedingly well.

More than half the voyage lay behind us, looking like the fast-settling
bank of storm-clouds hovering above the tempest-tossed sea so lately
passed, while ahead the bright horizon was full of promise of fine
weather for the remainder of the journey.





