CHAPTER VII


THE EVILS OF ARTIFICIAL BIRTH CONTROL


Section 1. NOT A PHYSICAL BENEFIT


Birth control is alleged to be beneficial for men and women, and these
"benefits" are no less amazing than the fallacies on which this practice
is advocated. At the Obstetric Section of the Royal Society of Medicine
in 1921 the leading physicians on diseases of women condemned the use of
contraceptives. [66]

    _A Cause of Sterility_

    Dr. R.A. Gibbons, Physician to the Grosvenor Hospital for Women, said
    that nowadays it was common for a young married woman to ask her
    medical man for advice as to the best method of preventing conception.
    The test of relative sterility was the rapidity with which conception
    takes place. He had made confidential inquiries in 120 marriages. In
    100 cases preventive measures had been used at one time or another, and
    the number of children was well under 2 per marriage. In Paris some
    time ago the birth-rate was 104 per 1,000 in the poorer quarters and
    only 34 in a rich quarter of the city; in London comparative figures
    had been given as 195 and 63 in poor and in rich quarters. These and
    similar figures showed that women living in comfort and luxury did not
    want to be bothered with confinements. It had been said that the degree
    of sterility could be regarded as an index to the morals of a race.
    Congenital sterility was rare, but the number of children born in
    England was decreasing. It had been estimated that one-third of the
    pregnancies in several great cities abroad aborted. Dr. Gibbons then
    quoted figures given by Douglas Wight and Amand Routh to show the high
    percentage of abortions and stillbirths. In his opinion it was the duty
    of medical men to point out to the public that physiological laws could
    not be broken with impunity. It had been observed that if the doe were
    withheld from the buck at oestral periods atrophy of the ovary took
    place. In this connection Dr. Gibbons recalled a large number of
    patients who had used contraceptives in early married life, and
    subsequently had longed in vain for a child. This applied also to those
    who had decided, after the first baby, to have no more children, and
    had subsequently regretted their decision.

    _Neuroses_

    Professor McIlroy, of the London School of Medicine for Women, deplored
    the amount of time spent on attempting to cure sterility when
    contraceptives were so largely used. The fact that neuroses were
    largely the result of the use of contraceptives should be made widely
    known, and also that in women the maternal passion was even stronger,
    though it might develop later, than sexual passion, and would
    ultimately demand satisfaction.

    _Fibroid Tumours_

    Dr. Arthur E. Giles, Senior Surgeon to the Chelsea Hospital for Women,
    endorsed Dr. Gibbons's remarks as to the great unhappiness resulting
    from deliberately childless marriages, and he added that he had always
    warned patients of this. He believed that quinine had a permanently bad
    effect. Those who waited for a convenient season to have a child often
    laid up trouble for themselves. On the question of fibroid tumours he
    had come to the conclusion that these were not a cause but in a sense a
    consequence of sterility. Women who were subjected to sexual excitement
    with no physiological outlet appear to have a tendency to develop
    fibroids. He would like the opinion to go forth from the section that
    the use of contraceptives was a bad thing.

All these authorities are agreed that the practice of artificial sterility
during early married life is the cause of many women remaining childless,
although later on these women wish in vain for children. To meet this
difficulty one of the advocates of birth control advises all young couples
to make sure of some children before adopting these practices; thus
demanding of young parents, at the very time when it is most irksome, that
very sacrifice of personal comfort and prosperity to prevent which is the
precise object of the vicious practice. Nor is sterility the only penalty.
The disease known as neurasthenia arises both in women _and in men_ in
consequence of these methods. Dr. Mary Sharlieb, [67] after forty years'
experience of diseases of women, writes as follows:

    "Now, on the surface of things, it would seem as if a knowledge of how
    to prevent the too rapid increase of a family would be a boon to
    over-prolific and heavily burdened mothers. There are, however, certain
    reasons which probably convert the supposed advantage into a very real
    disadvantage. An experience of well over forty years convinces me that
    the artificial limitation of the family causes damage to a woman's
    nervous system. The damage done is likely to show itself in inability
    to conceive when the restriction voluntarily used is abandoned because
    the couple desire offspring.

    "I have for many years asked women who came to me desiring children
    whether they have ever practised prevention, and they very frequently
    tell me that they did so during the early days of their married life
    because they thought that their means were not adequate to the support
    of a family. Subsequently they found that conception, thwarted at the
    time that desire was present, fails to occur when it becomes
    convenient. In such cases, even although examination of the pelvic
    organ shows nothing abnormal, all one's endeavours to secure conception
    frequently go unrewarded. Sometimes such a woman is not only sterile,
    but nervous, and in generally poor health; but the more common
    occurrence is that she remains fairly well until the time of the change
    of life, when she frequently suffers more, on the nervous side, than
    does the woman who has lived a natural married life."

The late Dr. F.W. Taylor, President of the British Gynaecological Society,
wrote as follows in 1904:

    "Artificial prevention is an evil and a disgrace. The immorality of it,
    the degradation of succeeding generations by it, their domination or
    subjection by strangers who are stronger because they have not given
    way to it, the curses that must assuredly follow the parents of
    decadence who started it,--all of this needs to be brought home to the
    minds of those who have thoughtlessly or ignorantly accepted it, for it
    is to this undoubtedly that we have to attribute not only the
    diminishing birth-rate, but the diminishing value of our population.

    "It would be strange indeed if so unnatural a practice, one so
    destructive of the best life of the nation, should bring no danger or
    disease in its wake, and I am convinced, after many years of
    observation, that both sudden danger and chronic disease may be
    produced by the methods of prevention very generally employed.... The
    natural deduction is that the artificial production of modern times,
    the relatively sterile marriage, is an evil thing, even to the
    individuals primarily concerned, injurious not only to the race, but to
    those who accept it."

That was the opinion of a distinguished gynaecologist, who also happened
to be a Christian. The reader may protest that the latter fact is entirely
irrelevant to my argument, and that the value of a man's observations
concerning disease is to be judged by his skill and experience as a
physician, and not by his religious beliefs. A most reasonable statement.
Unhappily, the Neo-Malthusians think otherwise. They would have us believe
that because this man was a Christian his opinion, as a gynaecologist, is
worthless. C.V. Drysdale, O.B.E., D. Sc., after quoting Dr. Taylor's views,
adds the following foot-note:

    "I have since learnt that Dr. Taylor was a very earnest Christian, and
    the author of several sacred hymns and of a pious work, _The Coming of
    the Saints_." [68]

Furthermore, in 1905, the South-Western Branch of the British Medical
Association passed the following resolution:

    "That this Branch is of opinion that the growing use of contraceptives
    and ecbolics is fraught with great danger both to the individual and to
    the race. That this Branch is of opinion that the advertisements and
    sale of such appliances and substances, as well as the publication and
    dissemination of literature relating thereto, should be made a penal
    offence." [69]


Section 2. A SCANDALOUS SUGGESTION

The foregoing opinions are very distasteful to Neo-Malthusians, and these
people, being unable apparently to give a reasoned answer, do not hesitate
to suggest that medical opposition, when not due to religious bias, is
certainly due to mercenary motives.

    "As the Church has a vested interest in souls, so the medical
    profession has a vested interest in bodies. Birth is a source of
    revenue, direct and indirect. It means maternity fees first; it
    generally presupposes preliminary medical treatment of the expectant
    mother; and it provides a new human being to be a patient to some
    member of the profession, humanly certain to have its share of
    infantile diseases, and likely, if it survives them, to produce
    children of its own before the final death-bed attendance is
    reached." [70]

That scandalous suggestion has recently been repeated by the President of
the Society for Constructive Birth Control and Racial Progress under the
following circumstances. On October 31, 1921, the _Sussex Daily News_
published the following paragraph from its London correspondent.

    "BIRTH CONTROL

    "Reverberations of Lord Dawson's recent sensational address to the
    Church Congress on birth control are still being felt as well in
    medical as in clerical circles. Indeed, the subject has been discussed
    by the lawyers at Gray's Inn. The London Association of the Medical
    Women's Federation had so animated a discussion on it that it was
    decided to continue it at the next meeting. It is quite evident that
    Lord Dawson did not speak for a united medical profession. Indeed,
    quite a number of doctors of all creeds are attacking the new Birth
    Control Society. A London physician has a pamphlet on the subject in
    the Press, and the controversy rages fiercely in the neighbourhood of
    'birth-control' clinics. Much is likely to be made of the example of
    France, where the revolt against the practices advocated is now in full
    swing, and strong legal measures have been taken and are in
    contemplation. French medical opinion is said to be very pronounced on
    the subject, and it has, of course, a great deal of clinical experience
    to back it."

On November 8, a second paragraph appeared:

    "BIRTH CONTROL

    "My remark recently that 'a number of doctors of all creeds are
    attacking the new Birth-Control Society' has been challenged by the
    hon. secretary of the body in question, who observes that I am
    misinformed. I must adhere to my statement, which was a record of
    personal observation. Many doctors have spoken to me on the subject,
    and their opinions on the ethics of birth control differ widely; but I
    can only remember one who did not attack this particular society. The
    secretary suggests that I am confusing what his society advocates with
    something else. As a matter of fact, the whole question of birth
    control has been discussed more than once by medical bodies. A doctor
    who attended one such discussion shortly after the opening of the
    clinic in Holloway told me that, while there was division of opinion on
    the general subject, the feeling of the meeting was overwhelming
    against the particular teaching given at the clinic, as undesirable and
    actively mischievous. The subject is controversial, and I profess to do
    no more than record such opinions as are current."

On November 17 the _Sussex Daily News_ published the following letter:

    "CONSTRUCTIVE BIRTH CONTROL

    "Sir,--Your recent paragraph of 'opinions' about the Mothers' Clinic
    and the Society for Constructive Birth Control and Racial Progress is
    not only extremely unrepresentative, but grossly misleading. Your
    writer says that he can only remember one doctor who did not attack
    this particular society. This implies that the medical profession is
    against it, which is absolutely untrue, as is quite evident from the
    fact that we have three of the most distinguished medical men in Great
    Britain on our list of Vice-Presidents; four others, also very
    distinguished, on our Research Committee; and that Dr. E.B. Turner, in
    a Press interview after the recent Church Congress, singled out
    Constructive Birth Control as the only 'Control' which was not
    mischievous.

    "_That there may be medical men who do not approve of birth control is
    natural, when one remembers that a doctor has to make his living, and
    can do so more easily when women are ailing with incessant pregnancies
    than when they maintain themselves in good health by only having
    children when fitted to do so. Opinions of medicals, therefore, must be
    sifted. The best doctors are with us; the self-seeking and the biassed
    may be against us_.

    "Details about the society, including the manifesto signed by a series
    of the most distinguished persons, can be obtained on application to
    the Honorary Secretary, at ... London, N.19.--Yours, etc.

    "MARIE C. STOPES,
    "President Society for Constructive and Racial Progress."

The italics are mine, and they draw attention to a disgraceful statement
concerning the medical profession. As the reader is aware, certain members
of our profession approve of artificial birth control. What, I ask, would
be the opinion of the general public, and of my friends, if I were so
distraught as to suggest that these men approved of birth control because
they had a financial interest in the sale of contraceptives? That
suggestion would be as reckless and as wicked as the statement made by Dr.
Marie C. Stopes. In the _British Medical Journal_ of November 26 I quoted,
without comment, the above italicised paragraph as her opinion of the
medical profession, and on December 10 the following reply from the lady
appeared:

    "Your two correspondents, Dr. Halliday Sutherland and Dr. Binnie
    Dunlop, by quoting paragraphs without their full context, appear to
    lend support to views which by implication are, to some extent,
    detrimental to my own. This method of controversy has never appealed to
    me, but in the interests of the society with which I am associated, I
    must be allowed to answer the implications. The paragraph quoted by Dr.
    Sutherland is not, as would appear from his letter, a simple opinion of
    mine on the medical profession, but was written in reply to a rather
    scurrilous paragraph so worded as to lead the public to believe that
    the medical profession as a whole was against the Society for
    Constructive Birth Control and Racial Progress. My answer, which
    appeared not only in the papers quoted but in others, contained the
    following statement: 'We have three of the most distinguished medical
    men in Great Britain on our list of Vice-Presidents; four others, also
    very distinguished, on our Research Committee.' Reading these words
    before the paragraph your correspondent quotes, and taking all in
    conjunction with an attack implying that the entire medical profession
    was against us, it is obvious that the position is rather different
    from what readers of Dr. Sutherland's letter in your issue of November
    26 might suppose."

It will be noted that Dr. Stopes does not withdraw but attempts to justify
her scandalous suggestion by stating, firstly, that the full context of her
letter was not quoted by me, and secondly, that her original letter was
written "in reply to a rather scurrilous paragraph."

As I have now quoted in full her original letter, excepting the address
of her society, and the two paragraphs from the _Sussex Daily News_, my
readers may form their own judgment on the following points: Is it possible
to maintain that the whole context of her original letter puts a different
complexion on her remarks concerning the medical profession? Can either
of the paragraphs from the _Sussex Daily News_ be truthfully described
as "rather scurrilous," or are they fair comment on a matter of public
interest? Moreover, even if a daily paper _had_ published a misleading
paragraph about this society, surely that is not a valid reason why its
President should make a malignant attack, not on journalists, but on the
medical profession?


Section 3. A CAUSE OF UNHAPPINESS IN MARRIAGE

Nor does birth control lead to happiness in marriage. On the contrary,
experience shows that the practice is injurious not only to the bodies
but also to the minds of men and women. As no method of contraception is
infallible, the wife who allows or adopts it may find herself in the truly
horrible position of being secretly or openly suspected of infidelity.
Again, when a family has been limited to one or two children and these die,
the parents may find themselves solitary and childless in old age; and
mothers thus bereaved are often the victims of profound and lasting
melancholy. The mother of a large family has her worries, many of them not
due to her children, but to the social evils of our time: and yet she is
less to be pitied than the woman who is losing her beauty after a fevered
life of, vanity and self-indulgence, and who has no one to love her, not
even a child.

Moreover, these practices have an influence on the relation between husband
and wife, on their emotions towards each other and towards the whole sexual
nisus. Mr. Bernard Shaw recently stated [71] that when people adopt methods
of birth control they are engaging, not in sexual intercourse, but in
reciprocal masturbation.

That is the plain truth of the matter. Or, from another point of view, it
may be said that the man who adopts these practices is simply using his
wife as he would use a prostitute, as indeed was said long ago by St.
Thomas Aquinas. [72] The excuse offered for illicit sexual intercourse is
not usually pleasure, but that the sex impulse is irresistible: and the
same argument is used for conjugal union with prevention. In both cases the
natural result of union is not desired, and positive means are taken to
prevent it.

And what of the results on the mutual love, if an old-fashioned word be
not now out of place, and on the self-respect of two people so associated?
Birth control cannot make for happiness, because it means that mutual love
is at the mercy of an animal instinct, neither satisfied nor denied. It is
an old truth that those who seek happiness for itself never find it. And
yet the advocates of birth control have the temerity to claim that these
practices lead to happiness. I presume that of the bliss following marriage
with contraceptives the crowded lists of our divorce courts are an index.
The marriage bond is weakened when a common lasting interest in the care
of children is replaced by transient sexual excitement. Once pregnancy is
abolished there is no natural check on the sexual passions of husband or
wife, for they have learnt how sexual desire may be gratified without the
pain, publicity, and responsibility of having children. In the experience
of the world marriages based merely on passion are seldom happy, and
artificial birth control means passion uncontrolled by nature. These
methods are not practised by nations such as Ireland and Spain, who accept
the moral rule of the natural law expressed in God's commandments and
sanctioned by His judgments; and no man who has ever lived in these
countries could truthfully maintain that the people there, on whom the
burdens of marriage press as elsewhere, are in reality anxious to obtain
facilities for divorce. On the other hand, there are many who allege that
the people of England are shouting out for greater facilities for divorce
than they now possess. At any rate, it is obvious enough that there are
those amongst us who are straining every nerve to force such facilities
upon them.


Section 4. AN INSULT TO TRUE WOMANHOOD

It has been said that patriotism is the last refuge of a scoundrel; and
apparently chivalry is the last refuge of a fool. Some of the advocates of
birth control who have never thought the matter out, either passionately or
dispassionately, claim to speak on behalf of women. They protest that "many
women of the educated classes revolt against the drudgery, anxieties,
inconveniences, disease, and disfigurements which attend the yearly
child-bearing advocated by the moralist." [73]

What moralist? Who ever said it? Again, they plead for women who "revolt"
from the "disfigurement" of the gestation period. The great artist
Botticelli did not think this was disfigurement. What true women do? Are
they not those of whom Kipling writes, "as pale and as stale as a bone"?
And, if so, are these unworthy specimens of their sex worth tears? The vast
majority of women bear the discomforts of gestation and the actual perils
and pangs of birth with exemplary fortitude: and it is a gross slander for
anyone to maintain that a few cowardly and degenerate individuals really
represent that devoted sex. But these writers are indeed well out of the
ruck of ordinary humanity, because they tell us that "whatever the means
employed, and whether righteous or not, the propensity to limit the highest
form of life operates silently and steadily amongst the more thoughtful
members of all civilized countries," and yet add that "it is not perhaps
good taste to consider the means employed to this end." While they thus
approve and commend the practice of birth control as natural to "the
more thoughtful members," they nevertheless question the "good taste" of
discussing the very methods of which they approve, even in the columns of a
medical journal! Again, they tell us that "assuredly continence is not, and
never will be, the principal" method. That may be possibly true, so long as
Christianity is more professed than practised; God knows we are all lacking
enough in self-control. And yet throughout the ages moralists have preached
the advantages of self-control, and we ordinary men and women know that we
could do better, and that others who have gone before us have done better;
but it is the self-styled "thoughtful members" who proclaim to the world
that self-control in matters of sex is an impossibility, and therefore not
to be even attempted. They are no common people--these epicureans, selfish
even in their refinement. In addition to losing their morals, they have
certainly lost their wits.


Section 5. A DEGRADATION OF THE FEMALE SEX

In the Neo-Malthusian propaganda there is yet another fact which--should
be seized by every married woman, because it is a clear indication of a
tendency to reduce women to degrading subjection. No recommendations of
limited intercourse or of self-restraint according to the dictates
of reason or of affection are to be found in the writings of birth
controllers. Unrestrained indulgence, without the risk of consequences, is
their motto. To this end they advocate certain contraceptive methods, and
the reader should note that these methods require precautions to be taken
solely by the woman. If she fails to take these precautions, or if the
precautions themselves fail, all responsibility for the occurrence of
conception rests on her alone; because her Malthusian masters have decided
that she alone is to be, made responsible for preventing the natural or
possible consequences of intercourse. Why? That is a very interesting
question, and one to which a leading Neo-Malthusian has given the answer.

In 1854 there was published, _Physical, Sexual and Natural Religion: by a
Graduate of Medicine_. In the third edition the title was altered to _The
Elements of Social Science_, and the author's pseudonym to _A Doctor of
Medicine_. This book, which contains over 600 pages of small type, may be
truthfully described as the Bible of Neo-Malthusians, and includes, under
the curious heading _Sexual Religion_, a popular account of all venereal
and other diseases of sex. In the Preface to the first edition, [74] the
anonymous author states: "Had it not been the fear of causing pain to a
relation, I should have felt it my duty to put my name to this work; in
order that any censure passed upon it should fall upon myself alone." The
relation appears to have had a long life, because anonymity was preserved
for fifty years, presumably out of respect for his, or her, feelings: and
he, or she, must have lived as long as the author, who died in 1904 at the
age of seventy-eight; because the author's name was not revealed until a
posthumous edition, the thirty-fifth, appeared in 1905, from which we learn
that the book was written by the late Dr. George Drysdale, brother of
the first President of the Malthusian League, and uncle of the present
incumbent. The last edition, in recompense for its smudgy type, contains a
most welcome announcement by the publisher:

    "PUBLISHER'S NOTE.--... It is due alike to the reader and the publisher
    to explain why the present edition is printed (in the main) from
    stereotypes that have seen fifty years' service. The cost of resetting
    the work would be prohibitive on the basis of present (and probable
    future) sales. To some extent the plates have been repaired; but such
    an expedient can do no more than remove the worse causes of offence."

But the fact with which I am at present concerned is that in every edition
all contraceptive methods that apply to the male are _condemned_ for the
following reasons:

    "The first of these modes [_coitus interruptus_] is physically
    injurious, and is apt to produce nervous disorder and sexual
    enfeeblement and congestion, from the sudden interruption it gives to
    the venereal act, whose _pleasure_ moreover it interferes with. The
    second, namely the sheath, _dulls the enjoyment_, and frequently
    produces impotence in the man and disgust in both parties; so that it
    also is injurious" (p. 349).... "Any preventive means, to be
    satisfactory, must be used by the woman, as _it spoils the passion and
    the impulsiveness_ of the venereal act _if the man have to think of
    them_" (p. 350).

The italics are mine, but the following comments are by a woman, who was
moreover the first woman to qualify in medicine--the late Dr. Elizabeth
Blackwell.

    "Here, in this chief teacher of the Neo-Malthusians, the cloven foot is
    fully revealed. This popular author, who in many parts of his book
    denounces marriage as the enslavement of men and women, who sneers at
    continence, and rages at Christianity as a vanishing superstition--all
    under a special pretence of benevolence and desire for the advancement
    of the human race, here clearly, shows what he is aiming at, and what
    his doctrines lead to. Male sexual pleasure must not be interfered
    with, male lust may be indulged in to any extent that pleasure demands,
    but woman must take the entire responsibility, that male indulgence be
    not disturbed by any inconvenient claims from paternity. Whatever
    consequences ensue the woman is to blame, and must bear the whole
    responsibility.

    "A doctrine more diabolical in its theory and more destructive in its
    practical consequences has never been invented. This is the doctrine of
    Neo-Malthusianism." [75]


Section 6. SPECIALLY HURTFUL TO THE POOR

(a) _Affecting the Young_

There are three special and peculiar evils that attend the teaching of
birth control amongst the poor. Of the first a doctor has written as
follows:

    "Morally, the doctrine is indefensible--it follows the line of least
    resistance, and sacrifices the spirit to the flesh. Materially, it is
    fraught with grave danger to the home and to our national existence. It
    is proposed to disseminate a knowledge of contraceptive methods
    throughout the overcrowded homes of the ill-fed, ill-clad poor. Now it
    is in these homes that the moral sense has already but little chance of
    development, where the child of eight or ten already knows far more
    than is good for the health of either body or mind, and, though we may
    succeed in reducing the size of the family, yet the means we employ
    will militate against the raising of the moral tone of the household,
    and the children will not be any less precocious than before." [76]

That danger is ignored by the advocates of birth-control. "But he that
shall scandalise one of these little ones that believe in Me, it were
better for, him that a mill-stone were hanged about his neck, and that he
were drowned in the depth, of the sea." [77]

(b) _Exposing the Poor to Experiment_

Secondly, the ordinary decent instincts of the poor are against these
practices, and indeed they have used them less than any other class. But,
owing to their poverty, lack of learning, and helplessness, the poor are
the natural victims of those who seek to make experiments on their fellows.
In the midst of a London slum a woman, who is a doctor of German philosophy
(Munich), has opened a Birth Control Clinic, where working women are
instructed in a method of contraception described by Professor McIlroy as
"the most harmful method of which I have had experience." [78] When we
remember that millions are being spent by the Ministry of Health and by
Local Authorities--on pure milk for necessitous expectant and nursing
mothers, on Maternity Clinics to guard the health of mothers before and
after childbirth, for the provision of skilled midwives, and on Infant
Welfare Centres--all for the single purpose of bringing healthy children
into our midst, it is truly amazing that this monstrous campaign of birth
control should be tolerated by the Home Secretary. Charles Bradlaugh was
condemned to jail for a less serious crime.

(c) _Tending towards the Servile State_

Thirdly, the policy of birth control opens the way to an extension of the
Servile State, [79] because women as well as men could then be placed under
conditions of economic slavery. Hitherto, the rule has been that during
child-bearing age a woman must be supported by her husband, and the general
feeling of the community has been opposed to any conditions likely to force
married women on to the industrial market. In her own home a woman works
hard, but she is working for the benefit of _her_ family and not directly
for the benefit of a stranger. If, instead of bearing children, women
practise birth control, and if children are to be denied to the poor as a
privilege of the rich, then it would be very easy to exploit the women of
the poorer classes. If women have no young children why should they be
exempt from the economic pressure that is applied to men? And indeed,
where birth control is practised women tend more and more to supplant men,
especially in ill-paid grades of work. One of the birth controllers has
suggested that young couples, who otherwise could not afford to marry,
should marry but have no children, and thus continue to work at their
respective employments during the day. As the girl would have little time
for cooking and other domestic duties, this immoralist is practically
subverting the very idea of a home! The English poor have already lost even
the meaning of the word "property," and if the birth controllers had their
way the meaning of the word "home" would soon follow. The aim of birth
control is generally masked by falsehood, but the urging of this policy
on the poor points unmistakably to the Servile State. When a nation, or
a section of a nation, is oppressed, their birth-rate rises. That is the
immutable law of nature as witnessed in history. Thus, the Israelites
increased under the oppression of the Pharaohs. Thus, the Irish, from the
Union to the Famine, multiplied prodigiously under the oppression of an
iniquitous political and land system. By the operation of this law the
oppressed grow in numbers, and break their chains.


Section 7. A MENACE TO THE NATION

(a) _There is a Limit to lowering the Death-rate_

Birth controllers believe that a high birth-rate is the cause of a high
death-rate, and that over-population is the cause of poverty. Yet, in spite
of their beliefs, they make the following statement: "Neo-Malthusians have
not aimed at reducing population, but only at reducing unnecessary death,
which injures the community without adding to its numbers." [80] In defence
of this statement they argue that if the death-rate falls people will
live longer, and therefore the population will not decrease, although the
birth-rate is lowered. There are two fallacies in their argument. They
overlook the fact that every one of us must die, and that therefore there
is a limit beyond which a death-rate cannot possibly fall, whereas there
is no limit, except zero, to the possible fall in a birth-rate. If a
birth-rate fell to nothing and no children were born, it is obvious that
the population would eventually vanish. The second fallacy is that a low
birth-rate will permanently lower the death-rate. At first a falling
birth-rate increases the proportion of young adults in the population, and,
as the death-rate during early adult life is relatively low, the total
death-rate tends to fall for a time. Sooner or later there is an increase
in the proportion of old people in the population, and, as the death-rate
during old age is high, the total death-rate tends to rise. That is now
happening in England, and these are the _actual facts_ as recorded by the
Registrar-General:

    "It may be pointed out that, though the effect of the fall in the
    birth-rate has hitherto been an a sense advantageous in that it has
    increased the proportions living at the working ages, a tendency to the
    reversal of this fact has already set in, and may be expected to
    develop as time goes on....

    "The general characteristics of the figures indicate very clearly the
    effects of the long-continued decline in the birth-rate of this
    country, and show, by the example of France, the type of
    age-distribution which a further continuance of the decline is likely
    to produce. The present age-distribution of the English population is
    still favourable to low death-rates, but is becoming less so than it
    was in 1901. The movements along the curve of the point of maximum
    heaping up population, referred to on page 61 (See [Reference:
    Population]), has shifted this from age 20-25 to a period ten years
    later, when mortality is appreciably higher."--Census of England and
    Wales, 1911. General Report, with Appendices, pp. 62 and 65.

Of these facts the birth controllers, would appear to be ignorant. That
is a charitable assumption; but, in view of the vital importance of this
question their ignorance is culpable.

(b) _Birth Control tends to extinguish the Birth-rate_

Whatever may be the nebulous aim of birth controllers, the actual results
of birth control are quite definite. We have no accurate information
regarding the extent to which, birth control is practised, for, needless to
say, the Malthusians can provide us with no exact figures bearing on this
question; but we do know that birth control, when adopted, is mostly
practised amongst the better paid artisans and wealthier classes. After
full examination of the evidence; the National Birth-rate Commission were
unanimously agreed "That the greater incidence of infant mortality upon the
less prosperous classes does not reduce their effective fertility to the
level of that of the wealthier classes." [81] It is probable that this
Commission overestimated the extent to which birth control has contributed
to the declining birth-rate; but, even so, this does not alter the obvious
fact that artificial birth control, when adopted, reduces fertility to
a lower level than Nature intended. If language has any meaning, birth
control means a falling birth-rate, and a falling birth-rate means
depopulation. Here and there this evil practice may increase the material
prosperity of an individual, but it lowers the prosperity of the nation
by reducing the number of citizens. Moreover, as birth control is not
a prevailing vice amongst semi-civilised peoples, the adoption of this
practice by civilised nations means that the proportion of civilised to
uncivilised inhabitants of the world will be reduced. If birth control had
been extensively practised in the past the colonisation of the British
Empire would have been a physical impossibility; and to-day, in our
vast overseas dominions, are great empty spaces whose untilled soil and
excellent climate await a population. Is that population to be white, or
yellow? A question which to-day fills the Australian with apprehension.

(c) _A Danger to the Empire_

Many people are honestly perplexed by Neo-Malthusian propaganda, and are
honestly ignorant of the truth concerning the population and the food
supply of the British Empire. They think that _if_ the population is
increasing faster than the food supply, there is at least one argument in
favour of artificial birth control from a practical, although possibly not
from an ethical, point of view. They apply to that propaganda the ordinary
test of the world, namely, 'Will it work?' rather than that other test
which asks, 'Is it right?' The question I would put to people who reason in
that way, and they are many, is a very simple one. If it can be proved that
Neo-Malthusian propaganda is based on an absolute falsehood, will it not
follow that the chief argument in favour of artificial birth control has
been destroyed? Let us put this matter to the proof. Neo-Malthusians state
that the population of the Empire is increasing more rapidly than the
food supply. That is a definite statement. It is either true or false.
To discover the truth, it is necessary to refer to the Memorandum of the
Dominions Royal Commission, and it may be noted that publications of that
sort are not usually read by the general public to whom the Neo-Malthusians
appeal. The public are aware that the staff of life is made from wheat, but
they are not aware of the following facts, which prove that in this matter,
at any rate, Neo-Malthusian statements are absolutely false. In foreign
countries the increase of the wheat area is proceeding at practically the
same rate as the increase of population. Within the British Empire _the
wheat area is increasing more rabidly than the population_.

Between 1901 and 1911 the percentage increase of the wheat area _was nearly
seven times greater_ than the increase of population; and the percentage
increase in the actual production of wheat _was nearly twelve times
greater_ than the increase of population. As these facts alone completely
refute the Neo-Malthusian argument, it is advisable to reproduce here the
official statistics. [82]

    "The requirements of wheat [83] for the United Kingdom and the extent
    to which Home and overseas supplies contributed towards these
    requirements during the period under review can be briefly summarised
    by the following table, viz.:

                      Normal       Supplies      Proportion of supply
    Annual        requirements
    average                      Home  Overseas    Home    Overseas

                     Million   Million  Million    Per      Per
                       cwts      cwts    cwts      cent     cent
    1901-5            138.8      28.7    110.1     20.7     79.3
    1906-10           143.2      31.9    111.3     22.3     77.7
    1911-13           149.2      32.9    116.3     22.1     77.9

    "The main sources of overseas supply are too well known to require
    recapitulation here. The imports from the Dominions and India and their
    proportionate contribution to the United Kingdom's total imports and
    wheat requirements since 1901 have been as follows:

                1901-5
                          Percentage
     From       Annual   Total      Total
               average  imports  requirements

               Million    Per     Per
                  cwts    cent    cent

     Canada       10.3     9.2     7.4
     Australia     6.6     5.9     4.8
     New Zealand    .4      .4      .3
     India        15.5    13.9    11.2

                  32.8    29.4    23.7


                1906-10
                          Percentage
     From       Annual   Total      Total
               average  imports  requirements

               Million    Per     Per
                  cwts    cent    cent

     Canada       17.2    15.1    12.0
     Australia     9.4     8.2     6.6
     New Zealand    .3      .3      .2
     India        13.3    11.7     9.3

                  32.8    29.4    23.7


                1911-13
                          Percentage
     From       Annual   Total      Total
               average  imports  requirements

               Million    Per     Per
                  cwts    cent    cent

     Canada       24.5    20.5    16.4
     Australia    12.6    10.6     8.4
     New Zealand    .4      .3      .3
     India        21.5    18.0    14.4

                  59.0    49.4    39.5

    "The large increase in the proportion received from the Dominions is,
    of course, mainly due to the great extension of wheat cultivation in
    Western Canada since the beginning of the century." [84]

    _Future Supplies_

    "As the United Kingdom is dependent for so large a proportion of its
    wheat supplies on the surplus of oversea countries, it is of material
    interest to examine whether this surplus is increasing, or whether the
    growth of population is proceeding more rapidly than the extension of
    the wheat-growing area.

    "The Board of Agriculture and Fisheries in 1912 estimated [85] that the
    extension of the wheat area and the growth of population during the
    period 1901-1911 was as follows:

                       Wheat area     Percent     Population.     Percent
    Wheat-growing                      age in                      age in
    countries.       1901.     1911.   crease    1901.     1911.   crease

    British Empire  Thousand  Thousand         Thousands Thousands
     (United Kingdom,  acres.    acres.
     Canada,
     Australia,
     New Zealand,
     and India).     34,696    50,490   +45.5   283,385   302,154   + 6.6
    European
      countries.     98,326   115,105   +17.1   291,685   337,181   +15.6
    Others           67,908    81,408   +19.9   139,927   168,818   +20.6

    "_It is important to find that, while in foreign countries, both
    European and extra-European, the increase of wheat area is proceeding
    at practically the same rate as the increase of population, in the
    British Empire the wheat area is developing far more rapidly, so that
    the Empire as a whole is becoming more self-supporting.

    "The total production of wheat within the British Empire, which was
    227,500,000 cwts. in 1901, had risen to 399,700,000 cwts. in 1911, an
    increase of 75 per cent_.

    "The relative yield per acre in 1911 was as follows:"

                                     Yield per acre.

                             Average for five
                              years, 1906-10.    1911.
                                 Bushels.      Bushels.

    United Kingdom                32.88         32.96
    Canada                        17.56[86]     20.80[87]
    Australia                     11.74          9.65[88]
    New Zealand                   28.72         36.73
    India
     (including Native States)    11.44         12.02

The foregoing facts destroy the chief Neo-Malthusian argument, and, as
birth control tends to extinguish the birth-rate, this Neo-Malthusian
propaganda is a menace to the Empire. In fact, the danger is very great for
the simple reason that the proportion of white people within the Empire is
very small.

    "The British Empire's share of the world's people is very large, but it
    mainly consists, it should be remembered, of Asiatics and African
    natives. The Empire as a whole contains about 450 millions of the
    world's 1,800 millions, made up roundly as follows:

    United Kingdom                      47,000,000
    Self-governing Dominions            22,000,000
    Rest of the Empire (chiefly India,
      319 millions)                    378,000,000
    Total                              447,000,000

    "Of the great aggregate Empire population of 447 millions, the white
    people account for no more than 65 millions. That is to say, outside
    the United Kingdom itself the Empire has only 18 million white people,
    or less than four million families. That figure, of course, includes
    Boers, French-Canadians, and others of foreign extraction. This fact is
    clearly not realized by those present-day Malthusians who assure us
    that too many Britons are being born." [89]

It is also well to remember that depopulation in Italy preceded the
disintegration of the Roman Empire. Historians have estimated that, while
under the Republic, Italy could raise an army of 800,000 men, under Titus
that number was halved.

Unfortunately there are some to whom this argument will not appeal, and
wandering about in our midst are a few lost souls, so bemused by the
doctrines of international finance that they see no virtue in patriotism
or, in other words, in the love that a man has for his own home. They are
unmoved by the story of sacrifice, of thrift, and of patient trust in
God that is told for instance in the history of the Protestant manses of
Scotland, where ministers on slender stipends brought up families of ten
and twelve, where the boys won scholarships at the universities, and where
women were the mothers of men.

These days have been recalled by Norman Macleod:

    "The minister, like most of his brethren, soon took to himself a wife,
    the daughter of a neighbouring 'gentleman tacksman,' and the
    grand-daughter of a minister, well born and well bred; and never did
    man find a help more meet for him. In that manse they lived for nearly
    fifty years, and there were born to them sixteen children; yet neither
    father nor mother could ever lay hand on a child and say, 'We wish this
    one had not been.' They were all a source of unmingled joy...." [90]

    "A 'wise' neighbour once remarked, 'That minister with his large family
    will ruin himself, and if he dies they will be beggars.' Yet there has
    never been a beggar among then to the fourth generation." [91]

How did they manage to provide for their children? In this pagan, spoon-fed
age, many people will laugh when they read the answer--in a family letter,
written more than a hundred years ago by a man who was poor:

    "But the thought--I cannot provide for these! Take care, minister, the
    anxiety of your affection does not unhinge that confidence with which
    the Christian ought to repose upon the wise and good providence of
    God! What though you are to leave your children poor and friendless?
    Is the arm of the Lord shortened, that He cannot help? Is His ear
    heavy, that He cannot hear? You yourself have been no more than an
    instrument in the hand of His goodness; and is His goodness, pray,
    bound up in your feeble arm? Do you what you can; leave the rest to
    God. Let them be good, and fear the Lord, and keep His commandments,
    and He will provide for them in His own way and in His own time. Why,
    then, wilt thou be cast down, O my soul; why disquieted within me?
    Trust thou in the Lord! Under all the changes and the cares and the
    troubles of this life, may the consolations of religion support our
    spirits. In the multitude of thoughts within me, Thy comforts O my
    God, delight my soul! But no more of this preaching-like harangue, of
    which, I doubt not, you wish to be relieved. Let me rather reply to
    your letter, and tell you my news." [92]

That letter was written by Norman Macleod, ordained in 1774, and minister
of the Church of Scotland in Morven for some forty years. His stipend was
£40, afterwards raised to £80. He had a family of sixteen. One of his sons
was minister in Campbelltown, and later in Glasgow. He had a family of
eleven. His eldest son was Chaplain to Queen Victoria, and wrote the
_Reminiscences of a Highland Parish_.

The birth controllers ask why we should bring up children at great cost and
trouble to ourselves, and they have been well answered by a non-Catholic
writer, Dr. W.E. Home. [93]

    "One of my acquaintances refuses to have a second child because he
    could not then play golf. Is there, then, no pleasure in children which
    shall compensate for the troubles and expenses they bring upon you? I
    notice that the penurious Roman Catholic French Canadian farmers are
    spreading out of Quebec and occupying more and more of Ontario. I fancy
    these hard-living parents would think their struggles to bring up their
    large (ten to twenty) families worth while when they see how their
    group is strengthening its position. If a race comes to find no
    instinctive pleasure in children it will probably be swept away by
    others more virile. One man will live where another will starve;
    prudence and selfishness are not identical.

    "In her book, _The Strength of a People_, Mrs. Bosanquet, who signed
    the Majority Report of the Poor Law Commission, tells the story of two
    girls in domestic service who became engaged. One was imprudent,
    married at once, lived in lodgings, trusted to the Church and the
    parish doctor to see her through her first confinement, had no
    foresight or management, every succeeding child only added to her
    worries, and her marriage was a failure. The other was prudent, did not
    marry till, after six months, she and her fiancé had chosen a house and
    its furniture. Then she married, and their house was their own careful
    choice; every table and chair reminded them of the afternoon they had
    had together when it was chosen; they were amusement enough to
    themselves, and they saved their money for the expenses of her
    confinement. He had not to seek amusement outside his home, did his
    work with a high sanction and got promoted, and each child was only an
    added pleasure. Idyllic; yes, but sometimes true. One of the happiest
    men I have known was a Marine sergeant with ten children, and a bed in
    his house for stray boys he thought he should help.

    "One of my friends married young and had five children; this required
    management. He certainly could not go trips, take courses and extra
    qualifications, but he did his work all right, and his sons were there
    to help in the war, and one of them has won a position of Imperial
    usefulness far above that of his father or me. Is that no compensation
    to his parents for old-time difficulties they have by now almost
    forgotten? A bad tree cannot bring forth good fruit."

Dr. W.E. Home is right, and the Neo-Malthusian golfer is wrong. Moreover,
he is wrong as a golfer. Golf requires skill, a fine co-ordination of sight
and touch, much patience and self-control: and many unfortunate people lack
these qualities of mind and body, and are therefore unable to play this
game with pleasure to themselves or to others. Consequently every golfer,
no matter whether he accepts the hypothesis of Spencer or that of Weismann
concerning the inheritance of acquired characteristics, should rejoice to
see his large family in the links as a good omen for the future of this
game, although there be some other reasons that also justify the existence
of children.

_(d) The Dangers of Small Families_

In a Malthusian leaflet, written for the poor Dr. Binnie Dunlop states:

    "You must at least admit that there would be nothing like the usual
    poverty if married couples had only one child for every 20s. or so, a
    week of wages. Yet the population would continue to increase rapidly,
    because very few of the children of small families die or grow up
    weakly; and it would become stronger, richer, and of course much
    happier." [94]

The false suggestion contained in his first sentence, namely that a high
birth-rate is the cause of poverty, has already been exposed (Chap. II),
and apparently Dr. Binnie Dunlop has never considered _why_ so many of the
English people should be so poor as to enable him to make use of their very
poverty in order to tempt them to adopt an evil method of birth control.
Moreover, his second contention, that a small family produces a higher type
of child, better fed, better trained, and healthier, than is found amongst
the children of large families is contrary to the following facts, as
stated by Professor Meyrick Booth:

    "1. A civilisation cannot be maintained with an average of less than
    about four children per marriage; a smaller number will lead to actual
    extinction.

    "2. Much information exists tending to show that heredity strongly
    favours the third, fourth, fifth, and subsequent children born to a
    given couple, rather than the _first two_, who are peculiarly apt to
    inherit some of the commonest physical and mental defects (upon this
    important point the records of the University of London Eugenics
    Laboratory should be consulted). A population with a low birth-rate
    thus naturally tends to degenerate. _It is the normal, and not the
    small family, that gives the best children_.

    "3. The present differential birth-rate--high amongst the less
    intelligent classes and low amongst the most capable families--so far
    from leading upwards, is causing the race to breed to a lower type.

    "4. The small family encourages the growth of luxury and the
    development of what M. Leroy-Beaulieu calls _l'esprit arriviste_.

    "5. The popular idea that _childbirth is injurious_ to a woman's health
    is probably _quite erroneous_. Where the _birth-rate is high the health
    of the woman is apparently better_ than where it is artificially low.

    "6. A study of history does not show that nations with low birth-rates
    have been able to attain to a higher level of civilisation. Such
    nations have been thrust into the background by their hardier
    neighbours." [95]

Moreover, M. Leroy-Beaulieu, in _La Question de la Population_ [96] states
that those districts of France which show an exceptionally low birthrate
are distinguished by a peculiar atmosphere of materialism, and that their
inhabitants exhibit, in a high degree, an attitude of mind well named
_l'esprit arriviste_--the desire to concentrate on outward success, to push
on, to be climbers, to advance themselves and their children in fashionable
society. This spirit means the willing sacrifice of all ideals of ethics
or of patriotism to family egoism. To this mental attitude, and to the
corresponding absence of religion, he attributes the decline of population.
In conclusion the following evidence is quoted by Professor Meyrick Booth:

    "The _Revue des Deux Mondes_ for July 1911 contains a valuable account,
    by a doctor resident in Gascony, of the state of things in that part of
    France (where, it will be remembered, the birth-rate is especially
    low). He expresses with the utmost emphasis the conviction that the
    Gascons are deteriorating, physically and mentally, and points out, at
    the same time, that the decline of population has had an injurious
    effect upon the economic condition of the country. 'L'hyponatalité est
    une cause précise et directe de la dégénérescence de la race,' he
    writes. And, dealing with the belief that a low birthrate will result
    in the development of a superior type of child, he says: 'C'est une
    illusion qui ne résiste pas à la lumière des faits tels que les montre
    l'étude démographique de nos villages gascons. Depuis que beaucoup de
    bancs restent vides à la petite école, les écoliers ne sont ni mieux
    doués, ni plus travailleurs, et ils sont certainement moins vigoureux.'
    And again, 'La quantité est en général la condition première et
    souveraine de la qualité.'" [97]


Section 8. THE PLOT AGAINST CHRISTENDOM

All purposive actions are ultimately based on philosophy of one sort or
another. If, for example, we find a rich man founding hospitals for the
poor, we may assume that he believes in the principle of Charity. It
is, therefore, of prime importance to determine what kind of philosophy
underlies Neo-Malthusian propaganda. The birth controllers profess to
be actuated solely by feelings of compassion and of benevolence towards
suffering humanity; and it is on these grounds that they are appealing to
the Church of England to bless their work, or at least to lend to
their propaganda a cloak of respectability. Now, the very fact that
Neo-Malthusians are sincere in their mistaken and dangerous convictions
makes it all the more necessary that we should discover the doctrines
on which their propaganda was originally based; because, although their
economic fallacies were borrowed from Malthus, their philosophy came from a
different source.

This philosophy is to be found, naked and unashamed, in a book entitled
_The Elements of Social Science_. I have already referred to this work
as the Bible of Neo-Malthusians, and its teaching has been endorsed as
recently as 1905 by the official journal of the Malthusian League, as
witness the following eulogy, whose last lines recall the happy days of
Bret Harte in the Far West, and the eloquent periods of our old and valued
friend Colonel Starbottle:

    "This work should be read by all followers of J.S. Mill, Garnier, and
    the Neo-Malthusian school of economists. We could give a long criticism
    of the many important chapters in this book; but, as we might be
    considered as prejudiced in its favour because of our agreement with
    its aims, we prefer to cite the opinion given by the editor of that
    widely circulated and most enlightened paper _The Weekly Times and
    Echo_, which appears in its issue of October 8." [98]

Before quoting from the book an explanation is due to my readers. I do not
suggest that all of those who are to-day supporting the propaganda for
artificial birth control would agree with its foolish blasphemies and
drivelling imbecilities; but it is nevertheless necessary to quote these
things, because our birth controllers are too wise in their day and
generation to reveal to the public, still less to the Church of England,
_the philosophy on which Neo-Malthusianism was originally based, and from
which it has grown_. Moreover, the Malthusians claim that it was the author
of the _Elements of Social Science_ "who interested Mr. Charles Bradlaugh
and Mrs. Annie Besant in the question." [99] Four quotations from the last
edition of the book will suffice:

    "But this is a certain truth, that any human being, any one of us,
    no matter how fallen and degraded, is an infinitely more glorious
    and adorable being than any God that ever was or will be
    conceived" (p. 413).

In justice to the memory of John Stuart Mill, whom Malthusians are ever
quoting, it should be noted that the foregoing blasphemy is nothing more
nor less than a burlesque of Positivism or of Agnosticism. The teaching of
Mill, Bain, and of Herbert Spencer was that the knowledge of God and of
His nature is impossible, because our senses are the _only_ source of
knowledge. Their reasoning was wrong--because a primary condition of all
knowledge is memory, in itself an intuition, because primary mathematical
axioms are intellectual intuitions, and because mind has the power of
abstraction; but, even so, not one of these men was capable of having
written the above-quoted passage. The next quotation refers to marriage.

    "Marriage is based upon the idea that constant and unvarying love is
    the only one which is pure and honourable, and which should be
    recognised as morally good. But there could not be a greater error than
    this. Love is, like all other human passions and appetites, subject to
    change, deriving a great part of its force and continuance from variety
    in its objects; and to attempt to fix it to an invariable channel is to
    try to alter the laws of its nature"(p. 353).

That quotation is an example of how evil ideas may arise from muddled
thinking: because if the word "lust" be substituted for the word "love" in
the third sentence, the remaining forty-five words would merely convey a
simple truth, expressed by Kipling in two lines:

    "For the more you 'ave known o' the others
    The less will you settle to one."

Very few people, I suppose, are so foolish as to believe that man is by
nature either a chaste or a constant animal, and indeed in this respect he
appears to his disadvantage when compared with certain varieties of birds,
which are _by nature_ constant to each other. On the other hand, millions
of people believe that man is able to overcome his animal nature; and for
the past two thousand years the civilised races of the world have held
that this is a goal towards which mankind should strive. In the opinion of
Christendom chastity and marriage are both morally good, but, according to
the philosophy of our Neo-Malthusian author, they are morally evil.

    "Chastity, or complete sexual abstinence, so far from being a virtue,
    is invariably a great natural sin" (p. 162).

Is it not obvious that to the writers of such passages love is synonymous
with animalism, with lust? It is by no means necessary to go to saints or
to moralists for a refutation of this Neo-Malthusian philosophy. Does any
decent ordinary man or woman agree with it? Ask the man in the street. Turn
the pages of our literature. Refer to Chaucer or Spenser, to Shakespeare or
Milton, refer to Fielding or Burns or Scott or Tennyson. Some of these men
were very imperfect; but they all knew the difference between lust and
love; and it is because they can tell us at least something of that which
is precious, enduring, ethereal, and divine in love that we read their
pages and honour their names. Not one of these men could have written the
following sentence:

            "Marriage distracts our attention from the real sexual
            duties, and this is one of its worst effects" (p. 366).

Now it is certain that if "the real sexual duties" are represented by
promiscuous fornication, then both marriage and chastity are evil things.
That philosophy is very old. From time immemorial--it has been advocated by
one of the most powerful intelligences in the universe. Such is the soil
on which the Neo-Malthusian fungus has grown--a soil that would rot the
foundations of Europe.

[Footnote 66: _The Lancet_, May 14, 1921, p. 1024]

[Footnote 67: _British Medical Journal_, 1921, vol. ii, p. 93.]

[Footnote 68: _The Small Family System_, 2nd edit., p. 2.]

[Footnote 69: _Supplement to The British Medical Journal_, March 18, 1905,
p. 110.]

[Footnote 70: _Common Sense on the Population Question_, by Teresa
Billington-Greig, p. 4. Published by the Malthusian League.]

[Footnote 71: _Medico-Legal Society_, July 7, 1921.]

[Footnote 72: _Suppl. Qu_. 49, Art. 6: "_Voluptates meretricias vir in
uxore quoerit quando nihil aliud in ea attendit quam quod in meretrice
attenderet_" (A husband seeks from his wife harlot pleasures when he asks
from her only what he might ask from a harlot). Quoted by the Rev. Vincent
McNabb, O.P., _The Catholic Gazette_, September 1921, p. 195.]

[Footnote 73: _British Medical Journal_, 1921, vol. ii, p. 169.]

[Footnote 74: Reproduced in fourth edition, 1861.]

[Footnote 75: _Essays in Medical Sociology_, 1899. Revised and printed
for private circulation, p. 95, (Copy in Library of Royal Society of
Medicine).]

[Footnote 76: _British Medical Journal_, August 20, 1921, p. 302.]

[Footnote 77: St. Matt. xviii. 6.]

[Footnote 78: _Proceedings of the Medico-Legal Society_, July 7, 1921]

[Footnote 79: "That arrangement of society in which so considerable a
number of the families and individuals are constrained by positive law to
labour for the advantage of other families and individuals as to stamp
the whole community with the mark of such labour we call The Servile
State."--Hilaire Belloc, _The Servile State_, 1912, p. 16.]

[Footnote 80: The Secretary of the Malthusian League. Vide _The Declining
Birth-rate_, 1916, p. 89.]

[Footnote 81: _The Declining Birth-rate_, 1916, p. 37.]

[Footnote 82: Dominions Royal Commission, Memorandum and Tables relating to
the Food and Raw Material Requirements of the United Kingdom: prepared by
the Royal Commission on the Natural Resources, Trade, and Legislation of
Certain Portions of His Majesty's Dominions. November, 1915, pp. 1 and 2.
My italics--H.G.S.]

[Footnote 83: i.e. grain, wheatmeal, and flour]

[Footnote 84: For particulars of this increase see Canada Year Book 1913,
p. 144.]

[Footnote 85: See pp. 387-8 of [Cd. 6588].]

[Footnote 86: Average for period 1907-1910 and excluding British Columbia,
where the yield per acre in 1911, the only year for which figures are
available, averaged 29-37 bushels.]

[Footnote 87: Including British Columbia.]

[Footnote 88: Below the average. The yield per acre in 1912 was 12.53
bushels, and in 1913 11.18.]

[Footnote 89: The Observer, Nov. 11, 1921.]

[Footnote 90: _Reminiscences of a Highland Parish_, by Norman Macleod,
D.D., 1876, p. 27.]

[Footnote 91: Ibid., p. 34.]

[Footnote 92: Ibid., p. 91.]

[Footnote 93: British Medical Journal, August 13, 1921, p. 261.]

[Footnote 94: Leaflet of the Malthusian League.]

[Footnote 95: _The Hibbert Journal_, October 1914, p. 153. My
italics.--H.G.S.]

[Footnote 96: Quoted by Professor Meyrick Booth, _The Hibbert Journal_,
October 1914, p. 153.]

[Footnote 97: _The Hibbert Journal_, October 1914.]

[Footnote 98: _The Malthusian_, November 1905, p. 84]

[Footnote 99: C.V. Drysdale, O.B.E., D. Sc., _The Small Family System_,
1918, p. 150.]




