CHAPTER VI


THE FALLING BIRTH-RATE IN ENGLAND: ITS CAUSES

Birth controllers claim that the fall in the English birth-rate, which
began to decline in 1876, is mostly due to the use of contraceptives: but
the very fact that this claim is made by these reckless propagandists makes
it imperative that we should scrutinise the evidence very carefully.


Section 1. NOT, AS MALTHUSIANS ASSERT, DUE MAINLY TO CONTRACEPTIVES

In support of the Malthusian contention, Dr. C.V. Drysdale, who is not a
doctor of medicine but a doctor of science, has published the following
statements:

    "... We might note that a recent investigation of the records of the
    Quakers (the Society of Friends) reveals the fact that family
    limitation has been adopted by them to a most astonishing extent. Their
    birthrate [_sic_] stood at 20 per thousand in 1876, and has now
    actually fallen to about 8 per thousand. The longevity of Quakers is
    well known, and the returns of deaths given by their Society show that
    the great majority live to between seventy and ninety years. Infantile
    mortality is practically unknown among them, although none of the
    special steps so dear to most social reformers have been taken for the
    protection of infant life. The Quakers are well known to be very
    earnest Christians, and to give the best example of religious morality.
    Their probity in business and their self-sacrifice in humanitarian work
    of all kinds are renowned. Yet it would seem that they have adopted
    family restriction to a greater extent than any other body of people,
    and, since the decline of their birth-rate only began in 1876, that it
    is due to adoption of preventive methods." [62]

Again, he translates the following quotation from a Swiss author:

    "In France a national committee has been formed which has as its object
    an agitation for the increase of the population. Upon this committee
    these [? there] sit, besides President Poincaré, who, although married,
    has no children, twenty-four senators and littérateurs. These
    twenty-five persons, who preach to their fellow citizens by word and
    pen, have between them nineteen children, or not one child on the
    average per married couple. Similarly, a Paris journal
    (_Intransigeant_, August and September, 1908) had the good idea of
    publishing four hundred and forty-five names of the chief Parisian
    personalities who are never tired of lending their names in support of
    opposition to the artificial restriction of families. I give these
    figures briefly without the names, which have no special interest for
    us. Anyone interested in the names can consult the paper well known in
    upper circles. Among them:

          176 married couples had 0 children =   0 children
          106    "       "     "  1 child    = 106    "
           88    "       "     "  2 children = 176    "
           40    "       "     "  3    "     = 120    "
           19    "       "     "  4    "     =  76    "
            7    "       "     "  5    "     =  35    "
            4    "       "     "  6    "     =  24    "
            3    "       "     "  7    "     =  21    "
            1    "       "     "  9    "     =   9    "
            1    "       "     " 11    "     =  11    "

    Total 445                             with 578

    That is, an average one and a third children per couple, while each
    single one of these families could much more easily have supported
    twenty children than a working-class family a single child."

"Comment on the above is superfluous," adds Dr. C.V. Drysdale, and with
that remark most people will cordially disagree. The obvious interpretation
of the foregoing figures is that there has been a decline in natural
fertility amongst highly educated and civilised people. But that
interpretation does not suit Dr. Drysdale's book, and hence we have the
disgraceful spectacle of a writer who, in order to bolster up an argument
which is rotten from beginning to end, does not hesitate to launch without
a particle of evidence a charge of gross hypocrisy against the Quakers of
England, a body of men and women who in peace and in war have proved the
sincerity of their faith, and against four hundred and seventy respected
citizens of Paris. Further comment on _that_ is superfluous. At the same
time it is obvious that, in so far as their pernicious propaganda spreads
and is adopted, Malthusians may claim to contribute to the fall of the
birth-rate, and towards the decline of the Empire.


Section 2. DECLINE IN FERTILITY DUE TO SOME NATURAL LAW

In the course of an inquiry on the fertility of women who had received a
college education, the National Birth Rate Commission [63] attempted to
discover to what extent birth control was practised amongst the middle and
professional classes. Of those amongst whom the inquiry was made 477 gave
definite answers, from which it was ascertained that 289, or 60 per cent.,
consciously limited their families, or attempted to do so; and that 188,
or 40 per cent. made no attempt to limit their families. Amongst those who
limited their families 183 stated the means employed, and of these, 105,
or 57 per cent., practised continence, whilst 78, or 43 per cent., used
artificial or unnatural methods.

Now comes a most extraordinary fact. Dr. Major Greenwood, [64] a
statistician whose methods are beyond question, discovered that there was
no real mathematical difference between the number of children in the
"limited" families and the number in the unlimited families. In both groups
of families the number of children was smaller than the average family in
the general population, and in both groups there were fewer children than
in the families of the preceding generation to which the parents belonged.
Dr. Greenwood states that this is _prima facie_ evidence that deliberate
birth control has produced little effect, and that the lowered fertility is
the expression of a natural change. Nevertheless, he holds that the latter
explanation cannot be accepted as wholly proved on the evidence, owing to
certain defects in the data on which his calculations were based.

    "I am of opinion that we should hesitate before adopting that
    interpretation in view of the cogent indirect evidence afforded by
    other data that the fall of the birth-rate is differential, and that
    the differentiation is largely economic. There are at least two
    considerations which must be borne in mind in connection with these
    schedules. The first is, that all the marriages described as unlimited
    may not have been so. I do not suggest that the answers are
    intentionally false, but it is possible that many may have considered
    that limitation implied the use of mechanical means; that marriages in
    which the parties merely abstained from, _or limited the occasions of_,
    sexual intercourse may have frequently entered as of unrestricted
    fertility."

The above italics are mine, because, if that surmise be correct, it goes
to prove that the restriction of intercourse to certain periods, which
restriction the married may lawfully practise, is as efficacious in
limiting the size of a family as are those artificial methods of birth
control contrary both to natural and to Christian morality. Dr. Major
Greenwood continues as follows:

    "In the second place, the schedules do not provide us with information
    as to when limitation was introduced. We are told, for instance, that
    the size of the family was five and that its number was limited. This
    may mean _either_ that throughout the duration of the marriage
    preventive measures were adopted from time to time, _or_ that _after_
    five children had been born fertile intercourse was stopped. In the
    absence of detailed information on this point it is plainly impossible
    to form an accurate judgment as to the effect of limitation."

There are, therefore, no accurate figures to indicate the extent to which
birth control has contributed to the decline in the birth-rate.


Section 3. AND TO CHARACTER OF OCCUPATION

Moreover the claim of birth controllers, that the decline in the English
birth-rate is mainly due to the use of contraceptives, is rendered highly
improbable by the fact that the Registrar-General [65] has shown that in
1911 the birth-rate in different classes varied according to the occupation
of the fathers. The figures are these:

                                       Births per 1,000 married
        Social Class.                males aged under 55, including
                                                  retired.

    1. Unskilled workmen                           213
    2. Intermediate class                          158
    3. Skilled workmen                             153
    4. Intermediate                                132
    5. Upper and middle class                      119

Thus, ascending the social scale, we find, in class upon class, that as the
annual income increases the number of children in the family diminishes,
until we come to the old English nobility of whom, according to Darwin, 19
per cent. are childless. These last have every reason to wish for heirs to
inherit their titles and what land and wealth they possess, and, as their
record in war proves them to be no cowards' breed, it would be a monstrous
indictment to maintain that their childlessness is mostly due to the use
of contraceptives. If _all_ these results arose from the practice of
birth control, it would imply a crescendo of general national selfishness
unparalleled in the history of humanity. No, it is not possible to give
Neo-Malthusians credit, even for all the evil they claim to have achieved.


Section 4. AGGRAVATED DOUBTLESS BY MALTHUSIANISM

Nevertheless, artificial birth control is an evil and too prevalent thing.
My contention is that the primary cause of our falling birth-rate is
over-civilisation; one of the most evil products of this over-civilisation,
whereby simple, natural, and unselfish ideals, based on the assumption that
national security depends on the moral and economic strength of family
life, have been replaced largely by a complicated, artificial, and
luxurious individualism; and that diminished fertility, apart from
the practice of artificial birth control, is a result of luxurious
individualism. Even if it be so, one of the most evil products of
over-civilisation is the use of contraceptives, because this practice, more
than any other factor in social life, hastens, directly and indirectly, the
fall of a declining birth-rate; and artificial birth control, to the extent
to which it is practised, therefore aggravates the consequences of a law of
decline already apparent in our midst. I have already said that restriction
of intercourse, as held lawful by the Catholic Church, is possibly as
efficacious in limiting the size of a family as are artificial methods.
If any man shall say that therefore there is no difference between these
methods, let him read the fuller explanation given in another connection on
p. 153. (See [Reference: Explanation]) The method which reason and morality
alike permit is devoid of all those evils, moral, psychological, and
physiological, that follow the use of contraceptives.

[Footnote 62: _The Small Family System_, pp. 195 and 160, New York, 1917.]

[Footnote 63: _The Declining Birth-rate_, p. 323.]

[Footnote 64: _The Declining Birth-rate_, p. 324.]

[Footnote 65: _The Declining Birth-rate_, p. 9.]




