CHAPTER IX

A SHADOW ON FIRE


When a naturally calm, clear, and courageous mind finds itself besieged
by what seem hysterical fancies, it is troubled and perplexed, and is
inclined to take drastic measures to restore itself to its normal
condition. Dr. Levillier found himself the prey of such fancies after
his interview with Mrs. Wilson. He had prescribed for her. He had very
carefully considered what way of life would be likely to restore her
to health, and to banish the demons which had brought her strength and
unusual self-reliance so low. He had received her gratitude, and had
dismissed her to the following of his plans for her benefit. All this
he had done with calm deliberation, the very cheerful composure which
he always practiced towards the victims of nervous complaints. But even
while he did this his own mind was in a turmoil. For this woman had let
fall statements with regard to her dead husband which most curiously
bolstered up Cuckoo's fantastic assertion that Valentine and Marr were
the same man. Marr had been cruel to animals, to dogs, had evidently
taken a keen enjoyment in torturing them, and on hearing Valentine's
voice she had turned pale and declared that it was the voice of her
husband. Then her strange declaration about her husband's use of music
as a mode of cruelty! These circumstances appealed powerfully to the
doctor's mind, or at least to that unscientific side of it which inclined
him to romance, and to a certain sympathy with the mysteries of the
world. Many Europeans who go to India return to their own continent
imbued with a belief in miracles, modern miracles, which no argument, no
sarcasm, can shake. But there are miracles in Europe too. The magicians
of the East work wonders in the strange atmosphere of that strange
country, whose very air is heavy with magic. Yet England, too, has her
magicians. London holds in the arms of its yellow fogs and dust-laden
clouds miracles. Doctor Levillier found himself assailed by ideas like
these as he thought of that transformed Marr, "possessed," as the pale,
strongly built wreck of a grand, powerful woman had named it, as he
thought of the transformed Valentine, the hour of whose transformation
coincided with the hour of Marr's death. Why had this new, horrible,
yet beautiful creature risen out of the ashes of the trance that was
practically a death? Why had he such amazing points of resemblance to
Marr? Why had the influence of Marr been deliberately intruded into the
calm, happy, and safe lives of Julian and Valentine? Marr was cruel to
dogs, and dogs showed rage and terror when the new Valentine approached
them. Marr had a hatred, yet a knowledge of music. The new Valentine,
when forced to sing, sang like some wild, desolate thing, with reluctant
and terrible voice. And at this point the doctor used the curb suddenly
and pulled himself up sharply. He felt that is was useless, that it was
unworthy, to plunge himself thus in romance, and to hang veils of mystery
around these facts which he had to accept and to deal with. A touch of
humanity is worth all the unhuman romance in the world. Humanity lay at
the doctor's gate, sore distressed, sinking to something that was beyond
distress. So, putting his fancies resolutely behind him, Doctor Levillier
resolved to fight through that frail weapon, the lady of the feathers,
the battle of Julian's will against the will--which he now fully and
once for all recognized as malign--of the man he must still call
Valentine. Valentine had said to Julian, at the Savoy, "If it came to a
battle--Cuckoo Bright's will against mine!" The doctor had not heard
those words. Yet, under the stars on the doorstep of Cuckoo's dwelling
he, too, had spoken to the girl of a fight. Thus he had poured a great
ardour into her heart. The three souls, Cuckoo's, Doctor Levillier's,
Valentine's, were thus set in battle array. They understood what they
faced, or at least that they faced warfare. Only Julian did not
understand--yet. He was besotted by the spell of the one he called friend
laid upon him, and by the vices in which he had been taught to wallow.
His brain was clouded and his eyes were dim, as the brains and eyes of
the _malades imaginaires_ who carry on the scheme of sin and sorrow in
the world, and prolong by their deeds the long travail of their race.
Julian did not understand. For now he seldom thought sincerely. Sincere
thoughts and the incessant and violent acts of passion do not often dwell
together.

The progress of Julian towards degradation had now become so rapid that
his many acquaintances talked of him openly as of one who had practically
"gone under." Not that he had ever done any of those few things at which
society, whose door is generally ajar, with Mrs. Grundy's large ear glued
to the keyhole, resolutely shuts the door. He had not forged, or stolen a
watch, or killed anybody, or married a grocer's widow, or anything of
that kind. But he had thrown his life to the pleasures of the body, and
made no secret of the fact. And the pleasures of the body, like eager
rats, had gnawed away his power of self-control until he could resist
nothing, no wish of the moment, no desire born illegitimately of passing
excitement or the prompting of wine. So he committed many follies, and
his follies had loud voices. They shrieked and shouted. And society heard
their cries, held the door a little more ajar, and listened with that
passion of attention which virtue accords to vice. But society, having
heard a good deal, shook its head over Julian. He had acquired such a
taste for low company that he ought to have been born a peer. Certainly,
he had money. That made his errors chink rather pleasantly, and filled
the bosoms of many mothers with an expansive charity towards him. Still,
the general opinion was that he was sinking very low. In fact, the legend
of Julian's shame was now written on his face in such legible and vital
characters that the most short-sighted eyes could not fail to read it.
The eager beauty of untarnished youth had faded into the dull, and often
sulky, languors of the utterly indulged body. Julian was often exhausted
and passing through those leaden-footed dreams that fitfully entrance
the vicious,--those dreams that are colourless and sombre, that press
upon all the faculties, and yet have no real meaning, that stifle all
intentions, and put an end, for the moment, to all active desires. People
talk of the vicious as "living," but half their time they are curiously
dead, for their sins blunt their energies and lull them into a condition
that resembles rather paralysis than slumber.

Since the night on which he had supped with Valentine at the Savoy,
Julian had given himself up to the company and influence of his friend
more than ever, and London, which had once nicknamed Valentine the Saint
of Victoria Street, began to dub him with quite another name. For it
gradually became apparent to those who only knew the two young men
slightly that Valentine exerted an extraordinarily powerful influence
over Julian, and that the influence was imperatively evil. At first
many were deceived by the clear beauty of Valentine's face, but that was
beginning to fade. A thin line, pencilled here and there with a fairylike
delicacy, a slight puffiness beneath the blue eyes, a looseness of the
cheeks, a droop of the lips, all very demure, as it were, and furtive,
shed alteration upon his fair beauty. He himself noticed it, as he looked
in a mirror one night, and silently cursed the inevitable effect which
mind produces upon matter. No man's face can forever remain an entirely
deceptive mask. The saintly expression of Valentine's was rapidly
becoming a thing of the past. He wondered whether Julian noticed it.
But Julian was too much preoccupied with his own energies of dreary
action and lacerating fatigues of subsequent thought, or it would be
truer to say moodiness, to notice anything. He was self-centred, as are
all sinners, immersed in his own downfall, like a man in an ocean. He
was unconscious that he was the subject of battle, that four wills were
to contend for his soul's sake. Four wills, yet one expressed itself in
no outward form. It was in exile, till the day of its redemption should
dawn.

       *       *       *       *       *

On the night when Valentine heard Julian babble incoherently the name
of the lady of the feathers, he said to himself that the battle should
be his, and he leaned upon his will to feel its power and its glory.
That night he forgot its fury, the intense emotion that had overtaken
him at the supper-table as he gauged, or strove to gauge, the influence
that Cuckoo was obtaining over Julian. He forgot Doctor Levillier. He
remembered only himself and his own strength, which he was now to test
to its foundations. And when he woke again to thoughts of others, it was
only to laugh at the force arrayed against him. The lady of the feathers
moved, to his fancy, like the most piteous of puppets, a jeering fate
manipulating the strings. This manipulator had kept her long to one set
of motions, stiff pleading arm, anxious head, interrogative joints,
and a strut of wolfish eagerness and hunger. But such a game was now
to be abandoned. And behold the puppet a warrior forsooth, a very
Amazon, hounded to fight by the doctor's voice, the doctor's word of
encouragement, battling with the stiff arms that had abandoned the
pleading gesture, stern in a wooden attitude of defiance. And Fate,
in fits of laughter at the string-holding! Then Valentine lost his fear,
and could have been angry that such a scarecrow was the creature selected
by Fate to draw a sword against him. He chose to forget the vision in the
mirror when he struck at the staring reflection of the lady of the
feathers and shivered under the influence of a cold terror. He chose
to remember only the thin and fearful woman who had given her body to
the world, and so had surely given her soul to a mill that had long ago
ground it to powder.

There is nothing so terrible to one screwed up to the highest pitch of
action as a monotony of waiting. Scourging were better, the hemp or the
fire. The lady of the feathers had been stirred to a strange enthusiasm,
and to a belief in herself, a faith more wonderful to some, more
unaccustomed and remote than any faith in God or devil. A flood of energy
flowed over her, warm as blood, strong as love, keen with the salt of
beautiful novelty, turbulent as the seas when the great tides take hold
on them. It was to her as if for the moment the world's centre was just
there where she was in the winter, and in the Marylebone Road, within
sound of the great church clock, the great church bells, the cries of
the street, the very steam panting up from the Baker Street Station.
Cuckoo was in the core of things, and the core of things is fierce and
hot and action-prompting. That half-revealed shadow waving good-bye to
Julian, as he stepped into the frosty night, was a shadow on fire. Yet he
had scarcely looked back at it. But Cuckoo was to learn to the last word
the lesson of patience. Inspired by the sympathy of the doctor and by
something deep in her own heart, she was, for the moment, all courage,
all flame. She was ready to fight. She was ready to do supreme things,
to touch the stars. The stars went out and she had not touched them. The
morning dawned very chilly, very dark, the morning that brought Mrs.
Brigg to her room yellow and complaining. Still, Cuckoo was conscious
of a high, beating courage that made summer in that winter day. She
astonished the old keeper of that weary house by the vivacity of her
manner, the brightness of her look. For Mrs. Brigg was well accustomed
to sad morning moods, to petulant lassitude, and dull grimness of
unpainted and unpowdered fatigue, but had long been a stranger to early
moods of hope or of gaiety. Mornings in houses such as hers are recurring
tragedies, desolating pulses of Time, shaking human hearts with each beat
nearer and nearer to the ultimatum of sorrow. She knew not what to make
of this new morning mood of Cuckoo, and wagged a heavily pensive head
over it, unresponsive and muttering. Jessie, too, was astonished, but
more pleasantly. The little dog, dwelling ignorantly in the midst of
degradation, had learned quickly the swing of its beloved mistress's
moods. In the dim morning it was ever the comforter of misery it could
not rightly understand, not the playfellow of happiness that stirred it
to leaps and barks of wonder and excitement. In the mornings Cuckoo held
it long against her thin bosom, sometimes crushed it nearly breathless,
pushing its little head down in the nest of her arms and telling it a
tale of the world's woe that sent long and thin whimpers twittering
through its body. The fluttering whisper of morning misery, or the
silence of vacant fatigue, these were accustomed things to Jessie. Even
if she did not thoroughly understand them, she was ready for them, and
eagerly responsive, as dogs are, to emotions along whose verges they
tread with the soft feet of sympathy, the sweeter for the ignorance
that paints their generosity in such tender colours. But Jessie was
_bouleversée_ by this passionate, eager Cuckoo; this shadow on fire, who
was alive almost ere London was alive, instead of half dead until half
London slept. The shadow on fire snatched her out of her sleep, tossed
her in air, spoke to her with a voice that thrilled her to quick barking
excitement, played with her till the little dog's flux of emotions
threatened to consummate in a canine apoplexy, and Mrs. Brigg battered at
the door with a shrill, "Keep that beast quiet, can't yer?" All this was
Cuckoo fighting; battle in the bedclothes, battle with soap and water,
curling-pins, corset, shoes. Each little act was performed with an energy
it did not demand. The sponge was squeezed dry like a live thing being
strangled; the toothbrush played as Maxim guns on an enemy; buttons went
into button-holes with a manner of ramrods going into muskets; hooks met
eyes as one army meets another. Battle in all that morning's common
tasks, setting them high, dressing them with chivalry and strong
endeavour. Cuckoo went into her sitting-room swiftly, with glowing cheeks
and flaming eyes, as one ardently expectant. And then--? Mrs. Brigg had
lit the fire, but it had spluttered out into a mass of blackened, ghostly
paper and skeleton sticks. A little more battle in the relighting of it.
But then--the blank day of the girl of the streets. Cuckoo sat down,
watched the growing fire, and wondered what she had expected. She was
conscious that she had expected something, and something not small. Her
mood had demanded it. But our moods are often like disappointed brigands,
who, having waylaid a pauper, demand with levelled pistols that which the
pauper has so vainly prayed for all his life. Moods come from within.
They are not evoked to dance valses with suitable partners from without.
And so Cuckoo's strong excitement and energy found nothing to dance with.
She sat there growing gradually less alive, and wondering why she had
hastened to get up; why she was fully dressed instead of wrapped in the
usual staring pink dressing-gown with the chiffon cascades down the
front. Mornings were of no use to her--never had been. God might as well
never have included them in the scheme of His days, so far as she was
concerned. But this morning she had thought, had felt--it seemed
impossible that she should feel so unusual and that nothing should
happen. She was ready, but Fate was in bed and asleep. That was really
the gist of the feeling that came over her. She thought of Dr. Levillier,
the man who had set a torch at last to her nature and fired it with a new
ardour. He was at his work in the morning, seeing, speaking to, that
passing line of strangers, who walked on forever through his life. His
energies were employed. Perhaps he had forgotten Cuckoo and her empty
mornings. Almost for the first time in her life the lady of the feathers
definitely longed for a legitimate occupation. How she could have flown
at it to-day. But already the bright mood was fading. It could not last
in such an atmosphere. As Cuckoo had said, she could fight better than
she could pray. But it seemed to her, after a while, that there was only
room in this cheerless, dark house to pray, no room at all to fight. She
tried reading yesterday's evening paper, left on the horsehair sofa by
Julian. But reading had never been a favourite occupation of hers, and
to-day she wanted to save Julian, to make him love her, and so to win him
from Valentine. She did not want to sit in the twilight of a winter's day
reading about people she had never seen, things she did not understand.
And she threw the paper down.

To make Julian love her. Cuckoo flushed, yes, even sitting there quite
alone, for Jessie had retired to the warmth of the bedroom blankets, as
she said it in her mind. The doctor had told her to do so. Her heart had
told her to try to do it long ago. But she trusted the doctor and she did
not trust her heart. And how could she trust her power to make Julian
love her? Cuckoo had once known very well how to make a man desire her.
In the very early days of her career she had been a very pretty girl.
Her old mother, who believed her dead, had often cried and said to the
neighbours that her beauty had been Cuckoo's undoing. Thus do we lay
blame on the few fine gifts that should gild our lives. But Cuckoo
had been very pretty and had soon learnt the first foul lesson of her
_métier_, to wake swift desire. As time went on and she wasted her gift
of beauty along the pavements of London, she found this poor power
failing in strength and in certainty. As to the power of wakening that
slower, deeper, kindred, yet opposed desire of love, Cuckoo had never
known whether she possessed it. She had had many lovers, but nobody to
love her really, and this in days of her beauty, or at any rate her
gracious prettiness. No wonder, then, that now a chill ran over her at
the thought of the task that lay before her if she was to gain her
battle. To break Valentine's influence she had to make Julian love her.
How? Instinctively, and with a sense of horror, she knew that her usual
practised arts, instead of helping, almost fatally handicapped her now.
She loved Julian purely, so purely that she could not endure that he
should meet her degradation as he had met it on that one night she never
thought of but with repentance. Yet to her ignorance, to her, rising
towards purity now, yet ever steeped in the coarsest knowledge, it
seemed that the thing called love could hardly utter itself save by some
threadbare blandishment, or parrot combination of words, used each night
by a hundred women of the town. Cuckoo knew no language of love that was
not, so to say, bad language, inasmuch as it was used by those whom she
hated. And hitherto she had been content to keep her love for Julian a
silent love, except on the few occasions when she had obliquely showed
it by the anger of jealousy or of reproach. She wished nothing bodily
from him, or if she did, stifled the wish in the mutely repeated record
of her own unworthiness. But now, if she was to draw his soul to hers,
she must move forward, she must surely commit some sacrifice, perform
some deed. What deed could she perform? What sacrifice could she make
that would win upon him, that would alter his relation towards her from
one of eccentric friendship to one of affection that might even be
governed?

The lady of the feathers did not reason this all out in her mind as
she sat before the spluttering fire, but she felt it, a tangled mass
of thoughts, catching her brain as in a net, catching her life as in
a net too. How could she make Julian love her? What could she do? And
all the time, as she asked herself passionately that question, the
hours were gliding by towards the evening refrain of her life. Cuckoo
began to consider this evening refrain as she had never considered it
before, as it might affect another if he loved her. If she made Julian
love her, if she succeeded in this attempt that seemed as if it must
be impossible, what of her evening refrain then? And what would be the
conclusion of such a love? She could not tell; she could only wonder.
The strange thing about the lady of the feathers, and about many of her
kind, was, that she never dreamed of such a thing as owing a duty to
herself, to her own body, her own soul, or nature. Cuckoo knew not the
meaning of self-respect. Had you told her that her body was a temple--not
of the Holy Ghost, but of a wonderful, exquisite thing called womanhood,
and for that reason should not be defiled, she would have stared at you
under drawn eyebrows, like a fierce boy, and wondered what in heaven or
earth you were talking jargon about. To get at her sympathy you must talk
to her of duty to another; and if she had a soft feeling for that other,
then she understood you, and then alone. It was the cause of Julian and
his safety that made her now consider this evening refrain of her life as
she sat there. And her mind ran back to Julian's first visit to her and
to his first request. He asked her to stay at home just for one night
with Jessie. And she refused. If she had not refused. If she had stayed
at home. If she had at that moment, from that moment, given up her life
of the street, would Julian have loved her then? Would she have been able
to do something for him? For hours Cuckoo sat there pondering in her
vague, desolate way over questions such as these. But she could give no
answer to them. And then she thought of that horrible night when the
hours danced to the music of the devil, when she gave Julian that first
little impetus which started him on his journey to the abyss. And at that
thought she grew white, and she grew hot, and she wondered why she had
been born to be the lady of the feathers, and the wrecker, not of men's
lives--she never thought of men tenderly in the mass--but of this one
life, of this one man, whom she loved in a strange, wild, good-woman way.

"C-r-r-r!" she said, her tongue flickering against her teeth. Jessie
stirred in the blankets, came to the floor with a "t'bb" and ran into the
room with curved attitudes of submission. But Cuckoo would not notice
the little dog. She stared at the fire and looked so old, and almost
intellectual. But there was nobody to see her. What a long, empty day it
had been, this day for which she had risen eagerly as to a day of battle!
What a long, empty day, and no deed done in it. And now the hour of the
evening refrain was come. Cuckoo had wanted this day to be a special day,
for it was the first of those new days which were to come after the
doctor's word of hope. And nothing had happened in it. Nobody had come.
The doctor was with his patients. Julian was--ah, surely--with Valentine.
And she, Cuckoo, this poor, pale girl, who wanted to fight and to do
battle, was alone. And she had been so eager in the morning. And now the
night was falling and she had not struck a blow. The hour chimed. It was
the hour of the evening refrain.

Suddenly Cuckoo got up. She went over to the window and pulled down the
blind so sharply that she nearly broke it. She struck a match violently
and lit the gas. She ran into the bedroom, caught her hat, which lay
ready for service on the top of the chest of drawers, and cast it with
a crash into a cardboard box, jamming the lid down on it. She seized her
jacket, which lay on the bed, and strung it up on a hook, as if she were
hanging a criminal. Then she came back into the sitting-room, sat down in
the chair, took up the evening paper of yesterday and began to read, with
eyes that gleamed under frowning brows, about "Foreign Affairs" and
"Bimetallism."

And that night the evening refrain of Cuckoo's life did not follow the
verse of her day.

She sat there all alone.

It was her way--the only way she could devise--of beginning to fight the
battle for Julian.

She did not stay at home with any thought of purifying herself by the
action. Another day she might go out as usual. But Julian had once asked
her not to go. She had gone then. Now she obeyed him, and the obedience
seemed to bring him a little nearer to her.




