CHAPTER V

THE LADY OF THE FEATHERS STARVES


Down in her dreary kitchen, among her dingy pots and pans, Mrs. Brigg was
filled with an anger that seemed to her as righteous as the anger of a
Puritan against Museum-opening on Sunday. Her ground-floor lodger was
going to the bad. Analysed, reduced to its essence, that was her feeling
about the lady of the feathers. Cuckoo had lived at number 400 for a
considerable time. Being, in some ways, easy-going, or perhaps one should
say rather reckless, she had given herself with a good enough grace to be
plucked by the claws of the landlady. She had endured being ruthlessly
rooked, with but little murmuring, as do so many of her patient class,
accustomed to be the prey of each unit in the large congregation of the
modern Fates. For months and years she had paid a preposterous price for
her badly furnished little rooms. She had been overcharged habitually for
every morsel of food she ate, every drop of beer or of tea she drank,
every fire that was kindled in her badly cleaned grate, every candle that
lighted her, almost every match she struck. She and Mrs. Brigg had had
many rows, had, times without number, lifted up their respective voices
in vituperation, and shown command of large and vile vocabularies. But
these rows had not been on the occasion of the open cheating of the
former by the latter. Fallen women, as they are called, seldom resent
being cheated by those in whose houses they live. Rather do they expect
the bleeding process as part of the penalty to be paid for a lost
character. The landlord of the leper is owed, for his charity and
tolerance, good hard cash. The landlady of the Pariah puts down mentally
in each added-up bill this item: "To loss of character--so much." And the
Pariah understands and pays. Such is the recognized dispensation. Mrs.
Brigg had had a fine time of robbery during the stay of Cuckoo in her
ugly house, and, in consequence, a certain queer and slow respect for
her lodger had very gradually grown up in her withered and gnarled old
nature. She had that feeling towards Cuckoo that a bad boy, too weak
to steal apples, has towards a bad boy not too weak to steal them. It
could hardly be called an actual liking. Of that the old creature in
her nethermost Hades was nearly incapable. But she enjoyed seeing apples
off the tree lying in her kitchen, and so could have patted any hands
that had gathered them nefariously. So far as she looked into the future
she saw there always Cuckoo, and herself robbing Cuckoo comfortably,
faithfully, unblamed and unrepentant, while the years rolled along,
the leech ever at its sucking profession.

Now this agreeable vision was abruptly changed. This slide of the magic
lantern was smashed to fragments. And Mrs. Brigg was filled with the
righteous anger of a balked and venerable robber. As a mother, dependent
upon the earnings of her child in some godly profession might feel on the
abrupt and reasonless refusal of that child to continue in it, so did
Mrs. Brigg feel now.

The lady of the feathers had, for the moment at least, given up
her profession. She sat at home with folded hands at night. It was
earth-shaking. It stirred the depths of the Brigg being. Quakings of a
world in commotion were as nothing to it. And the sweet Brigg dream that
had dawned on the last night of the old year, dream of a rich "toff" in
love with Cuckoo and winding her up to gilded circles, in which the fall
of night set gay ladies bareheaded, and scattered all feathered hats to
limbo, died childless and leaving no legacies. Certainly, Cuckoo was not
making money on the quiet enough in one night to keep her as seven or
fourteen nights would formerly have supplied. Mrs. Brigg questioned,
remonstrated, stormed, sulked, was rude, insinuating, artful, blunt, and
blackguardly--all to no purpose. Cuckoo would give no explanation of her
conduct. In the day she went out, but Mrs. Brigg was not to be deceived
by that. She based her observations and conclusions on weighty matters
connected with the culinary art and with things about which her trained,
disgraceful intelligence could not be deceived. Cuckoo was falling into
poverty. In the eyes of Brigg she had formerly been in touch with riches,
that is to say, she had--so the landlady considered--lived well. She had
got along without falling into debt. The exorbitant rent, regularly
earned, had been as regularly paid. The Brigg perquisites had not been
disputed. No watchful eye had been directed upon the claws that grabbed
and clung, the fingers that filched and retained.

But now was come a devastating change. Cuckoo grown, or growing, poor
was no longer easy-going. Living much less well, she also began to keep
a sharp eye on all she had. If it went mysteriously, without explanatory
action of her own, she called loudly on Brigg for enlightment. Where had
it gone? The old lady, disgusted to be brought to subterfuge, a thing to
which she was frankly unaccustomed, lied freely and with a good courage.
But her lies did not stand her in much stead with Cuckoo, who had, from
the start, no intention whatever of believing any word she might say.
So war of a novel kind came about between them. Mrs. Brigg was forced to
live and hear herself named thief, a distressing circumstance which she
could scarcely surmount with dignity, whatever she might manage in the
way of fortitude. Denial only armed forces for the attack. Battles were
numerous and violent. Cuckoo, who had in some directions no perception
at all of what was humiliating, took to measuring proportions of legs of
mutton going down to Hades and remeasuring them on their return. If the
inches did not tally, Mrs. Brigg knew it. Her soul revolted against such
surveyor's work on meat that her own hands had cooked. She called Cuckoo
names, and was called worse names in reply. But still the measurings went
on, and still Cuckoo spent her evenings within doors, sometimes without a
fire in the winter cold.

Mrs. Brigg therefore said within herself that Cuckoo had gone to the bad,
and beheld, with fancy's agitated eye, a time in the near future when not
only prequisites would be no more, but the very rent itself would be in
jeopardy. Fury sparkled in her heart.

Meanwhile the situation of Cuckoo above stairs was becoming at once
sordid and tragic. Starvation is always sordid. It exposes cheek-bones,
puts sharp points on elbows, writes ugliness over a face, and sets a
wolf crouching in the heart. Tragic it must always be, for a peculiar
sorrow walks with it; but when it is obstinate, and springs from the mule
in a human being, the tragedy has a lustre, a colour of its own. The lady
of the feathers was forever obstinate. She had been obstinate in vice,
she was now obstinate in virtue. In the old days Julian had said to her,
"Take some of my money and let the streets alone--even for one night."
She had refused. Now Doctor Levillier had said to her, "Prove your will.
Lean on it. Do something for Julian." She could only do this one thing.
She could only leave the street! With frowning, staring obstinacy she
left it. There was always something pathetically blind about Cuckoo's
proceedings. She was not lucid. But once she had grasped an idea she was
like the limpet on the rock. So now she sat at home. Out of her earnings
she had managed to save a very little money. One or two men had made her
small presents from time to time. For a little while she could exist. As
she sat alone on those strange new evenings she did much mental
arithmetic, calculating how long, with these reduced expenses, which
brought Mrs. Brigg's so low, she could live without earning. Sad sums
were these, whether rightly or wrongly worked out. The time must be
short. And afterwards? This question drove Cuckoo out in the mornings,
vaguely seeking an occupation. She knew that London was full of "good"
girls, who went forth to work while she lay in bed in the morning, and
came home to tea, and one boiled egg and watercress, when she started out
in the evening. So she put on her hat and jacket and went forth to find
out what work they did, and whether she could join in it. Those were
variegated pilgrimages full of astonishment. Cuckoo would stroll along
the road till she saw, perhaps, a girl who looked good--that is, as
unlike herself as possible--descend into the frost, or the mud from a
bus. Then she would dog the footsteps of this girl, find out where she
went, with a view of deducing from it what she did. In this manner she
once came to a sewing-machine shop in Praed Street, on the trail of a
bright-looking stranger, who walked gaily as to pleasant toil. Cuckoo
remained outside while the stranger went in and disappeared. She examined
the window--rows of sewing-machines, beyond them the dressed head of a
woman in a black silk gown. What did the stranger do here to gain a
living, and that bright smile of hers? Suddenly Cuckoo walked into the
shop and up to the lady with the dressed head.

"A machine, ma'am?" said the lady, with a very female look at Cuckoo.

Cuckoo shook her head.

"What can I do for you?"

"I'd like some work."

"Work!" said the lady, her voice travelling from the contralto to the
soprano register.

"I ain't got nothing to do. I want something; I'll do anything, like she
does," this, with a nod in the direction of a door through which the
pleasant stranger had vanished.

"Miss King; our bookkeeper! You know her?"

"No. I only see her in the street."

"Good morning," came from the lady, and a back confronted Cuckoo.

The pilgrimages were resumed. Cuckoo visited dressmakers, bonnet-shops,
ABC establishments, with no success. Her face, even when unpainted, told
its tale. Nature can write down the truth of a sin better than art.
Cuckoo learnt that fact by her walks. But still she trudged, learning
each day more truths, one of which--a finale to the long sermon, it
seemed--was that there is no army on earth more difficult to enlist in,
under certain circumstances her own, than the army of good working-girls.
The day she thoroughly understood that finale Cuckoo went home and had a
violent row with Mrs. Brigg. A cold scrag of mutton was supposed to be
the bone of contention, but that was only supposition. Cuckoo was really
cursing Mrs. Brigg because the world is full of close boroughs, not at
all because cold mutton has not learnt how to achieve eternal life, while
at the same time fulfilling its duties as an edible. Not understanding
this subtlety of emotion, Mrs. Brigg let herself loose in sarcasm.

"Why don't yer go out of a night?" she screamed, battering with one hand
on a tea-tray, held perpendicularly, to emphasize her words. "What's come
to yer? Go out; go out of a night."

"Shan't."

"Turned pious, 'ave yer?" sneered the landlady. "Or waitin' for a
'usband? Which is it to be? Mr. H'Addison, I dessey! Hee, hee, hee."

She burst into a bitter snigger. Cuckoo flushed scarlet and uttered words
of the pavement. Any one hearing her then must have put her down as
utterly unredeemed and irredeemable, a harridan to bandy foul language
with a cabman, or to outvie a street-urchin bumped against by a rival in
the newspaper trade. She covered Mrs. Brigg with abuse, prompted by the
gnawings at her heart, the hunger of mind and body, fear of the future,
wonder at the impossibilities of life. Her own greatness--for her love
and following obstinate unselfishness, without religious prompting or
self-respect, as it was, might be called great--turned sour within her
heart at such a moment. Her very virtue became as vinegar. Mrs. Brigg
was drowned in epithets and finally pushed furiously out into the
passage. Cuckoo turned from the door to Jessie yelping, and directed a
kick at the little dog. Jessie wailed, as only a toy dog can, like the
"mixture" stop of an organ, wailed and ran as one that runs to meet an
unknown future. Then Cuckoo pursued, caught her, and burst into tears
over her. The little creature's domed skull and india-rubber ears were
wet with the tears of her mistress. And she whimpered, too, but with much
relief, for she was back in her world of Cuckoo's lap; and could not be
quite unhappy there. But in what a world was Cuckoo!

It will be said that Dr. Levillier knew of her circumstances; but
anxiously kind and thoughtful though he was, he did not yet realize the
effect of his advice given to the lady of the feathers during the drive
on the Hampstead Heights. He had told her to prove her will by doing the
thing that Julian had asked of her. But he did not know what Julian had
asked. And he did not comprehend the bitter fruit that her following of
his further advice to keep from low and loveless actions must bring to
the ripening. When he spoke, as the sun went down on London, he was
carried on by excitement, and was thinking rather of the fate of Julian,
the _diablerie_ of Valentine, than of the individual life of the girl at
his side. He was arming her for the battle. But he dreamed of weapons,
not of rations, like many an enthusiast. He forgot that the soldier must
be fed as well as armed. He said to Cuckoo: "Fight! Use your woman's wit;
use your heart; wake up, and throw yourself into this battle." And she,
filled with determination, and with a puzzled, pent ardour to do
something, did not know what to do except--starve. So she began to
starve for Julian's sake, and because the doctor had fired her heart.
He had said: "Do what Julian asked you to do, and show Julian that you
have done it." But something within Cuckoo forbade her to fulfil this
last injunction. She could give up the street, but an extraordinary
shyness, false shame, and awkwardness had so far prevented her from
letting Julian know it. If he knew it, he would understand what it meant
for her, and would force money on her, and Cuckoo, having once made up
her mind that money and Julian should never be linked together in her
relations with him, stuck to secrecy on this subject with her normal dull
pertinacity. So matters move slowly towards a deadlock. The lady of the
feathers did not neglect the pawnshop. Her few trinkets went there very
soon. Then things that were not trinkets, that green evening dress, for
instance, the imitation lace, and one day a sale took place. Cuckoo
disposed, for an absurd sum, of her title deed, the headgear that had
given birth to her nickname. She was no longer the lady of the feathers.
The hat that had seen so much of her life reposed upon the head of
virtue, and knew Piccadilly no more. But Julian's present remained with
her, and indeed came into every-day use. And still Jessie sported her
yellow riband. Later there came a terrible time, when the eyes of
Cuckoo--appraising everything on which they looked--fell with that
fateful expression, not merely upon Jessie's yellow riband, but upon
Jessie herself. But that time was not quite yet.

While Cuckoo endured this fate, Dr. Levillier was in a perplexity of
another kind. The first round of that battle had ended in apparent
decisive defeat of Valentine's accusers. During the evening the fortunes
of war had certainly wavered to the doctor's side. Julian had displayed
sudden strong signs of an awakening; but the sitting had thrown him back
into his dream, had pushed him more firmly beneath the yoke of his
master. The doctor did not understand why, although he recognized the
fact; he could not divine the exact effect that disappointment would have
upon sudden suspicious eagerness. Julian had been waked to wonder, to
observe Valentine for an instant with new eyes, to look the mystery of
the great change in him in the face, and know it as a mystery. Yes, he
had even thought of Valentine as a stranger, and said to himself, "Where,
then, is my friend?" The new Valentine had risen out of the ashes of
sleep. Julian pressed forward the sitting as a means, the only one, of
searching among these ashes. In the old days each sitting had quickened
his senses into a strange life, as the last sitting quickened the senses
of the doctor. But to Julian this last sitting brought nothing but
disappointment; the thing which had been alive was dead, and so the
sudden hope which had come with the new wonder died too. He supposed
that he had been the prey of an absurd fancy created by the idle words
of the doctor, or by an idiotic movement of his mind, which had cried
to him on a sudden: "If the Valentine you love and revere is really gone
away, what are you worshipping now?" Now, in his heavy disappointment he
thought of this cry as a mad exclamation, and he sought to drown all
memory of it, and every memory in fresh vices, and in his fatal habit
of absinthe-drinking. He lay down under the yoke beneath which he had
previously wept, and so succeeded in going still lower. So that night
Valentine had won his intended triumph, although for a while it had been
in jeopardy.

Doctor Levillier was in perplexity; he had been brought to the very
threshold of revelation, and then thrust back into an every-day world
of thwarted hopes and broken ambitions. But the memory of magic was
still with him, and gave him a feeling of unrest, and a pertinacity that
was not to be without reward forever. Valentine's triumph held for the
conqueror a poison seed from which a flower was to spring. The doctor's
determination to continue the fight was frustrated at this time by
Julian, rather than by Valentine. Julian's disappointment plunged him
in a deep sea of indifference, from which he declined to be rescued. The
doctor's invitations to him remained unanswered. If he called, Julian
was never at home. Several times the doctor met Valentine, who, with a
deprecating smile, told him that Julian was away on some mad errand.

"I seldom see him now," he even added upon one occasion. "He has gone
beyond me. Julian is living so fast that my poor agility cannot keep pace
with him."

It seemed as if the whole affair was going completely out of the doctor's
knowledge, and that even Cuckoo had no longer any power of attraction for
Julian. The doctor wrote to her and received an ill-spelt answer, telling
him that Julian had not been near her since the last night of the year.
In this event the doctor's only hope lay in keeping closely in touch with
Valentine. To do this proved an easy matter. Valentine responded readily
to his invitations, asked him out in return, seemed glad to be with him.
The doctor believed he read the reason of this joy in Valentine's anxiety
to prove the depth of Julian's degradation. He had now begun to play
devilishly upon a pathetic stop, and sought every occasion to descant
upon the social ruin that was overtaking Julian, and his deep concern
in the matter. This hypocrisy was so transparent and so offensive that
there were moments when it stank in the doctor's nostrils, and he could
scarcely repress his horror and disgust. Yet to show them would be not
only impolitic, but would only add fuel to the flames of Valentine's pyre
of triumph. So the doctor, too, sought to play his part, and never
wearied in seeking Julian, although his quest was in vain. From Valentine
he gathered that Julian was now dropped even by the gay world; that his
clubs looked askance at him; that men began to shun him, and to whisper
against him.

"The stone is going down in the sea," Valentine said.

"Who threw it into the sea?" the doctor asked. "Tell me that."

Valentine shrugged whimsical shoulders.

"Fate, I suppose," he answered. "Fate is a mischievous boy, and is always
throwing stones. Is the lady of the feathers disconsolate?"

The doctor did not trust himself to reply, but was silent, plotting
another meeting to sit. For he had begun, still magic-bound perhaps, to
divine some possible salvation in that act which he had once condemned,
led, as he thought, by knowledge and by experience, of the nervous system
forsooth! Now he was led unscientifically by pure feeling, like a child
by a warm, close hand. The instinct that had guided Cuckoo seemed to
stretch out fingers to him. He must respond. But how to reach Julian?
While he strove to solve this problem it was solved for him in a manner
utterly surprising to him, although engineered by words of his.

Cuckoo wrought a strange work with the skeleton hands of hunger and of
pain.




