CHAPTER IV

THE SIXTH SITTING


Julian was painfully excited, but he strove to repress all evidences of
his inward turmoil as he began to pull out a table and arrange it in the
centre of the room. This act threw him with a jerk back into the days of
the past, recalling so vividly the former life of himself and Valentine
that he could not help saying:

"This is like last year."

"Like the year that the locust hath eaten," Valentine answered. "We must
push our empty white years down into the water, Julian."

Julian made no reply. The table was soon arranged, the screen was drawn
more closely round the fire, which had been allowed to burn low. Four
chairs were set. Valentine turned to Cuckoo, who sat hunched on the divan
staring with wide open eyes at these preparations.

"Will you come?" he said, with his hands on the back of one of the
chairs.

"Whatever are we going to do?" she asked nervously.

"Something very simple--and perhaps very foolish," said the doctor,
wondering, indeed, now the moment for beginning the phantasy was arrived,
whether he was not to blame for encouraging a thing that in his under
mind he so thoroughly disapproved of. "We are going to sit round that
table in the dark with our hands upon it, and wait."

"Whatever for?"

Her simple and blatant question caused the doctor actually to blush. His
confusion was quite obvious, but it was covered by Julian, who exclaimed,
rather roughly:

"Now, Cuckoo, don't chatter, but come here and sit quiet."

He drew her from the divan into a chair and sat down beside her.
Valentine glided swiftly into the chair on her other side and said:

"Oh, doctor, I forgot the light. Do you mind turning it out?"

The doctor obeyed, felt his way to the chair opposite Cuckoo and sat
down.

Almost at the moment he turned out the light the bells that rang,
"_Le roi est mort, vive le roi_," ceased. Cuckoo was directed to lay
her hands on the table, and to touch with her fingers the fingers of her
companions. She did so, trembling. This was a new experience to her, and
her entire lack of knowledge of what was expected to happen filled the
darkness with immoderate possibilities, and her soul with awe and with
confusion. Then, to sit between the man she loved and the man she
loathed, thus in the blackness, was a nerve-shaking experience which her
preceding fainting-fit did not deprive of its normal terrors. The hand of
Valentine and the hand of Julian were as ice and as fire to her. The
darkness seemed crowded with nameless things. She could fancy that she
heard it whisper incessantly in her ear.

But the real interest of this sitting, to any little demon gifted with
a miraculous power of pushing its detective way into the minds of the
sitters, would have lain, perhaps, chiefly in the mind of Doctor
Levillier. It has been said that, suddenly struck to the soul by the
conviction with which the instinctive Cuckoo pronounced those words,
"From Marr," Doctor Levillier entered into a new world, abandoning old
landmarks. He remained in this new world of the senses certainly, but
already he was becoming accustomed to it, clear-headed, keen-sighted,
even reasonable in it. Moved by some strange conviction that he was in
the presence of an inexplicable mystery, he no longer tried to explain
it in some ordinary fashion. He abandoned his theory of insanity, or it
abandoned him. In any case, it was dead, buried, whether he would or no.
He recognized a mystery at present beyond his capacity to understand or
to explain. Having got thus far, and having entered, at Julian's word,
into this present circumstance of sitting, table-turning, or rapping, or
whatever you may choose to call it, he cleared any ordinary furniture of
doctor's prejudices right out of his mind--made a clean sweep of them.
That done--and the doing of it required some strong effort--his mind
was receptive, ready for anything, odd or ordinary, that might come
along. There he sat with his empty room waiting to be filled--the only
reasonable way of waiting for that of which we have no knowledge. He did
not clamour "I won't," or "I will." He said nothing at all, only waited
with the strict desire and intention of recognizing things to be what
they truly were, neither dressing them up nor tearing their garments
off their backs. When he put out the light and sat down, what he
expected--so far as he expected anything--was this, that the addition
of darkness would add a cloud to his mind, and endeavour to give
various finishing-touches to any spurious excitement created in him,
however much against his will, by the enemy's doings. In this expectation
he was entirely deceived. The falling of darkness drew a veil from his
mind, leaving his mental sight singularly, even preternaturally,
clear. The falling of silence gave an amazing acuteness to his inner
sense of hearing. Certain people are so made that they can, under
certain conditions, and at certain moments, hear the workings of their
neighbours' minds, as you and I can hear the whirr of machinery, or the
cry of a child in the street. An ordinary man or woman can only hear a
mind when lips, teeth, and tongue utter it with living sounds that set
the air in vibration. These abnormal people hear, in these abnormal
moments, the silent murmurs of the mind making no effort at all to utter
itself through the usual speech apparatus. Till this moment the doctor
had supposed himself to be an entirely normal man, but he had been
sitting only a very short time before he began to become aware of the
silent murmurs of these three minds around him. The darkness set his own
mind free from clouds of excitement and from mists of unreason. That was
the first step. But it did more. It developed in him this marvellous
faculty of the hearing of silence, called by some divination. All his
senses were rendered amazingly acute. A perfectly distinct impression of
the precise feelings of Cuckoo, of Valentine, and of Julian respectively
came to him as he sat there, although he could neither see nor hear them.
Each of them seemed to pour his or her thoughts into the doctor's mind.
Thus, at first, did his empty room become furnished with the thoughts of
his companions. He was sitting in the circle between Julian and Valentine
and held their hands. And it was Valentine who forged the first link in
this strange chain of unuttered communication. As the darkness cleared
the doctor's mind, and set him once more on his feet--although in a new
world--an aroma of triumph floated to him softly, like a scent in a damp
wood at night. He heard then the mind of Valentine murmuring in the
stillness the Litany of its glory, a long and an ornate Litany, deep and
full, and he knew that he had been right in supposing that Valentine had
invited him to witness that glory. But the doctor became aware, too, that
at moments the Litany faltered, hesitated, as if the mind of Valentine
grew uncertain or was assailed by vague fears. And these fears ran like
little pale furtive things to Valentine from the lady of the feathers. By
degrees the doctor could imagine that he actually saw them stealing back
and forth. Now one would come alone as if to listen to the Litany, and
then another would follow, and another, and, growing brave, they would
combine against it. Then Valentine would waver and become uneasy, as one
who hears little voices crying against him in the night, and knows not
whence they come or from whom. But the Litany would begin again, and
Valentine would triumph over the pale fears and they would shrink away.
And in the Litany one name recurred again and again--the name of Julian.
Over him was the triumph. In his ruin and fall and ultimate destruction
the glory lived. To witness the complete possibility of this ruin, the
complete sovereignty of this glory, the doctor and the lady of the
feathers were there. And the doctor grew to feel that only some outside
circumstance, alarming Valentine to anxiety and waking Julian to a new
observation, had hindered the intended triumph. What circumstance was
that? He looked back along the past evening and found it in himself, in
his theory that a soul expelled was not necessarily a soul dead. The rift
in the glory of the Litany came with that. Valentine was trying to close
it by this act of sitting, to impress the strength of his will upon his
companions in the darkness. The doctor felt his effort like a continually
repeated blow, stealthy and hard and merciless.

And now, in the darkness and in the silence, the doctor heard the mind of
Julian. Another scent floated through that imagined damp and breathing
wood from another--but how different--soul-flower. No Litany of triumph
murmured in the blackness where Julian sat, but a hoarse and broken solo,
part despair, part fear, part anger, and all perplexed and flooded with
bewilderment and with excitement. The doctor drew into him the murmur
of Julian's mind until it seemed to become, for the time, the murmur of
his own mind. He was conscious of a dreadful turmoil of doubt, and dread
and perplexity, so strong, so painful, that it lay upon him like a dense
and a suffocating burden. In that moment he knew utterly that the
greatest load in the world laid on any man is the load of his own,
perhaps beloved, sin. He was staggering wearily with Julian away from
the light. His eyes were dim--with the eyes of Julian. His ears, like
Julian's, were assailed with the dastard clamour of the calling sin.
"Listen! Listen! you want me. I am here. Take me! Take me!" And the
weltering seas of heavy flooding impotence rolled round him as they
rolled round Julian. He grew numb and vacant and inert, then--alive ever
to the murmur of Julian's mind--caught a glimpse, through the waters of
that whelming sea, of far-away light, and heard that the voices of the
importunate sins grew fainter. But whether the voices were loud or low,
whether the seas flowed above his head or sank and failed, he was always
conscious of the dominating mood of almost wild perplexity and a madness
of bewilderment. For Julian stirred under the yoke that Valentine had
laid upon him, as if at last conscious distinctly that it was indeed a
yoke, and that it galled him; as if at last conscious, too, that without
that yoke was freedom. And he shot against Valentine in the darkness
arrows of inquiry. But always he lived in doubt and almost in terror.

And then, detaching himself from the triumph, touched with anxiety, of
Valentine, and from the wild turmoil of Julian, Dr. Levillier opened the
door of his mind wide, and the lady of the feathers entered in.

He heard the thoughts of a woman.

That was strangest of all--the most fantastic, eerie, wayward, wonderful
music the doctor had dreamed of.

Have you listened to far-off and mingling melodies at night--melodies of
things opposed and differing, yet drawn together, in strange places far
from your home? Have you heard a woman wailing over some abominable
sorrow in a dark house, and an organ--before which filthy children dance
fantastically--playing a merry Neapolitan tune in front of it, while the
mutter of scowling men comes from the blazing corner where the gin-palace
faces the night? There you have sorrow, sunshine, crime, singing together
in a great city. Or have you stood in a land not your own, and gleaned
the whisper of an ancient river, the sough of a desert wind, the hoarse
and tuneless song of a black man at a waterwheel, the soprano ballad of
a warbling hotel English lady, and the remote and throbbing roar of a
savage Soudanese hymn and beaten drums from the golden Eastern night?
There you have nature, toil, shrill civilization and war claiming you
with one effort in a sad and sweet country. Or have you, in a bright and
dewy morning, heard the "murmur of folk at their prayers," the drone of a
church organ, and, beyond the hedgerow, two graceless lovers quarrelling,
and an atheist, leaning over the church gate, sneering to his fellow at
the devotion of deluded Sabbath-keepers? There you have love of the
hidden and faith, love of the visible and distrust, hatred of hidden love
and faithlessness, making a symphony for you. Such mingled music is
strange--strange as life. But to the doctor the music of this girl,
Cuckoo, in the dark seemed stranger and more eerie far. Her mind sang to
him of a thousand things in a moment, as is the fashion of women. Only
men normally hear but one, at most two or three, of the many feminine
melodies. And now Doctor Levillier heard them all, as a man may hear
those differing songs already recounted, simultaneously and clearly.
Degradation and the hopelessness that catches it by the hand, passion
and the strength and purity of passion, hatred, fear, physical fatigue,
ignorant nervousness, grossness of the gutter, which will cling even to
a soul capable of great devotion and noble effort, and accompany it on
the upward journey, very far and very high, resolve and shrinking, mere
street-boy virulence of enmity, and mere angel tenderness of pity--all
these sang their song from the mind and heart of Cuckoo to the mind and
heart of the doctor. It was a chorus of women in one woman, as it so
often is in the dearest women we know. In that choir a harlot sat,
hating, by a girl who was all love and reverence. And they sang out
of the same hymn-book. Jenny joined her voice with Susannah, Mary
Magdalene with Mary Mother, so near together in one thing, so far
apart in another--alike in this, that both were singing. And in that
choir--celestial and infernal--sang the jealous woman with grey cheeks
and haggard eyes, and the timorous woman, and she of the fearless face,
and the woman who could scale the stars for the creature she worshipped,
and the woman who could lie down in the mud and let the world see her
there, and the woman who had sold her soul for food, and a thin woman,
such a thin, almost transparent, wistful creature, who was facing the
thing men call with bated breath--starvation. She sang too, but, of all
these women, she was the only one the doctor could not rightly hear nor
rightly see. For she, as yet, was remote, far down the level line of that
choir, hardly perhaps one with it yet, faint of voice, dim of outline.

The doctor heard the choir sing, and then--

His mind, as the time of the darkness grew longer, continued to grow
more and more clear, until he felt thoroughly, and was able to try to
analyze its unnatural condition. Scales had fallen from him and from
his companions for him. Their bodies were clothed, their souls, their
flames, seemed stripped bare and offered to him naked. He had examined
them with this greedy, yet sane, attention and curiosity. He had led them
into the empty room and stayed with them there. He had heard the Litany
of the Glory of Valentine, and the suffocation, and the anger, and the
stirring beneath his yoke of Julian. He had heard the many women sing in
the heart of the lady of the feathers. But all this seemed leading him
forward and onward, step by step, as to a threshold beyond which was some
greater, some more importunate, thing. And he took the last step with
Cuckoo. It was as if he was handed on from one room to another, as is the
fashion in the palace of a great king, his name being called in each, and
sent before, like a voice sent on the wind, and as if Cuckoo was in the
last anteroom that gave upon the audience-chamber. Now he had arrived,
and suddenly a great wave of mysterious expectation ran over him and
filled the cup of his soul. He felt that he stood still and waited. The
sense of Cuckoo, of all she felt and thought in the darkness, gradually
dropped away from him, like leaves from a tree, till every branch was
leafless. And this autumnal ravishment, like the ravishment of nature,
was but a preparation surely for a future spring.

The doctor waited outside that door, beyond which, perhaps, spring
blossomed and sang. He lost at last all sense of being in a company of
people, and felt as one feels who is entirely alone, expectant, calm,
ready. And still only the darkness and the silence. Nothing more at
first. But presently what seemed to him a marvel.

He had by this time grown at ease with his power of thought-reading,
at ease with this new sense of the hearing of silence. The differing
scents of these three flowers hidden in the night had been breathed
out to him. With infallible certainty he had recognized each one,
differentiated the one from the other. And as the scent of one flower
had failed, the scent of another had risen upon him, until he had known
the heart of each of the three. Then for a while was the night scentless,
silent, blank, empty. But presently the doctor was aware of an uneasiness
and of an anxiety stealing upon him. Whence it came he could not tell.
Only this he knew, that he received it from something, but that it came
neither from the lady of the feathers, from Valentine, nor from Julian.
From whom, then, could it emanate, this weird eagerness, this fluttering,
pulsing fear, and hope, and intention? From himself only? He asked
himself that question. Was he communing in the dark with his own soul?
He knew that he was not. The scent of this new and unknown flower grew
stronger in the night, more penetrating and intentional. Yet was it
vaguer, more distant, than that emitted by those other three flowers.
The exact impression received by the doctor at this moment was very
subtle. Precisely it was this: It seemed to him that he was gradually
coming into communication with a fourth mind, or soul; that this soul was
actually more strong, more vehement, even more determined, than the souls
of his three companions, but that some barrier removed it from him, set
it very far of. The flame of a match held to a man's eyes may dazzle him
more than the flame of a great fire on the horizon. This new flame was as
the latter in comparison to match-flames that had been flaring in the
doctor's eyes. And this great and distant flame burned slowly in a smoke
of mystery and upon the verge of dense darkness.

Never had the doctor known so peculiar, and even awe-striking, an
experience as that which he now underwent. What utterly bewildered him
was the circumstance of this undoubted new and definite personality
enclosed in this tiny room with him and with his three companions. He
was receiving the impression of the thoughts of a stranger. Yet there
was no stranger in the chamber. And he was vexed and curiously irritated
by the fact of the impression being at the same time very vague and very
violent, like the cry of a man which reaches you faintly from a very long
distance, but which you feel instinctively to have been uttered with the
frantic force of death or of despair. And the mind of this stranger was
tugging at the doctor's mind, anxiously, insistently. There was a depth
of distress in it that was as no mere human distress, and that moved the
doctor to a mood beyond the mood of tears or of prayers. There came over
him an awful sense of pity for this stranger-soul. What had it done? How
was it circumstanced? In what ghastly train of events did it move? It was
surely powerful and helpless at the same time; a cripple with a mind on
fire with fight; Samson blind. He felt that it wanted something--of him,
or of his companions, some light in its severe desolation. Deeper and
deeper grew his horror and pity for it, deeper and deeper his sense of
its ill fate. The woe of it was unearthly, yet more than earthly woe.
Similes came to the doctor to compare with its dreadful circumstance:
a child motherless in a world all winter; a saint devoted to hell by
some great error of God; even one more blasphemous, and more _bizarre_
still--God worsted by humanity, and, at the last, helpless to reclaim
the souls to which He had Himself given being; lonely God in a lonely
heaven, seeing far-off hell bursting with the countless multitudes of
the writhing lost. This last simile stayed with him. He fancied, he
felt--not heard--the voice of this frustrate God calling to him: "Do what
I could not do. Strive to help My impotence. A little--a little--and even
yet hell would stand empty, the vacant courts of heaven be filled.
Act--act--act."

"Doctor, why are you trembling? Why are you trembling?"

It was the voice of Valentine that spoke. The doctor, by an effort so
painful that the memory of it remained with him to the end of his life,
recalled his mind from its journey.

"Trembling!" he said. "What do you mean? I am all right. I am quietly in
my place. How long have we been sitting?"

"An immense time I fancy. It seems fruitless, Julian!"

"Yes."

Julian's voice sounded heavy and weary.

"Don't you think we had better stop?"

"If you like."

Valentine got up and turned on the light.

Then they saw that the lady of the feathers, leaning back in her chair,
was fallen asleep, no doubt from sheer weariness. Her face was very
white, and in sleep its expression had become ethereal and purified. Her
thin hands still rested nervelessly upon the table. She seemed like a
little child that had known sorrow early, and sought gently to lose the
sense of it in rest.

"Cuckoo," Julian said, leaning over her, "Cuckoo!"

She stirred and woke.

"I'm awfully done," she murmured, in her street voice. "Pardon!"

She sat up.

"I seemed as if I was put to sleep," she said.

"You were," Valentine answered her. "I willed that you should sleep."

He looked at the doctor, and his eyes said:

"I have had my triumph. You witness it."

Cuckoo reddened with anger, but she said nothing.

"Did you feel anything, Julian?" Valentine asked.

Julian looked strangely hopeless.

"Nothing," he said. "It's all different from what it was; like a dead
thing that used to be alive."

It seemed as if the sitting had filled him with a dogged despair.

"A dead thing," he repeated.

Then he went over to the spirit-stand and poured himself out more
absinthe.

"And you, doctor?" said Valentine. "What did you feel?"

"I was thinking all the time," he said, "of other things. Not of the
table or of table-turning."

When he and Cuckoo left the flat that night, or rather in the chill first
morning of the new year, they left Julian with Valentine.

He said he would stay, speaking in the voice of a man drugged almost into
uncertainty of his surroundings.




