CHAPTER III

THE FLIGHT OF THE BATS


Julian had resolved to keep his compact with the lady of the feathers. He
had learned partially to understand the curious and beautiful attitude
which her mind had assumed towards him, polluted as it must be by the
terror and working out of her fate, by many dreary actions, and by many
vile imaginings. But although he held to his promise he did not, after
that night of crisis, resume his former career of asceticism tempered by
winds of temptation which could never blow his casement open. There are
men who can vary the fine monotony of virtue by an occasional deliberate
error, and who return from such an excursion into dangerous by-paths
drilled and comforted, as it appears, for further journeying along the
main road of their respectability. But Julian was not such a man. He
resembled rather the morphia victim, or the inebriate, who must at
all hazards abstain from any indulgence, even the smallest, in drug
or draught, lest the demon who has such charm for him clasp him in
imperturbable arms, and refuse with the steadfastness of a once-tricked
Venus ever to let him go again.

Valentine's empire of five years was broken in one night.

At first Julian was scarcely conscious that his descent was not
momentary, but rather tending to the permanent. Certainly, at the first,
he was inclined to have the schoolboy outlook upon it, and the schoolboy
outlook is as a glance through the wrong end of a telescope, dwindling
giant sins to the stature of pigmies, and pigmy sins to mere points of
darkness which equal nothingness. But, strangely enough, it was his
interview with the weeping Cuckoo, that Magdalen of the streets, which
drove the schoolboy to limbo, and set virtue and vice for the moment
rightly on the throne and in the gutter. Despite his comparatively dull
mood and tendency to a calm of self-satisfaction in the Marylebone Road,
Julian could not be wholly unmoved by the passion of Cuckoo's regret, nor
entirely unaware that it was a passion in which he must have some share,
whether now or at some more distant time, when the thrall of recently
moved senses was weakened, and the numbness really born of excitement
melted in the quiet expansion of a manly and a reasonable calm. His
understanding of her passion, none too definite at first, gave him a
moment's wonder, both at her and at himself. It seemed strange that the
shattered influence of Valentine should be of less account to him who had
known and loved it than to her who had never known it. It seemed stranger
still that the streets--those wolves which tear one by one the rags of
good from human nature, till it stands naked and tearless beneath the
lamps, which are the eyes of the wolves--stranger that those streets
should have left to one of their children a veil so bridal and so
beautiful as that which hung round Cuckoo when she wept. Julian was
almost driven to believe that sin and purity can dwell together in one
woman, yet never have intercourse. Yet he knew that to be impossible. The
fact remained that the tarnished Cuckoo, in the first moments of regret,
was more conscious of his sin for him than he was conscious of it for
himself; that she led him, with her dingy hands, to such repentance as he
experienced, and that she, too, guarded him against repetition of the
sin, so far as she was concerned. Julian considered these circumstances;
and there was a time when they were not without effect upon him, and
when, with the assistance of a word from Valentine, they might have
worked upon him an easy salvation. But Valentine did not speak that word.
His peculiar purity had saved Julian in the past by its mere existence.
Its presence was enough. That _satis_ was dead now. Julian did not ask
why. Nor did he find himself troubled by its decease. There is nothing
like action for making man unobservant. Julian was no longer a ship in
dock, nor even a ship riding at anchor. The anchor was up, the sails were
set, the water ran back from the vessel's prow.

Cuckoo was not conscious of this. Sometimes she was subtle by intuition;
often she was not subtle at all. When she understood Julian's nature for
the moment, it was because his nature was, for the moment, in close
relation to hers. Her fate was affected by it, or its passages of arms
clashed near her heart. Then intuition, woman's guardian, had eyes and
ears, saw and heard with a distinctness that was nearly brilliant. But
when Julian's nature wandered, and the wanderings did not bring it where
hers was dwelling, her observation slept soundly enough. So she was not
conscious at first of Julian's gentle progress in a new direction.
Whether Valentine was conscious of it did not immediately appear, for
Julian said nothing. For five years he had not had a secret from
Valentine. Now he had to have one. He ranked Valentine with Doctor
Levillier as too good to be told of the evil thing. When he had had
temptations and resisted them he had told Valentine of them frankly. Now
he had temptations, and was beginning not to resist them; he kept silence
about them. This silence lasted for a little while, and then Valentine
swept it away, involuntarily it seemed, and by means of action, not of
words.

One day Julian met a man at his club, a lively, devil-may-care soldier of
fortune in the world. The man came to where he was sitting and said:

"So, Addison, your god has fallen from his pedestal. He's only a Dagon
after all."

Julian looked at him ignorantly.

"What god?" he asked.

"Your saint has tumbled from his perch. I never believed in him."

He was of the species that never believes in anything except vice and the
_Sporting Times_.

Julian rejoined:

"I don't understand you."

"Cresswell," said the man.

Julian began to wonder what was coming, and silently got ready for the
defence, as he always did instinctively when Valentine was the subject of
attack.

"What have you got to say about Cresswell?" he asked curtly.

"My dear chap, now don't you get your frills out. Nothing that I should
mind being said about me, I assure you. Only Cresswell will soon lose his
nickname if he goes on as he's going now."

"I'm in the dark."

"That's what he likes being, if what they say is true. Quite a
night-bird, I'm told."

"You'd better be more explicit."

But the man glanced at Julian's face and seemed to think better of it. He
moved off muttering:

"Damned rot, minding a little chaff. And when we're all in the same boat
too."

Julian sat pondering over his veiled remarks. They surprised him, but at
first he was inclined to consider them as meaningless and unfounded as so
much of the gossip of the clubs. Men like Valentine must always be a
target for the arrows of the cynical. Julian had heard his sanctity
laughed at in billiard-rooms and in bars many times, and had simply felt
an easy contempt for the laughers, who could not understand that any
nature could be finer than their own. But to-day his own faint change of
life--as yet in its gentle beginnings--led him presently to wonder,
literally for the first time, whether there was a side of Valentine's
life that was not merely a side of feeling, but of action, and that he
knew nothing of. If it were so, Julian felt an inward conviction that the
very nearest weeks of the past had seen its birth. He remembered once
more Valentine's idle remark about his weariness of goodness, and
wondered whether--in violation of his nature, in violent revolt against
his own nobility--he was living at last that commonplace, theatrical
puppet-play of the world, a double life.

Valentine a night-bird! What did that mean?

And then Julian thought of the great wheeling army of the bats, whose
evolutions every night of creation witnesses. In the day they do not
sleep, but they are hidden. Their wings are folded so closely as to be
invisible. Nobody could tell that they ever flew through shadowy places,
seeking that which never satiates, although it may transform, the
appetite. Nobody could tell how the twilight affects them when it comes;
how, in their obscurity, they have to keep a guard lest the involuntary
fluttering of a half-spread pinion betray them. And then when the
twilight, the blessed one of the twin twilights, one in course towards
day, one in course towards night, has deepened and has died, they can
dare to be themselves, to spread their short wings, and to flutter on
their vagrant and monotonous courses. It is a great though secret
army--the army of the bats. It scours through cities. No weather will
keep it quite restful in camp. No darkness will blind it into immobility.
The mainspring of sin beats in it as drums beat in a Soudanese fantasia,
as blood beats in a heart. The air of night is black with the movement of
the bats. They fly so thickly round some lives that those lives can never
see the sky, never catch a glimpse of the stars, never hear the wings of
the angels, but always and ever the wings of the bats. Nor can such lives
hear the whisper of Nature and of the sirens who walk purely with Nature.
The murmur of the bats drowns all other sounds, and makes a hoarse and
monotonous music. And the eyes of the bats are hungry, and the breath of
the bats is poisonous, and the flight of the bats is a charade of the
tragedy of the flight of the devils in hell.

How could Valentine be one of the bats? It seemed to Julian that if
Valentine tried to join them they would fall upon him, as certain birds
will fall upon one who is not of their tribe, and kill him. And yet?

Yet Julian began to know that he had been aware of a change in Valentine.
He had believed it to be momentary. Perhaps it was not momentary. Perhaps
Valentine was concealing his new mode of life from some strange idea of
chivalry towards Julian. As Julian pondered he grew excited. He began to
long to tell Valentine now what he had not liked to tell him before.
Suddenly he got up and hastened out of the club. He drove to Victoria
Street. But Valentine was not at home.

"I suppose Mr. Cresswell goes out every night Wade?" he asked the man,
after a moment of hesitation.

Wade looked very much astonished at such a question coming from Julian.

"Yes, sir. At least, most nights," Wade answered.

"I see," Julian said.

He stood a minute longer. Then he turned away, after an abrupt:

"Say I called, will you?"

Wade looked after him as he went down the stairs, with the raised
eyebrows of the confidential butler.

That night was warm and gentle, with a full moon riding in clear heavens.
The season was growing towards its full height, and the streets were
thronged with carriages till a late hour. There is one long pavement that
is generally trodden by many feet at every time of the year, and in
almost every hour of the wheeling twenty-four. It is the pavement on
which the legend of London's disgrace is written in bold characters of
defiance. Men from distant lands, having made the pilgrimage to our
Mecca, the queen, by right of magnitude at least, of the world's cities,
stare aghast upon the legend, almost as Belshazzar stared upon the
writing on the wall. Colonists seeking for the first time the comfortable
embrace of that mother country which has been the fable of their
childhood and the dream of their laborious years of maturity, gaze with
withering hearts at this cancer in her bosom. Pure women turn their eyes
from it. Children seek it that they may learn in one sharp moment the
knowledge of good and evil. The music of the feet on that pavement has
called women to despair and men to destruction; has sung in the ears of
innocence till they grew deaf to virtue, and murmured round the heart of
love till it became the heart of lust. And that pavement is the
camping-ground of the army of the bats. On wet nights they flit drearily
through the rain. In winter they glide like shadows among the revealing
snows. But in the time of flowers and of soft airs, when the moon at the
full swims calmly above the towers of Westminster, and the Thames rests
rocked in a silver dream among the ebony wharves and barges, the
flight of the bats is gay and their number is legion. And their circle is
joined by many who are but recruits, or as camp-followers, treading in
the track of those whose names are on the roll-call.

The lady of the feathers rarely failed to join the evening flight of the
bats. Her acquaintance with Julian, even her curious passion for his
respect and distant treatment, had not won her to different evenings, or
to a new mode of life. But her feeling for Julian led her to ignore now
the fact of this fate of hers. She chose to set him aside from it, to
keep him for a friend, as an innocent peasant-girl might keep some
recluse wandering after peace into her solitude. Julian was to be the
one man who looked on her with quiet, habitual eyes, who touched her
with calm, gentle hand, who spoke to her with the voice of friendship,
demanding nothing, and thought of her with a feeling that was neither
greed nor contempt. And that one fatal night in which Cuckoo's private
and secluded heart was so bitterly wounded she put out of her
recollection with a strength of determination soldier-like and almost
fierce. It lay in the past, but she did not treat the past as a woman
treats a drawer full of old, used things, opening it in quiet moments
and turning over its contents with a lingering and a loving hand. She
shut it, locked it almost angrily, and never, never looked into it.
Julian was to be her friend of leisure, never associated in any way with
her tragic hours. All other men were the same, stamped with a similar
hall-mark. He only was unstamped and was beautiful.

On this evening of summer, Cuckoo, as usual, joined the flight of the
bats with a tired wing. The heat tried her. Her cheeks were white as
ivory under their cloud of rouge. Her mouth was more plaintive even than
usual, and her heart felt dull and heavy. As she got out of the omnibus
at the Circus one of her ankles turned, and she gave an awkward jump that
set all the feathers on her hat in commotion, and made the newspaper boys
laugh at her scornfully. They knew her by sight, and joked her every
evening when she arrived. At first--that was a long while ago--she had
resented their remarks, still more their shrewd unboyish questions, and
had answered them with angry bitterness. But--well, that was a long while
ago. Now she simply recovered her footing, paused a moment on the
kerbstone to arrange her dress, and then drifted away into the crowd
slowly, without even glancing at her nightly critics, who were aware of
a new bow on her gown, recognized with imperturbable _sang-froid_ the
change in a trimming or the alteration of a waist-belt.

Slowly she walked along. Piccadilly bats fly slowly. The moon went up.
She had not met her fate. In the throng she saw Valentine pass. He looked
at her with a smile. She turned her eyes hastily away. She had met him on
several evenings of late, but had never told Julian so, for she began to
understand now his reverence for Valentine, and a new-born, ladylike
instinct taught her not to hurt that reverence. Valentine disappeared.
He had not tried to speak with her. Once, on encountering her, he had
paused, but Cuckoo glided behind two large Frenchwomen and escaped with
the adroitness of a snake in the grass. Apparently he recognized her
movement as one of retreat, and was resolved to leave her alone, for he
had never followed her since that day, although he always lifted his hat
when he saw her. The crowd grew thicker. It was very heterogeneous, but
Cuckoo did not thread it with the attention of a psychologist, or examine
it with the pains of a philosopher of the dark hours. She stared
listlessly at the faces of the men, and if they stared back at her,
smiled mechanically with a thin and stereotyped coquetry, moving on
vacantly the while in a sort of dream, such as a tired journalist may
fall into as he drives his pen over the paper, leaving a train of
familiar words and phrases behind it. There are many dreamers like Cuckoo
on the thin riband of that pavement, moving in a maze created by
everlasting custom, beneath their flowers, half senseless to life, and
yet alive to the least human notice, behind the stretched barriers of
their veils. She walked from the Circus to Hyde Park corner and back
again; then turned, with an ever-growing lassitude, to repeat the
desolate experience. By this time the playhouses had vomited their
patrons into the night, and locomotion was becoming more difficult.
Sometimes there was a block, and Cuckoo found herself "hung up," as she
called it, squashed in a mass of people, all intent on some scheme of
their own, and resentful of the enforced interruption to their movement.
Then, by some unknown and mysterious means, the human knot was untied,
and all the atoms murmured on again through the ocean of the town. And
still Cuckoo was alone, and still the mechanical smile came and went upon
her lips, and her feet seemed to grow heavier and heavier, till they were
as cannon-balls to be lifted and dragged by her protesting muscles. And
still her senses seem to become more and more drugged by the familiarity
of it all, the familiarity of smile, of tired limbs, of incessant slow
motion, of staring faces and watchful eyes; the familiarity of the cabs
rolling home towards Knightsbridge and farther Kensington, with a dull,
harsh noise; the familiarity of personal, intense loneliness and longing
for quiet; the familiarity of the knowledge that quiet could only be
earned by failure, and that failure meant lack of food, debt, and deeper
degradation.

At last--perhaps it was owing to the unusual heat of the night--Cuckoo
became so over-fatigued that she was scarcely conscious what she was
doing. Her smile was utterly devoid of meaning, and had she been suddenly
asked, she could not have told whether she was at the Regent Street
end of Piccadilly, at Hyde Park Corner, or midway between the two.
Once more there was a block. The people were pressed, or surged of
their own will, together, and Cuckoo found herself leaning against
some stranger. This sudden support gave to her an equally sudden
knowledge of the extent to which she was fatigued, and when the block
ceased and the stranger--unconscious that he was being used as a species
of pillow--moved away, Cuckoo almost fell to the ground. Stretching
out her hands to save herself, she caught hold of a man's arm, and as
she did so her eyes moved to his face. It was Julian, and, before her
grasp had time to fix all his attention on her, Cuckoo saw why he was in
Piccadilly. In an instant all her lassitude was gone; all the fatigue, so
passionless and complete, vanished. An extraordinary warmth, that of
fire, not of summer, swept into her heart. She stood still and trembled,
as if from the accession of the abrupt strength that flows from an energy
purely nervous.

"Hulloh, Cuckoo!" Julian said.

She nodded at him. He looked down at her, not quite knowing what to say,
for he knew, by this time, that she objected to any hint from him on the
subject of her proceedings of the night. That was ignored between them,
and when they met the situation was that of a lodger in the Marylebone
Road holding friendly intercourse with a dweller in Mayfair, nothing more
and nothing less.

"Taking a stroll?" Julian said at last. "Isn't it a lovely night?"

"Yes. I say, I'm tired," she answered.

"Shall I take you somewhere?" he asked.

"Yes, do," she said.

They moved towards the Circus.

"Where shall we go?" Julian said. "Have you any pet place?"

"I don't know--oh, the Monico," she replied.

The restaurant was right in front of them. They dodged across to the
island, thence to the opposite pavement, and passed in silently. The
outer hall was thronged with people. So was the long inner room, and
for a moment they stood in the doorway looking for a table. At length
Julian caught sight of an empty one far down under the clock at the end.
They made their way to it and sat down.

"What will you have?" Julian asked Cuckoo.

She considered, sinking back on the plush settee.

"A glass of stout, I think, and--"

"And a bun," he interposed, smiling in recollection of their first
interview.

But Cuckoo did not smile or seem to recognize the allusion.

"Please, I'll have a sandwich," she said.

Julian ordered it, the stout, a cup of coffee and a liqueur brandy for
himself. While the waiter was getting the things he noticed Cuckoo's
extreme and active gravity, a gravity which seemed oddly to give her
quite a formidable appearance under her feathers. Despite the obvious
weariness written on her face, there was somehow a look of energy about
her, the aspect of a person full of intention and purpose.

"Why, Cuckoo," he said, "you look like a young judge about to deliver a
sentence on somebody."

And indeed that was just how her expression and pose behind the
marble-topped table affected him. Just then the waiter brought the
stout and the other things. Cuckoo removed her cheap kid gloves, took
the tumbler in her thin fingers and sipped at it. After a sip or two
she put the glass down, and said to Julian:

"I say."

"Well?"

"What are you about to-night?"

The question came from her painted lips very sternly. It seemed
addressed by one who had a right to condemn, and who was going to
exercise that right. Julian was astonished by her tone, and had an
instant's inclination to resent it. But then he thought that there was
nothing in the words themselves, and that the odd manner probably sprang
simply from fatigue or some other womanish, undivined cause. So he
answered:

"Just taking a stroll. It's so fine," and began to drink his coffee.

But Cuckoo quickly showed that her manner meant all that it had seemed to
say.

"That ain't it," she said, with emphatic excitement, though she spoke in
a low voice because of the people all round them. "You know it ain't."

Julian was just lighting a cigarette. The match was flaming in his hand.
He let it go out as he looked at her.

"What do you mean?" he asked. "What's the matter?"

"What are you doin'?" she retorted. "That's what I want to know. Not as I
need to ask, though," she added, bitterly.

Julian was distinctly taken aback by the emotion in her manner, and the
passion that she tried to keep quiet in her voice. He flushed rather red,
a boyish trick which he could never quite get over.

"I don't know what you're talking about," he said, lighting another
match, and this time making it do its office on his cigarette.

Cuckoo tossed her head in a way that was not wholly free from vulgarity,
but that was certainly wholly unconscious and expressive of real feeling.

"Oh yes, you do," she rejoined. Then after a moment's silence, she added,
with bitter emphasis, and a movement of her hand in the direction of the
door:

"You out in that crowd, and doing the same as all of them?"

As she said the words tears started under her blackened eyelashes.
If Julian had been taken aback before she spoke the last sentence, he
was ten times more astonished now. The whole situation struck him as
unexampled, and but for something so passionate in the girl's manner
that it overrode the natural feeling of the moment, his sense of humour
must have moved him to a smile. It was strange indeed to sit at midnight
under the electric moons of the Monico, and to be passionately condemned
for dissipation by a girl with a painted face, dyed hair, and that
terribly unmistakable imprint of the streets. But Julian could not smile.
Something in Cuckoo's demeanour, something so vehement and so unconscious
as to be not far from dignity, impressed him and took him well beyond the
gates of laughter.

"Why--but you were out in the crowd too," he said.

"I!" she said sharply, and with a touch of scathing contempt for
herself, yet impatient, too, of any introduction of her entity into the
discussion; "of course I've got to be there. What's that to do with it?"

"Really, Cuckoo," Julian began, but she interrupted him.

"I ain't you," she said.

"No, of course, but--"

"I'm different. It's nothing to me where I go of a night, or what I do.
But you ain't got to be there. You needn't go, need you?"

"Nobody need," he said. "But--"

"Then what d'you do it for?" she reiterated, still in the same tone of
one sitting on high in condemnation, and moved by her own utterance to an
increasing excitement. This time she paused for a reply, and set her
rouged lips together with the obvious intention of not speaking until
Julian had plainly put forward his defence. Strange to say, her manner
had impressed him with a ridiculous feeling that defence of some kind was
actually necessary. It was a case of one denizen of the dock putting on
the black cap to sentence another. Julian glanced at Cuckoo before he
made any reply to her last question. If he had had any intention of not
answering it at all, of calmly disposing, in a word or two, of her right
to interrogate him on his proceedings, her fixed and passionate eyes
killed it instantly. He moved his coffee-cup round uneasily in the
saucer.

"Men do many things they needn't do, as well as women," he began. "I must
have my amusements. Why not?"

At the word "amusements" she drew in her breath with a little hiss of
contempt. Julian flushed again.

"You're the last person," he began, and then caught himself up short. It
must be confessed that she was very aggravating, and that the position
she took up was wholly untenable. Having checked himself, he said
more calmly:

"What's the good of talking about it? I live as other men do, naturally."

"Are you a beast too, then?" she asked.

She still kept her voice low, and the sentence came with all the more
effect on this account.

"I don't see that," Julian exclaimed, evidently stung. "Women are always
ready to say that about men."

Cuckoo broke into a laugh. She picked up her glass, and drank all that
was in it. Putting it down empty, she laughed again, with her eyes on
Julian. That sound of mirth chilled him utterly.

"Why d'you laugh?" he said.

"I don't know--thinkin' that you're to be like all the rest, I suppose,"
she answered. "Like all them brutes out there, and him too."

"Him," said Julian. "Whom are you speaking of?"

She had not meant to say those last words, and tried to get out of an
answer by asking for something more to drink.

"Chartreuse," she said, with the oddest imaginable accent.

Julian ordered it hastily, and then immediately repeated his question.

"Never mind," Cuckoo replied. "It don't matter."

But he was not to be denied.

"D'you mean Valentine?" he asked.

She nodded her head slowly. Although Julian had half suspected that
Valentine might be there this confirmation of his suspicion gave him a
decided shock.

"Oh, he was just walking home from some party," he exclaimed.

"P'raps."

"I'm certain of it."

"He don't matter," she said with a hard accent.

She drank the chartreuse very slowly, and seemed to be reflecting, and
a change came over her face. It softened as much as a painted face can
soften under dyed hair.

"Dearie," she said, "it makes me sick to see you like the rest."

"I never pretended to be anything different."

"But you was different," she asserted. "I know you was different."

How could she have divined the change in Julian that one night of the
Empire had wrought?

"I say," she went on, and her voice was trembling with eagerness, "you've
got to tell me somethin'."

"Well?"

"That night I--I--it wasn't me made you different, was it?"

And as she spoke Julian knew that it was she. Perhaps a fleeting
expression in his face--telling naked truth as expressions may, though
words belie them--made her understand, for her cheeks turned grey beneath
the paint on them.

"I wish I'd killed myself long ago," she said in a whisper.

"Hush!" he exclaimed, cursing his tell-tale features. "I'm not different;
and if I was you could have nothing to do with it."

She said no more, but he saw by her brooding expression that she clung to
her intuition, and knew what he denied.

The hands of the clock fixed on the wall above their heads pointed to the
half-hour after midnight. The pale and weary waiters were racing to and
fro clearing the tables, dodging this way and that with trays, stealing
along with arms full of long-stemmed, thick tumblers, eager for rest. The
electric moons gave a sudden portentous wink.

"Time!" a voice cried.

People began to get up and move out, exchanging loud good-nights. The
long room slowly assumed an aspect of desertion and greedy desolation.

"We must go," Julian said.

Cuckoo woke out of that reverie, which seemed so chilly, so terrible
even. She glanced at Julian, and her eyes were again full of tears. He
was standing, and he bent down to her with his two hands resting upon the
marble of the table. He bent down and then suddenly stooped lower, lower,
almost glaring into her eyes. She went back in her seat a little, half
frightened.

"What's it?" she murmured.

But Julian only remained fixedly looking into her eyes. In the pool of
the tears of them he saw two tiny shadowy flames, flickering, as he
thought, but quite clear, distinct, unmistakable. And there came a thick
beating in his side. His heart beat hard. Each time he had seen the
vision of the flame he had been instantly impressed with a sense of
strange mystery, as if at the vision of some holy thing, a flame upon a
prayer-blessed altar, a flame ascending from a tear-washed sacrifice.
And now he saw this thing that he fancied holy burning behind the tears
in Cuckoo's eyes!

Cuckoo got up.

"Come on," she said, abruptly.

Julian followed her out of the café.

The dream of the moon was with them as they came to the entrance, clear
as a quiet soul, directly above them in a clear sky. Julian looked up at
it, but Cuckoo looked, with eyes that were almost sullen, at the night
panorama of the Circus. They waited a moment on the step. Julian was
lighting a cigar, and many other voluble men, most of them French or
Italian, were doing likewise. Having lighted it, and given a strong puff
or two, Julian said to Cuckoo:

"Shall I drive you home?"

"I ain't going home yet," she replied doggedly. "Are you?"

He hesitated.

"Are you, or aren't you?" she reiterated.

While she spoke, in her voice that was often a little hoarse, a young
voice with a thread in it, he realized that somehow she--painted sinner
as she was--had managed to make him ashamed of himself. Or was it that an
awe had come to his soul with that strange flame? In any case his mood
had risen from the old night mood of a young man to something higher,
something that could not be satisfied in the sordid way of the world.

"I think I shall go home," he said.

"Right," she answered, and for the first time there was an accent of
pleasure in her voice.

"But I'll walk a little way with you first," he added.

Together they crossed the Circus and mingled with the humming mob at the
corner of Regent Street. They pushed their way towards Piccadilly with
difficulty, for numbers of people at this hour do not attempt to walk,
but stand stock still, despite the cry of the policeman, staring at the
passers-by, or talking and laughing with the women who throng the
pavement. Having elbowed their way along as far as the St. James
restaurant, they began to move with a little more ease, and could have
talked as they went, but apparently neither of them felt conversational.
Julian was comparing the vision of the moon with the vision of the
street, a comparison no doubt often made even by young men in London on
still nights of summer, suggestive to most people, perhaps, of much
the same thoughts--yet a comparison to thrill, as all the wild and
eternal contrasts of life thrill. And Julian was thinking, too, rather
sombrely of himself. Cuckoo walked on beside him, looking straight before
her. Quite unconsciously, with the unconsciousness of a mechanical toy,
expressive at the turning of a key in its interior, she had assumed her
thin, invariable, professional smile. It came to her face in a flash when
the pavement of Piccadilly came to her feet. She did not know it was
there.

The moon looked down on it, yet, if Julian had been able to see, perhaps
the little flame still flickered in those eyes which had been full of
tears. But a little beyond St. James's Hall their silent progress was
arrested, for they both saw Valentine pass them swiftly in the crowd.
He saw them, too, but did not attempt to speak to them. With a smile at
Julian he walked on. Julian gazed after him, then turned to Cuckoo.

"And you saw him here to-night before I met you?" he asked.

"Yes."

"How long ago?"

"Two hours, I dare say."

After that Julian ceased to think of the vision of the moon. But
presently he noticed that Cuckoo was walking more slowly.

"You're tired?" he said.

She nodded.

"Have you been out all the evening?"

She nodded again.

"Take a cab and go home. I'll pay the man."

"No; I can't go yet."

"Why not?"

"I can't," she repeated, and a mulish look of obstinacy came into her
face.

Julian guessed the miserable reason.

"Let me--" he began, and in a moment his hand would have been in his
pocket. She stopped him.

"I told you as I never would, not from you," she said. "And I wouldn't,
all the more since--since that night."

Then, after an instant, she added:

"But you'd better leave me to myself now."

And then Julian realized that his presence and company were ruining her
chance. That thought turned him sick and dull.

"I can't," he began almost desperately.

She gave with her hand a little twitch at his.

"I say," she whispered, and she spoke to him as if to Jessie in the tiny
flannel-lined basket, "Go bials! will you?"

"But you?" he said, and there was something that was half a sob in his
voice.

"I can't. But you--go bials."

And then, to please her, he held up his hand and hailed a hansom. Getting
in he gave the direction of his rooms, loud enough for her to hear. She
stood at the edge of the pavement and nodded at him as she heard it.

Then she turned away, and Julian saw the feathers in her big hat waving,
as she joined once more the flight of the bats.




