CHAPTER II

CAFÉ NOIR


Snow fell, melodramatically, on the year's death-night. During the day
Valentine occupied himself oddly in decorating his flat for the evening.
But although he thus seemed to fall in with the consecrated humours of
the season his decorations would scarcely have commanded the approval of
those good English folk who think that no plant is genial unless it is
prickly, and that prickly things represent appropriately to the eye the
inward peace and good will that grows, like a cactus, perhaps within the
heart. He did not put holly rigidly above his doors. No mistletoe drooped
from the apex of the tentroom. Instead, he filled his flat with flowers,
brought from English conservatories or from abroad. Crowds of strange and
spotted orchids stood together in the drawing-room, staring upon the
hurly-burly of furniture and ornaments. In the corners of the room were
immense red flowers, such as hang among the crawling green jungles of
the West Indies. They gleamed, like flames, amid a shower of cunningly
arranged green leaves, and palms sheltered them from the electric rays
of the ceiling. The tentroom was a maze of tulips, in vases, in pots,
in china bowls that hung by thin chains from the sloping green roof.
Few of these tulips were whole coloured. They were slashed, and striped,
and spotted with violent hues. Some were of the most vivid scarlet
streaked with black. Others were orange-coloured with livid pink spots,
circus-pink, such as you see round the eyes of horses bred specially for
the ring. There were white tulips, stained as if with blood, pale pink
tulips tipped with deepest brown, rose-coloured tulips barred with wounds
whose edges were saffron-hued, tulips of a warm wallflower tint dashed
with the stormy yellow of an evening sky. And hidden among those
scentless flowers, in secret places cunningly contrived, were great
groups of hyacinths, which poured forth their thick and decadent scent,
breathing heavily their hearts into the small atmosphere of the room,
and giving a strange and unnatural soul to the tulips who had spent
all their efforts in the attainment of form and daring combinations of
colour. As if relapsing into sweet simplicity, after the vagaries of a
wayward nature had run their course, Valentine had filled his hall and
dining-room with violets, purple and white, and a bell of violets hung
from the ceiling over the chair which the lady of the feathers was to
occupy at dinner. These were white only, white and virginal, flowers for
some sweet woman dedicated to the service of God, or to the service of
some eternal altar-flame burning, as the zeal of nature burns, through
all the dawning and fading changes of the world.

Thus Valentine passed his day among flowers, and only when the last
twilight of the year fell had he fixed the last blossom in its place.
Then he rested, as after six days of creation, and from the midst of
his flowers saw the snow falling delicately upon London. Lights began
to gleam in the tall houses opposite his drawing-room windows. He glanced
at them, and they brought him thoughts at which he smiled. Behind those
squares of light he imagined peace and good will in enormous white
waistcoats and expansive shirt-fronts, red-faced, perhaps even whiskered,
getting ready for good temper and turkey, journalistic geniality and plum
pudding. And holly everywhere, with its prickly leaves and shining,
phlegmatic surfaces.

Peace and good will!

He glanced at his orchids and at the red West Indian flowers, and he
thought of those crawling green jungles from which they should have come,
and smiled gently.

Peace and good will!

He went to dress.

          *       *       *       *       *

Meanwhile, in the Marylebone Road the lady of the feathers achieved
her toilet, assisted by Jessie. The only evening dress that Cuckoo
possessed had been given to her long ago by a young man in the millinery
department of a large London shop. For a week he had adored Cuckoo.
During that week he had presented her with this tremendous gift. She
went into her bedroom now, took it out and looked at it. The gown rustled
a great deal whenever it was moved; this had been the young man's idea.
He considered that the more a gift rustled, the more aristocratic it
was, and, being well acquainted with all the different noises made by
different fabrics, he had selected one with a voice as of many waters.
Cuckoo heard it now as in a dream. She laid it down upon the bed and
regarded it by candle-light. The young man's taste in sound found its
equivalent in his taste in colour. The hue of the gown was also very
loud, the brightest possible green, trimmed with thick yellow imitation
lace. Once it had enchanted Cuckoo, she had put it on with a thrill to go
to music-halls with the young man. But now she gazed upon it with a lack
lustre and a doubtful eye. The flickering flame of the candle lit it up
in patches, and those patches had a lurid aspect. Remembering that Julian
had liked her best in black, she shrank from appearing before him in
anything so determined. Yet it was her only dress for the evening,
and at first she supposed the wearing of it to be inevitable. She put
it on and went in front of the glass. In these days she had become even
thinner than of old, and more haggard. The gown increased her tenuity
and pallor to the eye, and, after a long moment of painful consideration,
Cuckoo resolved to abandon these green glories. Once her mind was
made up, she was out of the dress in an instant; time was short. She
hurriedly extracted her black gown from the wardrobe, caught hold of
a pair of scissors, and in a few minutes had ripped the imitation lace
from its foundations and was transferring it with trembling fingers
to Julian's gift. Never before had she worked at any task with such
grim determination, or with such deftness; inspired by exceptional
circumstances, she might for twenty minutes have been a practised
dressmaker. Certainly, pins were called in as weapons to the attack;
but what of that? Compromises are often only stuck together with pins.
In any case Cuckoo was not entirely in despair with the new aspect of
an old friend, and when she was ready was able at least to hope that
things might have been worse.

Putting on over the dress a black jacket, she went out into the passage
and called down to Mrs. Brigg, who, as usual, was wandering to and fro in
her kitchen, like an uneasy shade in nethermost Hades.

"Mrs. Brigg! Mrs. Brigg, I say!"

"Well?"

"Where's the whistle?"

Mrs. Brigg came to the bottom of the kitchen stairs.

"What d' yer want it for?"

"A cab, of course," cried Cuckoo, in the narrow voice of one in a hurry.

"A cab!" rejoined Mrs. Brigg, ascending the dark stairs all the time she
was speaking. "And what do you want with cabs, I should like to know? Who
pays for 'em, that's what I say; who's to do it?"

Her grey head hove in sight.

"Where are you going? Piccadilly?"

"No; get the whistle."

"What--and no hat!"

She was evidently impressed.

"A toff is it?" she ejaculated, obviously appeased. "Well! so long as I
get the rent I--"

With a white glare Cuckoo seized the whistle from her claw, and in a
moment was driving away through the snow.

Mrs. Brigg trotted back to the kitchen decidedly relieved. Cuckoo's
suddenly altered mode of life had tried her greatly. The girl had taken
to going out in the day and staying at home at night. Simultaneously
with this changed _régime_ her funds had evidently become low. She had
begun to live less well, to watch more keenly than of old the condition
in which her commons went down to the kitchen and returned from it on
the advent of the next meal. By various little symptoms the landlady
knew that her lodger was getting hard up. Yet no amount of badgering
and argument would induce Cuckoo to say why she sat indoors at night.
She acknowledged that she was not ill. Mrs. Brigg had been seriously
exercised. But now her old heart was glad. Cuckoo was, perhaps, mounting
into higher circles, circles in which hats were not worn during the
evening. And as Mrs. Brigg entered her nethermost hell she broke into
a thin, quavering song:

"In 'er 'air she wore a white cam-eeiyer,
Dark blue was the colour of 'er heye."

It was her song of praise. She always sang it on great occasions.

When the lady of the feathers reached Victoria Street she found the
little party already assembled. Valentine met her ceremoniously in the
violet-scented hall and helped her to slide out of her jacket. His glance
upon the imitation lace was quick and gay, but Cuckoo did not see it. She
was gazing at the flowers, and when she entered the drawing-room and
found herself in the midst of the orchids, the West Indian flowers and
the palms, her astonishment knew no bounds.

"I never!" she murmured under her breath.

Then she forgot the flowers, having only time to remember to be shy.
Dinner was immediately announced by Wade, whose years of trained
discretion could not banish a faint accent of surprise from his voice.
He was, in fact, _bouleversé_ by this celebration of the death of the
old year. Valentine offered Cuckoo his arm. She took it awkwardly, with
a shooting glance of question at the doctor, who seemed her only spar in
this deep social sea. Valentine placed her beneath the bell of violets,
and took his seat beside her. Julian was on her other hand, the doctor
exactly opposite. Wade presented her with _hors-d'oeuvres._ Cuckoo
selected a sardine. She understood sardines, having met them at the
Monico. Valentine and the doctor began to talk. Julian ate slowly, and
Cuckoo stole a glance at him. His aspect startled her so much that she
with difficulty repressed a murmur of astonishment. He had the appearance
of one so completely exhausted as to be scarcely alive. Most people,
however stupid, however bored, have some air, when in society, of
listening even when they do not speak, of giving some sort of attention
to those about them, or to the place in which they find themselves. They
glance this way and that, however phlegmatically. They bend in attention
or lean back in observation. It is seen that they are conscious of their
environment. But Julian was engrossed with fatigue. The lids drooped over
his eyes. His face wore a leaden hue. Even his lips were colourless. He
ate slowly and mechanically till his plate was empty. Then he laid down
his fork and remained motionless, his eyes still cast down towards the
tablecloth, his two hands laid against the table edge, while the fingers
were extended upon the cloth on either side of his plate. Cuckoo looked
at him with terror, wondering if he were ill. Then, glancing up, she met
the eyes of the doctor. They seemed to bid her take no heed of Julian's
condition, and she did not look at him again just then. Trying to control
her fears, she listened to Valentine's conversation with the doctor.

"Doctors are sceptics by profession," she heard him say.

"I believe in individualism too firmly to allow that any beliefs or
unbeliefs can be professional, Cresswell."

"Possibly you are right," Valentine answered lightly. "What a pity it is
that there is no profession of which all the members at least believe in
themselves."

"Ah; would you enter it?"

"I scarcely think it would be necessary."

He glanced first at the doctor, then at Cuckoo as he spoke.

"I am thankful to say," he added in his clear, cool voice, "that I have
no longer either the perpetual timidity of the self-doubter or even the
occasional anxiety of the egoist."

"You have passed into a region which even egoism cannot enter."

"Possibly--the average egoism."

"The average egoism of the end of the century moves in a very rarefied
air."

"Its feet touch ground nevertheless."

"And yours?"

Valentine only laughed, as if he considered the question merely
rhetorical or jocose.

"But we are getting away from the question, which was not personal,"
he said. "I contend that doctors, as a body, are bound to combat these
modern Athenians, who are inclined to attribute everything to some
obscure action of the mind. For, if their beliefs are founded on rock,
and if they can themselves sufficiently, by asceticism, or by following
any other fixed course of life which they may select as the right one,
train their minds to do that which they believe can be done, the
profession of doctors may in time be abolished. Mind will be the
universal medicine; will, not simply the cure, but the preventive,
of disease."

"And of death?" the doctor asked quietly. "Will man be able to think
himself into an eternity on earth?"

Valentine looked at him very strangely.

"You ask that question seriously?" he said.

"I ask seriously whether you think so."

It was evident that the doctor meant to make the question above all
things a personal one. This time Valentine accepted that condition.
He sat for a moment twisting his champagne-glass about in his long
fingers, and glancing rapidly from the doctor to Cuckoo, who heard this
conversation without very well understanding it. Indeed, she sat beneath
her bell of violets in much confusion, _distraite_ in her desire to
command intellectual faculties which she did not possess. Valentine
watched her narrowly, though he seemed unattentive to her. Perhaps
he thought of his delivery of his gospel to her, and wondered if she
recalled it at this moment; or perhaps once more he began to rejoice
in her mental distress and alienation.

"Wade," he said "the champagne to Mr. Addison. Well, doctor, suppose I
acknowledged that I did so--mind, I don't acknowledge it!--you might, on
your side, think something too--that I am mad, for instance. Ah! Miss
Bright has knocked over her glass!"

Cuckoo murmured a stumbling apology, gazing with nervous intentness at
Valentine. It seemed to her that he had a gift of divination. Doctor
Levillier laughed gently.

"I am not inclined to suppose all my opponents in thought mad," he said.
"Still, such a belief would certainly indicate in the holder of it the
possession of a mind so uncommon, so unique, I may say, that it would
naturally rouse one to very close attention and observation of it."

"Exactly," Valentine rejoined.

A certain audacity was slowly creeping into his demeanour and growing
while he talked. It manifested itself in slight gesticulations, conceited
movements of the hand and head, in the colour of the voice and the blunt
directness of his glances.

"Exactly. Attention and observation directed towards the object of
satisfying yourself that the man--myself, let us say--was mad? You
don't reply. Let me ask you a question. Why should a profound belief
in human power of will indicate madness?"

"A belief that is not based on any foundation or proof--that is my point.
An extraordinary belief, personal to one person, rejected by mankind in
the mass, and founded upon nothing, no fact, no inference even, in the
history of mankind, is decidedly a strong indication of dementia."

"But suppose it is a belief founded upon a fact?"

"Of course that would entirely alter the matter."

The two men looked across at one another with a long and direct glance
full in the eyes. Cuckoo watched them anxiously. Julian sat with his
eyes cast down. He seemed unaware that there was any one near him, any
conversation going on around him. Wade moved softly about, ministering
to the wants of his master's guests. Course succeeded course.

"Do you propose to give me a fact proving the reasonableness of
entertaining a belief that a man, by his own deliberate action of the
will, can compass immortality on earth, or even prolong his life in such
a way as this, for instance; by the successful domination, or banishment,
of any disease recognized as mortal?--For I acknowledge that the will to
live may prolong for a certain time a life threatened merely by the
sapping action of old age.--Do you propose to give me a fact to prove
that?"

"I do not say that I intend to give it to you," Valentine answered, with
scarcely veiled insolence.

"But you know of such a fact?" said the doctor, ignoring his host's tone.

"Possibly."

The voice of Valentine thrilled with triumph as he spoke the word. Again
he glanced at the lady of the feathers.

"Cannot you convert the doctor?" he asked her, in tones full of sarcastic
meaning. "You know something of my theories, something of their putting
into practice."

"I don't know--I don't understand," she murmured helplessly.

She looked down at her plate, flushing scarlet with a sense of shame at
her own complete mental impotence.

"What's the matter, Cuckoo?"

The words came slowly from the lips of Julian, whose heavy eyes were now
raised and fixed with a stare of lethargic wonder upon Cuckoo.

"What are they saying to you?"

His look travelled on, still slow and unwieldy, to the doctor and to
Valentine.

"I won't have Cuckoo worried," he said. And then he relapsed with a
mechanical abruptness upon the consideration of his food. Valentine
seemed about to make some laughing rejoinder, but, after a glance at
Julian, he apparently resigned the idea as absurd, and, turning again
to the doctor, remarked:

"It is sometimes injudicious to state all that one knows."

"Still more so all that one does not know. But I have no desire to press
you," the doctor said, lightly. "This is wonderful wine. Where did you
get it?"

"At the _Cercle Blanc_ sale," Valentine answered quickly.

It seemed that he was slightly irritated. He frowned and cast a glance
that was almost threatening upon the doctor.

"Would you assume weakness in every strong man who refuses to take off
his coat, roll up his shirt sleeve and display the muscle of his arm?"
he said, harshly.

"The case is not analogous. That muscle exists in the world is a proved
fact. When I was at Eton, I was knocked down by a boy stronger than I
was. Since then I acknowledge the power of muscle."

"And have you never been knocked down mentally?"

"Not in the way you suggest."

Valentine shifted in his seat. It did not escape the doctor that he
had the air of a man longing to either say or do something startling,
but apparently held back by tugging considerations of prudence or of
expediency.

"Some day you may be," he said at last, obviously conquered by this
prompting prudence.

"When I am, the 'Christian scientist' who once declared to me that she
cured a sprained ankle by walking on it many miles a day, and thinking
it was well while she walked, shall receive my respectful apologies,"
the doctor answered, laughing.

Valentine handed the lady of the feathers some strawberries. On her
nervous refusal of them he exclaimed:

"I see you have finished your wine, doctor. No more? Really? Nor you,
Julian?"

Julian made no reply. He simply pushed his glass a little away from him.

"Then shall we accompany Miss Bright into the tentroom? I thought we
would have coffee there. You have never seen the tentroom," he added to
Cuckoo, getting up from his seat as he spoke.

"I usually sit in it when I am alone or with Julian. You will not mind
our cigarettes, I know."

He led the way down the scented corridor, scented with the thin, gently
bright scent of violets.

"The tentroom has a history," he continued to Cuckoo, opening a door
on the left. "It was once the scene of an--an absurd experiment. Eh,
doctor?"

They entered the room. As they did so the hot, sticky scent of the hidden
hyacinths poured out to meet them. For a moment it seemed overwhelming,
and Cuckoo hung back with an almost unconquerable sensation of aversion
and even of fear. The aspect of this small room astonished her; she had
never seen any chamber so arranged. Certainly, it looked very unusual
to-night. The small fire was hidden by a large screen of white wood, with
panels of dull green brocade. Only one of the electric lamps was turned
on, and that was shaded, so that the diffused light was faint, a mere
unflickering twilight. The masses of tulips hung like quantities of
monotonously similar shadows from the tented ceiling, and the flood of
scent caused the room to seem even smaller than it really was, a tiny
temple dedicated to the uncommon, perhaps to the sinister.

"We will see the old year out and drink our _café noir_ here," said
Valentine. "Where will you sit, Miss Bright?"

"I don't mind. It's all one to me," murmured Cuckoo. "What a funny room,
though!" she could not help adding. "It ain't like a room at all."

"Imagine it an Arab tent, the home of a Bedouin Sheik in a desert of
Nubia," said Valentine. "This divan is very comfortable. Let me arrange
the cushions for you."

As he bent over her to do so, he murmured in her ear:

"And you, having tossed your will away, are nothing!"

They had been the last words of his gospel, proclaimed to her that night
on which she prayed!

The lady of the feathers looked up at him with a new knowledge, the
knowledge of her recent lonely nights, of which he knew nothing as yet;
the knowledge of that glancing spectre of want whom, by her own action,
she summoned while she feared its gaunt presence; the knowledge of the
doctor's trust in her; the knowledge of her great love for Julian; the
knowledge, perhaps, that leaning her arms upon the slippery horse-hair
sofa in her little room, she had once thrown a muttered prayer,
incoherent, unfinished, yet sincere, out into the great darkness that
encompasses the beginning, the progress, and the ending of all human
lives with mystery. She looked up at him with this world of mingling
knowledge in her eyes, and Valentine drew away from her with a stifling
sensation of frigid awe.

"What--what?" he began. Then, recovering himself, he turned suddenly
away.

"Sit down, doctor. Do you like my flowers? Julian, are you still tired?
The coffee will wake you up. A cigarette, doctor, or a cigar? Here are
the matches."

Julian came over heavily and sat down on the divan by Cuckoo. His
unnatural lethargy was gradually passing away into a more explicable
fatigue, no longer speechless. Leaning on his elbow, he looked into
her face with his weary eyes, in which to-night there was a curious dim
pathos. It seemed that the only thing which had so far struck him during
the evening was still Cuckoo's confusion over her own misunderstanding
at dinner, for he now again referred to it.

"Have they been chaffing you, Cuckoo?" he said, striking a match on the
heel of his shoe and lighting a cigarette. "Have they been worrying you?
Never mind. It's only Val's fun. He doesn't mean anything by it. I say,
how awfully pale you look to-night, and thin."

He paused, considering her with a glance that was almost severe.

"I'm all right," said Cuckoo, trying to repress the agitation she always
felt now when speaking to Julian. "I ain't ill. Why don't you come to see
me now?" she added. "You don't never come."

Julian glanced over to Valentine, who was standing by the hearth talking
to the doctor, who sat in an armchair.

"I've been busy," he said. "I've had a lot of things to do. Do you miss
me, Cuckoo, when I don't come?"

"Yes," she replied, but without softness. Then she added, lowering her
voice almost to a whisper:

"Don't he want you to come?"

Julian did not reply, but puffed rather moodily at his cigarette,
glancing towards Valentine. He was thinking of the conversation at
the Savoy and of the antagonism between Valentine and Cuckoo. Suddenly
there came into his mind a dull wish to reconcile these two on the last
night of the year, to--in Valentine's own words--bury the hatchet. He
sat meditating over his plan and trying to revolve different and dramatic
methods of accomplishing it. Presently he said:

"Cuckoo, you and Val have got to be friends from to-night."

She started, stirring uneasily on the great cushions that were heaped at
her back.

"We are," she said.

He shook his head.

"Not real friends."

"Oh, we are all right."

"D'you hate him still?"

"He don't like me," she answered, evasively.

"Yet he invites you here," Julian said. "Why does he do that?"

"I dunno," Cuckoo said.

She wondered why. Not so the doctor, to whom it had become evident
that Valentine had asked his guests out of vanity, and with a view to
some peculiar and monstrous display of his power over Julian. While
Cuckoo and Julian talked together on the divan Valentine came over to
the doctor. His eyes still held an expression of awe created in him by
the strange new glance of the lady of the feathers. He sought to conquer
this sensation of awe, which fought fiercely against his intended blatant
triumph of to-night.

"Your cigarette all right, doctor?" he said, in a quick voice.

"A delicious one, thanks."

Valentine began touching the ornaments on the mantelpiece with nervous
fingers.

"We didn't quite finish our conversation at dinner," he said.

"No?"

"I did not give you a reason for my belief."

A deep interest woke in the doctor, but he did not show it. He thought:

"So, he must insanely return to this one subject, round which his brain
makes an eternal tour."

"No," he said aloud; "you have a reason then?"

"Yes."

Valentine's voice vibrated with arrogance. His hand still darted to
and fro on the mantelpiece while he stood looking down at the doctor.
There was something in his manner that suggested a mixture of triumph
and fighting anxiety in his mind. But, as he continued to speak, the
former got the upper hand.

"A reason that might convince even you if you knew it."

"Convince me, of exactly what?" the doctor asked, indifferently.

His indifference seemed to pique Valentine, who replied with energy:

"That human will can be cultivated, has been developed, until it has
moved the mountain, achieved the thing men call a miracle."

"By whom has it been so developed?"

Valentine hesitated almost like one who fears to be led into a trap. The
doctor could see "By me!" trembling upon his lips. He didn't actually
utter it, but instead exclaimed with a laugh:

"Some day you will discover."

And as he spoke he looked at Julian and the lady of the feathers.
The doctor was anxious to lead him on, and leaning easily back in his
comfortable chair, occupied himself with his cigarette for a minute, as a
man calmly at ease. Between his whiffs he presently threw out carelessly:

"This man has compassed eternity by his own will?"

"Oh, I did not say that."

"He has contented himself with curing a sprained ankle by walking upon
it, like my Christian scientist?"

"Now you fly to the other extreme--from the very great to the very
little. Take a middle course."

"Where would that lead me?"

Valentine threw a glance round the dim, hot, scented little room, then
once more his eyes rested on Julian and Cuckoo.

"What if I said--To this little room, to Julian and that girl, to
myself?" he answered in a low voice.

"And the miracle?" said the doctor.

The door opened. Wade appeared with coffee.




