CHAPTER V

DOCTOR LEVILLIER VISITS THE LADY OF THE FEATHERS


Julian's utterance about the flame that held him with the lady of the
feathers struck Dr. Levillier forcibly at the time it was made, and
remained in his mind. He could not fail to connect it with his own
experience in Valentine's empty room, and, going further back, with
the last sitting of the two young men which was succeeded by the long
trance of Valentine. And as he thought of these things, it suddenly
occurred to him that the ghastly change which had taken place in
Valentine might well date from that night. Since the death of Rip the
doctor had formed the opinion that Valentine was no longer perfectly
sane. His excitement, the fury of his eyes when he spoke of the triumphs
of will, seemed to give the clue to his transformation. The insane
perpetually glorify themselves, and are transcendent egoists. Surely
the egoism of insanity had peeped out in Valentine's diatribe upon the
eternity of a strong man's individual will. The night of the trance had
been a strange crisis of his life. He had seemed to recover from it,
to come back from that wonderful simulation of death healthy, calm,
reasonable as before. This might have been only seeming. In that sleep
the sane and beautiful Valentine might have died, the insane and
unbeautiful Valentine have been born. There are many instances of a
sudden and acute shock to the nervous system leaving an indelible and
dreary writing upon the nature. If Valentine had thus been tossed to
madness, it was very possible that his dog, an instinctive creature,
should recognize the change with terror. It was even possible that other
instinctive creatures should divine the hideous mind of a maniac hidden
in the beautiful body of an apparently normal man. And Cuckoo, she too
was instinctive, a girl without education, culture, the reading that
opens the mind and sometimes shuts the eyes. Cuckoo Bright, she had
divined the evil of Valentine. To her he had made confession. In her
eyes Julian had seen the mysterious flame. Some influence from her had
kept him from his invited guests and from his house. Yes, Cuckoo, the
lady of the feathers, the blessed damozel of Regent Street and Piccadilly
Circus, the painted and possessed, faded and degraded, wanderer of the
pavements, seemed to become the centre of this wheel of circumstances,
as Doctor Levillier reflected upon her.

It was time for him to go to Cuckoo. Julian's descent must be stayed,
before he went down, like a new Orpheus without a mission, into Hades.
Valentine's influence, whether mad or sane, must be fought. It was to be
a struggle, a battle of wills, of what Valentine chose to consider souls.
And some prompting led the doctor to think of Cuckoo as a possible
weapon. Why? Because she had even once held Julian against his will,
against the intention of his soul.

So the doctor at length sought the lady of the feathers. She had been
passing through a period of great and benumbing desolation, believing
that her last appeal, her great effort for Julian, had been a failure.
For the doctor had not come to her, and Cuckoo could not tell that he
was making observations for himself and that she was often in his mind.
She supposed that he, like all others, laughed at her pretensions to
gravity, swept her exhibition of real and honest emotion away from his
memory with a sneer, considered her despair over another's ruin a vile
travesty, a grinning absurdity and trick. Never had Cuckoo felt more
lonely than in these days, though a vast loneliness is the constant
companion of her large sisterhood. Even Jessie failed to comfort her,
and she could find little courage within herself. And yet there were
moments when the vigour that had led her once to defy Valentine, when
the fire that had sprung up in her, as a flame may burst forth in a
swamp, seemed to be near to her again. She felt a new possibility within
her, stirring, striving. It was at such moments that she longed to see
the doctor, and could have cursed him for not coming to her. For at
such moments she seemed only waiting for a touch of sympathy, a word of
encouragement, to perform some great action, some momentous deed. But the
touch, the word, were lacking, and her life and experience of constant
and monotonous degradation dulled the impulse, stifled the enthusiasm
that she could not understand. And she fell again to brooding, and to
an ignorant and vague consciousness of impotence.

She bought a new hair-dye, painted her thin cheeks more heavily than ever
before, and sought, almost with a wild exultation that swiftly fled away,
to sink lower.

The monotony of sin is one of the scourges of sin. In those days Cuckoo
suffered many stripes. Her eyes grew more weary, her smile in Piccadilly
more mechanical, her walk more puppet-like than ever. Life was like
a moving dream of horror. And yet no day passed without a gleam of that
strange sensation of ignorant power, fluttering upward, fading away,
pausing, passing, dead.

She did not know what it meant. She could not keep it nor use it. She
could not unravel its message nor rest upon its strength. It was gone
almost while it came, but it did something for the lady of the feathers.
It gave to her the little seed of expectation that, quite alone in a
weary desert, yet makes of that desert the plot men call a garden. Like a
thread of steel, it held up this girl from the uttermost abyss, until at
last the doctor's hand struck upon her door.

Julian's occasional visits were as the scourgings of God, giving to
Cuckoo a vision of shifting ruin, in which she--so she told herself,
thinking of the dance of the hours--had been the first to have a share.

It was a wintry afternoon when the doctor came. Frost clung stealthily
round the grimy black trees, outlining their naked boughs with meagre
lines of white sewn with smuts. Above the frost hung the fog as if in
charge of the town, a despondent and gloomy sentinel. During the morning
the sun had lain in the fog like a faint blood-red jewel in a thick and
awkward sulphur setting, but with the afternoon the jewel faded to a
distant dim phantom, from that to blank nothingness. As if satisfied
with this piteous exit, the fog drew closer, keeping especially heavy
watch upon the long and bleak line of the Marylebone Road, and taking
the high and narrow house in which Cuckoo dwelt under its severest
protection. Twilight wanted to come as the afternoon drew on, but it had
been forestalled and was practically already there. Doubtless it did
come, but no one was much the wiser. The lamps had been alight all day,
and no procession of gloomy things, advancing from whithersoever,
could have added much to the volume of the crowding darkness, or have
appreciably increased its density. In the darkness the cold gathered,
and the frost began to take a harder grip of everything,--of desolate,
solitary pumps in tiny and squalid back yards, of pipes that crawled like
liver-coloured snakes over the unpresentable sides of houses, of pools
thick with orange-brown mud, and vagrant bushes creaking above the
grimy earth in places that children named gardens.

Fog and frost had taken a strong grip, too, upon the heart of the lady
of the feathers. Somewhere about eleven o'clock in the morning she had
stirred wearily in her bed, had stretched out her arms to the stagnant
air of the room, and crouched up on her pillow in a grotesque hump. For a
while the hump remained motionless. Then Cuckoo rolled round and extended
a bare thin leg to test the atmosphere. The leg was quickly withdrawn,
the atmosphere having been evidently tried in the balance and found
wanting. Cuckoo's bell rang, and Mrs. Brigg was called for tea and toast,
while once more the hump decorated the upper part of the disordered bed.
Jessie, awakened in her basket at the foot of the bed, joined the hump,
whining a greeting, and wriggling furiously in an effort to tunnel her
way to the ultimate depths of sheets and blankets. Then Mrs. Brigg, of
yellowish and bleak aspect, beneath a tumbled appurtenance that she
called a cap, appeared with a tray.

"Going to stop abed?" she asked, in a husky voice, in which the smuts
seemed floating.

"Yes. What's there to get up for?" Cuckoo groaned.

"Nothun' as I know of."

And Mrs. Brigg was gone about her business.

All the morning Cuckoo lay staring at the blank square of the window, and
Jessie snored under the blankets. The tea was drunk, the toast lay about
in fragments. One bit, hard and many cornered as it seemed, somehow
gained entrance to the bed, and greeted Cuckoo's every movement with
uncompromising grittiness. No shaking of coverlet and sheet, no beating
of pillow, no kicks and scufflings could expel it. The bed seemed full of
hard bits of toast, and Cuckoo felt as if an additional burden were laid
upon her by this slight evil. But, indeed, the horror of her existence
reached a culminating point to-day,--a point of loneliness, vacant
dreariness, squalor, and degradation that could not be surpassed. The
preceding night had been peculiarly horrible, and as Cuckoo now lay on
the tumbled bed, in the dim, cold room, with the fog gazing in, the
leaden hours of winter crawling by, she felt as if she could bear no
more. She could bear no more addition to her sick weariness; no more
addition to her useless hunger of love for Julian, that could never
be crowned with anything but despair; no more addition to her bodily
fatigue, born of tramping monotony succeeded by yet more enervating
weariness of the flesh. She could bear no more. Yes, but she must bear
more. For Cuckoo knew that she was not dying, was not even ill. She was
only tired in body, prostrate in heart, deserted in life, and forced to
witness the quick and running ruin of the man she had the farcical
absurdity to love. Imaginative, for once, in her morbid fatigue, she
began to wish that she could fade away and become part of the fog that
lay about London, be drawn into its murkiness, with all her murky
recollections, her fiendish knowledge, her mechanical wiles of the
streets, her thin and ghostly despairs and desires. For they seemed thin
and ghostly, they too, to-day, fit food for the fog, as indeed the whole
of her was. How could such as she evaporate into sweet air, a clear
heaven?

She caught at the hand-glass, leaning far out on the bed, as the blessed
damozel o'er the bright bar of heaven, and tried to see, with staring
eyes, how the new hair-dye that she was now using became her. Her mind
was vagrant, coming and going miserably, from that love of hers which was
strangely strong and subtle, to the powder-box with its arsenic-green
lid, or the rouge-pot of dirty white china. And by each event it paused
and sank, as if benumbed by the increasing frost. Leaning again to put
back the hand-glass she fell over too far and dropped it. The glass fell
face downwards and was smashed. Cuckoo laughed aloud, revelling feebly in
the additional misery a superstitious mind now began to promise her. The
fragments of broken glass actually pleased her, and, on a sudden, she
resolved to set her feet in them, that she might be cut and wounded, that
she might bleed outwardly as she had been bleeding inwardly for so long.
She swung her legs over the breadth of the bed, disorganizing Jessie,
planted her feet in the array of glass and stood up. As she did so the
doctor mounted her doorstep, plied the knocker and rang the bell. Cuckoo
stood listening. A fragment of glass had really penetrated the bare sole
of her foot, which bled a little gently on the carpet. But she scarcely
knew it. She heard Mrs. Brigg go by, and then steps sounding in the
passage. Then there came to her ears a quiet voice with a very
characteristic note of bright calmness in it. Standing in her frilled
nightdress among the bits of glass, Cuckoo flushed scarlet all over her
face and neck. She knew who the visitor was. With one dart she reached
the washhand-stand. Sponges, brushes, combs, all her weapons of the
toilet, were immediately in commotion, and when Mrs. Brigg opened her
door, the room was a whirlpool of quick activities, in the midst of
which, as on a frouzy throne, Jessie stood upon the bed barking
excitedly. Mrs. Brigg came in and closed the door. Her thin lips were
pursed.

"Light the fire!" Cuckoo called at her from the basin.

"What do you want the doctor for?"

Mrs. Brigg uttered the words with some suspicion.

"Hurry up and light the fire!"

Cuckoo turned round, her hands darting in her hair, and actually laughed
with a touch of merriment.

"You old owl! He's not come to doctor me, only to see me."

Mrs. Brigg looked relieved, but still surprised.

"Oh," she said. "That's it, is it?"

She paused as if in consideration.

Suddenly Cuckoo sprang on her, twisted her round, and spun her out into
the cold passage. "Light the fire, I tell you!"

She banged the bedroom door and went on with her rapid toilet.

When she came into the sitting-room an uneasy fire was sputtering in
the grate, one gas-jet flared, and Doctor Levillier was standing by the
window looking out at the fog. He turned to greet her.

"I thought you'd forgotten--or didn't mean to come," Cuckoo said; "they
often do--people that say they will to me, I mean."

The doctor held out his hand with a smile.

"No. Am I interrupting you?"

"Me!" said Cuckoo, in amazement, thinking of her empty days. "Lord, no."

Her accent was convincing. The little doctor sat down by the fire and put
his hat and gloves on the table.

"Mrs. Brigg thought I was ill--you bein' a doctor," Cuckoo said, with an
attempt at a laugh. She felt nervous now, and was not sustained today by
the strung-up enthusiasm which had supported her in Harley Street. "Funny
there bein' a fog again this time, ain't it?"

"Yes. I hope we shall meet some day in clear weather."

As the doctor said that, following a tender thought of the girl, he
glanced round the room and at Cuckoo. "I hope so," he repeated. Then,
rather abruptly:

"Two or three nights ago I went to dine with Mr. Addison. He was out. He
was here with you."

Cuckoo got red. She could still be very sensitive with a few people, and
perhaps Mrs. Brigg and her kind had trained her into irritable suspicion
of suspicion in others.

"Only for a friendly visit," she said hastily. "Nothin' else. He would
stop."

"I understand perfectly," the doctor said gently. Cuckoo was reassured.

"Did he say as he'd been?"

"Yes."

Cuckoo looked at the doctor and a world of reproach dawned in her eyes.

"I say," she said, "you haven't done nothin'. He's worse than ever. He's
gettin'--oh, he's gettin' cruel bad."

Tears came up over the world of reproach.

"It's all him, all Valentine," she said.

And Doctor Levillier was moved to cast reticence, the usual loyalty of
one man to another who has been his friend, away. Somehow the dead body
of Rip lying in the snow put that old friendship far off. And also an
inward thrill caught him near to Cuckoo. An impulse, swift and vital,
thrust his mind to hers.

"You are right," he answered. "I believe that it is all Valentine."

"There! Didn't I tell you?" Cuckoo cried with eyes of triumph. "It's been
him from the first. Oh, get him--get Julian away."

The doctor laid his hand upon Cuckoo's, which was stretched upon the
tablecloth, very gently, almost abstractedly.

"Will you tell me something?" he said.

"What's it?"

"You love Julian?"

"Me!" the lady of the feathers said.

Her voice trembled over the word. She stole a hasty, hunted glance at the
doctor. Was he, too, going to jeer at her? Would no one allow her to have
a clean corner in her heart?

"You're laughin' at me. What's the good of such as me doin' a thing like
that--lovin' a man?"

"I think you must love Julian. If you do, perhaps you are meant to
protect and save him."

A secret voice prompted the doctor with the words he spoke, gave them to
him, bent him irresistibly to repeat them. Never before had he felt what
it is to be between the strong hands of destiny.

"Me! Me save any one!" Cuckoo said, trembling.

"Yes, you. There is something in you--I feel it and I can't tell you why,
nor what it is--something that has hold of Julian. He told us so the
other night. Don't you know what it is?"

"Eh?"

"Perhaps he feels that you love him--purely, cleanly."

"I do--oh! I do that!" Cuckoo cried.

A wonder as to the relations between Julian and this girl shot through
the doctor. He was the last man in the world to think evil of any one,
but just then, as Cuckoo moved, the gaslight struck fully on her. The dye
on her hair shone crudely. The red and white of her face burned as on the
face of a clown. And then even the doctor's good heart wondered. Cuckoo
knew it in an instant, and her face hardened and looked older.

"Oh, go on," she said rudely. "Think as the others do. Damn you men! Damn
you! Damn you!"

And without warning she put her head down on the table and broke into a
wild passion of tears. She sobbed, and as she sobbed she cursed and
clenched her hands. She lost herself in fury and in despair. The Fates
had stung her too hard this time, and she must blaspheme against them
with her voice of the streets, her language of the streets, her poor
heart--not quite of the streets. The Fates had stung her too hard, for
they had put a flaw even in this one self-respect of hers. That one
night accused her whenever she thought of Julian, whenever she saw the
dissipation deepen round his eyes. She was not to have even one thing
that she could be quite proud of; not one thing of which she could say,
"This has been always pure." And then she turned on the doctor and cried:

"Go on--think it--think it! Think what you like! But I'll tell you the
truth. There was only once I did him any harm, and that wasn't my fault.
I never wanted to. I hated it. I told him I hated it. I didn't want him
to be that, like the others. And that was Valentine, too. And now--just
because of that I'm no use. And you'd said I might be, you'd said I might
be."

"And I say you shall be."

The wail died in Cuckoo's throat. The tears were arrested as by a spell.
Dr. Levillier had got upon his feet. All the truth and tenderness of his
heart was roused and quickened. He knew real passion, real grief, and
from that moment he knew and trusted the lady of the feathers. And by
the strength of her bitterness, even by the broken curses that would have
shocked so many of the elect of this world, he measured the width and
the depth of her possibilities. She had sent to damnation--what? The
vile cruelty, the loathsome, unspeakable, dastardly mercilessness of the
world. To damnation with it! That was the loud echo in his man's heart.

"That one night is nothing," he said. "Or rather it is something that you
must redeem. It is good to have to pay for a thing. It is that makes one
work. There is a work for you to do, a work which I believe no one else
can do. You love Julian. Love him more. Make him love you. My will cannot
fight the will of Valentine over him. No man's will can. A woman's may.
Yours may, shall."

His pale, small, delicate face flamed with excitement as he spoke. Few
of his patients looking upon him just then would have known their calm
little doctor. But Cuckoo had cried to him out of the very depths, and
out of the very depths he answered her, still prompted--though now he
knew it not--by that secret voice which sometimes rules a man, at which
he wonders ignorantly, the voice of some soul, some great influence,
hidden from him in the spaces of the air, the voice of a flame, warm,
keen, alive, and power-prompting.

And Cuckoo, as she listened to the doctor, had once again a hint of her
own strength, a thrill of hope, a sense that she, even she, was not
broken quite in pieces upon the cruel wheel of the world.

"Whatever can I do?" she said; "Valentine's got him."

As she spoke, the doctor, restless, as men are in excitement, had moved
over to the mantelpiece, and stood with one foot upon the edge of the
fender. Thinking deeply, he glanced over the photographs of Cuckoo's
acquaintance, without actually seeing them. But presently one, at which
he had looked long and fixedly, dawned upon him, cruelly, powerfully. It
was the face of Marr.

"Who is that?" he said abruptly to Cuckoo.

"That?" She too got up and came near to him, lowering her voice almost to
a whisper. "That's really _him_."

"Him?"

"Valentine."

The doctor looked at her in blank astonishment.

"Yes, it is," Cuckoo reiterated, and nodding her head with the obstinacy
of a child.

"That--Valentine! It has no resemblance to him."

The doctor took up the photograph, and examined it closely. "This is not
Valentine."

"He told me it was. It's Marr--and somehow it's him now."

"Marr," said the doctor, sharply. "Why, he is dead. Julian told me so.
He died--he died in the Euston Road on the night of Valentine's trance.
Ah, but you know nothing about that. Did you know Marr, then?"

"Yes, I knew him."

Cuckoo hesitated. But something taught her to be perfectly frank with the
doctor. So she added:

"I'd been with him at that hotel the night he died."

"You were the woman! But, then, how can you say that this (he touched the
photograph with his finger) is Valentine?"

"He says he's really Marr."

Cuckoo spoke in the most mulish manner, following her habit when she was
completely puzzled, but sticking to what she believed to be the truth.

"Marr and Valentine one man! He told you that?"

"He says to me--'I'm Marr.'"

Cuckoo repeated the words steadily, but like a parrot. The doctor said
nothing, only looked at her and at the photograph. He was thinking now
of his suspicion as to Valentine's sanity. Had he, perhaps in his
madness, been playing on the ignorance of the lady of the feathers?
She went on:

"It was on the night he told me all that. I couldn't understand what he
is and what he's doing. And he said that the real Valentine had gone. And
then he said--'I am Marr.'"

"The real Valentine gone. Yes," said the doctor, gravely, "that is true.
Does he then know that he is--?" "Mad" was on his lips, but he checked
himself.

"What else did he say that night?" he asked. "Can you remember? If you
succeed, you may help Julian."

Cuckoo frowned till her long, broad eyebrows nearly met. The grimace gave
her the aspect of a sinister boy, bold and audacious. For she protruded
her under lip, too, and the graces of ardent feeling, of pain and of
passion, died out of her eyes. But this abrupt and hard mask was only
caused by the effort she was making after thought, after understanding.
She pressed her feet upon the ground, and the toes inside her worn shoes
curved themselves inwards. What had Valentine said? What--what? She
stared dully at the doctor under her corrugated brows.

"What did he say?" she murmured in an inward voice, "Well--he didn't want
me to see you. He came here about that--my seeing you."

"Yes."

"And--and Marr's not dead, he says, at least not done with. Yes, that was
it--he says as no strong man who's lived long's done with when he's put
away. See?"

Her face lighted up a little. She was beginning to trust her memory.

"The influence of men lives after them," the doctor said. "Marr's too.
Yes. He said that?"

She nodded. Then with a flash of understanding, a flash of that
smouldering power which she had felt in loneliness and longed to tear
out from its prison, she cried:

"That's it. That's how he's Marr, then."

She hesitated.

"Isn't it?" she said, flushing with the thought that she might be showing
herself a fool. For she scarcely understood what she really meant.

"Valentine, no longer himself, but endowed with the influence of Marr,"
the doctor muttered; "she means that he told her something like that.
The phantasy of an unsteady brain."--"Go on," he added to her.

But Cuckoo was relapsing into confusion already.

"And then he talked a lot about will, as he called it. Can't remember
what he said."

"Try to."

She was silent, knitting her brows.

"It's no use. I can't," she said, despairingly. "But I know he says that
he's really Marr and that he's killed Valentine. He said that; I know he
did."

She glanced eagerly at the doctor, in the obvious hope that his
cleverness, which she believed to be unlimited and profound, would
in a flash divine all the strange secret from this exposition of her
disjointed recollection. With each word she spoke, however, the doctor
became more and more convinced that Valentine had only been cruelly
amusing himself with her, or weaving for her benefit some intricate
web of vain madness. And Cuckoo, noticing this now, and recollecting the
momentary clearness of comprehension which had seized her at one point in
Valentine's wild sermon to her, was mad with herself for not being able
to seize again that current of inspiration, almost mad with the doctor
for not unravelling the mystery. This excess of feeling finally drowned
and swept away as a corpse the memory of the gospel of influence.

"I can't remember no more," she said stolidly. "There was ever such a lot
about--about some one as was good and didn't want to be good any more,
and so it was driven away--I don't know. P'rhaps he was only gamin' me."

She stared moodily at her feet, which she had stuck out from under her
dress. The doctor said nothing, but at her last speech his face had lit
up with a sort of excitement. For had she not described in those few
ill-chosen words the very mental position of the former Valentine? A
saint at first with his will, a saint at last against his will--and now
a saint no more. That was, perhaps, the key to the whole matter. A good
man prays to be no longer good. His prayer is granted. His grievous
desire is fulfilled. And then he may pray forever in vain to be as he
once was. Yet the change in Valentine was more even than this, more
than the gliding from white purity to black sin. There was something.

As Cuckoo and the doctor sat in silence, she staring vacantly and empty
of thought, being now utterly and chaotically puzzled, he thinking
deeply, the door bell rang. In a moment Mrs. Brigg appeared, went to
Cuckoo and muttered in her ear:

"Mr. Haddison wants to come in. I told him you was busy."

"Oh," said Cuckoo, "I say--wait," and then to the doctor, "It's him. It's
Julian."

"Let him in," the doctor said quickly.

To see Cuckoo and Julian together might tell him much.

Julian came in, stumbling rather heavily at the entrance of the room.




