CHAPTER II

THE VOICE IN THE EMPTY ROOM


When the doctor arrived at the Victoria Street flat Valentine's man
answered his ring. Wade had been with Valentine for many years and was
always famous for his great devotion to, and admiration of, his master.
Wade was also especially partial--as he would have expressed himself--to
Doctor Levillier, and when he saw who the visitor was, his face relaxed
into contentment that strongly suggested a smile.

"Back at last Wade, you see," the doctor said, cheerfully. "Is Mr.
Cresswell in?"

"No, sir. But I expect him every minute to dress for dinner. He's dining
out, and it's near seven now. Will you come in and wait?"

"Yes."

The doctor entered and walked into the drawing-room, preceded by Wade,
who turned on the light.

"Why! what have you been doing to the room?" the doctor said, looking
round in some surprise. "Dear me. It's very much altered."

In truth, the change in it was marked. The grand piano had vanished, and
in its place stood an enormous cabinet made of wood, stained black, and
covered with grotesque gold figures, whose unnatural faces were twisted
into the expressions of all the vices. Some of these faces smiled, others
scowled, others protruded forked tongues like snakes and seemed to hiss
along the blackness of the background. The shapes of the figures were
voluptuous and yet suggested, rather than fully revealed, deformity, as
if the minds of these monsters sought to reveal their distortion by the
very lines of their curved and wanton limbs. Upon the top of this cabinet
stood a gigantic rose-coloured jar filled with orchids, the Messalinas of
the hothouse, whose mauve corruption and spotted faces leered down to
greet the gold goblins beneath. It was easy to imagine them whispering to
each other soft histories of unknown sins, and jeering at the corrupt
respectabilities of London, as they clustered together and leaned above
the ruddy ramparts of the china, wild flowers as no hedgerow violet, or
pale smirking primrose, is ever wild in the farthest wood.

Glancing from this cabinet, and those that stood upon it, the doctor
was aware of a deep and dusty note of red in the room, sounding from
carpet and walls, tingling drowsily in the window curtains and in the
cushions that lay upon the couches. This was not the crude and cheerful
sealing-wax red with which the festive Philistine loves to dye the
whiteness of his dining-room walls, cooling its chubby absurdity with
panels of that old oak, which is forever new. It was a dim and deep
colour, such as a dust-filmed ruby might emit if illuminated by a soft
light. And Valentine had shrouded it so adroitly that though it pervaded
the entire room, it always seemed distant and remote, a background, vast
perhaps, but clouded and shadowed by nearer things. These nearer things
were many, for Valentine's original asceticism, which had displayed
itself essentially in the slight bareness of his principal sitting-room
had apparently been swept away by a tumultuous greed for ornaments. The
room was crowded with furniture, chairs, and sofas of the most peculiar
shapes, divans and tables, bookstands and settees. One couch was made of
wood, carved and painted into the semblance of a woman, between whose
outstretched arms was placed the pillow to receive the head of one
resting there. Another lay on the bent backs of two grinning Indian
boys, whose crouching limbs seemed twined into a knot. Upon the tables
and cabinets stood a thousand ornaments, many of them silver toys,
sweetmeat-boxes, tiny ivory figures and wriggling atrocities from the
East. But what struck the doctor most in the transformation of the room
was the panorama presented upon its walls. The pictures that he
remembered so well were all gone. The classical figures, the landscapes
full of atmosphere and of delicacy had vanished. And from their places
leered down jockeys and street-women painted by Jan Van Beers and Dégas,
Chaplin and Gustav Courbet, while above the mantelpiece, where once had
hung "The Merciful Knight," a Cocotte by Leibl smoked a pipe into the
room. It seemed incredible that Valentine could be at rest in such a
livid chamber, and not even the vague communications of Cuckoo woke
in the doctor such a definite and alive sensation of discomfort as
this vision of outward change that must surely betoken an inward
transformation of the most vivid and unusual kind. And everywhere, as
a deep and monotonous bell ringing relentlessly through a symphony of
discordant and crying passions, there sounded that sinister note of deep
and dusty red. Despite his own complete health of mind, and the frantic
disquisitions of the morbid Nordau, the little doctor felt as if he heard
the colour, as if it spoke from beneath his very feet, as if it sang
under his fingers when he laid them on the brocade of a couch, as if the
room palpitated with a heavy music which murmured drowsily in his ears
a monotonous song of dull and weary change. No silence had ever before
spoken to him so powerfully. He was greatly affected, and did not scruple
to show his discomfort to Wade, who waited respectfully by the door.

"What an alteration!" he said again, but in a lower and more withdrawn
voice. "I cannot recognize the room I once knew--and loved!"

"Mr. Valentine has been doing it up, sir."

"But why, Wade; why?"

"I don't know, sir; a fancy, I suppose, sir."

"An evil one," the doctor murmured to himself.

He glanced at Wade. It struck him that the man's mind might possibly
march with Cuckoo's in detection of his master's transformation, if
transformation there were. Wade returned the doctor's glance with calm,
good breeding.

"Mr. Valentine is well, I hope, Wade?" he said.

"Very well, sir, I believe."

"And Mr. Addison?"

"I couldn't quite say, sir, as to that."

"Do you mean that he looks ill?"

"I couldn't say, sir. Mr. Julian don't look quite what he was, to my
view, sir."

"Oh."

The butler's level voice mingled with the clouded red of the room, and
again a prophetic chord of change was struck.

"Thank you, Wade" said the doctor.

The man retired, and the doctor was left alone in the empty room.

       *       *       *       *       *

Although he was intensely sensitive, Doctor Levillier was not a man whose
nerves played him tricks. He was, above all things, sane, both in mind
and in body, full of a lively calm, and a bright power of observation.
Indeed, having made the nervous system his special life study, he was,
perhaps, less liable than most other human beings to be carried away by
the fancies that many people tabulate as realities, or to be governed
by the beings that have no real existence and are merely projected by
the action of the imagination. Half, at least, of his great success in
life had been owing to his self-possession, which never verged on
hardness or fused itself with its near relation, stolidity. No man, in
fact, was less likely to be upset by the creatures of his mind than he.
Yet when Wade had gently closed the drawing-room door and retreated into
his private region, the doctor allowed himself to become the possession
of an influence which, to the end of his life, he believed to proceed
from the empty room in which he sat, not from his mind who sat there.
The electric light shone softly beneath the shades that shrouded it, and
revealed delicately but clearly every smallest detail of the crowded
chamber.

The hour was quiet. No fire danced in the grate. Doctor Levillier
leaned back in his low chair with the intention of composedly awaiting
Valentine's return. But the composure which had already been slightly
shaken by the visit of the lady of the feathers, and by the words of
Wade, was destined to be curiously upset by the motionless vision of the
empty room.

Sitting thus in it alone the doctor examined it with more detail, and
with a more definite remembrance of Valentine's habit of mind than
before. And he found himself increasingly amazed and confounded. For not
only was the change great, but it was not governed and directed by good
taste, or even by any definite taste, either good or bad. A number of
people might have devised the arrangement and selection of the mass of
furniture and ornaments, and have thrown things down here and there in
sheer defiance of each other's predilections. Only in the setting, the
red setting of the picture, was there evidence of the presence of a
presiding genius. In that red setting the doctor supposed that he was to
read Valentine. He could read nobody in the rest of the room, or perhaps
everybody whose taste refused purity and calm as foolish Dead Sea
growths. Some of the silver ornaments might have assembled in the garish
boudoir of a Parisian _fille de joie_, as the carved woman might have
been the couch to which Thais tempted Paphnuce, and the Indian boys the
lifeless slaves of Aphrodite. The jockeys on the wall would have been at
home on the lid of a cigar box belonging to any average member of the
_jeunesse dorée_ of any Continental city, while an etching of Felicien
Rops that lounged upon a sidetable would have been eminently suitable to
the house of a certain celebrity nicknamed the "Queen of Diamonds." The
golden figures that sprawled over the huge cabinet must have delighted
certain modern artists, whose rickety fingers can only portray in line
a fanciful corruption totally devoid of relation to humanity, but such
frail spectres would have shrunk with horror from certain robust works of
art, over which the most healthy of the beefy brigade might have smacked
large lips for hours. The room was in fact one quarrel between the
masculine and feminine, the corrupt "modern" and the flagrant Philistine,
the vaguely suggestive Nineteenth Century Athenian and the larky and
unbridled schoolboy. A neurotic woman seemed to have been at work here, a
sordid youth there. On a sidetable the hysterical man of our civilization
fought a duel in taste with some Amazon whose kept vow had evidently
wrought a cancer in her mind. In every corner there was the clash of
civil war. Yet there was always the cloudy red, visible through the
lattice-work of decoration, as the blue sky is visible through the
lattice-work of a Tadema interior. In that clouded red the doctor felt
himself reading a new yet powerful Valentine, and in the grotesque
orchids leaning their misshapen chins upon the rosy rim of their vase.
Those flowers had evil faces, and they seemed strangely at home in the
silent room where no clock ticked and no caged bird twittered. Only the
red cloud spoke like a dull voice, and Doctor Levillier sat and listened
to it, until he felt as if he began to know a new Valentine. There is an
influence that emanates from lifeless things, strong, subtle, and
penetrating; an influence in form, in colour, in scent, even in
juxtaposition. And such influence is like a voice speaking to the soul.
There was a voice in that empty room; and the words it uttered stirred
the doctor to a greater surprise, a greater dread than the words of
Cuckoo. Her painted lips related that which might well be a legend of
her fancy or of her hate. This voice related a reality and no legend.

As the doctor sat there he conversed of many strange and evil matters,
of many discomforting affairs. He was the interrogator, the perpetual
anxious questioner, and the voice in the empty room gave vague and
sinister answers. That was a terrible catechism, a catechism of the
devil, not of God. Question and answer flowed on, and in the doctor's
soul the anxiety and the distress ever deepened. Nor could he control
their development, although at moments his common sense broke into the
catechism like a cool voice from without, and sought to interrupt it
finally. But the twig could not stay the torrent. And the darkness
deepened, darkness in which there was a vision of fire, the vision of a
man, fantastic and menacing. He was the genius of this room. This room
sang of him. Yes, even now the twisted silver goblins, the curved
monstrosities on the cabinet, the crouched Indian boys, the leering
pictures, and always the dull red cloud on wall and carpet, cushion and
hanging. And then a strange deception overtook the doctor and shook his
usually steady nerves. The red cloud seemed to his observing eyes to
tremble, like a flame shaken in a breath of wind, and to glow all around
him. He looked again, endeavouring to laugh at his delusion. But the glow
deepened and there was surely distinct movement. Everywhere on walls,
floor, hangings, couches, faint, thin shadows took shape, grew more
definite. He watched them and saw that they were tiny flames, glowing red
relieved against the red. It was as if he sat in the midst of a ghostly
furnace; for these flames had no pleasant crackling voices. Silently they
burned, and fluttered upward noiselessly. He saw them move this way and
that. Some leaped up; others bent sideways; others wavered uncertainly,
as if their desire were incomplete and their intention undecided. The
doctor stared upon them, and listened for the chorus that fires sing
to tremble and to murmur from their lips. Yet they sang no chorus, but
always, in a ghostly silence, aspired around him. He knew himself to be
the victim of a delusion. He knew what he would have said to a patient
seeking his aid against such a deception of the senses. In his common
sense he knew this, and yet he gradually lost the notion that he was
being deceived, and allowed himself to drift, as he had seen others
drift, into the fancy that he was holding strange intercourse with the
actual. These flames were real. They had forms. They moved. They enclosed
him in a circle. They embraced him. As he watched them he fancied that
they longed to be near to him, and--and--yes--so ran his thoughts--to
communicate something to him, to sigh out their fiery hearts on his. They
trembled as if convulsed with emotion, with desire. They tried to escape
from the sinister red background that held them in its grasp as in a
leash. The doctor was impelled ardently to believe that they yearned to
find voices and to utter some word. And then, on a sudden, he recalled
Julian's declaration on the night of Valentine's trance, that he had seen
a flame shine from his friend's lips, and fade away in the darkness. He
recalled, too, Julian's question about death-beds. Was the soul of a man
a flame? And, if so, were these flames many souls, or one soul reproduced
on all sides by his excitement, and by the intensity of his gaze after
them?

They burned more clearly. Their forms were more defined. Then suddenly
they grew vague, blurred, faint all around him. They faded. They died
into the red of the room. And once more the doctor sat alone.

He listened and heard the click of a key in the front door. And then
suddenly the horror that he had felt long ago, on the night when he was
followed in Regent Street, once more possessed him. He got on his feet
to face it, and, as the drawing-room door was pushed slowly open, faced
Valentine.




