CHAPTER X

THE DOCTOR DRIVES OUT WITH THE LADY OF THE FEATHERS


Some days later Cuckoo received a telegram from Harley Street. It came in
the morning, and ran as follows:

"Call here to-day if possible. Important. Levillier."

Cuckoo read it, trembling. In her early days telegrams came often to her
door--"Meet me at Verrey's, four-thirty"; "Piccadilly Circus, five
o'clock to-day." Such messages flickered through her youth, forming
gradually a legend of her life. But this summons from the doctor at the
same time frightened her and braced her heart. It might mean that Julian
was ill, in danger--she knew not what. But at least it broke through the
appalling inaction, the dreary stagnation, of her days. The lady of the
feathers had fought indeed, of late, that worst enemy, mental despair,
bred of grim patience at last grown weary. That was not the battle she
had been inspired to expect, to prepare for. The doctor's telegram at
least swept the unforeseen foe from the field, and seemed to set the real
enemy full in view.

"There ain't any answer," the lady of the feathers said to Mrs. Brigg,
who waited in an attitude expressive of greedy curiosity.

"Which of 'em is it?" demanded that functionary.

"Shan't tell you," Cuckoo hissed at her.

The filthy groove in which the landlady's mind forever ran began to rouse
her to an intense animosity.

"Well, it's all one to me so long as I'm paid regular," muttered Mrs.
Brigg, with a swing of her dusty skirts and a toss of her grey head,
governed by pomade, since it was a Saturday. Mrs. Brigg must once have
held Christian principles, as she always prepared the ground for certain
Sabbath curls the day before.

Cuckoo ran to dress herself. It was seldom indeed that she stirred out
in the morning, so seldom that that alone was an experience. Arrived
in the bedroom, she pounced mechanically on rouge and powder, and was
about to decorate herself when she suddenly paused with outstretched
hands. She was going out into the bright wintry sunlight, and she was
going to the doctor's house, full, perhaps, of those smart patients of
whom Valentine had once spoken to her. What sort of an apparition would
she be among them? She dropped her hands, hesitating. Then she turned
to a cupboard, drew out the one famous black gown, and put it on. She
crowned her head with Julian's hat, hid her hands in black silk gloves,
pulled down her veil and seized an umbrella. Somehow Cuckoo vaguely
connected respectability with umbrellas, although even the most vicious
are fain to carry them in showery London. Then she looked at herself in
the glass and wondered if her appearance were deceptive enough to trick
the sharp eyes of the patients. The glance reassured her. She seemed to
herself an epitome of black propriety, and she set forth with a more easy
heart. As she walked, her mind ran on before, seeking what this summons
meant and debating possibilities without arriving at conclusions. At
the end of Harley Street her walk, which had been rapid, achieved a
_ritardando_ and nearly came to a full close before she gained the
doctor's door. Cuckoo could be a brazen hussy. A year ago she could
scarcely be anything else. But that love of hers for Julian had, it
seemed, a strange power of undermining old habits. It laid hands upon so
many perceptions, so many emotions, with which it should surely have had
nothing to do, and made subtle inroads upon every dark corner of the
girl's nature. From it came this _ritardando_. For Cuckoo was filled with
a very human dread of exposing Doctor Levillier to misconception by her
appearance in the midst of his patients. Had it been late afternoon
instead of morning her fortitude would certainly have been greater,
and might even have drawn near to impudence. But the clear light of
approaching noontide set her mind blinking with rapid eyelids, and
when she actually gained the street door her discomfort was acute.

As she put up her hand to touch the bell the door opened softly and a
stout Duchess issued forth. Cuckoo didn't know she was a Duchess, but she
quailed before the plethoric glance cast upon her, and her voice was
uneven as she asked for the doctor.

"Have you an appointment, ma'am?" asked Lawler, who did not recognize her
behind her black veil.

"I was asked to come," Cuckoo murmured.

"What name, ma'am?"

"Cuck--Miss Bright."

She was admitted. The doctor, in a hurry of business, had omitted to give
Lawler any instructions in the event of Cuckoo's prompt response to his
telegram. So she was shown into the waiting-room, in which three or four
people were turning over illustrated papers with an air of watchful
idleness and attentive leisure. Cuckoo sat down in a corner as quietly
as possible, and Lawler vanished. The leaves of the illustrated papers
rustled in the air with a dry sound. To Cuckoo they seemed to be
crackling personal remarks about her, and to be impregnated with
condemnation. She cast a furtive glance upon the square room and
perceived that they were returned by four ladies, and that three of
these ladies were looking straight at her. The eight eyes met in a
glance of inquiry and were instantly cast down. Again the leaves of the
illustrateds rustled, this time, Cuckoo felt convinced, more fiercely
than before. The _frou-frou_ of the skirts of one of the ladies joined
in the chorus, which was far from crying "Hallelujah!" Cuckoo began to
feel a growing certainty that, despite the black veil and the neat
umbrella, feminine instinct had divined her. She was totally unaccustomed
to such an atmosphere as that which prevailed in this room, and began
to be the victim of an odd, prickly sensation, which she believed to be
physical, but which was certainly more than half moral. A wave of heat
ran over her body. It was like the heat which follows on a received
slap. One of the illustrateds deleted its voice from the general chorus.
Cuckoo was aware of this, and looked up again to find two eyes fixed
upon her with an expression of thin distaste that was incapable of
misinterpretation. A second illustrated ceased to sing, two heads were
inclined towards one another, and the "t'p, t'p, t'p" of a low whisper
set the remaining two ladies at their posts as sentinels on the lady of
the feathers.

Cuckoo put her hand to her face to pull her veil a little lower down. By
accident she tugged too hard, or it had been badly fastened to her hat,
for one side got loose instantly and it fell down, revealing her face
frankly.

The "t'p, t'p, t'p" sounded again, multiplied by two. Cuckoo, thrown
into confusion by the malign behaviour of her veil, caught awkwardly at
the dropped end with an intention of readjusting it, but something in
the sound of the whispering suddenly moved her to a different action.
She snatched the veil quite off, set her feet firmly against the thick
Turkey carpet, raised her eyes and stared with all her might at the four
ladies, hurling, as a man hurls a bomb, an expression of savage defiance
into her gaze. The whispers stopped; a thin and repeated cough, dry as
Sahara, attacked the silence, and eight eyes were vehemently cast down.
Cuckoo continued staring, folding her hands in her lap. The prickly
sensation increased, but she considered it now as a thing to be jumped
on. Recognizing that she was recognized, she was instantly moved to
play up to her part, and she longed to stare the four women out into
Harley Street. If the energy of a gaze could have achieved that object,
they must have backed through the doctor's plate glass into the area
forthwith. They were, in fact, most obviously moved, and their attitudes
expressed, by a community of lines, virtue rampant and agitation gules.
A shattering silence endured till Lawler appeared to bid two of these
virgins with lit lamps of self-righteousness to the consulting-room.
As they rose the two other ladies rose also and followed in their wake.
Lawler politely protested, but they were now to proclaim their beauty
of character.

"We should prefer to wait in another room," said the lady who had coughed
as a communication with heaven.

"Yes, another room," added the other, and as she spoke she half turned,
indicating the corner where Cuckoo sat.

Without a word Lawler showed them out and closed the door. For another
twenty minutes Cuckoo sat alone, glaring at the table by which these
members of her sex had sat, and seeing no material objects but only--as
is the way of humanity--her own point of view. The ladies saw only
theirs. In this respect, at least, they closely resembled the lady of
the feathers. When Lawler at length returned with his grave: "This way,
if you please, ma'am," Cuckoo rose to her feet with the inflexibility
of some iron thing set in motion by mechanism, and marched in his wake
to the doctor's presence.

The doctor was standing up by a bright fire; he looked very grave.

"I am very sorry to have kept you," he said, "very sorry. I did not think
you could get here so quickly."

Cuckoo cleared her throat.

"I wish I hadn't," she answered bluntly.

"Why?"

"It don't matter. I started directly your wire came."

"That was good of you. Please sit down."

Cuckoo sat with a straight back in the straightest chair she could
perceive. The doctor still remained standing by the fire. He appeared
to be thinking deeply. His eyes looked downward at his gaily shining
boots. After a minute or two he said:

"I speak to you now in strict confidence, trusting your secrecy
implicitly."

The back of Cuckoo became less straight. Even a gentle curve made it more
gracious if less admirable from the dancing-mistress point of view.

"Honour!" she interjected rapidly, like a schoolboy.

The doctor looked up at her and a smile came to his lips. And as he
looked up he noticed the neatness of her black gown, the simplicity of
her hat, the absence of paint and powder. Being, after all, only a man,
he was surprised at Cuckoo's appearance of propriety. The four ladies had
been surprised at her appearance of impropriety. But the doctor, seeing
her so much better than usual, thought her--in looks--quite well, as
indeed she was in comparison with the _tout ensemble_ of her usual days.
He looked from her black gloves, which held the thick black veil, to the
winter sunshine sparkling, like a dancing, eager child, at the window.

"Do you like driving?" he said.

"What?"

"Driving--do you like it?"

"Pretty well, if the horse don't come down," said Cuckoo, at once
concentrated on cabs.

"My horses won't."

"Yours!"

"Yes. I have no more patients to-day. I have a half-holiday and I want to
talk to you. Shall we go for a drive to Hampstead and talk out in the
open air and the sunshine?"

The four ladies, the illustrateds, the cough, dry as Sahara, were
instantly forgotten. Cuckoo became all curves, almost like Jessie in
moments of supreme emotion.

"Me and you?" she exclaimed. "Oh yes!"

The doctor rang the bell.

"Take this lady to the dining-room and give her some lunch," he said to
Lawler. "And please order the victoria round at once."

"Yes, sir."

"While you lunch," he said to Cuckoo, "I'll just get through two letters
that must be written, and then we'll start."

Cuckoo followed Lawler with a sense of airy wonder and delight.

A quarter of an hour later she was seated with the doctor in the
victoria, the veil tightly stretched across her face, her poor mode of
living up to his trust in her, and deserving the honour now conferred
upon her. The coachman let his horses go, and Harley Street was left
behind. Such a bright day it was. Even the cold seemed a gay and festive
thing, spinning the circulation like a gold coin till it glittered,
decorating the poorest cheeks with the brightest rose as if in honour
of a festival. To Cuckoo London, as seen from a private carriage, was
a wonder and a dream of novelty, a city of kings instead of a city of
beggars, a city of crystal morning instead of a city of dreadful night.
She gazed at it out of a new heart as these horses--that never came
down--trotted briskly forward. Through the silk of her gloves her thumbs
and fingers felt silently the warm sables of the rug that caressed her
knees. And she thought that this feeling, and the feeling in her heart,
must be constituent parts of the emotion called happiness. If the four
ladies could see her now! If they could see her now, Cuckoo thought, she
would take off her veil, just for a moment. When the aspect of the street
began to change, when little gardens appeared, and bare trees standing
bravely in the sun behind high walls and iron gates, the doctor said to
Cuckoo:

"Now I will tell you why I telegraphed to you."

And then Cuckoo remembered that she was in this wonderful expedition for
a reason. The doctor continued speaking in a low voice, with the obvious
intention of being inaudible to the coachman, whose large furred back
presented an appearance of broad indifference to their two lives.

"You remember what I said to you the other day--that perhaps you could
help Julian from great evil."

Cuckoo nodded earnestly.

"And you are prepared to do anything you can?"

"Yes."

She had forgotten the smart carriage, and the horses that never came
down, now.

"Good," said the doctor, shortly and decisively. "I will speak to you
quite plainly to-day, for something leads me to trust you, and to say to
you what I would say to no other person. Something leads me to believe
that you can do more for Addison than any one else. Addison once implied
it; but what I have observed for myself in your house leads me to be
certain of it."

"Oh," said Cuckoo.

She had nothing more to say. She could have said nothing more. The stress
of her excitement was too great.

"Look at that holly tree. What a quantity of berries it has!" the doctor
said. "That's because it is a hard winter. Miss Bright, you are right in
you conviction. Valentine Cresswell is--has been--totally evil, and is
deliberately, coldly, but with determination, compassing the utter ruin
of the man who trusts him and believes in him--of Addison."

Cuckoo nodded again, this time with a strangely matter-of-course air,
which assured the doctor in a flash of the long certainty of her
knowledge of Valentine.

"Such a thing seemed to me entirely incredible," the doctor pursued. "I
am forced--forced--to believe it is true. But remember this: I have known
Mr. Cresswell for several years intimately. I have been again and again
with him and Julian. I have noticed the extraordinary influence he had
over Julian, and I know that influence used to be a noble influence, used
solely for good. Mr. Cresswell was a man of extraordinary high-mindedness
and purity of life. He had a brilliant intellect," the doctor continued,
forgetting to whom he was talking, as his mind went back to the Valentine
of the old days. "But, far more than that, he was born with a very
wonderful and unusual nature. It was written in his face in the
grandeur--I can call it nothing else--of his expression. And it was
written in his life, in all his acts. But, most of all it was written
in all he did for Julian. Ah, you look surprised!"

Indeed Cuckoo's face, such of it as was visible under the black shadow of
the veil, was a mask of blank wonderment. She looked upon the doctor as
all that was clever and perfect and extraordinary; so this, it seemed
to her, idiocy of his outlook upon Valentine was too much for her manner.

"Well, I never! Him!" she could not help ejaculating with a long breath,
that was almost like a little puff.

"Remember," said Dr. Levillier, "this was before you knew him."

He had taken the trouble to ascertain from Julian the exact date of
Valentine's first introduction to the lady of the feathers.

"Oh yes," said Cuckoo, still with absolute incredulity of the truth of
the doctor's panegyric expressed in voice and look.

"Men change greatly, terribly."

"Oh, not like that," she jerked out suddenly, moved by an irresistible
impulse to contradict his apparent deduction.

"No, there you are right," he answered with emphasis. "Sane men do not,
can never, I believe, change so utterly."

"That's what I say. I've seen men go down, lots of 'em, but it ain't like
that."

Cuckoo spoke with some authority, as of one speaking from depths of a
deep experience. She put her hands under the warm rug with a sensation of
something that was like dignity of mind. She and the doctor were talking
on equal terms of intellectuality just at this moment. She was saying
sensible things and he was obliged to agree with her.

"Not like that," she murmured again out of the embrace of the rug.

He turned towards her so that he could see her more distinctly and make
his words more impressive.

"Remember now that what I am going to say to you must not be mentioned
to Julian on any account, or to any one," he said.

"I'll remember. Honour. I'll never tell."

"I have a very sad theory to explain this great change in Mr. Cresswell,
from what he was as I knew him, and you must take his beauty of character
from me--to what he is as you and I know him now. I believe that he has
become mad." For the doctor had resolutely put away from his mind the
fancies called up in it by the visit of Marr's wife.

Cuckoo gave a little cry of surprise, then hastily glanced at the
coachman's back and pushed her hands under the rug up towards her mouth.

"Hush," said the doctor. "Only listen quietly."

"Yes, pardon," she said. "But he ain't--oh, he can't be."

"I am forced to think it, forced to think it," the doctor said, with
pressure. "He has, in great measure, one of the most common, most
universal, of the fatuous beliefs of the insane,--a deep-rooted, an
almost incredible belief in himself, in his own glory, power, will,
personality."

Cuckoo tried to throw in some remark here, but he went on without a
pause:

"There are madmen confined in asylums all over England who think
themselves the Messiah--this is the commonest form of religious
mania--emperors, kings, regenerators of the human race, doers of great
deeds that must bring them everlasting fame. On all other points they
are sane, and you might spend hours alone with them and never discover
the one crank in their mind that makes the whole mind out of joint. So
you have been alone with Mr. Cresswell and have not suspected him. Yet
he has a madness, and it is this madness which leads him to this
frightful conduct of his towards Julian, conduct which you will never
know the extent of."

Here Cuckoo succeeded in getting in a remark:

"Will," she said, catching hold of that one word and beginning to look
eager. "That's what he was at all the time he was talking to me that
night. Will, he says, is this and that and the other; will, he says, is
everythin', I remember. Will, he says, is my God, or somethin' like it.
He did. He did."

"Ah! you see; even you have noticed it."

"Yes; but he ain't mad, though," Cuckoo concluded, with an echo of that
obstinacy which she could never completely conquer. She said what she
felt. She could not help it. The doctor was in no wise offended by this
unskilled opinion opposed to his skilled one. He even smiled slightly.

"Why do you say that?" he asked.

"He's too sharp. He's a sight too sharp."

"Madmen are very cunning."

"So are women," Cuckoo exclaimed. "I could see if a man was mad."

She was a little intoxicated with the swift motion, the bright sun, the
keen air, the clang of the horse's hoofs on the hard roads, and, most of
all, with this conference which the befurred coachman was on no account
to hear. This made her hold fast to her opinion, with no thought of being
rude or presuming. The doctor, accustomed to have duchesses and others
hanging upon his words of wisdom, was whipped into a refreshed humour
by this odd attitude of an ignorant girl, and he replied with extreme
vivacity:

"You will think as I do one day. Meanwhile listen to me. When Mr.
Cresswell came to you and broke out into this tirade, which you say
you remember, on the subject of will, did he not show any excitement?"

"Eh?"

"Did he get excited, very hot and eager? Did he speak unusually loud,
or make any curious gestures with his hands? Did he do anything, that
you can remember, such as an ordinary man would not do?"

"Why, yes," Cuckoo answered. "So he did."

"Ah! What was it? What did he do?"

"Well, after he'd been talkin' a bit he caught hold of me and pulled me
in front of the glass. See?"

"Yes, yes."

"And he made me look into it."

"What for?"

But at this point Cuckoo got restive.

"I--I can't remember," she murmured, almost sullenly, recalling
Valentine's bitter sarcasms on her appearance and way of life.

"Never mind, then. Leave that. But after; what came next?"

"While we was standin' like that he seemed to get frightened or
somethin', like he saw somethin' in the glass. He was frightened, scared,
and he hit out all on a sudden, just where my face was in the glass, and
smashed it."

"Smashed the glass?"

"Yes. And then he snatched hold of me and looked in my eyes awful queer,
and then he burst out laughin' and says as the mirror was tellin' him
lies. That's all."

"He was perfectly sober?"

"Oh, he hadn't been on the booze."

"Sober and did that, and then you can tell me that there is no madness in
him."

The doctor spoke almost in a bantering tone, but Cuckoo stuck to her
guns.

"I don't think it," she said, with her under lip sticking out.

"Well, Miss Bright, I want you to assume something."

"What's that?"

"To pretend to yourself that you think something, whether you do really
think it or not."

"Make believe!" cried Cuckoo, childishly.

"Exactly."

"What about?"

"I want you to 'make believe' that Mr. Cresswell is not himself--is not
sane."

"O-oh-h!" said Cuckoo, with a long intonation of surprise.

"I do honestly believe it; you are to pretend to believe it. Now,
remember that."

"All right."

"You are not to contradict any more, you see."

"Oh," began Cuckoo, in sudden distress. "Pardon. I didn't--"

"Hush! That's all right. Act with me on the make-believe or assumption
that Mr. Cresswell is not himself at present."

"Ah, but that ain't no make-believe. He told me as he wasn't himself when
he says, 'I am Marr.'"

"Yes--yes," said the doctor. Secretly, almost angrily, he said to himself
that Valentine, in some access of insanity, had actually confessed to the
lady of the feathers that he knew himself to be mad.

"He says he ain't himself," she repeated again, with an eager feeling
that perhaps, at last, she had got at the right interpretation of the
gospel of Valentine.

"That is practically the same thing as his saying to you that he was mad.
Now you have told me what you feel for Julian."

Cuckoo flushed, and muttered something unintelligible, twining her hands
in the sables till she nearly pulled them from Doctor Levillier's knees.

"And you have seen the terrible change that has come over him, and that
is fast, fast deepening to something that must end in utter ruin. You
have not seen him these last few days, I think."

"No", said Cuckoo, her eyes fixed hungrily on the doctor's face. She
began to tug at her veil. "What's it? Is he--is he?"

She collapsed into a nervous silence, still tugging with a futile hand at
the veil, which remained implacably stretched across her face. The doctor
looked at her, and said steadily:

"He has gone a little further--down. You understand me?"

"I ought to," she said, bitterly.

"As you are mounting upward," the doctor rejoined, with a kind and firm
gravity that seemed indeed to lift Cuckoo, as a sweet wind lifts a
feather and sends it on high.

The bitterness went out of her face, but she said nothing, only sat
listening attentively while the doctor went on:

"My belief is this, and if you hold it you can perhaps act in this matter
with more boldness, more fearlessness, than if you do not hold it. I
believe that Mr. Cresswell, who played very foolish tricks with his
nerves some time ago, just before he got to know you, has become mad to
this extent, that he believes himself to have a power of will unlike that
possessed by any other man,--an inhuman power, in fact. He fancies that
he has the will of a sort of god, and he wishes to prove this to himself
more especially. Everything is for self in a madman. Now he looks about
for a means of proving that his will can do everything. He wants to make
it do something extraordinary, uncommon. What does he find for it to do?
This, the ruin of Julian. And now I'll tell you why this ruin of Julian
would be a peculiar triumph for his will. Originally, when Cresswell was
sane and splendid, his splendour of sanity guarded Julian from all that
was dangerous. Julian was naturally inclined to be wild. He has an ardent
nature, and five years ago, when he was a mere boy, might have fallen
into a thousand follies. Cresswell's influence first kept him from these
follies, and at last taught him to loathe and despise them. And Julian,
remember this, told Cresswell at last that he had been to him a sort of
saviour. You can follow me?"

"'M," Cuckoo ejaculated with shut mouth and a nod of her head.

"So that Cresswell knew what his will had been able to do in the
direction of lifting Julian high up, almost above his nature. Well, then
followed certain foolish practices which I need not describe. Cresswell
and Julian joined in a certain trickery, often practised by people who
call themselves spiritualists and occultists. It certainly had an effect
upon them at the time, and I advised them earnestly to drop it. They
disregarded my advice, and the result was that Mr. Cresswell fell into
an extraordinary condition of body. He fell into a trance, became as if
he were dead, and remained so for some hours on a certain night. I was
called in to him, and actually thought that he was dead. But he revived.
Now, I believe that though he seemed to recover, and did recover in
body, he never recovered from that insensibility in mind. I believe he
went into that sleep sane and came out of it mad, and that he remains
mad to this moment. Certainly, ever since then he has been an altered
man, the man you know, not at all the man he used to be. Since that
night he, who used to be almost unconscious of the wonder of his own
will, has become intensely self-conscious, and engrossed with it, and
has wished to make it obey him and perform miracles. And what is the
special miracle to which he is devoting himself at this moment, as you
have observed? Just this: the ruin of the thing he originally saved. It
is like this," he said, noting that Cuckoo was becoming puzzled and
confused, "Cresswell, by his influence, made Julian loathe sin. Coming
out of this trance, as I believe, a madman, he seeks to make his will
do something extraordinary. What shall he make it do? His eyes fall on
Julian, who is always with him, as you know. And he resolves to make
Julian love what he has taught him to loathe--sin, vice, degradation of
every kind. So he sets to work with all the cunning of a diseased mind,
and hour by hour, day by day, he works for this horrible end. At first he
is quiet and careful. But at last he becomes almost intoxicated as he
sees his own success. And he allows himself to be led into outbreaks of
triumph. One of those outbreaks you yourself seem to have witnessed. I
have witnessed another--on the night I dined alone with Cresswell, when
he killed the dog, Rip, and threw him out into the snow. Cresswell is
intoxicated with the mental intoxication of mania, at the degradation
into which his will has forced Julian, who had learnt to love him, to
think that everything he did must be right. And this intoxication is
leading him to excesses. It is my firm belief that he intends to drag
Julian down into intolerable abysses of sin, to plunge him into utter
ruin, to bring him perhaps to prison, and to death."

Cuckoo was listening now with a white face--even her lips looked almost
grey. The sunshine still lay over the winter world. The horses trotted.
The sables were warm about her. They had nearly left the city behind
them and were gaining the heights, on which the air was keener and more
life-giving, and from which the outlook was larger and more inspiring.
But the girl's gaiety and almost wild sense of vivacity and protectedness
had vanished. For the doctor's face and voice had become grave, and his
words were weighty with a conviction, which, added to her own knowledge
of Julian and Valentine, made her fears unutterable. As the doctor paused
she opened her lips as if to speak, but she said nothing. He could not
but perceive the cloud that had settled on her, and his manner quickly
changed. A brightness, a hopefulness, illumined his face, and he said
quickly:

"This tragedy is what you and I, but you especially, must prevent."

Then Cuckoo spoke at last:

"How ever?" she said.

"Remember this," he answered. "If Cresswell is mad we must pity him,
not condemn him. But we must, above all, fight him. Could I prove his
madness the danger would be averted? Possibly time will give me the
means of proving it. I have watched him. I shall continue to watch him.
But as yet, although I see enough to convince me of his insanity, I
don't see enough to convince the world, or, above all, to convince
Julian. Therefore never give Julian the slightest hint of what I have
told you of to-day. His adoration of Valentine is such that even a hint
might easily lead him to regard both you and me as his enemies. Keep your
own counsel and mine, but act with me on the silent assumption that
Cresswell being a madman, we are justified in fighting him to the bitter
end, you and I, with all our forces."

"I see," Cuckoo said, a burning excitement beginning to wake in her.

"Justified in fighting him, but not in hating him."

"Oh," she said, with a much more doubtful accent.

"Scarcely any human being, if indeed any, is completely hateful. How then
can a human being, whose mind is ill and out of control, be hateful?"
said the doctor, gently.

She felt herself rebuked, and a quick thought of herself, of what she
was, rebuked her too.

"I'll try not," she murmured, but with no inward conviction of success.

They were on the heath now, and the smoke of London hung in the wintry
air beyond and below them. The sun was already beginning to wear the
aspect of a traveller on the point of departure for a journey. His once
golden face was sinister with that blood-red hue which it so often
assumes on winter afternoons, and which seems to set it in a place more
than usually remote, more than usually distant from our world, and in a
clime that is sad and strange. Winds danced over the heath like young
witches. The horses, whipped by the more intense cold, pulled hard
against the bit, and made the coachman's arms ache. The doctor looked
away for a moment at the vapours that began to clothe the afternoon in
the hollows and depressions of the landscape, and at the sun, whose
gathering change of aspect smote on his imagination as something akin to
the change that falls over the faces of men towards that hour when the
sun of their glory makes ready for its setting. Still keeping his glance
on that sad red sun in its nest of radiating vapours, he said, in a
withdrawn voice:

"We must hate nothing except the hatefulness of sin in ourselves and in
others."

Cuckoo listened as to the voice of some one on a throne, and tears that
she could not fully understand rose in her eyes.

But now the doctor turned from the sun to the lady of the feathers, and
there was a bright light in his quiet eyes.

"You and I must fight with all our forces," he said. "Have you ever
thought about this thing will which Cresswell worships insanely? Have you
ever felt it in you, Miss Bright?"

"I don't know as I have," Cuckoo said, secretly wondering if it were
that strange and fleeting power which had come to her of late, which
had made her for a moment fearless of Valentine as she defied him in the
loneliness of her room, which had stirred her even to a faith in herself
when she spoke with the doctor under the stars upon her doorstep.

"I think you have. I think you will. It must be there, for Julian feels
it in you. He--he calls it a flame."

"Eh? A flame?"

"Yes. He sees it in your eyes, and it holds him near you."

So the doctor spoke, partly out of his conviction, partly because he
had definitely resolved to put away from him all the things that fought
against his reason and that his imagination perhaps loved too much.
Such things, he thought, floated like clouds across the clearness of
his vision, and drowned the light of his power to do good. So his
fancies that had fastened on the mystery of the dead Marr and the living
Valentine, connecting them together, and weaving a veil of magic about
their strange connection, were banished. He would not hold more commerce
with them, nor would he accept the fancies of others as realities. Thus,
in his mind, Julian's legend of the flame in this girl's eyes, despite
the doctor's own vision of flames, became merely a story of the truth
of human will and an acknowledgment of its power.

"Is that why he looks at me so?" Cuckoo asked, in a manner unusually
meditative. "But then he, Valentine, did the same! Why, could that be
what scared him that night--what he struck at?"

"He too may feel that you have a power for good, to fight against his
power for evil. Yes, he does feel it. Make him feel it more. Rely on
yourself. Trust that there's something great within you, something placed
there for you to use. Never mind what your life has been. Never mind your
own weakness. You are the home, the temple, of this power of will. Julian
feels it, and it draws him to you, but it is as nothing yet compared
with the power of Cresswell. You have to make it more powerful, so that
you may win Julian back from this danger."

"Eh? How?"

"Rest on it; trust in it; teach it to act. Show Julian more and more that
you have it. Can't you think of a way of showing that you have this
power?"

"Not I. No," Cuckoo murmured.

The doctor lowered his voice still more. Quite at a venture he drew a
bow, and with his first arrow smote the lady of the feathers to the
heart.

"Has Julian ever asked you to do anything?" he said.

Suddenly Cuckoo's face was scarlet.

"Why? How d' you know?" she stammered.

"Anything for him that was not evil?" the doctor pursued, following out
an abstract theory, not as Cuckoo fancied, dealing with known facts. "I
know nothing. I only ask you to try and remember, to search your mind."

There was no need for the lady of the feathers to do that.

"Yes, he did once," she said, looking still confused and furtive.

"Was it difficult?"

She hesitated.

"I s'pose so," she answered at last.

"Did you do it?"

"No."

The doctor had noticed that his questions gave pain.

"I don't want to know what it was and I don't ask," he said. "I have
neither the right to, nor the desire to. But can't you do it, and show
Julian that you have done it? If you do I think he will see that flame,
which he fears and which fascinates him, burn more clearly, more
steadily, in your eyes."

"I'll see," Cuckoo said with a kind of gulp.

"Do more than this. This is only a part, one weapon in the fight.
Cresswell is always near Julian; you must be near him. Cresswell
pursues Julian; you must pursue him, use your woman's wit, use all your
experience of men; use your heart. Wake up and throw yourself into this
battle, and make yourself worthy of fighting. Only you can tell how. But
this is a fact. Our wills, our powers of doing things, are made strong,
or made weak by our own lives. Each time we do a degradingly low, beastly
thing"--he chose the words most easily comprehended by such a woman as
she was--"we weaken our will, and make it less able to do anything good
for another. If you commit loveless actions from to-day--though Julian
has nothing to do with them--with each loveless action you will lose a
point in the battle against the madness of Cresswell. And you must lose
no points. Remember you are fighting a madman, as I believe, for the
safety of the man you love. If I could tell you what--"

The doctor pulled himself up short.

"No," he said, "no need to tell you more than that, within these last
few days I have found that all you said about Cresswell's present
_diablerie_"--he shook his head impatiently at the language he was using
to the lady of the feathers--"Cresswell's present impulse for evil is
less horribly true than the truth. I shall watch him, day by day, from
now. And if I can act, I shall do so. If his insanity is too sharp for
me, as it may well be, I shall be checkmated in any effort to forcibly
keep him from doing harm. In that case I can only trust to you, and
hope that some chance circumstance may lead to the opening of Julian's
eyes. But they are closed--closed fast. In any case you will help me and
I will help you. You shall have opportunities of meeting Julian often. I
will arrange that. And Cresswell--"

He paused as if in deep thought.

"How to do it," he murmured, almost to himself. "How to bring this battle
to the issue!"

Then he turned his eyes on Cuckoo.

She was sitting bolt upright in the carriage. Her cheeks were flushed.
Her hollow eyes were sparkling. She had drawn her hands out from under
the rug and clasped them together in her lap.

"Oh, I'll do anything I can," she said, "anything. And--and I can do that
one thing!"

"Yes," said the doctor. "Which?"

"The thing that he asked me once, and what I said no to," she answered,
but in such a low murmur that the doctor scarcely caught the words.

He leaned forward in the carriage.

"Home now, Grant," he said to the coachman. "Or--no--drive first to 400
Marylebone Road."

The doctor turned again towards Cuckoo. She was looking away from him, so
much that he was obliged to believe that she wished to conceal her face,
which was towards the sunset.

The sky over London glowed with a dull red like a furnace. It deepened,
while they looked, passing rapidly through the biting cold of the late
winter afternoon.

The red cloud near the fainting sun broke and parted.

Spears of gold were thrust forth.

"Flames," the doctor whispered to himself. "Flames! The will, the soul of
God in nature."




