CHAPTER VI

THE SELLING OF JESSIE


One chill morning of earliest February, a stirring of Jessie at the foot
of her bed wakened Cuckoo from a short and uneasy sleep. She opened her
eyes to the faint light that filtered through the green Venetian blind.
Jessie moved again, slowly rotating like a drowsy top, then suddenly
dropped into the warm centre of a nest of bedclothes, breathing a big
dog-sigh of satisfaction that shook her tiny frame. She slept. But she
had wakened her mistress, who lay with her head resting on one hand,
deep in thought while the day grew outside. Cuckoo, having directed her
steps down a blind-alley had, not unnaturally, reached a dead-wall,
blotting out the horizon. Lying there, she faced it. She stared at the
wall, and the wall seemed to stare back at her. Perhaps for that reason
a dull blankness flowed over and filled her mind, and made her widely
opened eyes almost as expressionless as the eyes of a corpse. For a
long time she lay in this alive stupor. Then Jessie stirred again, and
Cuckoo, as she had been before spurred into wakefulness, was stirred
into thoughtfulness. She began to pass the near past, the present,
eventually the future, in review. The past was a crescendo, solitude
growing louder each night, poverty growing louder, obstinacy growing
louder, Mrs. Brigg growing louder. What an orchestra! Cuckoo had not
seen Julian once. She had seen the doctor, to be told of his baffled
efforts, of Julian's escape from all his friends, of Valentine's
declaration of the stone going down in the sea, of utter deadlock,
utter stagnation. For the doctor treated Cuckoo frankly as a brave
woman, not deceitfully as a timid child to be buoyed on the waves of
ill-circumstances with gas-filled bladders. Cuckoo knew the worst of
things, and by the knowledge was confirmed in her mule's attitude which
so weighed upon Mrs. Brigg. Her hands were tied in every direction
except one. She could only dumbly prove that Valentine was wrong; that
her will was not dead, by exercising it to the detriment of her worldly
situation. Doggedly then she put her whole past behind her, despite the
ever-increasing curses of the landlady. She had given up her pilgrimages
in search of honest work. They were too hopeless. She had pawned
everything she could pawn, and sold every trifle that was saleable. Even
Jessie's broad band of yellow satin had been included in a heterogeneous
parcel of odds and ends purchased by a phlegmatic German with eyes like
marbles and the manner of a stone image. Living less and less well, doing
without fires, sitting often in the dark at night to save the expense of
gas, Cuckoo had managed to pay her rent until a week ago. Then money had
failed, and the great earthquake had at length tossed and swallowed the
wretched Mrs. Brigg. The scene had been tropical. Mrs. Brigg was really
moved to the very depths of her being. For days she had been, as it were,
eating and drinking apprehension. Now apprehension choked her. She was
shot up in the air by the cannon of climax. Limbs and mind were in the
extreme of commotion. From her point of view it must be acknowledged that
the situation was unduly exasperating. For Cuckoo would give no reason
whatever for her reiterated formula of refusal to earn any money. And now
she could not pay her week's rent, plunging Mrs. Brigg into the further
circle of an _inferno_, and yet sat within doors day after day. Mrs.
Brigg approached apoplexy by way of persuasion, was by turns pathetic
and paralytic with passion. She coaxed with the ardour of an executioner
inveigling the victim's neck to the noose and in haste to be off to
breakfast. She threatened like Jove in curl-papers. Cuckoo was
inexorable.

"Then out you go!" said Mrs. Brigg at last. "Out of my house you pack,
you--" Nameless words followed.

Cuckoo got up from her chair with no show of emotion and moved towards
her bedroom stonily to pack her box. She didn't care. She was in a mood
to lie down in the gutter and wait the last blow of Fate, living only in
her one obstinate determination to do what the doctor had told her, the
one thing Julian had asked of her. She did not any longer war with words
against the purple and hard-breathing landlady. And her silence and her
movement of obedience awed Mrs. Brigg for the moment into another mood.
She shuffled after Cuckoo into the bedroom.

"Eh? What is it?" she ejaculated. "What are you a-doing of?"

"Going," Cuckoo threw at her.

"Now?"

"Yes."

"Where to?"

No answer. Cuckoo was thrusting the few things still left to her into the
only box she now possessed in the world. Mrs. Brigg stood in the folding
doorway watching, and making mouths, as is the fashion of the elderly
when emotional.

"What are you going for?" she said presently, as Cuckoo, bending down,
stuffed a white petticoat into the depths.

"Can't pay," snarled Cuckoo.

"It don't matter--for a day or two," said Mrs. Brigg, reluctantly.

She stumped downstairs, torn by conflicting emotions. She had got
accustomed to Cuckoo, and then both Julian and Valentine, Cuckoo's
visitors, had taught her the colour of the British sovereign. They had
not been near 400 lately, but they might come again. And then Doctor
Levillier. Cuckoo had some fine friends, who would surely do something
for her. Mrs. Brigg had no other possible lodger in her eye. On the
whole, prudence dictated a day or two's patience, just a day or two,
or a week's, not more, not a moment more. Thus it came about that Cuckoo
had now been another week beneath the roof of Mrs. Brigg without paying
hard cash for the asylum. The previous evening the landlady had burst
out again into fury, refusing to get in any more food for Cuckoo, and
demanding the fortnight's rent. She had even, carried away by cupidity
and passion, striven to drive Cuckoo out to her night's work. A physical
struggle had taken place between them, ending in the landlady's
hysterics. Other lodgers had been drawn by the noise from their floors
to witness the row. Two of them had come, on the scene accompanied by
men, and to them Mrs. Brigg had shrieked her wrongs and explanations of
this swindling virtue of a woman who had formerly paid her way honestly
from the street. The lodgers and their men had provided an accompaniment
of jeering laughter to the Brigg solo, and Cuckoo, her clothes nearly
torn from her back, had flung at last into her sitting-room and locked
the door. That was last night--the past which she now reviewed in the
morning twilight. What was she to do? She was without food. She was in
debt, must leave Mrs. Brigg, no doubt, but must pay her first, had no
means to pay for another lodging. She might apply to Doctor Levillier.
What held her back from taking that road was mainly this. She had the
dumb desire to make a sacrifice for Julian, and the doctor had given her
the idea of the only sacrifice she could make--retention of herself from
the degradation that kept her free of debt. If she asked the doctor to
pay the expenses of the sacrifice, whose would it be? His, not hers. So
there was no banker in the world for Cuckoo. The dead-wall faced her.
The horizon was shut out. She lay there and tried to think--and tried to
think. How to get some money? Something--the devil perhaps--prompted the
sleeping Jessie to stir again at the bottom of the bed. Cuckoo felt the
little dog's back shift against her stretched-out toes, and suddenly a
bitter flood of red ran over her thin, half-starved face, and she hid it
in the tumbled pillow, pressing it down. The movement was the attempted
physical negation of an abominable, treacherous thought which had just
stabbed her mind. How could it have come to her, when she hated it so?
She burrowed further into the pillow, at the same time caressing the back
of Jessie with little movements of her toes. Horrible, horrible thought!
It brought tears which stained the pillow. It brought a hard beating of
the heart. And these manifestations showed plainly that Cuckoo had not
dismissed it yet. She tried to dismiss it, shutting her eyes up tightly,
shaking her head at the black, venomous thing. But it stayed and grew
larger and more dominant. Then she took her head from the pillow, faced
it, and examined it. It was a clear-cut, definite thought now, perfectly
finished, coldly complete.

Jessie was embodied money, an embodied small sum of money.

Long ago Cuckoo had said to Julian with pride:

"She's a show-dog. I wouldn't part with her for nuts."

Now she remembered those words, and knew, could not help knowing, that a
show-dog was worth more than nuts. At that moment she wished Jessie were
worthless. Then the sting would be drawn from her horrible thought.
Meanwhile Jessie slept calmly on, warm and cosey.

Cuckoo was cold and trembling. She knew that she was on the verge of
starvation. The doctor had said that one day she could help Julian, only
she. So she must not starve. Love alone would not let her do that.
Between her and starvation lay Jessie, curved in sleep, unconscious that
her small future was being debated with tears and with horror.

Long ago the little dog had entered Cuckoo's heart to be cherished
there. Many wretched London women own such a little dog, to whom they
cling with a passion such as more fortunate women lavish upon their
children. A great many subtleties combine to elevate companions with
tails to the best thrones the poor, the wicked, and the deserted can
give them. A dog has such a rich nature to give to the woman who is poor,
so much innocence at hand for the woman who is wicked, such completeness
of attachment ready for the woman who is lonely. It is so beautifully
humble upon its throne, abased in its own eyes before the shrine of its
mistress, on whom it depends entirely for all its happiness. A little
king, perhaps, it has the pretty manners of a little servitor. And even
when it presumes to be determined in the expressed desire for the dryness
of a biscuit or the warmth of a lap, with how small a word or glance can
it be laid upon its back, in the abject renunciation of every pretension,
anxious only for the forgiveness that nobody with a touch of tenderness
could withhold. Ah, there is much to be thankful for in a companion with
a tail! Jessie had winning ways, the deep heart of a dog. A toy dog she
was, no doubt, but hers was no toy nature. Cuckoo could not have shed
such tears as those she now shed over any toy. For she began to cry
weakly at the mere thought that had come to her, although it was not yet
become a resolve. Life with Jessie had been very sordid, very sad. What
would life be without her? What would such a morning as this be, for
instance? Cuckoo's imagination set tempestuously to work, with physical
aids--such as the following. She drew away her feet from the bottom of
the bed, where they touched the little dog's back. Doing this she said
to herself, "Now, Jessie is gone." Curled up, she set herself to realize
the lie. And perhaps she might have succeeded thoroughly in the sad
attempt had not Jessie, in sleep missing the contact of her mistress,
wriggled lazily on her side up the bed after Cuckoo's feet, discovering
which, she again composed herself to slumber. The renunciation was
not to be complete in imagination. Jessie's love, when present, was too
frustrating. And Cuckoo, casting away her horrible thought in a sort of
hasty panic, caught her companion with a tail in her arms, and made her
rest beside her, close, close. Jessie was well content, but still sleepy.
She reposed her tiny head upon the pillow, lengthened herself between the
sheets and dreamed again. And while she dreamed, the black thought about
her came back to Cuckoo. It was assertive, and Cuckoo began to fear it.
The fear of a thought is a horrible thing; sometimes it is worse than
the fear of death. This one made Cuckoo think herself more cruel than
any woman since the world began. Yet she could not exorcise it. On the
contrary, she grew familiar with it as the day marched on, until it put
on a fatal expression of duty. All that day she revolved it. Mrs. Brigg
attacked her again. Food was lacking. Cuckoo's case became desperate. She
turned over carefully all her few remaining possessions to see if there
was any inanimate thing that she had omitted to turn into money. Jessie,
poor innocent, assisted with animation at the forlorn inventory, nestling
among the tumbled garments, leaping on and off the bed. Her ingenuous
nature supposed some odd game to be in progress, and was anxious to play
a principal and effective part in it. Yet she was quieted by the look
Cuckoo cast upon her when the wardrobe had been passed in review and no
saleable thing was to be found. She shrank into a corner, ready for
whimpering. That night Cuckoo did not sleep, and through all the long
hours she held Jessie in her arms, and heard, as so often before, the
regular breathing of this little companion of hers. And each drawn breath
pierced her heart.

Next morning she got up early. She was faint with hunger and with a
resolve that she had made. She dressed herself, then carried Jessie to
the flannel-lined basket, put her into it and kissed her.

"Go bials," she said, with a raised finger. "Go bials."

Jessie winked her eyes pathetically, her chin resting on the basket edge.
Cuckoo went out into the passage and called down to Mrs. Brigg.

"What is it?" cried Hades.

"I'm going to get some money."

Mrs. Brigg ran out.

"Money!" she said in a keen treble. "Where are you going to git it?"

"Never you mind," said Cuckoo, in a dull voice.

She turned from Mrs. Brigg's flooding ejaculations and was gone. In her
peregrinations about London she had sometimes encountered in a certain
thoroughfare a broad old man with a face marked with small-pox, who
wore a fur cap and leggings. This individual conveyed upon his thickest
person certain clinging rats, which crawled about him in the public view
while he walked, and he led in strings three or four terriers, sometimes
a pup or two. Cuckoo had seen him more than once in conversation with
some young swell, even with gaily-dressed women, had noticed that his
terriers here to-day were often gone to-morrow, replaced by other dogs,
pugs perhaps, or a waddling, bow-legged dachshund. She drew her own
conclusions. And she had seen that the old man's eyes, in his poacher
face, were kindly, that his trotting dogs often aimed their sharp, or
blunt, noses at his hands and seemed to claim his notice. Her morning
errand was to him.

She walked a long time in search of him, trembling with the fear of
finding him, inconsistently. Her mind, reacting on her ill-fed body,
planted a crawling weariness there, and at last she had to stop and
examine her pockets. She came upon two or three pence, went into a shop,
bought a bun, and ate it sitting by a marble-topped table. It nearly
choked her. Yet she knew she needed it badly. With one penny the less she
resumed her pilgrimage. But nowhere could she see the old man in his
leggings, and suddenly a sort of joyful spasm shook her superstitiously.
Fate opposed her cruel resolution. In a rush of eager contrition she
started for home, walking as quickly as her abnormal fatigue would allow
her. She had left the street in which the old man generally walked, and
took care, as she turned its corner, not to cast one glance behind her.
She passed through the next street, and the next, and was far away from
his neighbourhood, rejoicing, when suddenly she saw him coming straight
towards her slowly, the rats resting on his shoulders, various small dogs
in strings pattering on each side of him.

Cuckoo's heart gave a great thump, and then for an appreciable fragment
of time stopped beating. She muttered a bad word under her breath and had
an impulse to flee as from an enemy. She did not flee, but stood still
like one condemned, while the old man stolidly approached with his
menagerie. When he reached her she lifted her head and looked him in the
face. The little dogs were jumping to reach his hands. Evidently they
loved him.

"I say," Cuckoo said huskily.

The old gentleman stopped, lifted a rat from his shoulder, placed it on
his breast, like a man who arranged his necktie, clicked his tongue
against his teeth, and remarked:

"Parding, lydy."

Cuckoo swallowed. She felt as if she had a ball in her throat shifting up
and down.

"I say," she repeated. "You buy toy dogs, eh?"

"I buys 'em and I sells 'em," answered the old man, with a large accent
on the conjunction. "Buys 'em dear and sells 'em cheap. There's a wy to
mike a living, lydy!"

His small eyes twinkled with humour as he spoke.

Cuckoo swallowed again. The ball in her throat was getting larger.

"Want to buy one this morning?" she asked. "A show little dog, eh?"

She choked.

The old man did not appear to notice it. He looked at her with sharp
consideration.

"Oh, you means selling!" he remarked. "Where is it, then?"

"What?"

"The show little dawg?"

Cuckoo gulped out her address. All this time the old man had been summing
her up, and drawing his own conclusions from her thin figure and haggard
face. He scented a possible bargain.

"Trot along, lydy," he said, turning on his heels with all his little
dogs in commotion. "Trot along. I'm with yer."

Cuckoo heard muffled drums of a dead-march as she walked. She, who had
lived a life so shameless, shivered with shame at the thought of what
she was going to do. Her treachery laid her out in its winding-sheet.
The old man tried to entertain her, as they went, by chatting about his
profession, declaiming the merits of his rats, and spreading before her
mind a verbal panorama of the canine life that had defiled through his
changeful existence. Cuckoo did not hear a word--they turned into
the Marylebone Road. She walked slower and slower, yet never had the
street in which she lived seemed so short. At length the iron gate of
number 400 was reached. Cuckoo stopped.

"In 'ere, lydy?" said the old man.

She nodded, unable to speak. He turned in with his crowd of pattering
dogs, and proceeded jauntily up the narrow path. Cuckoo followed slowly
and with a furtive step. She longed to open the front door, let him in,
and then run away herself. Anywhere, anywhere, only to be away, out of
sight and hearing of the cruel scene that was coming.

Now they were on the doorstep. The old man waited. She fumbled for her
latchkey, found it, thrust it into the door. Instantly the shrill bark of
Jessie was heard. Cuckoo's guilty shining eyes met the twinkling eyes of
the old man.

"That she a-barkin'?" he inquired, with a professional air.

Cuckoo nodded again.

"A nice little pype," he rejoined. "This wy, is it?"

The patter of feet in the oil-clothed passage roused Jessie to a frenzied
excitement. When the two opened the door of the sitting-room, the little
creature, planted tree-like upon her four tiny feet, was barking her dog
life into the air. Cuckoo, entering first, snatched her up and gave her a
sudden, vehement kiss.

It was good-bye.

Then she turned and faced the old man, who had paused in the doorway. She
held Jessie silently towards him. Transferring the strings held in his
right hand to his left, he took the wriggling dog from Cuckoo, lifted her
up and down as if considering her weight, ran his eyes over her points
with the quick decision of knowledge.

"'Ardly a show dawg, lydy," he said.

Cuckoo flamed at him.

"She is, she is," she cried vehemently, all her passion trying to find a
vent in the words. "You shan't have her, you shan't have her, you shan't
if--"

"Neow, neow; I ain't sying nothink ag'in 'er," he interposed. "She's a
pretty dawg, a very pretty dawg. 'Ow much do yer sy, lydy?"

Cuckoo sickened. She looked away. She could not have met the eyes of
Jessie at that moment.

"'Ow much, then?" repeated the old man, still weighing the whining Jessie
up and down.

"I dunno; you say."

The old man mentioned a price. It was bigger than Cuckoo had expected.
She nodded, moving her tongue across her lips. Then she looked away out
of the window. She heard the chink of money.

"Put it on the table," she murmured.

He did so, looking steadily at her.

"You feels the parting, lydy," he began. "Very nat'ral, very. I knows
what it is."

He extended Jessie, now whining furiously, towards Cuckoo.

"Want to sy good-bye, lydy?" he said.

Cuckoo shook her head. The old man popped Jessie into one of the
capacious side-pockets of his coat and buttoned the flap down.

"Mornin', lydy," he said, turning towards the door.

Cuckoo made no reply. Her chest was heaving and her lips were working.
The old man went out. Cuckoo heard the pattering feet of the little army
of dogs on the oilcloth of the passage. The hall door opened and shut. A
pause. The iron gate clicked. She had never moved. The money lay on the
table. At last Cuckoo went out into the passage, and called in a strange
voice:

"Mrs. Brigg."

The landlady came with hasty alacrity.

"Come here," said Cuckoo, leading the way into the sitting-room.
"There--there's some money for you."

Mrs. Brigg pounced on it with a vulture's eagerness.

"'Owever did yer--" she began.

But Cuckoo had rushed into the bedroom. The landlady stood with the money
in her hand, and heard the key turned in the lock of the door.




