CHAPTER VI

THE LADY OF THE FEATHERS LEARNS WISDOM


Julian did not come again to the house in the Marylebone Road for at
least a fortnight, and during that time the lady of the feathers was left
alone with her life and with her sad thoughts. The summer days went
heavily by, and the sultry summer nights. No rain fell, and London was
veiled in dust. The pavements were so hot that they burned the feet that
trod them. Sometimes they seemed to burn Cuckoo's very soul, and to sear
her heart as she stood upon them for hours in the night, while the crowds
of Piccadilly flitted by like shadows in an evil dream. She stared
mechanically at the faces of those passing as she strolled with a lagging
footstep along the line of houses. She turned to meet the eyes of the
pale-faced loungers in the lighted entrance of the St. James's
restaurant, "Jimmy's," as she called it. But her mind was preoccupied. A
problem had fastened upon it with the tenacity of some vampire or strange
clinging creature of night. Cuckoo was wrestling with an angel; or was it
a devil? And often, when she stopped on the pavement and exchanged a word
or two with some casual stranger, she scarcely knew what she said, or to
what kind of man she was speaking. She was possessed by one thought, the
thought of Julian and of his danger. Valentine, in her thoughts, was
strangely a pale shadow, incredibly evil, incredibly persistent, luring
Julian downwards, beckoning him with the thin hand of a saint to depths
unpierced by the gaze of even the most sinful. And that hand of the saint
was only part of the appalling deception of his beautiful and tragically
lying body, a crystal temple in which a demon dwelt secretly, peering
from its concealment through the shadowy blue windows, in which Julian
saw truth and honour, but in which Cuckoo read things to terrify and to
dismay.

For she was not wholly unaware of the mystery of Valentine, of the sharp
contrast between his appearance and the vision of his nature as it came
to her. She understood that there was something in the fine beauty of
his face and figure to account for Julian's blindness and refusal to be
warned against him. Cuckoo's intuition, the intuition of an unlearned and
instinctive creature trained by the hardest circumstances to rely on what
she called her wits, laid the crystal temple in ruins, and drove the
demon from its lurking-place naked and shrieking into the open. But,
after all, was not she rather deceived than Julian? Julian, from the
first moment of meeting Valentine, looked upon him as saint. Cuckoo,
from the first moment of meeting, looked upon him as devil. Each put
him aside from the general run of humanity, the one in a heaven of the
imagination, the other in a hell. Neither would allow him to be midway
between the two, containing possibilities of both,--ordinary, natural
man. Julian angrily scouted the notion of Valentine's being like other
men. Cuckoo felt instinctively that he was not. And so they glorified
and cursed him.

Cuckoo had at first cursed him plainly in the market-place and upon the
house-top. But that was before she had learned wisdom. Slowly she learnt
it on these hot days and nights, when the London dust filtered over the
paint upon her cheeks and lips, clung round the shadows in the hollows
beneath her eyes, and slept in the artificial primrose of her elaborate
cloud of hair. Slowly she learnt it in many vague and struggling mental
arguments, in which logic was a dwarf and passion a giant, in which
instinct strangled reason, and love wandered as a shamefaced fairy with
tear-dimmed eyes.

Julian's prolonged absence and silence first taught the lady of the
feathers the slow necessity of wisdom, otherwise, perhaps, her vehement
ignorance could never have absorbed the precious thing. Women of her
training and vile experience, nerve-ridden, and clothed in hysteria as
in a garment, often think to gain what they want by the mere shrillness
of outcry, the mere grabbing of ostentatious, eager hands and frenzy of
body. Their lives lead them through a wonder of knowledge and of danger
to the demeanour of babyhood, and they cry for every rattle, much more
for every moon. So Cuckoo had thrown her feelings down before Julian.
She had dashed her hatred of Valentine in his face; she had cried her
fears of his downfall to that which she consorted with eternally and
loathed--when she had still the energy to loathe it, which was not
always--in his ears with the ardent shrillness of a boatswain's whistle.
She had, in fact, done all that her instinct prompted her to do, and the
result was the exit of Julian from her life. This set her, always in her
sharp and yet childish way, sometimes oddly clear sighted, often muddled
and distressed, to turn upon instinct with a contempt not known before,
to discard it with the fury still of a child. And instinct thus forsaken
by an essentially instinctive creature opened the gates of distress and
of confusion.

By day Cuckoo sat in her stuffy little parlour brooding wearily. She
waited in day after day, always hoping that Julian would return, full of
resolutions, prompted by fear, to be gentle, even lively, to him when he
did come, full of excited intention which could not be fulfilled; for he
did not come. And by night, while she tramped the streets, still Cuckoo's
anxious mind revolved the question of her behaviour in the future. For
she would not, passionately would not, allow herself to contemplate the
possibility that Julian's anger against her would keep him forever
beyond reach either of her fury or of her tenderness. She insisted on
contemplating his ultimate reappearance, and her wits were at work to
devise means to win him from Valentine's influence without stirring his
horror at any thought of disloyalty to his friend. Cuckoo, in fact,
wanted to be subtle, intended to be subtle, and sought intensely the
right way of subtlety. She sought it as she walked, as she hovered at
street corners in the night, while the hours ran by, sometimes till the
streets were nearly deserted, sometimes even till the dawn sang in the
sky to the wail of the hungry woman beneath it. She sought it even in the
company of those strangers who stepped for a night into her life as into
a public room, and stepped from it on the morrow with a careless and
everlasting adieu, half-drowned in the chink of money.

And sometimes she thought, with a sick dreariness, that she would never
find it, and sometimes courage failed her, and, despite her passionate
resolution, she did for a moment say to herself, "If he should never come
again." There were moments, too, when every other feeling was drowned by
sheer jealousy of Julian, when the tiger-cat woke in this street-girl who
had always had to fight, when her thin frame shivered with the shaking
violence of the soul it held. Then she clenched her hands, and longed to
plant her nails in the faces of those other women, divined, though never
seen,--those French women who had sung him, like sirens, to Paris, away
from the sea of her greedy love. Her similes were commonplace. In her
heart she called such sirens hussies. Had she met them the battle of
words would have been strong and singularly unclean. That she herself was
a hussy to other men, not to Julian, did not trouble her. She did not
realize it. Human nature has always one blind eye, even when the other
does not squint. This passion of jealousy, circling round an absent man,
seized her at the strangest, the most inopportune moments. Sometimes it
came upon her in the street, and the meditation of it was so vital and
complete that Cuckoo could not go on walking, lest she should, by
movement, miss the keenest edge of the agony. Then she would stop
wherever she was, lean against the down-drawn shutter of a shop, or the
corner of a public house, among the gaping loungers, let her powdered
chin drop upon her breast, and sink into a fit of desperate detective
duty, during which she followed Julian like a shadow through imagined
wanderings, and watched him committing all those imagined actions that
could cause her to feel the wildest and most inhuman despair.

One night, when she was thus sunk and swallowed up in the maw of
miserable inward contemplation, a young man, who was walking by, observed
her. He was very young and eager, fresh from Cambridge, ardent after the
mysteries and the subtleties of life, as is the fashion of clever modern
youth. The sight of this painted girl leaning, motionless as some doll or
puppet, against the iron shutters of the vacant house, her head drooped,
and her hands, as if the strings to manipulate her had fallen loose from
the grasp that guided them, caught and eventually fascinated him. It was
a late hour of night. He passed on and returned, shooting each time a
devouring, analytical glance upon Cuckoo. Again he came back, walking a
little nearer to the houses. His heart beat quicker as he approached the
puppet. Its complete immobility was almost appalling, and each time he
came within view of it he examined it violently to see if a limb was
displaced. No; one might almost suppose that it was the body of some one
struck dead so suddenly against the shop that she had not had time to
fall, and so remained leaning thus. With shorter and shorter revolutions,
like a dog working itself up to approach some motionless but strange
object, the youth went by Cuckoo, hesitating more and more each time he
came in front of her with strange feelings of one being vaguely criminal.
He longed to touch the puppet, to see if any quiver would convulse its
limbs, any light flicker into its eyes. And he was so fascinated and
interested that at last he did furtively stop precisely in front of it.
For a second both of them were motionless, he from contemplation of the
outward, she of the inward. Then Cuckoo's thoughtful jealousy came to a
ghastly crisis. Her imagination had shown her frightful things and
herself an utterly helpless and compelled spectator. The puppet opened
its red lips to utter a sob, lifted up its white and heavy eyelids to let
loose tears upon its unnaturally bright cheeks, stirred its hanging hands
to clasp them in a crude gesture of dull fury. The youth started as at a
corpse showing suddenly the pangs of life. His movement shot Cuckoo like
a bullet into her real world. Through her tears she saw a man regarding
her. In a flash, old habit brought to her a smile, a turned head of
coquetry, an entreating hand, a hackneyed phrase that reiteration
rendered parrot-like in intonation. The youth shrank back and fled away
in the darkness. Long afterwards that incident haunted him as an epitome
of all the horrors of cruel London.

And Cuckoo, thus roused and deserted, put aside for the moment her
nightmare, and started once more upon her promenade of the night.

At last she began to fear that Julian would never come back, and by a
sudden impulse she wrote to him a short, very ill-spelt letter, hoping he
would come to tea with her on a certain afternoon. On the day mentioned
she waited in an agony of expectation. She had put on his black dress,
removed all traces of paint and powder from her face, remembering his
former request and her experiment, tricked Jessie out in a bright yellow
satin riband twisted into a bow almost larger than herself, and bought
flowers--large ones, sunflowers--to give to her dingy room an air of
refinement and of gaiety. Amid all this brilliancy of yellow satin and
yellow flowers she waited uneasily in her simple black gown. The day was
dull, not wet, but brooding and severe, iron-grey, like a hard-featured
Puritan, and still with the angry peace of coming thunder. The window was
open to let in air, but no air seemed to enter, only the weariful and
incessant street noises. Jessie wriggled about, biting sideways with
animation to get at her yellow adornment, and pattering around the
furniture seeking stray crumbs, which sometimes eluded her for a while
and, lying in hidden nooks and corners, unexpectedly rewarded her
desultory and impromptu search. Cuckoo leaned her arms across the table,
glanced at the tea things for two, and listened. A cab stopped presently.
She twisted in her chair to face the window. It had drawn up next door,
and she subsided again into her fever of attention. Jessie found a crumb
and swallowed it with as much action and large air of tasting it as if it
had been a city dinner. The hands of the clock drew to the hour named in
Cuckoo's note, touched it, passed it. A sickness of despair began to
creep upon her like a thousand little biting insects. She shuffled in her
seat, glanced this way and that, pressed her lips together, and, taking
her arms from the table, clasped her hands tightly in her lap. Then she
sat straight up and counted the tickings of the clock, the spots on the
tablecloth, the gold stars upon the wallpaper of the room. She counted
and counted until her head began to swim. And all the time she waited,
the lady of the feathers was learning wisdom. The lesson was harsh, as
the lessons of time usually are; the lesson was bitter as Marah waters.
And she thought the lesson was going to be a cross too heavy for her
narrow shoulders to bear when the iron gate of the garden sang its
invariable little note of protest on being opened. Cuckoo's head turned
slowly to one side. Her haggard eyes swept the view of the path. Julian
was walking up it.

She met him very quietly, almost seriously, and he shook hands with
her as if they had been together quite recently and parted the best of
friends. Only, as he held her hand, she noticed that he cast a hasty, and
as she fancied a fearful, glance into her eyes. Then he seemed reassured
and they sat down to tea. Cuckoo supposed that he had for the moment
dreaded what she called another row, and was satisfied by her expression
of good temper. They drank their tea, and after a short interval of
constraint began chattering together very much as usual. At first Cuckoo
had hardly dared to look much at Julian, lest he should see the joy she
felt at his coming, but when she was pouring out his second cup she let
her eyes rest fully on his face, and only then did she realize that a
shadow lay upon it, a shadow from which it had been free before.

With a trembling hand she filled the cup and stared upon the shadow.
She knew its brethren so well. In dead days she herself had helped to
manufacture such shadows upon the faces of men. She had seen them come,
thin, faint, delicate, impalpable as a veil of mist before morning. Only
morning light never followed them. And she had seen them stay and grow
and deepen and darken. Shadow over the eyes of the man, shadow round his
lips, shadow like a cloud upon the forehead, shadow over the picture
painted by the soul, working through the features, that we call
expression. Many times had she seen the journey taken by a man's face
to that haunted bourne, arrived at which it is scarcely any more a man's
face, but only a mask expressive of one, or of many, sins. Had Julian
then definitely set foot upon that journey? As yet the shadow that lay
over him was no more than the lightest film, suggestive of a slightly
unnatural and forbidding fatigue. Yet Cuckoo shrank from it as from a
ghost.

"Why, Cuckoo, your hand is trembling!" Julian said.

"Oh, I was out late last night," she answered, putting the teapot hastily
down. And they talked on, pretending there were only two of them and no
shadowy third.

Julian, having returned at last to the Marylebone Road, fell into his
old habit of coming there often. And each time that he came the lady of
the feathers counted a fresh step on his hideous journey towards the
haunted bourne. Yet she never spoke of the dreary addition sum she was
doing. She never reproached Julian, or wept, or let him see that her
heart was growing cold as a pilgrim who kneels, bare, in long prayers
upon the steps of a shrine. For she had learnt wisdom, and hugged it in
her arms. Valentine was scarcely ever mentioned between them; but once,
and evidently by accident, Julian allowed an expression to escape him
which implied that Valentine now objected to the intimacy with Cuckoo.
Immediately the words were uttered, Julian looked confused, and obviously
would have wished to recall them, had it been possible.

"Oh, I know as he don't like me," Cuckoo said.

Julian answered nothing.

"Why d'you come, then?" she continued, with a certain desperation. "There
ain't nothin' here to bring you. I know that well enough."

She cast a comprehensive glance round over the badly furnished room.

"Nothin' at all," she added with a sigh.

While she spoke Julian began to wonder, too, why he came, why he liked
to come there. As Cuckoo said, there was nothing at all to bring him so
often. He liked her, he was sorry for her, he had even a deep-running
sympathy for her, but he did not love her. Yet he was fascinated to come
to her, and there were sometimes moments when he seemed taken possession
of, led by the hand, to that squalid room and that squalid presence in
it. Why was that? What led him? He could not tell.

"I like coming here," he said; "and of course it's nothing to Valentine
where I go."

Cuckoo glanced up hastily at the words. A little serpent enmity surely
hissed in them. Julian spoke as if he were a man with some rebel feeling
at his heart. But the serpent glided and was gone as he added:

"I'm always with him when I'm not with you, for I haven't seen the doctor
for ages."

"The doctor! Who's that, then," asked Cuckoo.

"Doctor Levillier. Surely you've heard me talk about him."

"No, dearie."

"Oh, he's a nerve-doctor, and a sort of little saint, lives for his work,
and is a deuced religious chap, never does anything, you know."

Julian looked at her.

"Oh," she said.

"And believes in everything. He's a dear little chap, the kindest heart
in the world, good to every one, no matter who it is. He's devoted to
Valentine."

"Eh?" said Cuckoo, with a long-drawn intonation of astonishment.

"I say he's devoted to Valentine," Julian repeated rather irritably. His
temper was much less certain and sunny lately than of old. "But I believe
he's devoted to every one he can do any good to. We used to see him
continually, but he's been abroad for weeks, looking after a bad case, a
Russian Grand Duke in Italy, who would have him, and pays him all the
fees he'd be getting in London. He'll be coming back directly, I think."

"Where does he live?" said Cuckoo, ever so carelessly.

Julian gave the number in Harley Street rather abstractedly. Their
conversation had led him to think of the little doctor. Would he be glad
to see him again? And would Valentine? He tried to realize, and presently
understood, and had a moment of shame at his own feeling. Soon afterwards
he went away. That night, before she went to Piccadilly, Cuckoo walked
round to Harley Street. She wandered slowly down the long thoroughfare
and presently came to the doctor's house. There was a brass plate upon
the door. The light from a gas lamp, just lit, flickered upon it, and
Cuckoo, stopping, bent downwards and slowly read the printed name,
"Doctor Levillier." Did it look a nice name, a kind name? She considered
that question childishly, standing there alone. Then, without making up
her mind on the subject, she turned to go. As she did so she saw the tall
figure of a man motionless under the gas-lamp on the other side of the
street. He was evidently regarding her, and Cuckoo felt a sudden thrill
of terror as she recognized Valentine. They stood still on the two
pavements for a minute, looking across at one another. Cuckoo could only
see Valentine's face faintly, but she fancied it was angry and distorted,
and her terror grew. She hesitated what to do, when he made what seemed
to her a threatening gesture, and walked quickly away down the street.




