CHAPTER VIII

VALENTINE EXPOUNDS THE GOSPEL OF INFLUENCE TO THE LADY OF THE FEATHERS


Valentine closed the door behind him and stood by it, looking at Cuckoo
gravely. She had pushed herself up on the sofa, using her elbows as a
lever, and in an awkward attitude, half sitting, half lying down, stared
at him with startled eyes. Her unshod feet were drawn in towards her
body, and her dyed hair hung in a thick tangle round her face and on her
shoulders. She said nothing.

Valentine put his hat down on the table and began to take off his gloves.

"I am glad to find you at home," he said politely.

Cuckoo shifted a little farther back on the sofa. Now that she was
actually shut up alone with Valentine, fear returned upon her and
banished every other feeling, every desire except the desire to be
away from him. She ran her tongue over her lips, which had suddenly
become dry.

"What are you come for?" she asked, never taking her eyes from his.

"To see you. I have never yet returned your kind call upon me."

"Eh?"

Cuckoo spoke in the tone of one who had become deaf, and she felt as if
the agitation of her mind actually clamoured within her like a crowd of
human voices, deadening sounds from without. Valentine repeated his
remark, adding:

"Won't you ask me to sit down?"

He put his hand on the back of a chair.

"May I?"

Cuckoo gave her body a jerk which brought her feet down to the floor, so
that she was sitting upright. She pushed out one of her hands as if in
protest.

"You can't sit here," she murmured.

"I? Why not?"

"I can't have you here, nor I won't either."

Her voice was growing louder and fiercer as the first paralysis of
surprise died gradually away from her. After all, she had not buckled
on her armour only to run away from the enemy in it. The street Arab
impudence was not quite killed in her by the strange influence of this
man. The mere fact of having her feet firmly planted upon the floor gave
Cuckoo a certain fillip of courage, and she tossed her head with that old
vulgar gesture of hers which suggested the harridan. She pointed to the
door.

"Out you go!" she cried.

For her intrepidity had not risen to calm contemplation of an interview.
She was only bracing herself up to the necessary momentary endurance of
his presence, which followed upon Mrs. Brigg's admittance of him within
the door.

Valentine heard the gentle hint unmoved, and replied to it by drawing
a chair out from the table and sitting down upon it. A sort of rage,
stirred by terror, ran over Cuckoo. She seized the back of his chair
with both hands and shook it violently.

"No, you don't stay," she ejaculated; "I won't have it!"

It was characteristic of her to lose all sense of dignity at an instant,
when dignity might have served her purpose. Her outburst might have been
directed against a statue. Valentine neither moved nor looked in any way
affected. Glancing at Cuckoo with a whimsical amusement, he said:

"What a child you are! When will you learn wisdom!"

Cuckoo took away her hands. A conviction pierced her that the weapons a
woman may use with effect against an ordinary man could be of no service
now, and with this man. She faded abruptly from anger and violence into
fatigue, always closely accompanied by fear.

"I'm awfully tired to-night," she said. "Please do go! I'm home because
I'm tired."

"The walk from Harley Street was too much for you. You shouldn't make
such exertions."

For the first time a sinister note rang in his voice.

"I shall go where I like," Cuckoo answered, and this time with some real
sturdiness of manner. "It ain't nothin' to you where I go, nor what I
do."

"How can you tell that?"

She laid her chin in the upturned palms of her two hands, planting her
elbows on her knees.

"How can it be?" she said. "I'm nothin' to you, nor I ain't going to be
either."

"That's what you say."

"And it's God's truth too!" she cried again with violence, as the sense
of Valentine's inflexible power grew in her.

"I'm going to smoke if you will allow me," Valentine said.

Slowly he drew out and lit a cigarette, Cuckoo neither refusing nor
permitting it. With protruding lips he threw the light smoke round him.
Then speaking through it he said:

"Tell me why you go to Harley Street."

"I ain't goin' to talk to you."

"Tell me why. It lies out of your beat; it's a respectable thoroughfare."

The words were said to sting. Cuckoo let them go by. She had been stung
too often, and repetition of cruelty sometimes kills what it repeats. She
set her lips to silence, with a look of obstinacy not impressive, but
merely mulish and childish.

"Well?" Valentine said.

She made no answer. He did not seem angry, but continued:

"You find few fish for your net there, I imagine. But perhaps you don't
go for fish. What was the name you read upon the door while I watched
you?"

This time Cuckoo, changing her mind, as she often did, with all the
swiftness of a crude nature, answered him:

"You know well enough!"

"It was Dr. Levillier, wasn't it?"

She nodded her head silently.

"Why do you go to his door? What do you want with him?"

Cuckoo's quick woman's instinct detected a suspicion of something that
was like anxiety in his voice as he said the words. In an instant the
warm impulse that, in her silent meditation, had led her to buckle on her
armour and to think, with a certain courage, that she was to fight one
day, stirred and glowed and leaped up, an impulse greater than herself.
The fear that had fallen upon her was lessened, for she felt that this
man, too, might, nay did, know fear.

"What's that to you?"

She turned upon him boldly with the question, and he knew her for
the first time as an antagonist, who might actively attack as well as
passively hate. He leaned forward, and looked into her eyes searchingly,
with a sort of rapture, of anxiety, too. It recalled something to Cuckoo.
She tried to remember what, but for a moment could not. Then, as if
reassured, he resigned his eager and nervous posture of inquiry. That
second movement brought the light that Cuckoo's puzzled mind sought.
It was Julian who had looked first into her eyes with that strange
watchfulness. These men echoed one another in that glance which she
could not understand. What they sought in her eyes she could not tell.
If it were the same thing it could not be love. And it seemed to be a
thing that they feared to find.

"Doctor Levillier is a great friend of mine," Valentine said. "He is a
famous nerve-doctor. Seeing you hovering about his door led me to suppose
you might be ill, and were going to consult him. I hope you are not ill."

"Not I!"

"Because he is away from home at present."

"Oh!"

"Do you want to see him?"

"I suppose I can see him, like any one else, if I've a mind to."

"Well! He's--he doesn't see quite every one. His practice is only among
the richest and smartest people in town. Some one else might answer your
purpose better."

He spoke suavely, but the words he said cemented Cuckoo's previously
vague thought of trying, perhaps, to see Doctor Levillier into a sudden,
strong determination. She divined that, for some reason, Valentine was
anxious that she should not see him. That was enough. She would, at
whatever cost, make his acquaintance.

"I'll see him if I like," she said hastily, lost to any appreciation
of wisdom, through the desire of aiming an instant blow at Valentine.

"Of course! Why not?" was his reply.

"You don't want me to. I can see that," she went on, still more
unadvisedly. "You needn't think as you can get over me so easily."

Valentine's smile showed a certain contempt that angered her.

"I know you," she cried.

"Do you?" he said. "I wonder if you would like to know me? Do you
remember Marr?"

The lady of the feathers turned cold.

"Marr!" she faltered; "what of him?"

"You have not forgotten him."

"He's dead!"

A pause.

"He's dead, I say."

"Exactly! As dead as a strong man who has lived long in the world ever
can be."

"What d'you mean? I say he's dead and buried and done with." Her voice
was rather noisy and shrill.

"That's just where you make a mistake," Valentine said quite gravely,
rather like a philosopher about to embark upon an argument. "He is not
done with. Suppose you fear a man, you hate him, you kill him, you put
him under the ground, you have not done with him."

"I didn't kill him! I didn't, I didn't!" Cuckoo cried out, shrilly,
half rising from the sofa. A wild suspicion suddenly came over her that
Valentine was pursuing her as an avenger of blood, under the mistaken
idea that she had done Marr to death in the night.

"Hush! I know that. He died naturally, as a doctor would say, and he has
been buried; and by now probably he is a shell that can only contain the
darkness of his grave. Yet, for all that, he's not done with, Miss
Bright."

"He is! he is!" she persisted.

The mention of Marr always woke terror in her. She sat, her eyes fixed
on Valentine, her memory fixed on Marr. Perhaps for this reason what her
memory saw and what her eyes saw seemed gradually to float together,
and fuse and mingle, till eyes and memory mingled, too, into one sense,
observant of one being only, neither wholly Marr nor wholly Valentine,
but both in one. She had linked them together vaguely before, but never
as now. Yet even now the clouds were floating round her and the vapours.
She might think she saw, but she could not understand, and what she saw
was rather a phantom standing in a land of mirage than a man standing
in the world of men.

"Some day, perhaps, I will prove to you that he is not," Valentine said.

"Eh, how?"

She had lost all self-consciousness now, and in her eagerness of fear,
wonder, and curiosity seemed tormented by the veil of yellow hair that
was flopping in frizzy strands round her face and over her eyes. She
seized it in her two hands, and with a few shooting gestures, in and out,
wound it into a dishevelled lump, which she stuck to the back of her head
with two or three pins. All the time she was looking at Valentine for an
answer to her question.

"Perhaps I don't know how yet."

"Yes, you do, though. I can see you do. What have you got to do with him,
with Marr?"

"I never said I had anything to do with him."

"Ah! but you have. I always knew it!"

"Many men are linked together by thin, perhaps invisible threads,
impalpable and impossible to define."

The lady of the feathers was out of her depth in this sentence, so she
only tossed her head and murmured:

"Oh, I dessay!" with an effort after contempt.

But Valentine's mood seemed to change. An abstracted gaiety stole over
him. If it was simulated, the simulation was very perfect and complete.
Sitting back in his chair, the cigarette smoke curling lightly round
him, his large blue eyes glancing gravely now at Cuckoo crumpled up on
the horsehair sofa, now meditatively at some object in the little room,
or at the ceiling, he spoke in a low, clear, level voice, as if uttering
his thoughts aloud, careless or oblivious of any listener.

"Every man who lives, and who has a personality, has something to do with
many men whom he has never seen, whom he will never see. Messengers go
from him as carrier-pigeons go from a ship. He may live alone, as a ship
is alone in mid-ocean, but the messengers are winged, and their wings are
strong. They fly high and they fly far, and wherever they pause and rest,
that man has left a mark, has stamped himself, has uttered himself, has
planted a seed of his will. Have you a religion?"

Valentine stopped abruptly after uttering this question, and waited for
an answer. It was characteristic enough.

"What?" said the lady of the feathers, staring wide-eyed.

"I say, have you a religion?"

"Not I. How can I when I don't go to no church?"

"That is, no doubt, a convincing proof of heathendom. And yet I have a
religion that never leads me to a church door. My religion is will, my
gospel is the gospel of influence, and my god is power. Will binds the
world into a net, whose strands are like iron. Will dies if it is weak,
but if it is strong enough it becomes practically immortal. But, though
it lives itself, it has the power to kill others. It can murder a soul in
a man or a woman, and throw it into the grave to decay and go to dust,
and in the man it can create a soul diametrically opposite to the corpse,
and the world will say the man is the same; but he is not the same. He is
another man. Or if the will is not strong enough actually to kill a
soul"--at this point Valentine spoke more slowly, and there was a certain
note of uneasiness, even almost of agitation, in his voice--"it can yet
expel it from the body in which it resides, and drive it, like a new
Ishmael, into the desert, where it must hover, useless, hopeless,
degraded, and naked, because it has no body to work in. Yes! yes! that
must be so! The soul can have no power divorced from the body! none!
none!"

He got up from his chair, and began to pace the little room. Cuckoo
watched him as a child might watch a wild animal in its cage. His face
was hard and thin with deep thought, and hers was contorted under her
yellow hair--contorted in a frantic effort to grasp and to understand
what he was saying; for, stupid, ignorant as the lady of the feathers
was, she had a sharp demon in her that often told her the truth, and
this demon whispered now in her ear:

"Listen, and you may learn things that you long to know!"

And she listened motionless, her eyes bright and eager, her lips shut
together, her slim body a-quiver with intensity, mental and physical.

"How can it?" Valentine went on. "What is a soul without a body? You
cannot see it. You cannot hear it, and if you think you can, that is
a vile trick of the mind, an hallucination. For if one man can see it,
why not another? Here, let me look into your eyes again."

As he said the last words, he stopped opposite to Cuckoo, suddenly caught
her chin in his two hands, which felt hard and cold, and forcibly pushed
up her face towards his. She was terrified, beginning now to think him
mad, and to fear personal injury. Gazing hard and furtively into her
eyes, he said:

"No; it's a lie! It is not there. It never was! It is dead and finished
with, and I won't fear it."

As if struck by the fatigue of some sudden reaction, he sank down again
into his chair, and went on with his apparently fantastic monologue:

"And if it was ever alive, what could it do? A soul can't work, except
through a body; it must fasten on a body, and bend the body to its
will--man is such a creature that he can only be influenced through flesh
and blood, nerves, sinews, eyes, things he can see, things that he can
hear. He is so grovelling that nothing more delicate than these really
appeals to him."

Again, and this time with less abstraction, and with a sort of
contemptuous humour, he turned to the lady of the feathers, and
continued, as if once more aware of her presence:

"Are you imbibing my gospel, the gospel of will and of influence? I see
you are by your pretty attitude and by the engaging face you are making
at me. Well, don't get it wrong. A gospel gone wrong in a mind is
dangerous, and worse than no gospel at all. If you get this gospel wrong
you may become conceited, and fancy yourself possessed of a power which
you haven't a notion of. To use will in any really affective way, you
must train your body, and take care of it, not ruin it, and let it run
to seed, or grow disfigured, or a ghastly tell-tale, a truth-teller, a
town-crier with a big bell going about and calling aloud all the silly
or criminal things you do. Now you have forgotten this, or perhaps you
never knew it, and so will could not work in you; not even, I believe,
a malign will to do mischief. You have thrown your body to the wolves,
and whoever looks upon you must see the marks of their teeth."

It was evident that he gloated on this idea that the body of the lady of
the feathers was forever useless for good, and even powerless to do much
effective evil. He seemed to revel in the notion that she was simply a
thing powerless, negative, and totally vain.

"I was mad ever to imagine the contrary," he said. Then, glancing away
from personality, he exclaimed with more energy:

"But sometimes a will is so great, so trained, so watchful of
opportunities, so acute and ready, that, instead of passing away
practically on the passing away of the body in which it has been born
and has lived, and merely living and working through the emanations
of itself that have clung to men and women in many different places,
instead--in fact--of being diffused--you understand me?" he broke
out, with an obvious delight in the grossness of her ignorance and the
denseness of her bewilderment and misunderstanding of him--"which is a
sort of death, it seizes, whole, as a body, with all the members sound,
upon another home. It commits, in effect, a great act of brigandage.
It lives on complete, powerful--even more powerful than ever before,
because to all its original powers it adds a glory of deception, and
is a living lie. If only you could understand me!"

Suddenly he burst into a peal of laughter that was a full stop to his
philosophy. His cigarette had gone out. He threw it into the grate and
stretched out his arms, still laughing. And Cuckoo gazing at him, as if
fascinated, said silently to herself, "If only I could!"

For she felt as if Valentine were telling her a great secret, secure in
the hideous knowledge that, though she heard it, it must remain a secret
from her on account of her ignorance and of her stupidity. There was
something in that feeling peculiarly maddening, yet Cuckoo displayed no
irritation. The sharp little demon at her elbow whispered to her to be
silent, told her that she might learn, might yet understand, if she would
play a part, and be no more the wildcat, the foolishly impulsive lady of
the feathers. Valentine struck his hand upon the table, and repeated:

"Why--why can't you understand?"

The piquancy of the situation evidently delighted his mind and his
sense of mischief. He enjoyed playing the philosopher to a fool; and
the more the fool became a fool, the higher soared his philosophy and
his appreciation of it. There is always something paradoxical in wisdom
instructing folly, for, after all, folly can never really learn, can
never really understand. Valentine hugged that thought.

"Go on," the lady of the feathers said, apparently in gaping wonderment.

"Why? do you mean to tell me you are interested?"

"I'm listenin'! It sounds wonderful!"

"It is wonderful!" Valentine cried. "Every living lie is wonderful.
But you don't know yet much about will. My gospel is full of secrets
and of subtleties, and only a few people are beginning to guess at its
far-reaching power, and to aim at learning its truths and sounding
its depths. And many unbelievers play with it, and never know that they
are playing with fire. A man did this once. Shall I tell you about him?"

"Yes!" said Cuckoo.

And her soul cried to the darkness in which she imagined some vague power
to dwell; cried aloud for understanding. This silent cry was so intense
that she lay back upon the hard sofa, almost exhausted, and as she lay
there, something hot, like fire, seemed to make its nest in her heart,
and to flame there, and to be alive, as a flame is alive, and to speak to
her, but not aloud, as a flame speaks in the coals to the imagination of
the watcher by the hearth. In that moment the lady of the feathers felt
as if she were conscious of a new companion, a companion full of some
intensity towards her, some anxiety about her, anxious and brilliant as a
flame is, vital, keen, blazing, intense. Although she could not define
her sensation thus, that lack of analytical power could not deprive her
of it. She knew that her vision became clearer, that her mind became
brighter, that a light illumined her, that she was, for the moment,
greater than herself. But Valentine did not know it. He looked towards
the sofa and saw spread upon it a thin, painted, haggard young creature
curled into a position at once passionate, languid, and merely awkward,
with relentless, thickly tangled hair, staring eyes, and half-opened
lips, glowering in rouged stupidity and a coarseness of the gutter. He
was a philosopher, with a beauty of the stars and of snows, with a
refinement, white in its brilliance. She was an image of Regent Street,
a ghastly idol of the town; and he was telling her strange things that
she could never comprehend, in a jargon that was to her as Greek or as
Hebrew. It was too absurd. Yet he loved to tell her, and he could
scarcely tell why he loved it.

"Go on," said the lady of the feathers.

"This man," Valentine said, assuming a devout earnestness to trick her
more, and watching for the puzzled expression to grow and to deepen in
her eyes,--"this man had a holy nature, or I will say an unalterable will
to do only things pure, reserved, refined--things that could not lead his
body into difficulties, or his mind into quagmires. He was a saint
without a religion. That is a possibility, I assure you; for a will
can be amazingly independent. He had the peculiar grace that is said to
belong to angels, a definite repugnance to sin. I know you understand
me."

She nodded bluntly.

"I know--he couldn't go wrong, if it was ever so," she ejaculated.

"If it was ever so--as the housemaids say--you put the position of this
man in a nutshell, and if this strange will of his had never relented,
the transformation I am going to describe, or--" he paused for a moment
as if in doubt, then continued--"or rather to hint at, would never have
taken place. But he grew dissatisfied with his will. It bored him ever so
little. He fancied he would like to change it, and to substitute for it
the will of the world. And the will of the world, as you know well, my
lady of the feathers, is to sin. For some time he longed, vaguely enough,
to be different, to be, in fact, lower down in the scale than he was.
But his longing to be able to desire sin did not lead him to desire it
actually. One can force one's self to do a thing, you see, but one cannot
force one's self to wish to do it, or to enjoy doing it. And this man,
being a selfish saint--saints are very often very selfish--would not sin
without desiring it. So it seemed that he must remain forever as he was,
a human piece of flawless porcelain, wishing to be cracked and common
delft."

"Whatever did he wish it for?" asked Cuckoo, with the surprise of a zany.

"Who can tell why one man wishes for one thing, another for another?
That, too, is a mystery. The point is, that he did wish it, and that he
did something more."

"What was that, eh?"

"He deliberately tried to weaken and to deface his will; to alter it.
And he chose curious means, acting under suggestion from another will
or influence that was more powerful than his own, because it was utterly
self-satisfied and desired only to be what it was. I don't think I will
tell you what the means were. But his original dissatisfaction with his
own goodness was the weapon that brought about his own destruction. His
will did not change, as he believed; but what do you think actually
happened to it? I will tell you. It was expelled from his body. He lost
it forever. He lost, in fact, his identity. For will is personality,
soul, the ego, the man himself. And this soul, if you choose to call it
so, was driven into the air. It went away in the darkness, like a bird.
Do you see?"

He waved his hand upward, and lifted his eyes, as if following with them
the flight that he described.

"It flew away!"

"Where did it go?" ejaculated Cuckoo.

Valentine seemed suddenly to become fully aware of the depth of her
interest.

"Ah! even you are fascinated by my gospel, you who cannot understand it,"
he said. "But I cannot tell you where it went. I too have wondered."

He knit his brows rather moodily over this question of location. "I too
have wondered. But I imagine that it died; that it ceased to be. Divorced
from the body that was its home, degraded by dissatisfaction with itself,
of what use could it be to any one? Even if it still continues to be, it
is practically dead, for it can work neither harm nor good to any one,
and the thing that cannot be good or evil, or turn others towards the
one or the other, is dead. It is no more a will. It is no more an
influence. It is a heart without a pulse in it; in fact, it is nothing."

A sort of joy had leapt into his face as he dwelt on this idea of
nothingness, and he added:

"It is something like your soul, my lady of the feathers. Do you hear
me?"

"Yes. I hear!"

"But the will that ousted it gained in power by that triumph. Totally
self-satisfied, desirous of being only that which it is, having no enemy
of yearning disappointment with itself in its camp, it can do what will
never did before. It can lead captive the soul that was formerly the
captive of the soul that it drove away to die. Like an enemy it has
seized its opponent's camp, and the slave dwelling in that camp is now
its slave forever."

As Valentine spoke he seemed to become almost intoxicated with the
thoughts conjured up by his own words. His blue eyes blazed with a fury
of shining excitement. His white cheeks were suffused with blood.

"I have made myself, my will, a god!" he exclaimed passionately.

At the words the lady of the feathers moved suddenly forward on the sofa.

"What--_you_!" she said.

The last word was uttered with an intensity that could surely only
spring from something near akin to comprehension, if not from actual
comprehension itself. It certainly startled Valentine, or seemed to
startle him. His face showed an amazement like the amazement of
a man raving to an image of wood, to whom, abruptly, the wood speaks
with a tongue.

"What do you mean?" he said, and his voice faltered from its note of
triumph and of exultation.

Cuckoo resumed her former position.

"Only was you the will, or the man, or whatever it all is?" she replied
in the voice of one hopelessly muddled.

Valentine was reassured as to her stupidity.

"That has nothing to do with the story," he said.

"There was two of them, was there?" she persisted, but still with the
accent of a hopeless dullard.

"Oh yes. One will must always work upon another, or else there could be
no story worth the telling."

"Oh, I see; that's it."

Valentine again broke into laughter.

"You see, do you?" he said. "You see that, but do you see the truth of
what I told you before about the connection of the will with the body?
Do you see why you have no power now, can never have power again? Do you
understand that the wreck of your body inevitably causes the wreck of
your will, so that it really dies and ceases, because it can no more
influence others? Do you understand that? I'll make you understand it
now. Come here."

He got up from his chair and seized her two hands in his, dragging her
almost violently up from the sofa. Her fear of him, always lurking near,
came upon her with a rush at the contact of his hands, and she hung back,
moved by an irresistible repulsion. The slight and momentary struggle
between them caused her hair, carelessly turned up and loosely pinned, to
come down. It fell all round her in a loose shock of unnatural colour.
Valentine's hands were strong, and Cuckoo soon felt that resistance was
useless. She let her body yield, and he drew her in front of the glass
that stood over the mantelpiece. Pushing back the table behind them, he
made her stand still in the unwinking glare of the three gas-jets, which
she had herself turned up earlier in the evening.

"Look there!" he cried; "look at yourself well! How can you have power
over anybody?"

Their two faces, set close together as in a frame, stared at them from
the mirror, and Cuckoo--forced to obedience--examined them as if indeed
they were a picture. She saw the man's face, fair, beautiful, refined,
triumphant, full of the courage that is based upon experience of itself
and of its deeds and possibilities, full of a strange excitement that
filled the face with amazingly vivid expression. She saw the bright blue
eyes gazing at her, the red lips of the mouth curved in a smile. There
was health in the face as well as thought. And there was power, which is
greater than health, more beautiful even than beauty. And then she turned
her eyes to the face's companion. Thin, sharp, faded, it met her eyes,
half-shrouded in the thick, tumbled hair that shone in the mirror with
the peculiar frigid glare that can only be imparted by a chemical dye,
and can never be simulated by nature. One cheek was chalk-white. The
other, which had been pressed against the horsehair of the sofa, showed
a harsh, scarlet patch. All the varying haggard expressions of the world
seemed crowding in the eyes of this scarecrow, and peering beneath the
thickly blackened eyelashes that struck a violent discord against the
yellow hair. The thin lips of the mouth were pressed together in an
expression of pain, fear, and weariness. Shadows slept under the eyes
where the face had fallen into hollows. To-night there seemed no vestige
of prettiness in those peaked features. Nothing of health, youth, gaiety,
or even girlhood, was written in them, but only a terrible, a brutal
record of spoliation and of wreckage, of plunder, and of despair. And
the gaslight, striking the flat surface of the mirror, made the record
glitter with a thin, cheap sparkle, like the tinsel trappings of the
life whose story the mirror revealed in its reflection.

How, indeed, could such a creature have power over fellow man or woman
for good or for evil? If weakness can be written without words, it seemed
written in that wasted countenance, which Cuckoo examined with a creeping
horror that numbed her like frost. As she did so, Valentine was watching
the ungraciousness of her face in the glass deepen and glide, moment by
moment, into greater ugliness, greater degradation. And as the little
light there had ever been behind those unquiet eyes, faded gradually
away, in his reflected eyes the light leaped up into fuller glare,
sparkling to unbridled triumph. And his reflected lips smiled more
defiantly, until the smile was no longer touched merely with triumph,
but with something more vehement and more malign! Cuckoo did not see
the change. She saw only herself, and her heart cried and wailed, What
good--what good to love Julian? What good to hate Valentine? What good
to fight for the man she loved against the man she loathed? As well set
a doll to move its tense joints against an army, or a scarecrow to defy
a god! Never before had she realized thoroughly the complete tragedy of
her life. Hitherto she had assisted at it in fragments, coming in for
a scene here, a scene there. Now she sat through the whole of the five
acts, and the only thing she missed was the fall of the curtain. That
remained up. But why? There was--there could be--nothing more to come,
unless a dreary recapitulation of such dreary events as had already been
displayed. Such a cup could hold no wine that was not foul, thick, and
poisonous. And she had known herself so little as to imagine that she
could really love, and that her love might fulfil itself in protection
instead of sensual gratification. Yes, vaguely she had believed that.
She had even believed that she could put on armour and do battle
against--and at this point in her desperate meditation the lady of the
feathers shifted her eyes from her own face mirrored to the face beside
it. As she did so, a sudden cry escaped from her lips. For a moment she
thought she saw the face of the dead Marr, and the hallucination was so
vivid that when it was gone and the mirror once more revealed the face
of Valentine, Cuckoo had no thought but that she had really seen Marr.
She turned sharply round and cast a glance behind her. Then:

"Did you see him?" she whispered to Valentine.

"Whom?"

"Him--Marr! He's not dead; he's here; he's here, I tell you. I see him in
the glass!"

She shivered. The room seemed spinning round with her, and the two faces
danced and sprang in the mirror, as if a hand shook it up and down, from
side to side.

"If he is here," Valentine said, "it is not in the way you fancy. Your
imagination has played you a trick."

"Didn't you--didn't you see him? Don't you see him now?"

"I see only you and myself."

As if for a joke he bent his head and peered closely at the mirror, like
a man endeavouring to discern some very pale and dim reflection there.

"No, he's--he's not there!" he murmured, "but--"

With a harsh exclamation he dashed his fist against the mirrored face of
the lady of the feathers. The glass cracked and broke from top to bottom.
Cuckoo cried out. Valentine's hand had blood upon it. He did not seem to
know this, and swung round upon her with an almost savage fury.

"Don't--don't, for God's sake," she cried, fearing an attack.

But he made no movement against her. On the contrary, an expression of
relief chased the anger from his lips and eyes.

"Ah!" he said, "that's a lying mirror! It lied to you and to me. I
smashed it. Well, I'll give you another that is more truthful, and more
ornamental too."

"What was it you saw?" she murmured.

"A silly vision, power where there is only weakness; a will, a soul,
where there could not be one!"

"Eh? was it that you struck at?"

"Why do you ask?" he said with sudden suspicion.

"You struck where my face was," she said doggedly. "You did, you did!"

"Nonsense!"

"It ain't! Why did you do it, then?"

A gleam of hope had shot into her eyes, lit by his weird attack upon
her mirrored image. After all, despite his sneers at her faded body, his
gibes at her faded and decaying soul, he struck at her as a man strikes
at the thing he fears. In that faded soul a wild hope and courage leaped
up, banishing all the sick despair which had preceded it. The lady of the
feathers faced Valentine with a deathless resolution of glance and of
attitude.

"You've been telling lies," she said "you've been telling me damned
lies!"

"What do you mean?"

"You said as I was--was done with."

A forced smile came like a hissing snake on Valentine's lips.

"So you are!"

"I ain't! I ain't! What's more, you know it!"

"You have broken yourself to pieces as I have broken that mirror!"

He spoke with an effort after scathing contempt, but she detected a
quiver of agitation in his voice.

"If I have, I'll break you yet!" she cried.

"Me? What are you talking about?"

"You know well enough."

"But do you know--do you know that I--I am Marr?"

He almost whispered the last words! A chill of awe fell over the lady of
the feathers. She did not understand what he meant, and yet she felt as
if he spoke the truth, as if this inexplicable mystery were yet indeed no
fiction, no phantasy, but stern fact, and as if, strangely, she had at
the back of her mind divined it, known it when she first knew Valentine,
yet only realized it now that he himself told her. She did not speak. She
only looked at him, turning white slowly as she looked.

"I am Marr," he repeated. "Now do you understand my gospel? Understand it
if you can, for you are bereft of the power that belongs of right only to
the woman who is pure. Long ago, perhaps, you might have fought me. Who
knows, you might even have conquered me? But you have thrown yourself to
the wolves, and they have torn you till you are only a skeleton. And how
can a soul dwell in a skeleton? Your soul, your will, is as useless as
that vagrant soul of Valentine, which I expelled into the air and into
the night. It can do nothing; you can do nothing either. If I have ever
feared you, and hated you because I feared you, I have fooled myself. I
have divined your thoughts. I have known your enmity against me, and your
love--_yours_!--for Julian. But if the soul and the will of Valentine
could not save Julian from my possession, how can yours? You are an
outcast of the streets! Go back to the streets. Live in them! Die in
them! They are your past, your present, your future. They are your hell,
your heaven. They are everything to you. I tell you that you are as much
of them as are the stones of the pavement that the feet of such women as
you tread night after night. And what soul can a street thing have? What
can be the will of a creature who gives herself to every man who beckons,
and who follows every voice that calls? I feared you. I might as well
have feared a shadow, an echo, a sigh of the wind, or the fall of an
autumn leaf. I might as well have feared that personal devil whom men
raise up for themselves as a bogey. Will is God! Will is the Devil! Will
is everything! And you--you, having tossed your will away--are nothing."

He had spoken gravely, even sombrely. On the last word he was gone.

The lady of the feathers stood alone in the ugly little room, and heard
the clock of the great church close by chime the hour of midnight. Her
face was set and white under its rouge, in its frame of disordered
canary-coloured hair. Her eyes were clouded with perplexity, with horror,
and with awe. Yet she looked undaunted. Staring at the door through which
the man men still called Valentine Cresswell had vanished, she whispered:

"It ain't true! It ain't! Nothin' does for a woman; not when she loves a
man! Nothin'. Nothin'."

She fell down against the hard horsehair sofa, and stretched her arms
upon it, and laid her head against them, as if she prayed.




BOOK IV--DOCTOR LEVILLIER




