CHAPTER IV

THE DEATH OF RIP


Although Dr. Levillier's visit to Victoria Street had been such a painful
one, he had no intention whatever of letting the two young men drift away
out of his acquaintance. He wanted especially to be with them in public
places, and to see for himself, if possible, whether Cuckoo's accusation
against Valentine were true. That a frightful change had taken place in
Julian's life, and that he was rapidly sinking in a slough of wholly
inordinate dissipation was clear enough. But did Valentine, this new,
strange Valentine, lead him, or merely go with him, or stand aloof
smiling at him and letting him take his own way like a foolish boy? That
question the doctor must decide for himself. He could only decide it
satisfactorily by ignoring Valentine's impertinence to himself, and
endeavouring to resume his former relations of intimacy with these old
friends who were strangers. He began by asking them both to dinner.
Rather to his surprise they accepted and came. The mastiffs were shut
close in their den below, lest they should repeat their performance of
the summer. The dinner passed off with some apparent cheerfulness, but
it served to show the doctor the gulf that was now fixed between him and
his former dear associates. He was on one shore, they on another. Their
faces were altered as if by the desolate influence of distance. Even
their voices sounded strange and far away. Great spaces had widened
between their minds and his. He endeavoured at first to cover those
spaces, to bridge that gulf; but he soon came to learn the vanity of
such an attempt. He could not go to them, nor would they return to him.
He could only pretend to bridge the gulf by the exercise of a suave
diplomacy, and by carefully banishing from his manner every trace of that
dispraising elderliness which seems to the young the essence of prudery
arising, like an appalling Phoenix, from the ashes of past imprudence.
In this way he drew a little nearer to Julian, who obviously feared at
first to suffer condemnation at his hands, but, finding only geniality,
lost his uneasiness and suffered himself to become more natural.

But this thawing of Julian, the quick response of humanity to the adroit
treatment of it, only threw into harsher relief the immobility of
Valentine, and to him the doctor drew no nearer, but seemed, with each
moment, more distant, more absolutely divided from him. And the gulf
between them was full of icebergs, which filled the atmosphere with the
breath of a deadly frost. This was what the doctor felt. What Valentine,
the new Valentine, felt could not be ascertained. He wore a brilliant
mask, on whose gay mouth the society smile was singularly well painted.
He wore a manner edged with tinkling bells of brilliancy. Happiness and
ease beamed in his eyes. Yet his look, his voice, his smile, his gaiety
chilled the doctor and set him mentally shivering. And with each bright
saying and merry laugh he struck a blow upon the former friendship.
The doctor fancied he could actually hear the sound of the hammer at
its work.

The simile of the hammer was peculiarly consonant with his present
view of the new Valentine, for, despite the latter's gaiety, ease, and
self-possession, his smiling sociability and expansiveness, the doctor
was perpetually conscious of a lurking violence, an incessant and
forcible exigence in him. It might be a fancy, but the doctor was not,
as a rule, the prey of fancies. Yet Valentine gave no outward hint of
inward turmoil. Rather did the doctor divine it as by a curious intuition
that guided him to that which lay in hiding. And it was this apprehension
of a deep violence and peculiar, excessive animation in Valentine that
woke the doctor's deepest wonder, and set the gulf between them so
widely. For all violence had once been so specially abhorred by
Valentine. He had so loved and sought all calm. The calm, he had often
said, were the true aristocrats of life. Fury and any wild movements of
the passions were of the gutter.

That dinner was returned. The doctor dined with Valentine and Julian
more than once, and accompanied them to the theatre. But he was unable to
make certain of Valentine's precise attitude towards Julian, although he
saw easily that the influence of the one over the other had rather waxed
than waned. This being so, it followed that Julian, having completely
changed, the influence that guided him must have completely changed also.
The pendulum had swung back. That often happened in the record of men's
lives. But not in such a way as this. The doctor, like Cuckoo, recognized
the existence of a mystery. But he was by no means prepared to accept
her fantastic and ignorantly vague explanation of it. That was a wild
fable, a fairy tale for a child, not a reasonable elucidation for a man
and a doctor. The most curious thing of all was that she declared that
Valentine had actually told her the truth about the matter, knowing that
she could not understand it. The doctor resolved to see her later, and
to question her more minutely on this point. Meanwhile he began to watch
Valentine carefully, and with the most sedulous attention to every detail
and _nuance_ of manner, look, and word. He understood Julian. His sad
case was to an extent due to his long happiness and freedom from the
bondage in which so many men move wearily. It was as if his passions had
been dammed up by the original influence of Valentine. Through the years,
behind the height of the dam, the waters had been rising, accumulating,
pressing. Suddenly the dam was removed, and a devastating flood swept
forth, uncontrollable, headlong, and furious. Julian needed rescue, but
the only way to rescue seemed to lie through Valentine, within whose
circle of influence he was so closely bound. The mystery of Valentine
must be laid bare.

And so the doctor watched and wondered, bringing all his knowledge of the
world and of the minds and bodies of men to help him.

And meanwhile the lady of the feathers was seen nightly in Piccadilly.

And Julian went his way steadily downwards.

       *       *       *       *       *

One night there was a flicker of snow over London, and the air was chill
with the breath of coming winter. The dreary light of snow illumined the
faces of all who walked in the streets, painting the brightest cheeks
with a murky grey pigment, and making the sweetest eyes hollow and
expressive of depression. Heavily the afternoon went by and the evening
came sharply, like a blow.

Dr. Levillier was engaged to dine with Julian and Valentine at the
former's rooms in Mayfair. Of late Valentine had seemed to seek him
out, and especially to enjoy seeing him in the company of Julian. And
the doctor fancied he detected something of a triumph that was almost
blatant in Valentine's manner when they three were together, and when the
doctor's eyes rested sorrowfully upon that crumbling wall, which had once
been so fair and strong. Of late, too, the doctor, ever watching for the
signs of change in Valentine, had grown more and more aware that he was
an utterly, through and through, different man from the youth men had
called the Saint of Victoria Street. He felt the transformation to be
inhuman, and, by slow and reluctant degrees, he was beginning to form
an opinion. It was only in embryo as yet, a shadow hesitating in the
background of his mind. He shrank from holding it. He shuddered at its
coming. Yet, if it were right, it might explain everything, might make
what was otherwise incredible clear and comprehensible.

Was this vile change in his friend caused by a radical distortion of
mind? Was Valentine a madman?

Lunacy turns temperaments upside down, transforms the lamb into the
tiger, the saint into the murderer.

Was Valentine then mad? and was the monstrous distortion of his brain
playing upon the life of Julian, who, like the rest of the world,
believed him sane?

The thought came to the doctor, and once it had been born it was often
near to him. Yet he would not encourage it unless he could rest it upon
facts. That a man should change was not a proof of his madness, however
unaccountable the change might seem. The doctor watched Valentine, and
was compelled to admit to himself that in every way Valentine seemed
perfectly sane. His cynicism, his love of ordinary life, his toleration
of common and wretched people, might seem amazing to one who had known
him well years ago, but there were many perfectly sane men of the same
habits and opinions, of the same modes of speech and of action. If the
doctor's strange thought were to become a definite belief, much more
was needed, something at least of proof, something that would carry
conviction not merely to the imagination, but to the cool and searching
intellect.

On this night of the first snow the doctor's thought moved a step forward
towards conviction.

When he arrived at Julian's rooms, he was greeted by Valentine alone.

"Our host has deserted us," he said, leading the doctor into the fire.

"What, is he ill?"

"He has not returned. He went away last night--on a quest of a certain
pleasure. This afternoon he wired, asking me to entertain you. He was
unavoidably detained, but hoped to arrive in time for dessert. His
present love's arms are very strong. They keep him."

"Oh!" the doctor said, slipping out of his cloak; "we dine here then?"

"We do, alone. I don't think we've dined alone since Julian and I came
back from abroad, and you deserted your Russian."

"No. I will consider myself your guest."

It struck the doctor that here was an excellent opportunity for
confirming or abandoning his dreary suspicion. Alone with Valentine, he
would be able to lead the conversation in any direction he chose. He was
glad that Julian had not returned, and resolved to use this opportunity.

They went into the dining-room and sat down to dinner. Valentine was
apparently rather amused at playing the host in another man's house.
It was novel, and entertained him. He was obviously in splendid spirits,
ate with good appetite and drank the champagne with an elation not
unlike the elation of the dancing wine. More than once, too, he alluded
to Julian's absence and probable occupation, as if both the one and
the other were bouquets in his cap, or laurels in some crown which he
alone could wear. Dr. Levillier noticed it and sought to draw him on
in that direction, and to lead him to some open acknowledgment of his
share in Julian's rapidly proceeding ruin. But Valentine changed the
conversation into another channel without apparently observing his
companion's intention, or deliberately frustrating it. He chattered
of a thousand things, mostly of topics that are the common converse
of London dinner-tables. The doctor joined in. To a listening stranger
the two men would have seemed old friends, pleasantly at ease and secure
with one another. Yet the doctor was doing detective duty all the time.
And Valentine! was he not secretly revelling in that destruction of a
human soul that was galloping apace?

Course succeeded course. At last dessert was placed upon the table.
Valentine raised his glass with a smile:

"Let us drink the health of Julian's absence," he said. "For you and I
get on so perfectly together."

"Rather a cruel toast in Julian's own rooms," said the doctor.

"Ah, but he's happy enough where he is."

"You know where that is?"

"No--I only suspect," Valentine cried gaily. "In the wilds of South
Kensington, in a tiny house, all Morris tapestry and Burne-Jones stained
glass, dwells the latest siren who has been calling to our Ulysses. He
is there, I suspect. Wait a moment, though. His telegram might tell us.
Where was it sent from?"

He sprang up, went to the writing-table near the window, and caught up
the crumpled thin paper that he had flung down there. Smoothing it out,
he read, holding the paper close to a wax candle:

"Handed in at the Marylebone Road office at 5:50."

His brow clouded.

"Marylebone Road," he repeated, looking at the doctor. "Why should he be
there?"

His words immediately set the doctor on the track.

"Does not Cuckoo Bright live there?" he said.

"Yes, she does."

"May he not be with her?"

Valentine had dropped the telegram. He was standing at the table, and he
pressed his two fists, clenched, upon the white cloth.

"I have told him he must give Cuckoo up," he said, almost in a snarl.

The doctor glanced at him quickly.

"You have told him?"

"Advised him, I mean."

"You dislike her?"

"I! No. How can one dislike a painted rag? How can one dislike a pink and
white shell that holds nothing?"

"Every body holds a soul. Every human shell holds its murmur of the great
sea."

"The body of Cuckoo then contains a soul that's cankered with disease,
moth-eaten with corruption, worn away to an atom not bigger than a grain
of dust. I would not call it a soul at all."

He spoke with more than a shade of excitement, and the gay expression of
his face had changed to an uneasy anger. The doctor observed it, and
rejoined quietly:

"How can you answer for another person's soul? We see the body, it is
true. But are we to divine the soul from that--wholly and solely?"

"The soul! Let us call it the will."

"Why?"

"The will of man is the soul of man. It is possible to judge the will
by the body. The will of such a woman as Cuckoo Bright is a negative
quantity. Her body is the word 'weakness,' written in flesh and blood
for all to read."

"Ah, you speak of her will for herself," the doctor said, thinking of
Cuckoo's broken wail to him, as she sat on that autumn evening in his
consulting-room. "But what of her will for another, her soul for
another?"

He had spoken partly at random, partly led by the thought, the suspicion,
that Cuckoo's abandoned body held a fine love for Julian. He was by no
means prepared for the striking effect his remark had upon Valentine.
No sooner were the words spoken than a strong expression of fear was
visible in Valentine's face, of terror so keen that it killed the anger
which had preceded it. He trembled as he stood, till the table shook; and
apparently noticing this, and wishing to conceal so extreme an exhibition
of emotion, he slid hastily into a seat.

"Her will for another," he repeated,--"for another. What do you mean by
that? where's the other, then? who is it?"

The doctor looked upon him keenly.

"Anybody for whom she has any desire, any solicitude, or any love--you,
myself, or--Julian."

"Julian!" Valentine repeated unsteadily. "Julian! you mean to say you--"

He pulled himself together abruptly.

"Doctor," he said, "forgive me for saying that you are scarcely talking
sense when you assume that such a creature as Cuckoo Bright can really
love anybody. And even if she did, Julian's the last man--oh, but the
whole thing is absurd. Why should you and I talk about a street-girl,
a drab whose life begins and ends in the gutter? Julian will be here
directly. Meanwhile let us have coffee."

He pushed his cigarette-case over to the doctor and touched the bell.

"Coffee!" he said, when Julian's man answered it.

The door stood open, and as the man murmured, "Yes, sir," a dog close by
howled shrilly.

The noise diverted Valentine's attention and roused him from the
agitation into which he had fallen. He glanced at the doctor.

"Rip," he said.

"Howling for his master," said the doctor.

"Wait a moment," Valentine said to the man, who was preparing to leave
the room. Then, to the doctor:

"I am his master."

"To be sure," rejoined the doctor, who had, in truth, for the moment
forgotten the fact, so long a time had elapsed since the little dog took
up his residence with Julian.

"You think he's howling for me?" Valentine said.

"I was thinking of Julian at the moment."

"And what do you say now? Still that he is howling for his master?"

The dog's voice was heard again. It sounded almost like a shriek of fear.

"No," the doctor replied, wondering what intention was growing in
Valentine's face.

"Oh!" Valentine said curtly.

He turned to the man.

"Bateman, bring Rip in here to us."

The man hesitated.

"I don't think he'll come, sir."

"I said, bring him to us."

The man went out, as if with reluctance. Valentine turned to the doctor.

"We spoke about soul--that is, will--just now," he said. "To deny the
will is death, despite Schopenhauer. Death? Worse than death--cowardice.
To assert the will is life and victory. With each assertion a man steps
nearer to a god. With each conquest of another will a man mounts, and
if any man wants to enjoy an eternity he must create it for himself by
feeding his will or soul with conquest till it is so strong that it
cannot die."

His eyes shone with excitement. It seemed to the doctor that he was
caught in the whirlpool of a violent reaction. He had shown fear,
weakness; he was aware of it, and determined to reassert himself. The
doctor answered nothing, neither agreeing with his fantastic philosophy
nor striving to controvert it. And at this moment there was the sound of
a struggle and of whining outside. The door was pushed open, and Julian's
man appeared, hauling Rip along by the collar. The little dog was hanging
back, with all its force, and striving to get away. Having succeeded in
getting it into the room, the man quickly retreated, shutting the door
hastily behind him. The little dog was left with Valentine and the
doctor. It remained shrinking up against the door in a posture that
denoted abject fear, its pretty head turned in the direction of
Valentine, its eyes glaring, its teeth snapping at the air. The doctor
looked at it and at Valentine. His pity for the dog's condition was held
in check by a strange fascination of curiosity. He leaned his arms on the
table and his eyes were fixed on Valentine, who got up slowly from his
chair.

"I have let Rip be the prey of his absurd fancies long enough, doctor,"
he said. "To-night I will make him like me as he used to, or at least
come to me."

And he whistled to the dog and called Rip, standing by the table. Rip
howled and trembled in reply, and snapped more fiercely in the direction
of Valentine.

"Do you see that, doctor? But he shall come. I will make him."

He shut his lips firmly and stared upon the animal. It was very evident
that he was exerting himself strongly in some way. Indeed, he looked
like a man performing some tremendous physical feat. Yet all his limbs
were still. The violence of his mind created the illusion. Rip wavered
against the door. There was foam on his jaws and his white legs trembled.
Valentine snapped his fingers as one summoning or coaxing a dog. The
doctor started at the sound and leaned further forward along the table
to see the upshot of this strange fight between a man's desire and an
animal's fear. Rip scarcely whined now, but turning his head rapidly
from one side to the other, with a motion that seemed to become merely
mechanical, he made a hoarse noise that was like a terrified and
distressed growl half strangled in his throat. But though he wavered
against the door, he did not obey Valentine and go to him, and the
doctor was conscious of a sudden thrill of joy in the dog's obstinacy.
This obstinacy angered Valentine greatly. His face clouded. He bent
forward. He put out his hands as if to seize Rip. The dog snapped at
him frantically, wildly. But Valentine did not recoil. On the contrary,
he advanced, bending down over the wretched little creature. Then Rip
shrank down on all fours before the door. To the doctor's watching
eyes he seemed to wane visibly smaller. He dropped his head. Valentine
bent lower. Rip lay right down, pressing himself upon the floor. As
Valentine's hand touched him a quiver ran over him, succeeded by a
surprising stillness.

The doctor made a slight sound. He knew that Rip was dead. Valentine took
the little dog by the scruff of its neck and lifted it up. Then he, too,
saw what he held. He glanced at the doctor, and there was a glare of
defeat in his eyes. Then he passed across the room to the window, still
holding the dog, pulled aside the curtain and thrust up the window. The
ground was white and the snow was falling. With an angry gesture he flung
the body out. It dropped with a soft noise in the snow and lay there.

Valentine closed the window, but the doctor felt as if he still saw the
poor little corpse in the snow. And he shuddered.

A moment afterwards there was a step in the passage and Julian entered.
He was looking haggard and excited, and ill with dissipation. His eyes
shone in deep hollows that seemed to have been painted with indigo,
and his lips were parched and feverish.

"Where have you been, Julian?" said Valentine.

"Oh, with her--with Molly, of course," he replied.

"What? Till now?"

Julian seemed uneasy under his scrutiny.

"Till this morning," he replied, almost suddenly.

"Well, but since then?"

"With Cuckoo. Oh! don't bother me."

He went over towards the window.

"Oh, how hot it is here," he said.

He glanced at the bright fire.

"Intolerably!" he murmured.

And he opened the window to the drifting snow.

"Am I mad?" he suddenly cried to them. "I saw the flame in her eyes again
to-day, in Cuckoo's eyes. It held me with her. I'll swear it held me. It
wouldn't let me go--wouldn't let me--till now!"

He sank down in a chair by the window, and turning his back on them,
pushed his head out to get air.

"I say," he suddenly called. "What's that, that lying there?"

Valentine and the doctor joined him. He was pointing to the body of Rip,
which was already almost covered by the snow.

"That," Valentine said; "that is--"

"The body of a creature that died fighting," the doctor interrupted. "A
fine fashion of dying. Look at it, Julian. Its soul was indomitable to
the last, and so it won the battle it fought. It won by its very death
even. Nature is at work on its winding-sheet."

Valentine said nothing.




