CHAPTER X

THE DANCE OF THE HOURS


Even so huge a city as London, full of so many varying personalities and
clashing interests, assumes upon certain days of the year a particular
and characteristic aspect, arising from a community of curiosity, of
excitement, or of delight felt by its inhabitants. Such days are Derby
day and boat-race day. On the latter more especially London is leavened
by a huge mob of juveniles from the universities, and their female
admirers from the country, who cast a pleasant spell over the frigid
indifference of town-bred dullards, and wake even the most vacuous of the
Piccadilly loungers into a certain vivacity and boyishness. The cabmen
blossom cheerily in dark and light blue favours. The butcher-boys are
partisans. Every _gamin_ in the gutter is all for one boat or for the
other, and dances excitedly to know the result. London, in fact, loses
several wrinkles on boat-race day, and smiles itself into a very pleasant
appearance of briskness and of youth. As a rule, Julian went to see the
race and to lunch with his friends at Putney or elsewhere, without either
abnormal experience of excitement or any unusual vivacity. He was
naturally full of life, and had hot blood in his veins, loved a
spectacle, and especially a struggle of youth against youth. But no
boat-race day had ever stirred him as this one did--found him so
attentive to outside influence, so receptive of common things. For
Julian had recently been half-conscious that he was progressing, and with
increasing rapidity, though he knew not in what exact direction. Simply,
he had the feeling of motion, of journeying, and it seemed to him that he
had been standing comparatively still for years. And this boat-race day
came to him like a flashing milestone upon the road of life. He felt as
if it held in its hours a climax of episodes or of emotions, as if upon
it either his body or his mind must prepare to undergo some large
experience, to meet the searching eyes of a face new and unfamiliar.

Possibly the reason of his own excitement lay in the excitement of
another, in the curious preparations, which he had oddly shared, for the
transformation of the unmistakable into the vague. For the transformation
of Cuckoo Bright had been preparing apace, and Julian was looking forward
like a schoolboy to the effect which her novel respectability of
appearance would have upon Valentine. The rouge-box lay lonely and
untouched in a drawer. Even the powder-puff suffered an unaccustomed
neglect. The black gown had been tried on and taught to fit the thin
young figure, and a hat--with only one feather--kept company with the
discarded sarcophagus which had given to Cuckoo her original nickname.
And Cuckoo herself was almost as excited as Francine when she received
her muff. She had not seen Valentine since the day of the tea-party,
yet her attitude of mind had undergone a change towards him, bent to it
probably by her vanity. Ever since Julian had given her the invitation to
the Empire she had displayed a furtive desire to meet him again, and was
perpetually talking of him and asking questions about him. Nevertheless
her fear of him had not died away. Even now she sometimes exclaimed
against him almost with vehemence, and made Julian renew his promise not
to leave her during the evening. But Julian could see that she longed, as
well as dreaded, to meet him again. After all, had he not picked her out
from all the girlhood of London as one to whom he wished, to do honour?
Had he been the Minotaur, such a fact must have made her look upon him
with desirous interest.

When the great day arrived poor Cuckoo had to struggle with a keen and a
sore temptation. She longed to deck herself out in her usual borrowed
plumage, to take the habitual brilliant complexion out of the accustomed
drawer, to crown her frizzed head with feathers, and to look noisily
dashing--her only idea of elegance and grace. Never before had she so
desired to create an impression. Yet she had given Julian her most solemn
promise, and she intended to keep it. As she slowly attired herself,
however, she wondered very much why he was so set upon denuding her of
her accustomed magnificence. Her mind was entirely unable to grasp his
conception of beauty and of attractiveness. She thought all men preferred
the peony to the violet. To-night it was very certain that she would be
no peony, scarcely even a violet. Her new gown had been expensive, but it
was terribly simple, and the skirt hung beautifully, but was surely most
direfully sombre. Nevertheless, it rustled with a handsome sound, a
melody of wealth, when she had put it on and promenaded about her dingy
bedroom, with Jessie at her heels, pretending to worry it playfully. The
black bodice had some trimming. But it was all black. Cuckoo wished it
had been scarlet, or, at the least, orange--something to catch the eye
and hold it. When she was fully attired, and was staring into her glass,
between two boldly flaring gas-jets, she nearly resolved to break her
promise to Julian. She even went so far as to paint her lips and eyes,
and was charmed with the effect against the black. But then with a sudden
fury she sponged her pale face clean, threw the new feather boa round her
throat, and, without daring to glance again at her funereal image, turned
out the gas, and went into the sitting-room. As usual, her last act was
to ensconse the pensive Jessie in the flannel-lined basket, and to give
her a kiss. To-night, as she did so, she let a tear fall on the little
dog's head. She scarcely knew why she cried. Perhaps the quiet gown, the
lack of paint and powder, the prospect of kind and even respectful
treatment from at least Julian, if not from Valentine, gave to her heart
a vision of some existence in which Piccadilly Circus had no part.

Jessie shivered as she felt the tear, and licked the face of her mistress
eagerly. Then Cuckoo rustled forth, avoiding Mrs. Brigg, who might be
heard laboriously ascending the kitchen stairs to view her in her gala
attire. In the twinkling of an eye she was out in the street, and Mrs.
Brigg returned, swearing gustily, to the lower regions.

Cuckoo was to join the young men in their box, of which she had received
the number. She took a cab to the Empire, and was there in excellent
time. As she paid the man, she saw several women going noisily in,
dressed in bright colours and gigantic hats. She looked at them, and
felt terribly mean and poor, and it was with no trace of her usual airy
impudence that she asked her way of the towering attendant in uniform who
stood at the bottom of the carpeted staircase.

Julian and Valentine were already there. They turned round as she came
in, and stood up to receive her. Julian took her hand, but Valentine
hesitated for a moment. Then he said:

"Is it--can it be really Miss Bright?"

"Sure enough it is," Cuckoo answered, with an effort after liveliness.

But her eyes were fixed on his. She had seen a curious expression of
mingled annoyance and contempt flit across his face as she came in.
Why, why had she allowed Julian to over-persuade her? She was looking
horrible, a scarecrow, a ghost of a woman. She was certain of it. For
a moment she felt almost angry with Julian for placing her in such a
bitter position. But he was glowing with a consciousness of successful
diplomacy, and was delighted with her neat black aspect, and with her
smart, though small, hat. He was indeed surprised to find how really
pretty she still was when she allowed her true face to be seen, and was
only wishing that she had made a little less of her hair, which was more
vigorously arranged even than usual. He glanced to see Valentine's
surprise.

"You are so altered," the latter continued. "I scarcely recognized you."

Cuckoo's lips tightened.

"Altered or not, it's me, though," she said.

Valentine did not reply to this. He only made her come to the front of
the box, and placed a chair for her. She sat down feeling like a dog just
whipped. The young men were on each side of her, and the band played an
overture. Cuckoo peered out over the bar of the box, shifting ever so
little away from the side on which Valentine sat. In his presence all her
original and extreme discomfort returned, with an added enmity caused by
her secret certainty that he thought her looking her worst. She peered
from the box and strove to interest herself in the huge crowd that
thronged the house, and in her own dignified and elevated position in it.
For Valentine had taken one of the big boxes next the stage on the
first tier, and Cuckoo had never been in such a situation before. She
could survey the endless rows of heads in the stalls with a completeness
of bird's-eye observation never previously attained. What multitudes
there were. Endless ranks of men, all staring in the same direction,
all smoking, all with handkerchiefs peeping out of their cuffs, and gold
rings on their little fingers. Some of them looked half asleep, others,
who had evidently been dining, threw themselves back in their stalls,
roaring with laughter, and leaning to tell each other stories that must
surely have teemed with wit. Most of them were young. But here and there
an elderly and lined figure-head appeared among them, a figure-head
that had faced many sorts of weather in many shifting days and nights,
and that must soon face eternity--instead of time. Yet at the gates of
death it still sipped its brandy and soda, smiled over a French song
with tired lips, and sat forward with a pale gleam dawning in its eyes
to reconnoitre the charms of a _ballet_. And if it looked aside at youth
and was pierced by the sword of tragedy, yet it was too well bred or too
conventional to let even one of the world around witness the wound. There
is much secret bravery in social life. But these elderly figure-heads
were fewer than usual to-night. Youth seemed to have usurped the
playing-grounds of pleasure, to have driven old age away into the
shadows. With flag flying, with trumpet and drum, it gaily held the
field. The lady of the feathers, Valentine, and Julian leaned out from
their box as from the car of a balloon and saw below them a world of
youth hand in hand with the world of pleasure the gods offer to youth as
wine. It was yet early in the evening, and the hours were only tripping
along, as women trip in the pictures of Albert Moore. They had not begun
to dance, although the band was playing a laughing measure from an opera
of Auber that foams with frivolity. Men kept dropping in, cigar in mouth,
walking to their seats with that air of well-washed and stiff composure
peculiar to British youth, grim with self-consciousness, but affecting
the devil-may-care with a certain measure of success. Some of them
escorted ladies, but by far the greater number were in couples, or in
parties of three or four. The rose of health, or, in many cases, of
repletion, sat enthroned upon their cheeks; on the upper lips of many the
moustaches were budding delicately. These were just getting up on the box
and gripping the reins for the great coach-drive. Little wonder if the
veins in their eager hands stood out. Little wonder if they flourished
the whip with an unnecessary vehemence. But for them, too, so far the
hours were only tripping, a slow and a dainty measure, a formal minuet.
And they were but watching. Only later would they rise up and join the
great dance of the hours, large, complicated, alluring, through whose
measures the feet of eventual saints have trod, whose music rings in the
ears of many who, long after, try to pray and to forget. Some who were
with women made conversation jocosely, putting on travesties of military
airs, and a knowingness of expression that might have put the wisdom of
the Sphinx to shame. Nor did they hesitate to appear amorous in the
public eye. On the contrary, their attitudes of attention were purposely
assumed silently to utter volumes. They lay, to all intents and purposes,
at the feet of their houris, as Samson lay shorn at the feet of Delilah.
In loud young voices they told the secrets of their hearts, until even
the clash of the music could scarcely keep them hidden. And Delilah,
who had shorn the locks of so many Samsons, and who had heard so many
secrets, gave ear with a clever affectation of interested surprise that
deceived these gay deceivers and set them high on the peaks of their own
estimation. Two or three family parties, one obviously French, seemed out
of place, indecently domestic in the midst of such a throng, in which
matrimony was a Cinderella before the ball, cuffed in curl-papers rather
than kissed in crystal slippers. They sat rather silent. One consisted of
a father, a mother and two daughters, the latter in large flowered hats.
The father smoked. The mother looked furtive in a bonnet, and the two
daughters, with wide open eyes, examined the flirtations around them as a
child examines a butterfly caught in a net. One of them blushed. But she
did not turn away her eyes. Nor were her girlish ears inactive. Family
life seemed suddenly to become dull to her. She wondered whether it were
life at all. And the father still smoked domestically. He knew it all.
That was the difference. And perhaps it was his knowledge that made him
serenely content with domesticity and the three women who belonged to
him. Two boys, who had come up from a public school for the race, and had
forgotten to go back, sat at the end of a row in glistening white collars
and neat ties, almost angrily observant of all that was going on around
them. For them the dance of the hours was already begun, and already
become a can-can. They watched it with an eager interest and excitement,
and the calm self-possession with which some of the men near them made
jokes to magnificently dressed women with diamond earrings struck them
dumb with admiration. Yet, later on, they too were fated to join in the
dance, when the stars affected to sleep on the clouds and the moon lay
wearily inattentive to the pilgrims of the night, like an invalid in a
blue boudoir. On the thick carpet by the wall attendants stood loaded
with programmes. One of them, very trim and respectable, in a white cap,
was named Clara and offered a drink by an impudent Oxonian. She giggled
with all the vanity of sixteen, happily forgetful of her husband and
of the seven children who called her mother. Yet the dance of the hours
was a venerable saraband to her, and she often wished she was in bed as
she stood listening to the familiar music. In the enclosure set apart for
the orchestra the massed musicians earned their living violently in the
midst of the gaily dressed idlers, who heard them with indifference, and
saw them as wound-up marionettes. The drummer hammered on his blatant
instrument with all the crude skill of his tribe, producing occasional
terrific noises with darting fists, while his face remained as immovable
as that of a Punchinello. A flautist piped romantically an Arcadian
measure, while his prominent eyes stared about over the chattering
audience as if in search of some one. Suddenly he gave a "couac." He had
seen his sweetheart in the distance with a youth from Christ Church. The
conductor turned on the estrade in the centre of the orchestra and
scowled at him, and he hastened to become Arcadian once again, gazing at
his flute as if the devil had entered into it. In a doorway shrouded with
heavy curtains two acting managers talked warily, their hands in retreat
behind their coat-tails. They surveyed the house and mentally calculated
the amount of money in it, raising their eyes to the more distant
promenade, at the back of which large hats covered with flowers and
feathers moved steadily to and fro. One of them curled his lips and
murmured the word "Chant." Then they both laughed and strolled out to
the bar. More men passed in. Many could not get seats, and these stood,
smoking and exchanging remarks in the broad space between the stalls and
the wall. Some of them leaned nonchalantly against it and criticised the
appearance of the seated audience, or nodded to acquaintances. Others
gathered round the bar, and a few looked at the drop-curtain as if they
thought their ascetic glances would cause it to roll up and disappear.
The overture at length ended. The stage was disclosed, and a man came
forward with a smirk, and a wriggle of gigantic feet, to sing a song.

But Cuckoo Bright, Valentine, and Julian, from their balloon-car, still
surveyed the world. Cuckoo had heard the man before. She was no stranger
to the upper regions of the Empire, but the fascination of knowing
herself watched and commented on from the stalls was a new experience,
and she wished to make the most of it. Forgetting that she was not
painted and powdered, she stretched herself into view and believed she
was creating a sensation. So absorbed was she in the grand effort of
being seen, that when Valentine drew his chair a little closer to her
she did not notice it. One of her hands lay on her lap, the other being
on the ledge of the box supporting her chin. She returned eagerly the
glances of the stalls. The hand that was in her lap felt another hand
close on it. Instinctively Cuckoo turned towards Julian, ready to smile.
But Julian was gazing absorbed at the crowd, and half abstractedly
listening to the song of the man in the huge, distorted boots. It was
Valentine who held her hand. She tried to draw it away. He merely
tightened his grip on it and continued sitting in silence, not even
looking towards her. And as he held her hand a sense of helplessness came
over Cuckoo. Even through his kid glove she could feel the burning heat
of his palm, of the fingers that clutched hers with the strength of an
athlete. She gazed towards him through the new black veil that was drawn
over her face, and it seemed even to her limited intelligence that the
man who was so brutally holding her against her will could not be the man
at whom she was now looking. For Valentine, whose profile was set towards
her, was pale, calm, almost languid in appearance. His blue eyes were
glancing quietly over the multitude, with an air of indifferent
observation. His lips were slightly parted in a sort of dawning smile,
and his whole attitude was that of a man lazily at ease and taking his
pleasure in a desultory mood. Yet the hand on Cuckoo's knees was vicious
in its grasp. This startling and silent contradiction threw her into a
complete panic, but she did not dare to say anything in protest. She
sat silently trembling, and drawing her lips together in growing
perturbation, till Julian happened to turn towards them. Then Valentine's
fingers relaxed their grasp quietly, and slipped away. At the same time
he moved with an air of energy, and broke into gay conversation. His
languor vanished. His blue eyes sparkled. Julian was astonished at his
intense vivacity. He laughed, made jokes, became absolutely boyish.

"Why, Val, how gay you are!" Julian said.

"Every one is gay to-night."

He was interrupted by a roar of laughter. The man in the boots was
becoming immoderately whimsical. His feet seemed to have escaped from
control, and to be prancing in Paradise while he looked on in Purgatory.

"Every one is gay."

As Valentine repeated the words, and the huge theatre laughed like one
enormous person, Julian felt again the strange thrill of overmastering
excitement that had shaken him on the night when he and Valentine had
leaned out of the Victoria Street window. The strength of the spring
and of his long tended and repressed young instincts stirred within
him mightily. Scales fell from his eyes. From the car of the balloon
he gazed down, and it seemed to him that they--Valentine, Cuckoo,
and himself--were drifting over a new country, of which all the
inhabitants were young, gay, careless, rightly irresponsible. The
rows of open-mouthed, laughing faces called to him to join in their
mirth,--more, to join in their lives, and in the lives of the pirouetting
hours. He moved in his chair as if he were impelled to get up and leave
his seat. And as he moved a voice whispered in his ear:

"Let us eat and drink, for to-morrow we die."

Was it Valentine's voice? He turned round hastily, curiously perturbed.

"Val, was that you? Did you speak to me?"

"No."

Julian looked at Cuckoo. Her cheeks were flushed, and her eyes shone with
dancing excitement.

"Did you, Cuckoo?"

"Not I, dearie. I say, ain't he funny to-night?"

Then the voice must have spoken in his own brain. He listened for it and
fancied he could hear it again and again, driving him on like a phantom
fate. But the voice was in timbre like the voice of Valentine, and he
felt as if Valentine spoke with a strange insistence and reiteration.
His heart, his whole being, made answer to the whisper.

"To-morrow we die. It is true. Ah, then, let us--let us eat and let us
drink."

The man in the boots wriggled furiously into the wings, and the curtain
rose on the ballet. Wenzel had ascended to the conductor's platform amid
loud applause. The first weary melodies of "Faust" streamed plaintively
from the orchestra, and a gravity came over the rows of faces in the
stalls. Julian's face, too, was grave, but his excitement and his sense
of his own power of youth grew as he looked on. The old Faust appeared,
heavy with the years and with the trouble of useless thought, and Julian
felt that he could sneer at him for his venerable age. As he watched the
philosopher's grandiloquent pantomime of gesture, like a mist there
floated over him the keen imagination of the hell of regret in which the
old age, that never used to the full its irrevocable youth, must move,
and a passion of desire to use his own youth rushed over him as fire
rushes over a dry prairie. Even a sudden anger against Valentine came to
him,--against Valentine for the protection he had given through so many
years. For had he not been protecting Julian against joy? and does not
the capacity for joy pass away with a tragic swiftness? As Faust was
transformed into youth, and the ballet danced in the market-place, Julian
turned to Valentine and said:

"We will live to-night."

Valentine laughed.

"You look excited."

"I feel excited. Don't you?"

Valentine answered:

"I may presently. We mustn't stay in here all the evening."

There was a knock at the door of the box. An attendant appeared to ask
their orders. Valentine spoke some words to him, and in a few minutes he
brought three long drinks to the box. Julian drank his mechanically. His
eyes were always on the ballet. The betrayal of poor Margaret had now
been accomplished and the soldiers were returning from the wars. Beyond
the wall of the garden the tramp of their feet was heard, a vision of the
tops of their passing weapons was seen. The orchestra played the fragment
of a march. Cuckoo sipped her brandy and soda, and gazed sometimes at the
stage indifferently, often at the audience eagerly, and then at Julian.
When her eyes were on Julian's face a light came into them that made her
expression young, and even pure. A simplicity hovered about her lips, and
a queer dawning of something that was almost refinement spoke in her
attitude. But if she chanced to meet the eyes of Valentine her face was
full of fear.

And now the last great scene of the pageant approached, and the two
schoolboys leant forward in their stalls in a passion of greedy
excitement. Julian happened to see them, and instead of smiling at their
frankly lustful attitudes with the superiority of the drilled man over
the child, he was conscious of an eager sympathy with their vigour of
enjoyment and of desire. His nature retrograded and became a schoolboy's
nature, with the whole garden of life flowering before its feet. Suddenly
there came to him the need of touching something human. He stole his arm
closely around Cuckoo's waist. She glanced at him surprised. But his eyes
were turned away to the stage. Valentine pushed his chair a little
backwards. He was watching them, and when he saw the movement of Julian's
arm, he laughed to himself. The classical Sabbath sprang into view, and
it seemed to be just then that the feet of the hours first began to move
in the opening steps of their great dance of that night. Was it the
magnificent Cleopatra that gave them the signal? Or did Venus herself
whisper in their ears that the time for their _fête_ was come at length,
that the paid vagaries of the stage demanded companionship, and that the
audience, too, must move in great processions, whirl in demon circles,
rise up in heart to the clash of cymbals, bow down before the goddesses
of the night, the women who gave to modern men the modern heaven that
they desire in our days? The stage was a waving sea of scarlet, through
which one white woman floated, like a sin with pale cheeks in the midst
of the rubicund virtues. She was, perhaps, not beautiful, but she was
provocative and alluring, and her whiteness made her as voluptuous as
innocence is when it moves through the habitations of the wicked. Julian
watched her come to Faust and win him from the scarlet dancers and from
the arms of Cleopatra, and the strange rejuvenation of this philosopher
who had been old, and known decaying faculties, and the flight of the
heart from the warm closes of the summer to the white and iron winter
plains, filled him with sympathy. It must be easy to use your youth after
you have known the enforced reserve of age. For age is a bitter lesson.
The dance grew more wild and rattling. The _frou-frou_ of the swinging
scarlet skirts filled the great house with sound as the glitter of
spangles filled it with a shimmering light. Faust was surrounded by
fluttering women moving in complicated evolutions with a trained air of
reckless devilry. And Julian gave himself to the illusion created by the
skill of Katti Lanner, ignoring entirely the real care of the dancers,
and choosing to consider them as merely driven by wild impulse, vagrant
desires of furious motion, and the dashing gaiety of keen sensual
sensation. They danced to fire a real Faust, and he was Faust for the
moment. His arm closed more firmly round the waist of Cuckoo, and he
could feel the throbbing of her heart against the palm of his hand. He
did not look at her, and so he did not see the dawning anxiety with which
she was beginning furtively to regard him. Entirely engrossed with the
stage spectacle, the movement of his arm had been entirely mechanical,
prompted by the hardening pressure of excitement in his mind. If he had
actually crushed Cuckoo and hurt her he would have been unconscious that
he was doing it.

And Valentine all this time leaned back in his chair, that stood in the
shadow of the box, and looked at the enlaced figures before him with an
unvarying smile.

Contrast and surprise are the essence of the successful "spectacle."
Just as the scarlet dervish whirl was at its height the character of
the music changed, slackened, softened, died from the angrily sensuous
into an ethereal delicacy. The stage filled with clouds that faded in
golden light, and a huge and glittering stairway rose towards the painted
sky. On either side of it hung in the blue ether guardian angels with
outstretched wings, and between their attentive ranks stood the radiant
figure of the purified Margaret, at whose white feet the red crowd of
women, even the majestic Cleopatra and pale voluptuous Venus, sank
abashed. Harps sounded frostily, suggesting that crystal heaven of St.
John, in which the beauties we know in nature are ousted by unbreathing
jewels, the lifeless pearl and chrysolite. The air filled with thin and
wintry light, that deepened, and began to glow, through lemon to amber
and to rose. The angels swam in it, and then the huge stairway leading
up to heaven shone with the violence of a gigantic star. Faust fell in
repentance before the girl he had ruined and failed to ruin, the girl who
bent as if to bless him upon this fiery ascent to heaven. And Julian,
absorbed, devoured the wide and glowing scene with his eyes, which were
attracted especially by the living flames that were half veiled and half
revealed beneath the feet of Margaret. The music of the orchestra rippled
faintly, and then it seemed to Julian that, as if in answer, there
rippled up from the golden stairs and from the hidden company of flames
that faint, thin riband of shadowy fire which had already so strangely
been with him in the dawn and in the dusk. It came from beneath the
pausing feet of the girl who blessed Faust, and trembled upwards slowly
above her glittering hair. Julian felt a burning sensation at his heart,
as if the tiny fire found its way there. He turned round sharply,
withdrawing his arm from Cuckoo's waist with an abruptness that startled
her.

"Valentine!" he exclaimed in a whisper. "There; now you see it."

Valentine leaned to him.

"See what?"

"The flame. It's no fancy. It's no chimera. Look, it is mounting up
behind Margaret. Watch it, Valentine, and tell me what it is."

"I see nothing."

Julian stared into his eyes, as if to make certain that he really spoke
the truth. Then Valentine asked of Cuckoo:

"Miss Bright, can you see this flame of which Julian speaks?"

Cuckoo answered, with the roughness that always came to her in the
company of alarm:

"Not I. There ain't nothing, no more than there was that day when I had
the coffee."

She added to Julian, reproachfully:

"You've been drinkin'. Now, dearie, you have."

Suddenly his two companions became intolerable to Julian. He thought them
stupid, boorish, dense, devoid of the senses of common humanity, not to
see what he saw, not to feel as he felt,--that this vague flame had a
meaning and a message not yet interpreted, perhaps not even remotely
divined. With an angry exclamation he sprang to his feet, turning once
more to the stage. And as the curtain fell, he distinctly saw the flame
glowing like a long and curiously shaped star above the head of Margaret.

And this man and woman would not see it! A sudden enmity to them both
came to him in that moment. He abruptly opened the door of the box, and
went out without another word to either of them. Cuckoo's voice shrilly
calling to him to stop did not affect his resolution and desire to escape
from them if only for a moment.

Out in the corridor at the back of the dress circle people were beginning
to circulate, relieved from the tension of examining the ballet. Julian
was instantly swallowed up in a noisy crowd, hot, flushed, loud-voiced,
bright-eyed. Masses of excited young men lounged to and fro, smoking
cigarettes, and making fervent remarks upon the gaily dressed women, who
glided among them observantly. From the adjoining bar rose the music of
popping corks and flowing liquids. The barmaids were besieged. Clouds of
smoke hung in the air, and the heat was terrific. Julian felt it clinging
to him as if with human arms as he slowly walked over the thick carpet,
glancing about him. Humanity touched him on every side. At one moment an
elderly woman, with yellow hair and a fat-lined face, enveloped him in
her skirts of scarlet and black striped silk. The black chiffon that
swept about her neck and heaving shoulders fluttered against his face.
Her high-heeled boots trod on his. He seemed one with her. Then she had
vanished, and instantly he was in the arms of a huge racing-man, who wore
gigantic pink pearls in his shirt front, and bellowed the latest slang to
a thin and dissipated companion. It seemed to Julian that he was kicked
like a football from one life to another, and that from each life he drew
away something as he bounded from it, the fragment of a thought, the
thrill of a desire, the indrawn breath of a hope. Like a machine that
winds in threads of various coloured silks, he wound in threads from the
various coloured hearts about him,--red, white, coarse, and fine. And,
half-unconsciously, was he not weaving them into a fabric? Never before
had he understood the meaning of a crowd, that strange congregation of
passions and of fates which speaks in movements and is melodious in
attitudes, which quarrels in all its parts, silently, yet is swayed
through and through by large impulses, and as an intellect far more keen
and assertively critical than the intellect of any one person in it. And
now, when Julian began to feel the meaning of this surging mob of men and
women, the hours danced, and he and all the crowd danced with them. And
the music that accompanied and directed the feet through the figures of
that night's quadrille was the music of words and of laughter, of hissing
enticements and of whispered replies. Irresistible was the performance
of the hours and of the crowd that lived in them. Julian knew it when the
dance began, marvelled at it for a little when the dance was ended. There
was contagion in the air, furtive, but strong as the contagion of
cholera,--the contagion of human creatures gathered together in the
night. Only the youth who dwells--like Will-o'-the-Mill--forever by the
lonely stream in the lonely mountain valley escapes it entirely. Aged
saints look backward on their lives, and remember at least one night
when it seized them in its embrace; and even the purest woman, through
its spell, has caught sight of the vision behind the veil of our
civilization, and although she has shrunk from it, has had a moment of
wonder and of interest, never quite effaced from her memory.

On every side the Oxford and Cambridge boys laughed and shouted, pushed
and elbowed. They had begun to cast off restraint, and the god that is
rowdy on a rowdy throne compelled them to their annual obeisance at his
feet. Some of them moved along singing, and interrupting their song with
shouts. Friends, when they met in the crowd, yelled shrill recognitions
at each other, and nicknames sang in the air like noisy birds. Rows of
men linked arms, and, striding forward, compelled the throng to yield
them difficult passage, swinging this way and that to make their progress
more comprehensive. The attendants, standing by the wall like giants,
calmly smiled on the growing uproar, into which they darted now and then
with a sudden frenzy of dutiful agility to eject some rude wit who had
transgressed their code of propriety. The very spirit of lusty youth was
in this crowd of hot, careless, blatant, roving youths, mad to find
themselves away from the cool and grey Oxford towers, and from the vacant
banks of the Cam, in passionate Leicester Square, fired by the scarlet
ballet, and the thunder of the orchestra, and the sight of smart women.
Sudden emancipation is the most flaming torch to human passions that
exists in the world. It flared through all that mob, urging it to
conflagration, to the flames that burst up in hearts that are fresh and
ardent, and that so curiously confuse joy with wickedness.

Flames! flames! The word ran in Julian's mind, and in his breast flames
surely burned that night, for, when he suddenly ran against Valentine and
Cuckoo in the throng, he caught Valentine by the arm and said:

"Val, you were right just now. There was no flame; there could have been
no flame where Margaret stood. She was too pure. What can fire have to do
with snow? Cuckoo, I was a fool. Catch hold of my arm."

He pulled her arm roughly through his, never noticing how pale the girl's
face was, how horror-stricken were her eyes. He wanted to bathe himself,
and her, and Valentine, in this crowd that influenced him and that he
helped to influence. He felt as the diver feels, who, when he plunges,
has a sacred passion for the depths. There are people who have an ardour
for going down comparable to the ardour felt by those who mount. Tonight
such an ardour took hold of Julian.

Valentine fell in with it, seeing the humour of his friend, and Cuckoo,
prisoned between the two men, did not attempt to resist them. As they
moved on Valentine said, in a voice he made loud that it might be heard:

"Now, you feel the strength of the spring, Julian. Is it not better than
all my teachings of asceticism?"

"Yes, by ----, it is."

And as he made that answer, Julian, for the first time, forgot to look
up to Valentine, and felt a splendid equality with him, the equality
that men of the same age and temper feel when they are bent on the same
pursuit. How can one of two Bacchanals stoop in adoration of the other,
when both are bounding in the procession of Silenus? Valentine fell from
his pedestal and became a comrade instead of a god. He was no longer the
chaperon of the dancing hours, but their partner. And a new fire shone in
his blue eyes, an unaccustomed red ran over his cheeks, as he heard
Julian's answer to his question. From that moment he ceased to play what,
it seemed, had been but a part, the empty ivory _rôle_ of saint. For
Julian was no longer conscious or observant of him, no longer able to
wonder at his abrupt transformation. In a flash he cast off his habitual
restraint and passed from the reserve of thought to the rowdyism of act.

He chattered unceasingly, dressing his English in all the slang
embroidery of the day. He laughed and chaffed, exchanged repartees with
the flowing multitude through which they passed, stopped to speak to the
flaunting women and loaded them with extravagant compliments, elbowed
loungers out of his way, and made the most personal remarks on those
around him. Two men went by, and one of them exclaimed, with a surprised
glance at Valentine:

"I'm damned! Why, there goes the Saint of Victoria Street."

"Saint!" said the other; "I should think devil the more appropriate name.
That chap looks up to anything."

"Ah, well; when a saint turns sinner--," answered the first speaker, with
a laugh.

Valentine heard the words and burst into a roar of laughter. He drew
Cuckoo to the left and Julian followed. They passed under an archway into
the bar, which was crowded with men, drinking and talking at the tops of
their voices. Valentine called for drinks in a voice so loud and
authoritative that the barmaid hurried to serve him, deserting other
customers, who protested vainly. He forced Cuckoo to drink, and Julian
needed no urging. Clinking glasses noisily with them, he gave as a toast:

"To the dance of the hours!"

These words, uttered with almost strident force, attracted attention even
amid the violent hubbub that was raging, and several young men pressed
round Valentine as he stood with his back against the counter of the bar.
They raised their glasses, too, half in ridicule, and shouting in chorus,
"To the dance of the hours!" drained them to this toast, which they could
not comprehend. Valentine dashed his glass down. It broke and was
trodden under foot. The barmaid protested. He threw her a sovereign. The
young men gathered round, broke theirs in imitation, and Julian,
snatching Cuckoo's from her, flung it away. As he did so, Valentine
thrust another, filled with champagne, into her hand, and again cried
out the toast.

"What the deuce does he mean by it?" one youth called out. "The dance of
the hours; what's that?"

"The dance of the hours! The dance of the hours!" echoed other voices,
and glasses were drained wildly. There was something exciting in the mere
sound of the words that seemed to set brains jigging, and feet moving,
and the world spinning and bowing. For if Time itself danced, what could
the most Puritan human being do but dance with it? Seeing the crowd round
Valentine, men who were drinking at the other end of the bar joined it,
and the toast passed quickly from mouth to mouth. Uttered by every
variety of voice, with every variety of accent, it filled the stifling
atmosphere, and tickled many an empty brain, like the catchword political
that can set a nation behind one astute wire-puller. Boys yelled it, men
murmured it, and an elderly woman in a plush gown and yellow feathers
screamed it out in a piercing soprano that would have put many a
trumpet-blast to shame. Glasses were emptied and filled again in its
honour. Yet nobody knew what it meant, and apparently nobody cared,
except the Oxford boy who had already expressed his desire to be better
informed on the subject. He had gradually edged his way through the
throng until he was close to Valentine, at whom he gazed with a sort of
tipsy reverence.

"I say, you chap," he cried. "What are we drinking to--eh? What the
devil's the dance of the hours?"

Valentine brought his glass down on the counter.

"What is it?" he exclaimed. "Why, the greatest dance in the world, the
dance that youth sends out the invitations for, and women live for, and
old men die with longing for. We set the hours dancing in the night,
we--all who are gay and careless, who love life in the greatest way, and
who laugh at death, and who aren't afraid of the devil. The devil's only
a bogey to frighten old women and children. What do the hours care for
him? Not a snap. It's only cowards who fear him. Brave men do what they
will, and when the hours dance they dance with them, and drink with them
all the night through. Who says there'll be another morning? I don't
believe it. Curse the sunshine. Give me the night and the dancing hours!"

The youth gave a yell, which was echoed by some of his rowdy companions,
and by the two little schoolboys who had joined the throng in a frenzy of
childish excitement, which they thought manly.

"The dancing hours! The dancing hours!" they cried, and one who was with
a girl suddenly caught her round the waist and broke into wild steps.
Others joined in. The confusion became tremendous. Glasses were knocked
over. Whiskies and sodas were poured out in libations upon the carpet.
The protests of the barmaids were unheeded or unheard. Julian whirled
Cuckoo into the throng, and Valentine, snapping his long white fingers
like castanets, stamped his feet as if to the measure of a wild music.
Against the wall some loungers looked on in contemptuous amusement, but
by far the greater number of men present were young and eager for any
absurdity, and not a few were half tipsy. These ardently welcomed
anything in the nature of a row, and the romp became general and noisy.
Men danced awkwardly with one another, roaring the latest music-hall
tunes at the pitch of their voices. The women screamed with laughter,
or giggled piercingly as they were banged and trodden on in the tumult.
The noise, penetrating to the promenade, drew the attention of the
audience, many of whom hurried to see what was going on, and the block
round the archways quickly became impenetrable. One or two of the
gigantic chuckers-out forced their way into the throng and seized the
dancers nearest to them, but they were entirely unable to stay the
ridiculous impulse which impelled this mob of young human beings to
capering and yelling. Indeed they merely increased the scuffle, which
rapidly developed towards a free fight. Hats were knocked off, dresses
were torn. The women got frightened and began to scream. The men swore,
and some lost their tempers and struck out right and left. Valentine
watched the scene with laughing eyes as if he enjoyed it. Especially he
watched Julian, who, with scarlet face and sparkling eyes, still forced
Cuckoo round and round in the midst of the tumult. Cuckoo was white, and
seemed to be half fainting. Her head rested helplessly against Julian's
shoulder, and her eyes stared at him as if fascinated. Her dress was
torn, and her black veil hung awry. If she danced with the hours it was
without joy or desire.

But suddenly police appeared. The dancers, abruptly realizing that a joke
was dying in a disaster, ceased to prance. Some violently assumed airs of
indifference and of alarming respectability. Many sinuously wound their
way out to the promenade. A few, who had completely lost their heads,
hustled the police, and were promptly taken into custody. Julian would
have been among these had it not been for the intervention of Valentine,
who caught him by the shoulder, and drew him and Cuckoo away.

"No; you mustn't end to-night in a cell," he said in Julian's ear. "The
dancing hours want you still. Julian, you are only beginning your real
life to-night."

Julian, like a man in an excited dream, followed Valentine to the bottom
of the broad stairs, on, through the blooming masses of flowers, to the
entrance. Two or three cabs were waiting. Valentine put Cuckoo into one.
She had not spoken a word, and was trembling as if with fear.

"Get in, Julian."

Julian obeyed, and Valentine, standing on the pavement, leaned forward
and whispered to him:

"Take her home, Julian."

Suddenly Julian shouted Cuckoo's address to the cabman hoarsely.

The cab drove away.

Valentine walked slowly towards Piccadilly Circus, whistling softly,
"I want you, my honey; yes, I do."




BOOK III--THE LADY OF THE FEATHERS




