CHAPTER I

THE LADY OF THE FEATHERS


The thin afternoon light of an indefinite spring day shone over the
Marylebone Road. A heavy warmth was in the air, and the weather was
peculiarly windless, but the sun only shone fitfully, and the street
looked sulky. The faces of the passers-by were hot and weary. Women
trailed along under the weight of their parcels, and men returned from
work grimmer than usual, and wondering almost with a fretfulness of
passion why they were born predestined to toil. The cabmen about Baker
Street Station dozed with nodding heads upon their perches, and the
omnibus conductors forgot to chaff, and collected their tolls with a
mechanical deliberation. At the crossings the policemen, helpless in
their uniforms of the winter, became dictatorial more readily than on
cooler days. Some sorts of weather incline every one to temper or to
depression. The day after the boat-race lay under a malign spell. It
seemed to feel all the weariness of reaction, and to fold all men and
women in the embrace of its lassitude and heavy hopelessness.

At number 400, Jessie whined pitifully in her basket, and her arched back
quivered perpetually as her minute body expanded and contracted in the
effort of breathing. Her beady eyes were open and fixed furtively upon
her mistress, as if in inquiry or alarm, and her whole soul was whirling
in a turmoil set in motion by the first slap she had ever received in
gravity at the hands of Cuckoo. Jessie's inner nature was stung by that
slap. It knocked her world over, like a doll hit by a child. Her universe
lay prone upon its back.

And Cuckoo's? She was sitting in the one arm-chair with her thin hands
folded in her lap. She wore the black dress given to her by Julian, but
she did not look prepared to go out, for her hair was standing up over
her head in violent disorder, her cheeks were haggard and unwashed, and
her boots--still muddy from the previous night's promenading--stood
in a corner near the grate in the first position, as if directed by
a dancing-mistress. Cuckoo was neither reading nor working. She was
simply staring straight before her, without definite expression. Her
face indeed wore a quite singularly blank look and her mouth was slightly
open. Her feet, stuck out before her, rested on the edge of the fender,
shoeless, and both her general appearance and attitude betokened a
complete absence of self-consciousness, and that lack of expectation of
any immediate event which is often dubbed stupidity. The lady of the
feathers sitting in the horsehair-covered chair in the cheap sitting-room
with the folding doors looked indeed stupid, pale, and heavy. Fatigue lay
in the shadows of her eyes, but something more than ordinary fatigue
hovered round her parted lips and spoke in her posture. A dull weariness,
in which the mind took part with the body, held her in numbing captivity.
She had only broken through it in some hours to repulse the anxious
effort of Jessie to scramble into the nest of her lap. That slap given,
she had again relapsed without a struggle into this waking sleep.

The sun came out with a sudden violence, and an organ began to play a
frisky tune in the street. Jessie whined and whimpered, formed her mouth
into the shape of an O, and, throwing up her head, emitted a vague and
smothered howl. Below stairs, Mrs. Brigg, who was afflicted with a
complaint that prompted her to perpetual anxious movement, laboured about
the kitchen, doing nothing in particular, among her pots and pans. The
occasional clatter of them mingled with the sound of the organ, and with
the suffocated note of Jessie, in a depressing symphony. The sun went in
again, and some dust, stirred into motion by a passing omnibus, floated
in through the half-open window and settled in a light film upon the
photograph of Marr. Presently the organ moved away, and faded gradually
in pert tunes down the street. Jessie's nervous system, no longer played
upon, ceased to spend its pain in sound, and a London silence fell round
the little room. Then, at length, Cuckoo shifted in her chair, stretched
her hands in her lap, and sat up slowly. The inward expression had not
faded from her eyes yet, for, leaning forward, she still stared blankly
before her, looking, as it seemed, straight at Marr's photograph.
Gradually she woke to a consciousness of what she was looking at, and
putting up one hand she took the photograph from its place, laid it in
her lap, and, bending down, gazed at it long and earnestly. Then she
shook her head as if puzzled.

"I don't know," she murmured; "I don't know."

Encouraged by the sound of her mistress's voice, Jessie stepped from
her basket and gingerly approached, snuffling round Cuckoo's feet, and
wriggling her body in token of anxious humility. Cuckoo picked her up and
stroked her mechanically, but still with her eyes on the photograph. Two
tears swam in them. She dashed the photograph down. It lay on the carpet,
and was still there when a knock at the door was succeeded by the
entrance of Julian.

He, too, looked pale and rather weary, but excited.

"Cuckoo," he said.

She sat still in the chair, looking at him.

"Well?" she said, and closed her lips tightly.

He came a step or two forward into the little room, and put his hat and
stick down on the table.

"You expected me to come, didn't you?"

"I don't know as I did."

Her eyes were on Jessie now, and she stroked the little dog's back
steadily up and down, alternately smoothing and ruffling its short coat.
Julian came over and stood by the mantelpiece.

"I told you I should come."

"Did you?"

"Don't you remember?"

She shifted round in the chair till he could only see her shoulder, and
the side of her head and neck, on which the loose hair was tumbling in
ugly confusion. Sitting thus she threw back at him the sentence:

"I don't want to remember nothing. I don't want to remember."

Julian stood hesitating. He glanced at Cuckoo's hair and at the back of
her thin hand moving to and fro above the little contented dog.

"Why not?" he said.

At first she made no answer to this question, and seemed as if she had
not heard it, but presently it appeared that her silence had been caused
by the effect of consideration, for at length she said, still retaining
her aloof attitude:

"I don't want to remember, because it's like a beastly dream, and when I
remember I know it ain't a dream."

Julian said nothing, and suddenly Cuckoo turned round to him, and took
her hand from Jessie's back.

"I say. You were mad last night. Now, weren't you?"

The words came from her almost pleadingly, and her eyes rested on
Julian's insistently, as if demanding an affirmative.

"He'd made you mad," she continued.

"He," said Julian. "Who?"

"Your friend."

"Valentine! He had nothing to do with it."

"It was all his doing."

Her voice grew shrill with feeling.

"He's a devil," she said. "I hate him. I hate him worse than I hate
that copper west side of Regent Street. And I hate you, too,--yes, I
do,--to-day."

The tears gathered in her eyes and began to fall, tears of rage and shame
and regret, tears of one who had lost a great possession. Julian looked
embarrassed and pained, almost guilty, too. He put out his hand and tried
to take Cuckoo's. But she drew hers away and went on crying. She spoke
again with vehemence.

"I told you what I wanted you to be; yes, I did," she exclaimed. "Yes,
I told you. You said you only come here to talk to me."

"It was true."

"No; it wasn't. You're just like all the others. And I did so want to
have a pal. I've never had one."

With the words the sense of her desolation seemed to strike her with
stunning force. She leaned her head against the back of the chair, and
cried bitterly, catching at the horsehair with violent hands, as if she
longed to hurt something, to revenge her loss even upon an object without
power of feeling. Julian sprang up and went over to the window. He looked
out onto the road and watched the people moving by in the fitful sunshine
beyond the dirty railings. That day, he, too, was in a tumult. He felt
like a monk who had suddenly thrown off his habit, broken his vows, and
come forth into the world. The cell and the cloister were left behind,
were things to be forgotten, with the grating of the confessional and the
dim routine of service and of asceticism. He had been borne on by the
wave of a brilliant, a violent hour, away from them. Let the angelus bell
ring; he no longer heard it. Let the drone of prayers and praises rise in
a monotonous music by day and by night; he no longer had the will to heed
them. For there was another music in his ears. Soon it would be in his
heart. Imagine a Trappist suddenly transported from the desert of his
long silence to a gay _plage_ on which a brass band was playing. Julian
was that Trappist in mind. And though he knew Cuckoo was sobbing at his
back, and though his heart held a sense of pity for her trouble, yet he
heard her grief with a strange cruelty, at which he wondered, without
being able to soften it. That afternoon it seemed to him useless for
anybody to cry. No grief was quite worth tears. The violence of life was
present with him, gave him light and blinded him at the same time. He
found delight in the thought of violence, because it held action in its
grasp. Even cruelty was worth something. Was he cruel to Cuckoo?

He turned from the window and looked at her, with the observation of a
nature not generally his own. He noted the desolation of her hair, and he
noted, too, that she wore the gown he had given to her. Would she have
put it on if she had hated him as she said she did? Somehow it scarcely
seemed to suit her to-day. It looked draggled, and as if it had been up
all night, he thought. The black back of it heaved as Cuckoo sobbed, like
a little black wave. Was the eternal movement of the sea caused by some
horrible, inward grief which, though secret, must come thus to the eye of
God and of the world? Julian found himself wondering in an unreasonable
abstraction as he contemplated the crying girl. Then suddenly his mind
swerved to more normal paths; he was seized by the natural feeling of a
man who has made a woman weep, and had the impulse to comfort.

"Don't cry, Cuckoo," he said, coming over to her and sitting on the edge
of her chair. "You must not. Let us say I was mad last night. Perhaps I
was. Men are often mad, surely. To-day I'm sane, and I want you to
forgive me."

He put his arm round her shoulder. She glanced up at him. Then, with the
odd penetration that so often gilds female ignorance till it dazzles and
distracts, she said quickly:

"You don't mean what you say; you don't really care."

Julian was taken aback by her sharpness, and by the self-revelation that
immediately stabbed him.

"You mustn't say that," he began. But she stopped him on the instant.

"You don't care; you think it's nothing. So it ought to be to me, I
know."

That had perhaps actually been his thought, the thought of a mind
unimaginative to-day, because deadened by the excitement of action.
But if it was his thought he hastened to deny it.

"You know I don't think of you in that way," he said.

"You will now. You do."

That was the scourge that had lashed her all through this weary day of
miserable reaction; that now stung her to a passion that was like the
passion of purity. As she made this statement there was a question in
her eyes, but it was a question of despair, that scarcely even asked for
the negative which Julian hastened to give. He was both perplexed and
troubled by the unexpected violence of her emotion, and blamed himself
as the cause. But, though he blamed himself, his regret for what was
irrevocable had none of the poignancy of Cuckoo's. For a long time he
had gloried in living in a cloister with Valentine. Now he had left the
cloister, he did not look back to it with the curious pathos which so
often gathers like moss upon even a dull and vacant past. He did not,
for the moment, look back at all. Action had lifted scales from his eyes,
had stirred the youth in him, had stung him as if with bright fire, and
given him, at a breath, a thousand thoughts, visions, curiosities. A
sense of power came to him. He did not ask whether the power made for
evil or for good. Simply, he was inclined to glory in it, as a man
glories in his recovered strength when he wakes from a long sleep
following fatigue. Cuckoo, with feeble hands, seemed tugging to hold back
this power, with feeble voice seemed crying against it as a deadly thing.
And Julian, though he strove to console her, scarcely sympathized with
her fully. He could not, if he would, be quite unhappy to-day. Only in
Cuckoo's grief he began to read a curious legend. In her tears there was
a passion, in her anger a vehemence that could only spring from the
depths of a nature. Julian began to suspect that through all her sins
and degradations this girl, his lady of the feathers, had managed to
keep shut one door, though all the others had been ruthlessly opened.
And beyond this door was surely that holy of holies, an unspoiled woman's
heart. From what other dwelling could rush forth such a passion for a
man's respect, such a fury to be rightly and chivalrously considered? As
he half vaguely realized something of the true position of Cuckoo and of
himself, Julian felt stirred by the wonder of life, in which such strange
blossoms flower out of the very dust. He looked at Cuckoo with new eyes.
She looked back at him with the old ones of a girl who loves.

As he looked she stopped crying. Perhaps the sudden understanding in his
gaze thrilled her. He put out his hand to touch hers, and again repeated
his negative, but this time with greater conviction.

"I do not think of you in that way. I never shall," he said.

Her face was still full of doubt, and thin with anxiety. She was not
reassured, that seemed apparent; for in her ignorance she had a strange
knowledge of life, and especially a strange intuition which guided her
instincts as to the instinctive proceedings of men.

"They always do," she murmured. "Why should you be different?"

"All men aren't alike," he said, pretending to laugh at her.

"Yes, in some things, though," she contradicted. "They all think dirt of
you for doing what they want."

Seeing how unsatisfied she was, and how restlessly her anxiety paced up
and down, Julian resolved on more plain-speaking.

"Look here, Cuckoo," he said, and his voice had never sounded more
boyish, "last night I was drunk. Last night I woke up, and I'd been
asleep for years."

"Eh?" she interrupted, looking puzzled, but he went on:

"I was emancipated, and I was mad. Mind, I didn't mean to do you any
wrong, but if you have thought of me in a different way, I'm sorry.
Tell me what you want me to be to you, and in future I'll be it."

Hope and eagerness sprang up in her eyes then.

"I say," she began,

"Yes."

"You promise?"

"I promise."

The dull blood rose in her tired face.

"I want just a--just a friend," she said, as if almost ashamed.

Julian smiled.

"Not a lover," he said, with a fleeting air of gallantry. She shrank
visibly from the word, and hurriedly went on:

"Not I. I've had too much of love." The last word was spoken with a
violence of contempt. "I want a man as likes me, just really likes me,
as he might another man. See?"

"And you'll not love him?"

His eyes searched hers with a gaiety of inquiry that was almost laughter.
Cuckoo looked away.

"I'll not love him either," she said steadily. "I'll just like him too."

Seeing her earnestness and obvious emotion, Julian dropped his gently
quizzing manner, and became earnest, too, in his degree.

"Then it's a bargain," he said. "You and I are to like each other
thoroughly, never anything more, never anything less. Like two men, eh?"

She began at last to look relieved and happier.

"Yes, like that," she said. "Ain't it--ain't it truer than the other
thing? There's something beastly about love; that's what I always think."

And she spoke with the sincerest conviction. When Julian left her that
day, he shook hands with her by the door; she stood after he had done it
as if still half expectant.

"There's a man's good-bye to a man," he said. "Better sort of thing than
a man's good-bye to a woman, isn't it?"

"Rather!" she said hastily, and moved back into the sitting-room.
She stepped on something, and bent down to pick it up. It was Marr's
photograph.

"What's that?" Julian asked.

"Nothing," she said, concealing it. She had a foolish fancy that even
the photograph of the creature she had feared and hated might spoil that
good-bye of theirs. Yet even as it was, when Julian had gone she still
seemed unsatisfied.

She was a woman after all, and woman is most feminine in her farewells.




