CHAPTER VII

THE LADY OF THE FEATHERS BUCKLES ON HER ARMOUR


That evening Cuckoo remained in a condition of mingled terror and
resolution. There was something about Valentine that filled her, not
merely with alarm, but with a nameless horror, indescribable and
inveterate. She felt that he was her deadly enemy and the enemy of
Julian. But he had cast such a spell over Julian that the latter was
blinded and ready to follow him anywhere, and not merely to follow him,
but to defend every step he took. Cuckoo had a sense of entering upon a
combat with Valentine. As she stood upon the doorstep in Harley Street
and faced him under the gas-lamp, were they not as antagonists definitely
crossing swords for the first time? It seemed so to her. And the
impression upon her was so strong and so exciting, that for once she
broke through her invariable routine. Instead of going to Piccadilly she
went home to her lodgings. It was about half-past nine when she arrived
and opened the door with her latchkey. Mrs. Brigg happened to be in the
passage _en route_ to the kitchen from some business in the upper
regions. She stared upon Cuckoo with amazement.

"What ever," she began, her voice croaky with interrogation. "Are you
ill? What are you back for?"

"I'm all right," said Cuckoo crossly. "Leave me alone, do."

She turned into her sitting-room. Mrs. Brigg followed, open-mouthed.

"Ain't you a-goin' out ag'in?"

"No; oh do leave off starin'. What's the matter with you?"

Mrs. Brigg heaved a thick sigh and shuffled round upon her heels, which
made a noise upon the oilcloth like the boots of the comic man at a
music-hall.

"Well," she said with a sudden grimness, "I hope it'll be all right about
the rent, that's all."

She vanished, shaking her head, on which a stray curl-paper, bereft of
its comrades of the morning, sat unique in a thin forest of iron-grey
wisps.

Cuckoo shut her door and sat down to think. But at first she had to
receive the attentions of Jessie, who was even more surprised than Mrs.
Brigg at her unexpected return, and who began to bark with shrill joy
and run violently round the room with the speed of a rat emancipated from
a cage. As she would not consent to repose herself again, Cuckoo at last
put her into the next room, on the bed, and shut the door on her. Then
she returned, lit all the three gas-burners and turned them full on,
before she removed her hat, and definitely settled herself in for the
evening. She was fearful, and dreaded darkness, or even twilight. The
pulse of London beat round her while she stretched herself on the hard
sofa, let down her touzled yellow hair, and frowned slowly as the
unlearned do when they know that they want to meditate.

Now and then she rose suddenly on her elbow, half turned her head towards
the window and listened. She had thought she heard a step on the pavement
pause, and the cry of the little iron gate. Then, reassured, she leaned
back once more. She had taken off her boots, and her feet, in black
stockings gone a little white at the toes, were tilted up on the shoulder
of the sofa. She fixed her eyes mechanically upon them while she began,
all-confusedly, and with the blurred vagueness of the illiterate, to plan
out a campaign. Not that she said that word to herself; she did not know
its meaning. All that she knew was, that she wanted to put her back
against the wall, or get into an angle, like a cornered animal, and use
her teeth and claws against Valentine, that menacing figure with an
angel's face. And what disgusted and drove Cuckoo almost mad as she
lay there in the crude gaslight was the abominable fact that she was
desperately afraid of Valentine. There was something about him which
filled her not only with intense horror, but with something worse than
horror,--intense fear. Why, she had all three gas-burners alight because,
having met him that night and seen him watching her, she trembled at the
faintest shadow and must see things plainly, lest their dim outlines
should appal her fancy by taking his form.

Only once had the lady of the feathers known such enfeebling terror as
this, on the night when she fled from the hotel in the Euston Road and
left Marr dying on the bed between the tall windows. More than once,
in her thoughts, had she loosely linked Marr with Valentine, puzzled,
scarcely knowing why she did so. And, she repeated the mental operation
now more definitely. They had at least one thing in common, this
extraordinary power of striking fear into her soul. And Cuckoo was
not accustomed to sit with fear. Her life had bred in her a strong,
tough-fibred restlessness. She was essentially a careless creature, ready
to argue, quarrel, hold her own with anybody, proud, as a rule, of being
a match for any man and well able to take care of herself. She had
knocked about, and was utterly familiar with many horrors of the streets,
and of nameless houses. She had heard many rows at night; had been in
brawls; had been waked, in the dense hours, by sudden sharp cries for
help; was accustomed to be alone with strangers, men of unknown history,
of unknown deeds. And all these circumstances she met with absolute
carelessness, with a devil-may-care laugh, or the sigh of one weary, but
not afraid. She was no more timid than the average English street-boy.
Only these two men, one dead, one alive, knew how to dress her in terror
from head to foot, brain, heart, and body. And so she joined them in a
ghastly brotherhood.

But to-night she was making a conscious effort against the domination of
Valentine, for the awakening of fear in her was counterbalanced by other
feelings prompting her to fight. And once Cuckoo began to fight she felt
that she would not lack courage. For she clung to action, and hated
thought, walking clearly in the one, but through a maze in the other.

Despite her fear of him, something drove her to fight Valentine; only she
did not know how to fight him. It was in a mood of doubt that she had
wandered into Harley Street and bent to read the name on the door of
Dr. Levillier. Julian's description of the doctor had appealed to her.
The mention of his goodness, of his pure life, of his care for others,
had impressed her, she scarcely knew why, and brought into her mind a
desire to see this little man. Yet he was devoted to Valentine. And then
Cuckoo, lying back on the sofa, felt heart-sick, wondering at the power
of this man whom she hated and feared, wondering how she could ever fight
against his influence over Julian; wondering, too, a little, why it was
that she knew she must and certainly would fight it. For beyond the
motive power of her love and jealousy, beyond the ordinary woman's desire
to keep the man she admired from sinking to the level of the men she
despised, there was another fiery and strong and urging insistent
influence working upon her, working within her, crying to her, like a
voice, to buckle on her armour and to do battle with the enemy. This
influence came silently from without, and spoke to the lady of the
feathers when she was alone, and never more clearly and powerfully than
to-night. It wrestled with her terror of Valentine, and told her to put
it away, to come into closer relations with him fearlessly, not to flee
from him, but rather to watch him, dog him, learn what he was and what
he was doing or trying to do. Yet fear fought this growing, stirring,
strange warm influence that burned like a fire at Cuckoo's heart. She
flushed and she paled as she lay there, with down-drawn brows and enlaced
hands, her yellow hair falling over the hard, shiny horsehair of the
sofa. She longed for some one to come to her who would give her counsel,
help, courage, that she might fight for Julian, who was too spell-bound
to fight for himself, and who was falling so fast, so terribly fast,
into the abyss where men crawl like insects and women are as poisonous
weeds in the slime of the pit.

Oh, for some one!

Involuntarily she sat up and extended her thin arms almost as if in a
beckoning gesture.

As she did so the front door bell rang.

Cuckoo was startled and felt as if it rang for her. But that was
unlikely; and there were other lodgers of her kind in the house. No
doubt it was a visitor for one of them.

Mrs. Brigg went in weary procession along the passage and opened the
door. A few words were indistinctly spoken in a man's voice. Then the
street door shut, and almost simultaneously the door of Cuckoo's
sitting-room opened very quietly and Valentine entered.




