CHAPTER IX

THE FOURTH SITTING


They turned the light off and sat down in silence. Then Julian said:

"Keep your hands well away from mine, Val."

"I will."

They had not been sitting for five minutes before Valentine felt that the
atmosphere was becoming impregnated with a certain heaviness of mystery,
with a certain steady and unyielding dreariness hanging round them like a
cloud. They were once again confronted by a strange reality. Surely they
were. Valentine felt it, silently knew it.

In this blackness he seemed at length to step forward and to stand upon
the very threshold of an abyss, beyond which, in vague vapours, lay
things unknown, creatures unsuspected hitherto. From this darkness
anything might come to them, angel or devil, nymph or satyr. So, at
least, he dreamed for a while, giving his imagination the rein. Then,
in a revulsion of feeling, he jeered at his folly, mutely scolded his
nerves for spurring him to such flagrant imbecilities.

"This is all nonsense," he told himself, "all fancy, all a world created,
peopled, endowed with life by my desirous mind, which longs for a new
sensation. I will not encourage this absurdity. I will be calm, cold,
observant, discriminating. This is the same darkness in which every
night I sleep, with no sense of being surrounded by forms which I cannot
see, pressed upon by the denizens of some other sphere, not that in which
I breathe and live."

He deliberately detached himself from his mood of keen expectation, and
ardently resolved to anticipate nothing. And at this moment the table
began to shift along the carpet, to twist under their hands, to rap, to
tremble, and to pulsate, as if breath had entered into it. Like some live
animal it stirred beneath their pressing fingers.

"It is beginning," Julian whispered.

"Animal magnetism," Valentine murmured.

"Yes, of course," Julian replied. "Shall I ask--"

"Hush!" Valentine interrupted.

Julian was silent.

For some time the table continued its stereotyped performances. Then
it tremblingly ceased, and stood, mere dead furniture of every day, wood
on which lay the four hands made deliberately limp. A long period of
unpopulated silence ensued, and through that silence, very gradually,
came again to Valentine a growing sense of anxiety. At first he fought
against it as most men, perhaps out of self-respect, fight against the
entrance of fear into their souls. Then he yielded to it, and let it
crawl over him, as the sea crawls over flat sands. And the sea left no
inch of sand uncovered. Every cranny of Valentine's soul was flooded.
There was no part of it which did not shudder with apprehension. And
outwards flowed this invisible, unmurmuring tide, devouring his body,
till the sweat was upon his face and his strained hands and trembling
fingers were cold like ice, and his knees fluttered as the knees of
palsied age, and his teeth clicked, row against row, and his hairs
stirred, and his head, under its thatch, tingled and burned and throbbed.
Every faculty, too, seemed to stand straight up like a sentinel at its
post, staring into dust clouds through which rode an approaching enemy.
Eyes watched, ears listened, brain was hideously alert. The whole body
kept itself tense, stiff, wary. For Valentine had a secret conviction
at this moment that he was about to be attacked. By what? He was hardly
master of himself enough to wonder. His thoughts no longer ran free.
They crept like paralyzed things about his mind, and that despite the
unnatural vitality of his brain. It was as if he thought intensely,
violently, and yet could not think at all, as a man terrified may stare
with wide open eyes and yet perceive nothing, lacking for a moment the
faculty of perceiving. So Valentine waited, like some blind man with
glaring eyeballs. And then, passing into another stage of sensation, he
found himself vehemently and rapidly discussing possibilities of terror,
forming mental pictures of all the things, of all the powers, that we
cannot see. He embodied, materialized, the wind, the voice of the sea,
the angry, hot scent of certain flowers, of the white lily, the tuberose,
the hyacinth. He created figures for light, for darkness, for a wail, for
a laugh, and set them in array all around him in the blackness. But none
of these imagined figures could cause the horror which he felt. He drove
away the whole pack of them with a silent cry, a motionless dismissing
wave of his hands. But there might be other beings round us, condemned
to eternal invisibility lest the sight of them should drive men mad. We
cannot see them, he thought. As a rule, we have no sensation of these
gaunt neighbours, no suspicion of their approach, of their companionship.
We do not hear their footsteps. We are utterly unconscious of them. Yet
may there not be physical or mental paroxysms, during which we become
conscious of them, during which we know, beyond all power of doubt, that
they are near us, with us? And, in such paroxysms, is it not possible for
them to break through the intangible and yet all-powerful barriers that
divide them from us, and to touch us, caress us, attack us? Valentine
believed that he was immersed in such a paroxysm, and that the barriers
were in process of being broken down. He seemed actually to hear the
faint cry of an approaching being, the dim uproar of its violent efforts
to obtain its sinister will, and gain the power to make itself known to
him by some ghastly and malignant deed. He was unutterably afraid.

"The hand again!" Julian suddenly cried. "Valentine, is it yours? Why
don't you answer? I say, is it yours?"

"No," Valentine forced himself, with difficulty, to reply.

"For God's sake then--the light!"

Valentine felt for it, but his hand shook and did not find the button.

"Make haste, Val. What are you doing? Ah!"

The room sprang into view, and Julian's eyes, with a furious, sick
eagerness, sought his hands.

"Valentine," he exclaimed hoarsely, "I see nothing, but I've got hold of
the hand still. I've got it tight. Put your hand here--that's it--under
mine. Now d'you feel the thing?"

Julian's hand, contracted as if grasping another, was in the air, about
an inch, or an inch and a half, above the surface of the table. Valentine
obediently thrust his hand beneath it. He now shook his head.

"I feel nothing," he said. "There is nothing."

"Then am I mad?" said Julian. "I'm holding flesh and blood. I'll swear
that. Yes, I can feel the fingers twitching, the muscles, the bones. I
can even trace the veins. What does this mean?"

"I can't tell."

"You look very strange, Valentine. You are certain you see and feel
nothing?"

"Nothing whatever," Valentine forced himself to answer calmly.

"We'll see this through," said Julian with a sort of angry determination.
"I won't be frightened by a hand. We'll see it through. Out with the
light."

Valentine turned it off. The action was purely mechanical. He had to
perform it, whether he would or no.

"Don't speak," he whispered to Julian in the darkness. "Don't speak,
whatever happens, till I ask you to speak."

"Why?"

"Don't; don't!"

"All right."

They sat still.

And now the horror that had possessed Valentine so utterly began to
fade away, making its exit from his body and soul with infinitesimally
small steps. At length it had quite gone, and its place was taken by a
numb calm, level and still at first, then curiously definite, almost
too definite to be calm at all. Gradually this calm withdrew into
exhaustion, an exhaustion such as dwells incessantly with the anemic,
with those whose hearts beat feebly and whose vitality flickers low to
fading. That was like a delicious arrival of death, of death delicate
and serene, ivory white and pure, death desirable, grateful. Valentine
indeed believed that he was dying, there in the darkness beside his
friend, and, impersonally as it seemed, something of him, his brain
perhaps, seemed to be floating high up, as a bird floats over the sea,
and listening, and noting all that he did in this crisis. This attentive
spirit heard a strange movement of his soul in its bodily prison, heard
his soul stir, as if waking out of sleep, heard it shift, and rise up
slowly, noted its pause of hesitation. Then, as the vitality of the body
ebbed lower, there grew in the soul an excitement that aspired like a
leaping flame. It was as if a madman, prisoned in his narrow cell in a
vast asylum, secluded with his company of phantoms, heard the crackling
of the fire that devoured his habitation, and was stirred into an
ignorant and yet tumultuous passion. As the madman, with a childish,
increasing uneasiness, awed by the sinuous approach of the unseen fire,
might pace to and fro, round and round about his cell, so it seemed to
this poised, watching faculty of Valentine that his soul wandered in
its confined cell of the body, at first with the cushioned softness
of an animal, moving mechanically, driven by an endless and unmeaning
restlessness, then with an increasing energy, a fervour, a crescendo of
endeavour. What drove his soul? Surely it was struggling with an unseen
power. And the steady diminuendo of his bodily forces continued, until
he was a corpse in which a fury dwelt. That fury was the soul. He had a
strange fancy that he, unlike all the rest of humanity, would die, yet
still retain his spirit in its fleshy prison, and that the spirit
screamed and fought to be free on its wayward pilgrimage to heaven or
hell. All its brother and sister spirits had fled, since the beginnings
of time, from their bodies at the crisis of dissolution, had gone to
punishment or to reward. His soul alone was to meet a different fate,
was to be confined in a decaying body, to breathe physical corruption,
and to be at home in a crumbling dwelling to which no light, no air,
could ever penetrate. And the soul, which knows instinctively its eternal
_mêtier_, rebelled with a fantastic violence. And still, ever, the body
died. The pulses ceased from beating. The warm blood was mixed with snow
until it grew cold and gradually congealed in the veins. The little door
of the heart swung slower and slower upon its hinges, more feebly--more
feebly. And then there came a supreme moment. The soul of Valentine, with
a frantic vehemence, beat down at last its prison door, and, even as his
body died, escaped with a cry through the air.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Valentine, did you hear that strange cry?"

       *       *       *       *       *

"Valentine, what was it? I never heard any sound like that before, so
thin and small, and yet so horribly clear and piercing; neither like the
cry of a child nor of an animal, nor like the wail that could come from
any instrument. Valentine, now I see a little flame come from where you
are sitting. It's so tiny and faint. Don't you see it? It is floating
toward me. Now it is passing me. It's beyond. It's going. There, it has
vanished. Valentine! Valentine!"




BOOK II--JULIAN




