PART V--FLAMES




CHAPTER I

VALENTINE INVITES HIS GUESTS


Valentine and Julian sat together in the tentroom at night, as they sat
together many months ago, when Julian confessed his secret and Valentine
expressed his strange desire to have a different soul. Now it was deep
winter. The year was old. In three days it must die. It lay in the snow,
like some abandoned beggar waiting for the inevitable end. Some, who were
happy, would fain have succoured it and kept it with them. Others,
who were sad, said: "Let it go--this beggar. Already it has taken too
many alms from us." But neither the happy nor the sad could affect its
fate. So it lay in the snow and in the wind, upon its deathbed.

The tentroom had not been altered. Still the green draperies, veiled
walls, windows and door, meeting in a point at the ceiling. The fire
danced and shone. The electric moons gleamed with a twilight softness.
Only Rip was gone from the broad and cushioned divan upon which he had
loved to lie, half sleeping, half awake, while his master talked and
Julian listened or replied. The room was the same, and this very fact
emphasized the transformation of the two men who sat in it. They leaned
in their low chairs on each side of the fire, thinly veiled from time to
time in cigarette-smoke. No sound of London reached them in this small
room. Even the voice of the winter wind whispered and sang in vain.
Stifled by the thick draperies, it failed in its effort to gain their
attention, and sighed among the chimney-tops the chagrin of its soul. The
face of Julian was drawn and heavy. His eyes were downcast. His arms hung
over the cushioned elbows of his chair, in which he sat very low, in the
shrivelled posture of one desperately fatigued. From time to time he
opened his lips in a sort of dull gape, then shut his teeth tightly as if
he ground them together. The drooping lids of his eyes were covered with
little lines, and there were deeper lines at the corners of his mouth.
The colour of his face was the colour of the misty cloud that haunts the
steps of evening on an autumn day--grey, as if it clothed processes of
decay and desolation. Years seemed to crouch upon him like lean dogs upon
a doorstep. Within a few months he had stepped from boyhood to the
creaking threshold of premature age.

The change in Valentine was far less marked to a careless eye. There was
still a peculiar cleanness in his large blue eyes, a white delicacy in
his features. The lips of his mouth were red and soft, not dry, as were
the lips of Julian. The crisp gold of his hair caught the light, and his
lithe figure rested in his chair in a calm posture of pleasant ease. Yet
he, too, was changed. Expression of a new nature now no longer lurked
furtively in his face, but boldly, even triumphantly, asserted itself.
It did not shrink behind a soft smile, or glide and pass in a fleeting
gaiety, but stared upon the world with something of the hard and fixed
immobility of a mask. Every mask, whatever expression be painted upon
it, wears a certain aspect of shamelessness. Valentine's was a hard and
shameless face, although his features, if coarser than of old, were still
noble, and, in line, a silent legend of almost priestly intellectuality.

He was looking across at Julian, who held idly between his lax fingers
a letter written with violet ink upon pink paper, which had a little bird
stamped in the left-hand corner.

"When did you get it?" he said.

"Two or three days ago, I think. I can't remember. I can't remember
anything now," Julian answered heavily.

"And you have had two since?"

"Yes. And to-day she called."

"You were out?"

"Yes."

"She shows herself very exigent all of a sudden. She is afraid of losing
you. I told you long ago she cherished absurd ambitions with regard to
you. Do you intend to answer her notes?"

"Oh yes," Julian said. "Cuckoo has always been very fond of me; very
fond."

He glanced at the absurdly vulgar little bird in the corner of the
letter. "And that's something," he added slowly.

"You are weighed down with gratitude? No wonder. Are you grateful to
others who have always cared for you in a different way--unselfishly,
that is?"

"I don't seem to feel very much about anybody now," Julian said. "I do
such a lot. The more you do, the less you feel. Damnable life! All
cruelty. I can't feel satisfied. But there must be something; something
I haven't tried. I must find it," he said, almost fiercely, and, stirring
in a sudden energy, "I must find it--or--curse you, Val, why don't you
find it for me?"

Valentine laughed.

"The last novelty has failed? You are a very discontented sinner, Julian.
And yet London begins to think you too enterprising. I hear that Lady
Crichton is the last person to shut her doors against you. What did she
hear of?"

"How should I know?"

He laughed bitterly.

"She oughtn't to be particular. She used to receive Marr. I met him first
in her yellow drawing-room."

"London had not discussed him, perhaps. You are rapidly becoming a legend
and a warning. That is fame. To be the accepted warning for others."

"Or infamy; which is much the same thing."

"But you are only at the first posting-station of your journey,"
Valentine continued, looking at him with a smile. "If you are
dissatisfied, it is because you have not tasted yet half that strength
of the spring we once talked of. You have not completely thrown off
the foolish yoke of public opinion. The chains still jangle about you.
Cast them away and you will yet be happy."

"Shall I? Shall I, Valentine?"

The exhausted, worn, and weary figure leaned abruptly forward in its
chair. Julian's tired eyes glittered greedily.

"To be happy, I'd commit any crime," he said.

"Crime is merely opinion," Valentine answered. "Everything is opinion.
You will commit crimes probably. Most brave men do."

"But shall I be happy?"

"You are greedy, Julian, greedy of everything, knowledge of life, lust,
joy. You are never satisfied. That's because you and I fasted for so
long; and the greedy man is never quite happy while he is eating, for
he is always anticipating the next course. And, let philosophers say what
they will, happiness does not lie in anticipation. Go on eating. Pass on
from course to course. At last there will come a time, a beautiful time,
when your appetite will be satisfied and you will rest contented. But,
remember, not till you have journeyed through the whole _menu_, played
with your dessert and even drunk your black coffee. Go on, only go on.
Men and women are unhappy. They think it is because they have done too
much. They reproach themselves for a thousand things that they have done.
Fools! They are unhappy because they have not done enough. The text
which will haunt me on my deathbed will be: 'I have left undone those
things which I ought to have done.' Yes, during my long cursed years of
inaction, when I was called the Saint of Victoria Street. Ah! Julian, you
and I slept; we are awake now. You and I were dead; we are now alive. But
we are only at the beginning of our lives. We have those years, those
white and empty years, to drown in the waters of Lethe. They are like
monstrous children that should have been strangled almost ere they were
born, white, vacant children. And now, day by day, we are pressing them
down in the waters with our hands. At last they will sink. The waves will
flow over their haggard faces. The waves will sweep them away. Then we
shall be happy. We shall redeem those years on which the locust fed, and
we shall be happy."

"Yes, by God, we shall be happy, we will--we will be happy. Only teach me
to be happy, Valentine, anywhere, anyhow."

"Not with the lady of the feathers. She will not make you happy."

"Cuckoo? No! For she's terribly unhappy herself. Poor old Cuckoo. I
wonder what she's doing now."

"Searching in the snow for her fate," Valentine said, with a sneer.

       *       *       *       *       *

It was not so. Cuckoo was sitting alone in the little room of the
Marylebone Road looking a new spectre in the face, the spectre of
hunger, only shadowy as yet, scarcely defined, scarcely visible. And
the lady of the feathers wondered, as she gazed, if she and the spectre
must become better acquainted, clasp hands, kiss lips, be day-fellows
and night-fellows.

       *       *       *       *       *

"I am going to write to Cuckoo," Julian said a day later. "What shall I
say?"

Valentine hesitated.

"What have you thought of saying?" he asked.

"Oh, I don't know. First one thing, then another. Good-bye among the
number. That's what you wish me to say, Val, isn't it?"

He spoke in a listless voice, monotonous in inflection and lifeless
in timbre. The dominion of Valentine over him since the supper at the
Savoy had increased, consolidating itself into an undoubted tyranny,
which Julian accepted, carelessly, thoughtlessly, a prey to the internal
degradation of his mind. Once he had only been nobly susceptible, a fine
power. Now he was drearily weak, an ungracious disability. But with his
weakness came, as is usual, a certain lassitude which even resembled
despair, an indifference peculiar to the slave, how opposed to the
indifference peculiar to the autocrat. Valentine recognized in the voice
the badge of serfdom, even more than in the question, and he smiled with
a cold triumph. He had intended telling Julian now, once for all, to
break with the lady of the feathers, of whom even yet he stood in vague
fear. But the question, the voice of Julian, gave him pause, slid into
his soul a new and bizarre desire, child of the strange intoxication of
power which was beginning to grip him, and which the doctor had remarked.
If Julian broke with Cuckoo, repulsed her forever into the long street
that was her pent and degraded world, would not the sharp salt of
Valentine's triumph be taken from him? Would not the wheels of his
Juggernaut car fail to do their office in his sight--there was the
point!--upon a precious victim? The lady of the feathers thus
deliberately abandoned by Julian would suffer perhaps almost to the
limit of her capability of pain, but Valentine would have lost sight
of her in the dark, and though he would have conquered that spectral
opposition which she had whimsically offered to him--he laughed to
himself now, thinking of his fear of it--he would not see that greatest
vision, the flight of his enemy. These thoughts flashed through his mind,
moving him to an answer that astonished Julian.

"Good-bye!" he said. "Why should I wish that?"

"You said the other day at the Savoy that she hated you; that you and she
must have a battle unless I chose between you."

"I was laughing."

The lifelessness left Julian's voice as he exclaimed:

"Valentine! But you were--"

"Sober, and you were not. Can you deny it?"

Julian was silent.

"I so little meant that nonsense," Valentine continued, "that I have
conceived a plan. To-morrow is the last night of the old year. The doctor
asked us to spend it with him. We refused. Providence directed that
refusal, for now we are at liberty to celebrate the proper occasion
for burying hatchets by burying our particular hatchet. The lady of the
feathers, your friend, my enemy, shall see the new year in here, in this
tentroom, where long ago we--you and I--with how ill success, sought to
exchange our souls."

Julian looked utterly astonished at this proposition.

"Cuckoo wouldn't come here," he began.

"So you said once before. But she came then, and she will come now."

"And then the doctor! If he gets to hear of it! We said we were dining
out."

Valentine's hard smile grew yet harder, and his eyes sparkled eagerly.

"I'll arrange that," he said. "The doctor shall come here too."

It seemed indeed as if he meant that his triumph should culminate on this
final night of the year, his year. He laughed Julian's astonishment at
this vagary aside, sat down and wrote the two notes of invitation, and
then went out with Julian, saying:

"Julian, come out with me. You remember what I said about the greedy man?
Come; Fate shall present you with another course, one more step towards
your _café noir_ and--happiness. _Voilà!_"

Valentine was right in his supposition that both the lady of the feathers
and the doctor would accept his invitation, but he did not understand
the precise motive which prompted their acceptance. Nor did he much care
to understand it. Cuckoo, Doctor Levillier! After all, what were they
to him now? Spectators of his triumph. Interesting, therefore, to a
certain extent, as an unpaying audience may be interesting to an actor.
Interesting, inasmuch as they could contribute to swell the bladder of
his vanity, and follow in procession behind his chariot wheels. But he no
longer cared to divine the shades of their emotions, or to busy himself
in fathoming their exact mental attitudes in relation to himself. So he
thought, touched perhaps with a certain delirium, though not with the
delirium of insanity attributed to him by Doctor Levillier.

The doctor had intended celebrating the last night of the year in Harley
Street with Cuckoo and the two young men. The refusal of the latter put
an end to the opening of his plan of campaign in this strange battle,
and he was greatly astonished when he received Valentine's invitation.
Still, he had no hesitation in accepting it.

"So," he said to himself, as he read the note, "we join issue within the
very wall of the enemy. Poor, deluded, twisted Valentine! that I should
have to call him, to think of him as an enemy! We begin the fight within
the shadow of our opponent's tent."

Literally that was the fact.

Cuckoo's thoughts were less definite, more tinged with passion, less
shaped by the hands of intellect. They were as clouds, looming large,
yet misty, hanging loose in torn fragments now, and now merging into
indistinguishable fog that yet seemed pregnant with possibilities.
Poor thoughts, vague thoughts; yet they pressed upon her brain until
her tired head ached. And they stole down to her heart, and that ached
too, and hoped and then despaired--then hoped again.




