CHAPTER VIII

THE DOCTOR RECEIVES A VISIT FROM MRS. WILSON


Doctor Levillier grew more puzzled day by day. His observation of
Valentine taught him only one thing certainly, and beyond possibility of
doubt and that was the death of the youth he had once loved, the living
presence of a youth whom he could not love, whom he could only shrink
from and even fear. He held to the theory that this radical and ghastly
change must be caused by some obscure dementia, some secret overturning
of the mind; but he was obliged to confess to himself that he held to
it only because, otherwise, he would be floating helpless, and without a
spar, upon a tide of perplexity and confusion. He could not honestly say
that he was able to put his finger upon any definite signs of madness
exhibited by Valentine, any that would satisfy a mad-doctor. He could
only say that Valentine's character had been strangely beautiful and was
now strangely evil, and that the soul of Julian was following rapidly the
soul of Valentine. The more closely he watched Valentine, the more
astounded did he become and the more eager to detach Julian from him. But
the strangest thing of all, as the doctor allowed in one of his frequent
self-communings, was, that though formerly he had loved Valentine
better than Julian, it never occurred to him that the work of rescue
might be undertaken on behalf of the former. His mind dismissed the new
Valentine into a region that was beyond his scope and power. He felt
instinctively that here was a soul, a will, that his soul could not turn
from its ends or detach from its pursuits. The new Valentine was a law to
himself. What moved the doctor to such horror was that the new Valentine
was a law to Julian. And there was something peculiarly dreadful in the
idea which he held, that Julian, once under the beautiful influence of
Valentine's sanity, was now under the baneful influence of his insanity.
The doctor had gone the length of deciding, in his own mind, that
Valentine's sane period of life and insane period lay one on each side
of a fixed gulf, and that fixed gulf was his long trance succeeding the
final sitting of the two young men. This conclusion was arrived at with
ease, once the theory of a subtle lunacy was accepted as a fact. For,
on sending his mind back along the ways of recollection, the doctor was
able to recall hints of the new Valentine dating from that very night,
but never before it. The first hint was Rip's manifested fear, and this
led on to others which have been already mentioned. Having made up his
mind that this trance was the motive power of Valentine's supposed
madness, the doctor sought in every direction to increase his knowledge
on the subject of simulations of death by the human body. He looked up
again the cases of innumerable hysterical patients whom he had himself
treated, sometimes with success, sometimes with failure. He consulted
other doctors, of course without mentioning the object of his research.
He endeavoured to apply to Valentine's case standards by which he was
quickly able to form a satisfactory opinion on the cases of others. He
even went so far as to examine as closely as possible into the history of
table-turning, the uses ascribed to it by its votaries, and the results
obtained from it by credible--as opposed to merely credulous--witnesses.
But he found no case that seemed in any way analogous to the strange case
of Valentine. As was only natural, the doctor did not forget the
possibility of hypnotism, which had struck him during his second
conversation with the lady of the feathers. Her confused declarations on
the subject of Valentine and Marr being one person, if they were really
a true account of what Valentine had said to her--which seemed very
doubtful--could only be made clear by accepting as a fact that the dead
Marr had laid a hypnotic spell upon Valentine, which continued to exist
actively long after its weaver slept in the grave. But Marr and Valentine
had never met. This fact seemed fully established. Valentine had always
denied any knowledge of him before the trance. Julian had always assumed
that only he of the two friends had any acquaintance with Marr. And
again, when the doctor, one day, quite casually, said to Valentine, "By
the way, you never did meet Marr, did you?" Valentine replied, "Never,
till I saw him lying dead in the Euston Road."

The doctor could see no ray of light in the darkness that could guide him
to the clue of the mystery. He could only say to himself, "It must be, it
must be an obscure and horrible madness," and keep his theory to himself.
Sometimes, as he sat pondering over the whole affair, he smiled, half
sadly, half sarcastically. For the event brought home to his ready
modesty the sublime ignorance of all clever and instructed men, taught
him to wonder, as he had often wondered, that there exists in such a
world as ours such a fantastic growth as the flourishing weed, conceit.

Another matter that puzzled him greatly was this: As the days went on,
and as Valentine grew--and he did grow--more certain of his own power for
evil over Julian, and as, consequently, he took less and less pains to
hide the truth of his personality from the knowledge of the doctor, the
latter was frequently seized with the appalled sensation which had long
ago overtaken him when he was followed in Regent Street and in Vere
Street. This recurrence of sensation, and the certainty forced gradually
upon the doctor that it was caused by the presence of Valentine,
naturally led him to wonder whether it were possible that the man who
had dogged his steps, and eventually fled from him, could have been
Valentine himself. If that were indeed so, then this madness--if it did
exist--must surely have come upon Valentine before the trance. Nothing
but a madness could have led him thus in the night hours to steal out
in pursuit of the friend who had just left his house and company. But the
doctor knew of no means by which he could satisfy himself of Valentine's
movements on the night in question. To ask Valentine himself would be to
court a lie. Once the doctor thought for a moment of having recourse to
Wade. But then he remembered that the butler did not sleep in the flat,
and had no doubt long gone home before the event of the night in
question. So, again, he was confronted with a dead-wall, beyond which
he could see no clear view or comprehensible country.

About this time there happened an event which struck strongly upon
the doctor's mind. He was one day, as usual, in his consulting-room,
receiving a multitude of patients, when his man-servant entered with
a card on a salver.

"A lady, sir, who wishes to see you. She has no appointment."

The doctor took the card. On it was printed merely "Mrs. Wilson."

"I cannot see the lady to-day," he said, "unless she can call again after
five o'clock. But I can see her then, or to-morrow morning at ten. Ask
her which she would prefer."

After a moment's absence Lawler returned.

"The lady will come at five o'clock this evening, sir."

"Very well."

And the doctor bent his mind once more steadily upon his work.

At five o'clock the door opened, and a tall, square, and strong-looking
woman, dressed in black, walked quietly into the room. She bowed to the
doctor and sat down.

"I am glad you could see me to-day," she said. "I leave London early
to-morrow morning. I hate London."

She spoke in a full and rather rich voice, with a slightly burring
accent, and looked the doctor full in the face with a pair of large and
sensible grey eyes. Nature had certainly built her to be one of those
towers of women, strong for themselves, for their sex, and often for men
also, who possess a peculiar power, given in quite full measure to no
male creature, of large sympathy and lofty composure. But the doctor saw
at a glance that some adverse fate had disagreed with the intentions of
nature, and fought against them with success. Circumstances must have
arisen in this woman's life to break down her unusual equipment of
courage and resolution, or if not to break it down, to dint and batter
the shield she carried over her heart and life. For her fine face was
lined with care, her naturally firm mouth was tormented by an apparently
irresistible quivering, that, once prompted by long and painful emotion,
had now become habitual and mechanical, and her eyes, although they met
the eyes of the doctor with a peculiar large reception and return of
scrutiny, held in their depths that hunted expression which is only
developed by long agony, either physical or mental. So much the doctor
read in a glance before his patient began to detail her symptoms. She
detailed them with a certain obvious shame and a slow conquering of
reticence that made her speak very deliberately.

She began by saying, in no insulting manner, that she had kept clear of
doctors during almost the whole of her life; that she had meant to keep
clear of them till her death.

"For I was born with a constitution of iron," she said, "and I have
always lived on the most sanitary principles, and with the utmost
simplicity. So I hoped to go to my grave without much suffering.
Certainly I never expected to have to consult any one on the ground
of nervous breakdown. Yet that is exactly why I am here with you at
this moment. The circumstances of my life have been too much for me,
I suppose."

There was a grave pathos in her voice as she uttered the last words.

"At any rate," she continued, after a pause, "I would like you to help
me if you can. The cause of my breakdown is remote enough, several years
old. I had a tremendous burden to bear then, and I bore it, as I thought
bravely, for a long time. At last it grew intolerable, and then I
succeeded at last in getting it removed, in getting rid of it, you
understand, altogether. The odd thing is, that while I was bearing my
burden my strength did not fail me, my courage did not utterly give way.
Only when the burden was removed did I faint because of it. My trouble
was partially physical--I had to endure grave physical cruelty at that
time--but chiefly mental. My agony of mind ran a race with my agony of
body, and won easily. It's generally so with women, I believe?"

She waited as if for a reply.

"Yes, it is often so," Doctor Levillier answered.

"Ever since the burden was lifted from my shoulders," she continued, "I
have been getting steadily worse. Each month, each year, I became more
and more degraded in my cowardice, my fear of trifles, even of things
which have no existence at all. All this is perhaps--perhaps--peculiarly
painful to me because I am naturally, you must understand, what sane
people call a strong-minded woman. I had originally complete physical
courage, didn't know the meaning of the word 'fear,' despised those who
did, I am afraid. So you see this is very bad for me; it cuts so deep
into my mind, you see. It makes me hate and loathe myself so. I sleep
badly, and have the usual symptoms of nervous collapse, I believe. I'm
strong one moment, feeble, no good at all, the next. My appetite has long
been bad, and so on. But it isn't that sort of thing I mind. I could
fight with that well enough. It's my horrible deterioration of mind that
troubles me, that has brought me here, to you, in spite of my hatred of
London, of every city. It was in a city, though not in London, that I
bore that burden I told you of. It doesn't seem possible to me, but I'm
told, and I read, that my mind diseased may be an effect, and that the
cause may lie in my body. That's why I come to you. Doctor Levillier,
root out the disease if you can."

She ended speaking almost with passion, her lips trembling all the time
and her eyes never leaving his face. Then she added with a curious
characteristic abruptness:

"I will tell you that I've plenty of money. Lack of funds is no weapon
against my return to health--if my return is in any way possible."

Doctor Levillier smiled slightly.

"You are anticipating the usual 'long-sea voyage' formula, I see," he
said.

"Possibly."

"I should not prescribe it for you off-hand," he said. "Sea air is not a
specific for all nervous complaints, as some people seem to think. You
have no bodily pain?"

"No. I often wish I had."

"What you tell me about your gradual collapse coming on after the crisis
of your troubles was over, and not during it, does not surprise me. Nor
am I puzzled by your malady increasing if, as I suppose, you are living
idly."

"I am. I have no courage to do anything or see anybody."

"Exactly. You live in a sort of hiding."

"Why--yes. You see, once I was well known to a good many people. My
troubles became known to them too. I could not get rid of that burden I
told you of except by blazoning them abroad. I shrink from meeting any
people now. Therefore I live very quietly. I--"

Suddenly she seemed to grow tired of the half measures in frankness that
had so far governed her communications. She spread forth her hands with
a very characteristic, ample gesture of sudden confidence.

"I think I'll tell you exactly what it was," she said. "You may have
read of me. Long ago, some years at least, I was obliged to take action
against my husband, a Mr. Wilson, who afterwards assumed the name of
Marr. I charged him with cruelty, won my case, and obtained a judicial
separation."

Then Dr. Levillier knew that he looked on the former wife of the strange,
cruel, dead man, whose influence had entered into the lives of his two
friends.

"You may have heard of my case?" Mrs. Wilson said.

"Certainly I have."

"It was bad, even from a newspaper point of view, I believe. People
congratulated me on getting rid of a brute, and thought I was all right
and ought to be happy. But the newspapers and the world never knew what
I had gone through, the real horrors, before I insisted on release. You
started when I called my husband a brute just now, Dr. Levillier; I
noticed it. The phrase hurt you, coming from any wife about any husband.
I know why, a boy once told me that his mother was always drunk. He hurt
me then into hating him for the rest of my days. But I called a stranger
a brute, not the man I loved and married, not the man I loved after I
married him. Dr. Levillier, do you believe in possessions?"

She had been gradually getting excited while she spoke, and, on the last
words, she leaned forward in her chair and struck her hand down in her
lap.

"Do you mean possession by the devil?" said the doctor, very quietly,
opposing a strong calm to her intensity.

"Yes. I do. My experience obliges me to. I knew, for a year before I
married him, I married, I lived for two years after I married him, with
a man who was my conception of what a man should be, strong, gentle,
tender, brave, a hero to me. I got rid of a devil, after I had endured
two years of torture at his hands. It is no use to tell me those two
distinct men I knew were one and the same man. My soul, my heart, declare
that it's a lie. There were such differences. My husband loved music;
this man hated it; yet had the power to use it as a means of tormenting
me. But I needn't dwell on the evidences of change. Suffice it to say
that the thing that crushed me, the thing that has brought me down into
the dust where I am, dust of cowardice, and weakness, and impotence to
do or to be anything, was the horror of awakening to a knowledge of that
change, of having to live as wife with this devil, whom I knew not, who
was a stranger to me. Only the features were my husband's, nothing else.
I got rid of a stranger. The man found dead in the Euston Road was a
stranger whom I hated, nothing more to me than that."

As she spoke, in a deep, resonant voice that pulsated through the room,
Dr. Levillier recalled, almost with a thrill, Julian's words to him in
Harley Street, on the night of the _fracas_ with the mastiffs, words
spoken about the dead Marr: "His face dead was the most absolutely direct
contradiction possible to his face alive. He was not the same man." He
recalled these words and the thought shot through his mind: "Did the man
this woman loved return at the moment of death?"

And that change in Valentine!

He said to Mrs. Wilson, betraying none of the excitement that he really
felt:

"You spoke of cruelty. You had to endure physical cruelty?"

"Worse, to see it endured by others, dumb, helpless creatures, by my own
dog."

A great shudder ran through her.

"I can't talk of it," she said. "But it made me what I am. Can you do
anything for me? Why do you look at me like that?"

For, at her word about the dog, the doctor had fallen into a tense
reverie, looking steadily upon her, yet as one who sees little or
nothing. He roused himself quickly.

"Tell me something of the symptoms of your mental malady," he said.
"These fancies that distress you, of what nature are they?"

She told him. Many of them were symptoms well known to all those who have
suffered acutely after some great shock, imagined sounds, movements, and
so forth. The doctor listened. He had heard such a story many times
before.

"I, _I_ am full of these ghastly, these degrading fancies," Mrs. Wilson
cried, with a sort of large indignation against herself, and yet an
uncertain terror. "Is it not--?"

She suddenly stopped speaking.

"There's some one at your door," she said, after a second or two of
apparent attention to some sound without.

"I dare say. A patient."

At this moment a voice, which Dr. Levillier immediately recognized as the
voice of Valentine, was audible in the hall.

Mrs. Wilson turned suddenly very pale, and began to tremble and gnaw her
nether lip with her teeth in an access of nervous disturbance.

"In God's name tell me who that is," she whispered, turning her head in
the direction of the door. "It can't be--it can't be--" Valentine's voice
rose a little louder. "It _is_ his voice."

"Fancy!" the doctor said firmly. "It is the voice of a friend of mine,
Mr. Valentine Cresswell."

Mrs. Wilson said nothing. She was trying to force herself to believe
the evidence of another's sense against her own. Such a task is always
difficult. At last she looked up and said:

"There, doctor, there you have an exhibition of my illness. It's horrible
to me. Can you cure it?"

"I will try," the doctor answered.

But he found it very difficult just at that moment to say the three
words quietly, to let Valentine go after leaving his message, without
confronting him with this haggard patient who was entering the pool of
Bethesda.




