CHAPTER VI

CLEAR WEATHER


"Damn that mat!" he exclaimed. "I say, Cuckoo, who the--?" The question
faded on his lips as he saw Doctor Levillier, on whom he gazed with a
vacant surprise that, added to the unsteadiness of his movement upon
them, spoke his condition very plainly.

"You, doctor! Well, I'm damned! What are you here for?"

"To see Miss Bright," the doctor said, coolly.

He had pushed forward a chair quickly with his foot. Julian collapsed in
it by the table. Beads of the fog lay all over his long greatcoat and
upon his hat, which he had not yet taken off. His face was flushed and
dull.

"It's an infernal evening," he said. "You doctoring Cuckoo, eh?"

"I have been talking to Miss Bright."

"Oh, all right. I don't mind. Cuckoo, help me off with this coat. There's
a good girl."

She obeyed without a word. When the coat was off Julian threw himself
back in the chair and heaved a long sigh. His hat fell onto the floor
with a bang, but he did not seem to notice it. His face was moody and
miserable.

"Molly's thrown me over," he said.

Cuckoo caught her breath sharply and stole a glance at the doctor.

"Have some tea?" she said.

"No; a brandy and soda."

"Haven't got it. You must do with tea."

She rang the bell and ordered it despite his grumblings. Mrs. Brigg made
no difficulty. Julian had long ago soothed her delicate susceptibilities
with gold.

So, Cuckoo, oddly shy and excited, made tea for the doctor and Julian.
The tea cleared the latter's fogged brain a little, but he was still
morose and self-centred. He had evidently come to pour some woes out
to Cuckoo and was restrained by the presence of the doctor, at whom he
looked from time to time with an expression that was near to disfavour.
But the doctor began to chat easily and cordially, and Julian gradually
thawed.

"I suppose you know Rip's dead," he said presently. "Went out the other
night and got frozen in the snow. Poor little beggar. Val's awfully cut
up about it."

"Is he?" said the doctor.

"Yes. Dear old Val. Dev'lish hard Rip's never making it up with him
again, wasn't it? Rip didn't know a good fellow, did he, doctor?"

"He was devoted to Valentine once," the doctor said.

"Ah, but he changed. Dogs are just like women, just like women, never the
same two days together. Curse them."

He appeared to have forgotten Cuckoo's presence, and she sat listening
eagerly, quite unmoved by the dagger thrust at her sex.

"Dogs don't usually change. Their faithfulness bears everything without
breaking."

"Except a trance, then," Julian said, still with a wavering in-and-out
stolidity, at the same time mournful and almost ludicrous.

"That trance did for Rip; did for him, I tell you. He never knew poor old
Val again. As if he thought him another man after that, another man."

The doctor's eyes met Cuckoo's. She had a teacup at her rouged lips, and
had paused in the act of drinking, fascinated by the words that wound so
naturally into the legend of change which she knew and knew not.

"As if Val wasn't just the same," Julian pursued, shaking his head
slowly. "Just the same."

"You think so?" the doctor said, quickly.

"Eh?"

"You think that trance made no difference to him?"

"Why, how should it?"

Cuckoo drank her tea hastily and put the cup down.

"How should it?" Julian repeated, as if with a heavy challenge.

"It might in many ways, to his health--"

"He's stronger than ever he was."

"Or to his mind, his nature. You see no change there that might have
frightened Rip?"

"Not I. He's more of a man, good old Val, even than he was."

"Ah! You acknowledge there is a change."

"Give me some more tea, Cuckoo," Julian said, thrusting his cup towards
her. "Make it strong. It's picking me up." He sat forward in his chair
and began to light a cigar, keeping his eyes on the doctor.

"Well, if you call that a change; to get like other men. Old Val was a
saint. I loved him then, but I love him ten times more now he's--a--the
other thing, you know. Ten times more. He knows the world now, and his
advice is worth having. I'd follow him anywhere. He can't go wrong. Takes
care of himself, and of me too. I might have been anything--anything, but
for him. Instead of what I am--"

He drew himself up with some pride, and pulled at the cup which Cuckoo
pushed towards him.

"I'm just what Val makes me; just what he makes me," he said, taking
obvious joy in the thought. "Val can make me do anything. You know that,
doctor?"

"Yes. Then you have changed with him, become more of a man, as you call
it, with him. Is that so, Julian?"

"I suppose so."

Julian was drinking his tea, which had become very strong from standing.

"And are you happier than you were before?"

The doctor spoke insistently and gravely. Cuckoo had taken Jessie onto
her lap and now stroked the little dog quickly and softly with a thin,
fluttering hand. Julian seemed trying to think, to dive into his mind and
discover its real feelings.

"I suppose so," he said presently. "But who's happy? I should like to
know. Cuckoo isn't. Are you, Cuckoo?"

It seemed a cruel question, addressed to that spectre of girlhood.

"I dunno," she answered swiftly. "It don't matter much either way."

"She may be," the doctor said. "And you were happy, Julian."

The tea had certainly cleared the boy's brain. His manner was more
sensible, and the heavy sensuality had gone from his eyes. Though he
still looked haggard and wretched, he was no longer the mere wreck of
vice he had seemed when he drifted into the little room out of the fog.

"Was I?" he said slowly. "It seems a devil of a time ago."

The doctor's heart warmed to these two young creatures, children to
him, yet who had seen so much, gone so far down into the depths that
lie beneath the feet of life. He thought in that moment that he could
willingly give up all his own peace of mind, success, fame, restfulness
of heart, to set them straight up, face to face with strength and purity
once more. One was well born, educated, still handsome, the other a
so-called lost woman, and originally only a very poor and hopelessly
ignorant girl. Yet their community of misery and sorrow put them side
by side, like two children who gather violets in a lane together, or
drown together in some strong, sad river.

"It is not so long, Julian," he said. "Only before Valentine's trance."

Julian caught him up quickly.

"Why d'you say that, doctor?"

"Why? Simply because it is truth."

"You're always at that trance. I believe it's just because you told us
not to sit again. But there was no harm done."

"You are sure of that?"

As he put the question the doctor's mind was on a hunt round that sleep
and waking. He had gradually come to think that night a night of some
strange crisis, through which Valentine had passed from what he had
been to what he was. Yet his knowledge could not set at the door of that
unnatural slumber the blame of all that followed it. His imagination
might, but not his knowledge. He wondered whether Julian might not help
him to elucidation.

"Sure? of course! Why not? Valentine's all right. I'm all right. Rip's
the only one gone. And if he'd only stayed in the house that night he'd
be all right too."

"No, Addison."

Julian stared at this flat contradiction.

"Not?"

"Rip never went out of the house."

"But he died in the snow."

"No," the doctor said quietly. "He died in your dining-room, of
fear--fear of his old master, Valentine."

"What?" said Julian, gripping the table with his right hand. "Val had
been at him?"

In two or three simple, straightforward words, the doctor described the
death of Rip. When he had finished Cuckoo gave a little cry, and clasped
the astonished and squirming Jessie close in her arms. Julian's brow
clouded.

"He might have left Rip alone," he said. "It's odd dogs can't bear Val
now."

"Again since that trance," the doctor said.

Julian looked at him with acute irritation, but said nothing. Then,
turning his eyes on Cuckoo, who was still hugging Jessie, he snapped his
fingers at the little dog and called its name. Cuckoo extended her arms,
holding Jessie, to Julian, and he took the small creature gently. And as
he took her he bent forward and gazed long and deeply into Cuckoo's eyes.
She trembled and flushed, half with pleasure, half with a nervous
consciousness of the doctor's presence.

"Oh, why do you?" she murmured, turning her head away. The action seemed
to make Julian aware that perhaps his manner was odd, and his subsequent
glance at the doctor was very plainly, and even rudely, explanatory
of a wish to be alone with Cuckoo. The doctor read its meaning and
resolved to go away. With the quick observation and knowledge of men
which long years of training had given to him, he saw that, strangely
enough, the only creature whose influence could in any way cope with the
influence of Valentine was not himself, who once had been as a seer to
the two young men, but the thin, spectral, weary, painted Cuckoo. There,
in that small room, with the long murmur of London outside, sat these two
human beings, desolate woman, vice-ridden man, both fallen down in the
deep mire, both almost whelmed in the flood of Fate. And he stood strong,
faithful, clean-souled, brave-hearted, yet impotent, regarding them. For
some power willed it that misery alone could hold out a helping hand to
misery, that vice and degradation must rise to thrust back vice and
degradation. The fallen creature was to be the protector, the unredeemed
to be the redeemer. Doctor Levillier knew this when he saw Julian's
long glance into the hollow eyes of Cuckoo. And he thrilled with the
knowledge. It seemed to him a great demonstration of the root, the core,
of divine pity which he believed to be the centre of the scheme of the
world. Round this centre revolved wheels within wheels of cruelty, of
agony, of ruthless passions and of lawless bitterness. Yet they radiated
from pity. They radiated from love. How it was so he could not tell, and
there the pessimist had him by the throat. But that it was so he felt in
his inmost heart, and never more than now, when the tired boy sneered at
him, who was an old friend, clean of life, gentle of nature, and turned
to this girl, this thing that loathsome men played with and scorned.
Cuckoo flushed and trembled; this divine pity outpainted her rouge, and
shook that body which had so often betrayed itself to destroyers. This
divine pity gave to her, who had lost all, the power to find freedom for
another soul that lay in bondage.

The doctor gazed for an instant at the boy and girl, and was deeply
moved. His lips breathed a word that was a prayer, for Julian, for the
lady of the feathers.

Then he got up.

"I have to go," he said.

Julian said nothing; Cuckoo flushed again, and accompanied the doctor to
the hall door. When she had opened it, and they looked out, it was very
cold, but the fog had lifted, and was floating away to reveal a sky full
of stars, which always seem to shine more brightly upon frost. The doctor
took the girl's hand.

"I see you in clear weather," he said.

"You don't--you don't think as he'll--as I'll--" stammered Cuckoo,
glancing awkwardly towards the lighted doorway of the little
sitting-room, and then at the doctor. The church clock striking
7:30 pointed the application of the hesitating murmur. It was
unconventionally late for an afternoon call.

"It'll be all right, you know that?" said the lady of the feathers.

"Yes, I know that," he answered. "You have to fight, I feel that; only
you can do it. You have to fight this--this--" and here the doctor's
loyalty spoke, for he could not betray even this new Valentine,--"this
strange madness of Valentine's. Pit your will against his, and conquer
for Julian's sake."

"Will," said Cuckoo. "That's what he says I can't have."

"Won't you pray to have it given you?" said the little doctor.

Cuckoo looked at him, wondering. Then she said:

"I believe I could fight better 'n pray."

"Sometimes battle is the greatest of all prayers," said the doctor.

The iron gate clicked. He was gone. Cuckoo cast an oblique glance up
at the stars before she shut the door, and retraced her steps down the
passage.




