CHAPTER I

THE TRANCE


Gaining no reply to his call, Julian grew alarmed. He sprang up from
the table and turned on the electric light. Valentine was leaning back
nervelessly in his chair. His face was quite pale and cold. His lips were
slightly parted. His eyes were wide open and stared before him without
expression. His head hung far back over the edge of his chair. He looked
exactly like a man who had just died, and died in a convulsion. For
though the lips were parted, the teeth set tightly together grinned
through them, and the hands were intensely contracted into fists. Julian
seized Valentine in his arms, lifted the drooping body from the chair
and laid it out at length on the divan. He put a pillow under the head,
which fell on it grotesquely and lay sideways, still smiling horribly at
nothing. Then he poured out a glass of brandy and strove to force some
of it between Valentine's teeth, dashed water in the glaring eyes, beat
the air with a fan which he tore from the mantelpiece. All was in vain.
There came no sign of returning life. Then Julian caught Valentine's
hands in his and sought to unclench the rigid, cold fingers. He laid
his hand on the heart of his friend. No pulsation beat beneath his
anxious touch. Then a great horror overtook him. Suddenly he felt a
conviction that Valentine had died beside him in the dark, had died
sitting up in his chair by the table. The cry he had heard, so thin, so
strange and piercing, the attenuated flame that he had seen, were the
voice and the vision of the flying soul which he had loved, seeking its
final freedom, _en route_ to the distant spheres believers dream of and
sceptics deny.

"Valentine! Valentine!" he cried again, with the desperate insistence of
the hopeless. But the cold, staring creature upon the green divan did not
reply. With a brusque and fearful movement Julian shut the eyelids. Would
they ever open again? He knelt upon the floor, leaning passionately over
his friend, or that which had been his friend. He bent his head down on
the silent breast, listening. Surely if Valentine were alive he would
show it by some sign, the least stir, breath, shiver, pulse. There was
none. Julian might have been clasping stone or iron. If he could only
know for certain whether Valentine were really dead. Yet he dared not
leave him alone and go to seek aid. Suddenly a thought struck him. In the
hall of the flat was a handle which, when turned in a certain direction,
communicated with one of those wooden and glass hutches in which sleepy
boy-messengers harbour at night. Julian sprang to this handle, set the
communicator in motion, then ran back into the tentroom. His intention
was to write a note to Dr. Levillier. The writing-table was so placed
that, sitting at it, his back would be turned to that silent figure on
the divan. A shiver ran over him at the bare thought of such a blind
posture. No, he must face that terror, once so dear. He caught up a
pen and a sheet of note paper, and, swerving round, was about to write,
holding the paper on his knee, when the electric bell rang. The boy had
been very quick in his run from the hutch. Julian laid down the paper and
went to let the boy in. His knees shook as he descended the dark, echoing
stairs and opened the door. There stood the messenger, a rosy-faced
urchin of about twelve, with rather sleepy brown eyes.

"Come up," Julian said, and he hurried back to the flat, the little boy
violently emulating his giant stride up the stairs and arriving flushed
and panting at the door. Julian, who was entirely abstracted in his
agitation, made for the tentroom without another word to the boy, seized
pen and paper and began to write, urgently requesting Dr. Levillier to
come at once to see Valentine. Abruptly a childish voice intruded itself
upon him.

"Lor', sir," it said. "Is the gentleman ill?"

Julian glanced up and found that the little boy had innocently followed
him into the tentroom, and was now standing near him, gazing with a
round-eyed concern upon the stretched figure on the divan.

"Yes," Julian replied; "ill, very ill. I want you to go for a doctor."

The boy approached the divan, moved apparently by the impelling curiosity
of tender years. Julian stopped writing and watched him. He leaned down
and looked at the face, at the inertia of hands and limbs. As he raised
himself up from a calm and close inspection he saw Julian staring at him.
He shook his round bullet head, on which the thick hair grew in an
unparted stubble.

"No, I don't think he's ill, sir," he remarked, with treble conviction.

"Then why does he lie like that?"

"I expect it's because he's dead, sir," the child replied, with grave
serenity.

This unbiased testimony in favour of his fears came to Julian's mind like
a storm.

"How do you know?" he exclaimed, with a harsh voice.

"Lor', sir," the boy said, not without a certain pride, "I knows a corpse
when I sees it. My father died come a fortnight ago. See that?"

And he indicated, with stumpy finger, the black band upon his left arm.

"Well, father looked just like the gentleman."

Julian was petrified by this urchin's intimacy with death. It struck
him as utterly vicious and terrible. A horror of the rosy-faced little
creature, with good-conduct medals gleaming on its breast, came over him.

"Hush!" he said.

"All right, sir; but you take my word for it, the gentleman's dead."

Julian finished the note, thrust it into an envelope, and addressed it to
the doctor.

"Run and get a cab and take that at once to Harley Street," he said.

The boy smiled.

"I like cab-riding," he said.

"And," Julian caught his arm, "that gentleman is not dead. He's alive,
I tell you; only in a faint, and alive."

The boy looked into Julian's face with the pitying grin of superior
knowledge of the world.

"Ah, sir, you didn't see father," he said.

Then he turned and bounded eagerly down the stairs, in a hurry for the
cab-ride.

Loneliness and desolation descended like a cloud over Julian when he had
gone, for the frank belief of the boy, who cared nothing, struck like an
arrow of truth to his heart, who cared everything. Was Valentine indeed
dead? He would not believe it, for such a belief would bring the world in
ruins about his feet. Such a belief would people his soul with phantoms
of despair and of wickedness. Could he not cry out against God in
blasphemy, if God took his friend from him? The tears rushed into his
eyes, as he sat waiting there in the night. As before a drowning man,
scenes of the last five years flashed before him, painted in vital
colours,--scenes of his life with Valentine,--then scenes of all that
might have been had he never met Valentine, never known his strange
mastering influence. Could that influence have been given only to be
withdrawn? Of all the inexplicable things of life the most inexplicable
are the abrupt intrusions and disappearances of those lovely
manifestations which give healing to tired hearts, to the wounded
soldiers of the campaign of the world. Why are they not permitted to
stay? Bitterly Julian asked that question. Of all the men whom he knew,
only Valentine did anything for him. Must Valentine, of all men, be the
one who might not stay with him? The rest he could spare. He could not
spare Valentine. He could not. The impotence of his patience tortured him
physically, like a disease. He sprang up from his chair. He must do
something at once to know the truth. What could he do? He had no
knowledge of medicine. He could not tabulate physical indications, and
he would not trust to his infernal instinct. For it was that which cried
to him again and again, "Valentine is dead." What--what could he do?

A thought darted into his mind. Dogs are miraculously instinctive. Rip
might know what he did not certainly know, might divine the truth. He ran
into Valentine's bedroom.

"Rip," he cried; "Rip!"

The little dog sprang from its lonely sleep and accompanied Julian
energetically to the tentroom. Observing Valentine's attitude, it sprang
upon the couch beside him, licked his white face eagerly, then, gaining
no response, showed hesitation, alarm. It began to investigate the body
eagerly with its sharp nose, snuffing at head, shoulders, legs, feet.
Still it seemed in doubt, and paused at length with one fore foot planted
on Valentine's breast, the other raised in air.

"Even Rip is at fault," Julian said to himself. But as the words ran
through his mind, the little dog grew suddenly calmer. It dropped the
hesitating paw, again licked the face, then nestled quietly into the
space between Valentine's left breast and arm, rested its chin on the
latter, and with blinking eyes prepared evidently for repose. A wild
hope came again to Julian.

"Valentine is not dead," he said to himself. "He is in some strange
hypnotic trance. Presently he will recover from it. He will be well.
Thank God! Thank God! I will watch!"

And so he kept an attentive and hopeful vigil, his eyes always upon
Valentine's face, his hand always touching Valentine's. Already life
seemed blossoming anew with an inexplicable radiance. Valentine would
speak once more, would come back from this underworld of the senses.
And Julian's hand closed on his cold hand with a warm, impulsive
strength, as if it might be possible to draw him back physically to
consciousness and to speech. But there was no answer. And again Julian
was assailed with doubts. Yet the dog slept on happily, a hostage to
peace.

Julian never knew how long that vigil lasted. It might have been five
minutes, or a lifetime. The vehemence of his mental debate slew his
power of observation of normal things. He forgot what he was waiting
for. He forgot to expect Dr. Levillier. Two visions alternated in glaring
contrast before the eyes of his brain--life with Valentine, and life
without him. It is so we watch the trance, or death,--we know not
which,--of those whom we love, with a greedy, beautiful selfishness.
They are themselves only in relation to us. They live, they die, in that
wonderful relation. To live is to be with us; to die, to go away from us.
There are women who love so much that they angrily expostulate with the
dying, as if indeed the dying deliberately elected to depart out of their
arms. Do we not all feel at moments the "You could stay with me, if only
you had the will!" that is the last bitter cry of despairing affection?
Julian, sitting there, while Valentine lay silent and the dog slept by
his breast, saw ever and ever those two lives, flashing and fading like
lamps across a dark sea, life with, life without, him. The immensity of
the contrast, the millions of airy miles between those two life-worlds,
appalled him, for it revealed to him what mighty issues of joy and grief
hung upon the almost visionary thin thread of one little life. It is
ghastly to be so idiotically dependent. Yet who, at some time, is not?
And those who are independent lose, by their power, their possible
Paradise. But such a time of uncertainty as that which Julian must now
endure is a great penalty to pay for even the greatest joy, when the
joy is past. He had his trance of the mind. He was hypnotized by his
ignorance whether Valentine were alive or dead. And so he sat motionless,
making the tour of an eternity of suffering, of wonder, of doubt, and
hope, and yet, through it all, in some strange, indefinite way, numb,
phlegmatic, and actually stupid.

At last the bell rang. Dr. Levillier had arrived. He was struck at once
by Julian's heaviness of manner.

"What is it? What is the matter?" he asked.

"I don't know. You tell me."

"He is fainting--unconscious?"

"Unconscious, yes."

They were in the little hall now. Doctor Levillier narrowly scrutinized
Julian. For a moment he thought Julian had been drinking, and he took him
by the arm.

"No; it is fear," he murmured, releasing him, and walking into the
tentroom.

Julian followed with a loud footstep, treading firmly. Each step said to
Death, "You are not here. You are not here."

He stood at a little distance near the door, while Levillier approached
Valentine and bent over him. Rip woke up and curled his top lip in a
terrier smile of welcome. The doctor stroked his head, then lifted
Valentine's hand and held the wrist. He dropped it, and threw a glance
on Julian. There was a scream of interrogation in Julian's fixed eyes.
Doctor Levillier avoided it by dropping his own, and again turning his
attention to the figure on the divan. He undid Valentine's shirt, bared
the breast, and laid his hand on the heart, keeping it there for a long
time.

"Fetch me a hand-glass," he said to Julian.

Mechanically, Julian went into the bedroom, and groped in the dark upon
the dressing-table.

"Well, have you got it? Why don't you turn up the light?"

"I don't know," Julian answered, drily.

Doctor Levillier saw that anxiety was beginning to unnerve him. When the
glass was found the doctor led Julian back to the tentroom and pushed him
gently down in a chair.

"Keep quiet," he said. "And--keep hoping."

"There is--there is--hope?"

"Why not?"

Then the doctor held the little glass to Valentine's lips. The bright
surface was not dimmed. No breath of life tarnished it to dulness. Again
the doctor felt his heart, drew his eyelids apart, and carefully examined
the eyes, then turned slowly round.

"Doctor--doctor!" Julian whispered. "Why do you turn away? What are you
going to do?"

Doctor Levillier made a gesture of finale, and knelt on the floor by
Valentine. His head was bowed. His lips moved silently. Julian saw that
he was praying, and sprang up fiercely. All the frost of his senses
thawed in a moment. He seized Levillier by the shoulders.

"Don't pray!" he cried out; "don't pray. Curse! Curse as I do! If he's
dead you shall not pray. You shall not! You shall not!"

The little doctor drew him down to his knees.

"Julian, hush! My science tells me Valentine is dead."

Julian opened his white lips, but the doctor, with a motion, silenced
him, and added, pointing to Rip, who still lay happily by his master's
side:

"But that dog seems to tell me he is alive; that this is some strangely
complete and perfect simulation of death, some unnatural sleep of the
senses. Pray, pray with me that Valentine may wake."

And, kneeling by his friend, with bent head, Julian strove to pray. The
answer to that double prayer pierced the two men. It was so instant, and
so bizarre, fighting against probability, yet heralding light, and the
end of that night's pale circumstances.

Rip, relapsing quickly from his perfunctory smile on the doctor, had
again fallen asleep with an evident exceeding confidence and comfort,
snoring his way into an apparent peace that passed all understanding. But
scarcely had the doctor spoken, giving Julian hope, than the little dog
suddenly opened its eyes, shifted round in its nest of arm and bosom,
smelt furtively at Valentine's hand. Then it turned from the hand to the
side of its master, investigated it with a supreme anxiety, pursued its
search as far as the white, strict face and bared bosom. From the face
it recoiled, and with a piercing howl like the scream of a dog run over
by a cart, it sprang away, darted to the farthest corner of the room,
and huddled close against the wall in an agony of terror.

Julian turned cold. He believed implicitly that the trance at that very
moment had deepened into death, and that the sleepless instinct of the
dog had divined it partially while he slept, and now knew it and was
afraid. And the same error of belief shook Dr. Levillier. A spasm crossed
his thin, earnest face. No death had ever hurt him so sharply as this
death hurt him. He saw Julian recoil in horror from the divan, and he
could say nothing. For he, too, felt horror.

But in this moment of despair Valentine's hands slowly unclenched
themselves, and the fingers were gradually extended as by a man
stretching himself after a long sleep.

The doctor saw this, but believed himself a victim of a delusion, tricked
by the excitement of his mind into foolish visions. And Julian had turned
quite away, trembling. But now Valentine moved slightly, pressed his
elbows on the cushions that supported him, and half sat up, still with
closed eyes.

"Julian," Dr. Levillier said in a low, summoning voice,--"Julian, do you
see what I see? Is he indeed alive? Julian."

Then Julian, turning, saw, with the doctor, Valentine sit up erect, open
his eyes and gaze upon his two friends with a grave, staring scrutiny.

"Valentine, Valentine, how you frightened me! How you terrified me!"
Julian at last found a voice to exclaim. "Thank God, thank God! you are
alive. Oh, Valentine, you are alive; you are not dead."

Valentine's lips smiled slowly.

"Dead," he answered. "No; I am not dead."

And again he smiled quietly, as a man smiles at some secret thought
which tickles him or whips the sense of humour in him till, like an
obeying dog, it dances.

Dr. Levillier, having regained his feet, stood silently looking at
Valentine, all his professional instinct wide awake to note this
apparent resurrection from the dead.

"You here, doctor!" said Valentine. "Why, what does this all mean?"

"I want you to tell me that," Levillier said. "And you," he added, now
turning towards Julian.

But Julian was too much excited to answer. His eyes were blazing with joy
and with emotion. And Valentine seemed still to be informed with a
curious, serpentine lassitude. The life seemed to be only very gently
running again over his body, creeping from the centre, from the heart, to
the extremities, gradually growing in the eyes, stronger and stronger, a
dawn of life in a full-grown man. Dr. Levillier had never seen anything
quite like it before. There was something violently unnatural about it,
he thought, yet he could not say what. He could only stand by the broad
couch, fascinated by the spectacle under his gaze. Once he had read a
tale of the revivifying of a mummy in a museum. That might have been like
this; or the raising of Lazarus. The streams of strength almost visibly
trickled through Valentine's veins. And this new life was so vigorous,
so alert. It was as if during his strange sleep Valentine had been
carpentering his energies, polishing his powers, setting the temple
of his soul in order, gaining almost a ruthlessness from rest. He
stretched his limbs now as an athlete might stretch them to win the full
consciousness of their muscular force. When the doctor took hold of his
hand to feel his pulse the hand was hard and tense like iron, the fingers
gripped for a moment like thin bands of steel, and the life in the blue
eyes bounded, raced, swirled as water swirls in a mill-stream. Indeed,
Dr. Levillier felt as if there was too much life in them, as if the cup
had been filled with wine until the wine ran over. He put his fingers
on the pulse. It was strong and rapid and did not fluctuate, but beat
steadily. He felt the heart. That, too, throbbed strongly. And while he
made his examination Valentine smiled at him.

"I'm all right, you see," Valentine said.

"All right," the doctor echoed, still possessed by the feeling that there
lurked almost a danger in this apparently abounding health.

"What was it all?" Julian asked eagerly. "Was it a trance?"

"A trance?" Valentine said. "Yes, I suppose so."

He put his feet to the floor, stood up, and again stretched all his
limbs. His eyes fell upon Rip, who was still in the corner, huddled up,
his teeth showing, his eyes almost starting out of his head.

"Rip," he said, holding out his hand and slapping his knee, "come here!
Come along! Rip! Rip! What's the matter with him?"

"He thought you were dead," said Julian. "Poor little chap. Rip, it's all
right. Come!"

But the dog refused to be pacified, and still displayed every symptom of
angry fear. At last Valentine, weary of calling the dog, went towards it
and stooped to pick it up. At the downward movement of its master the dog
shrank back, gathered itself together, then suddenly sprang forward with
a harsh snarl and tried to fasten its teeth in his face. Valentine jumped
back just in time.

"He must have gone mad," he exclaimed. "Julian, see what you can do with
him."

Curiously enough, Rip welcomed Julian's advances with avidity, nestled
into his arms, but when he walked toward Valentine, struggled to escape
and trembled in every limb.

"How extraordinary!" Julian said. "Since your trance he seems to have
taken a violent dislike to you. What can it mean?"

"Oh, nothing probably. He will get over it. Put him into the other room."

Julian did so and returned.

Doctor Levillier was now sitting in an arm-chair. His light, kind
eyes were fixed on Valentine with a scrutiny so intense as to render
the expression of his usually gentle face almost stern. But Valentine
appeared quite unconscious of his gaze and mainly attentive to all that
Julian said and did. All this time the doctor had not said a word. Now
he spoke.

"You spoke of a trance?" he said, interrogatively.

Julian looked as guilty as a cribbing schoolboy discovered in his dingy
act.

"Doctor, Val and I have to crawl to you for forgiveness," he said.

"To me--why?"

"We have disobeyed you."

"But I should never give you an order."

"Your advice is a command to those who know you, doctor," said Valentine,
with a sudden laugh.

"And what advice of mine have you put in the corner with its face to the
wall?"

"We have been table-turning again."

"Ah!"

Doctor Levillier formed his lips into the shape assumed by one whistling.

"And this has been the result?"

"Yes," Julian cried. "Never, as long as I live, will I sit again. Val, if
you go down on your knees to me--"

"I shall not do that," Valentine quietly interposed. "I have no desire to
sit again now."

"You both seem set against such dangerous folly at last," said the
doctor. "Give me your solemn promise to stick to what you have said."

And the two young men gave it, Julian with a strong gravity, Valentine
with a light smile. Julian had by no means recovered his usual gaiety.
The events of the night had seriously affected him. He was excited and
emotional, and now he grasped Valentine by the arm as he exclaimed:

"Valentine, tell me, what made you give that strange cry just before
you went into your trance? Were you frightened? or did something--that
hand--touch you? Or what was it?"

"A cry?"

"Yes."

"It was not I."

"Didn't you hear it?"

"No."

Julian turned to the doctor.

"It was an unearthly sound," he said. "Like nothing I have ever heard or
imagined. And, doctor, just afterward I saw something, something that
made me believe Valentine was really dead."

"What was it?"

Julian hesitated. Then he avoided directly replying to the question.

"Doctor," he said, "of course I needn't ask you if you have often been at
deathbeds?"

"I have. Very often," Levillier replied.

"I have never seen any one die," Julian continued, still with excitement.
"But people have told me, people who have watched by the dying, that at
the moment of death sometimes a tiny flame, a sort of shadow almost,
comes from the lips of the corpse and evaporates into the air. And they
say that flame is the soul going out of the body."

"I have never seen that," Levillier said. "And I have watched many
deaths."

"I saw such a flame to-night," Julian said. "After I heard the cry, I
distinctly saw a flame come from where Valentine was sitting and float up
and disappear in the darkness. And--and afterwards, when Valentine lay so
still and cold, I grew to believe that flame was his soul and that I had
actually seen him die in the dark."

"Imagination," Valentine said, rather abruptly. "All imagination. Wasn't
it, doctor?"

"Probably," Levillier said. "Darkness certainly makes things visible that
do not exist. I have patients who are perfectly sane, yet whom I forbid
ever to be entirely in the dark. Remove all objects from their sight, and
they immediately see non-existent things."

"You think that flame came only from my inner consciousness?" Julian
asked.

"I suspect so. Shut your eyes now."

Julian did so. Doctor Levillier bent over and pressed his two forefingers
hard on Julian's eyes. After a moment,

"What do you see?" he asked.

"Nothing," Julian replied.

"Wait a little longer. Now what do you see?"

"Now I see a broad ring of yellow light edged with ragged purple."

"Exactly. You see flame-colour."

He removed his fingers and Julian opened his eyes.

"Yes," he said. "But that cry. I most distinctly heard it."

"Imitate it."

"That would be impossible. It was too strange. Are the ears affected by
darkness?"

"The sense of hearing is intimately affected by suspense. If you do not
listen attentively you may fail to hear a sound that is. If you listen
too attentively you may succeed in hearing a sound that is not. Now, shut
your eyes again."

Julian obeyed.

"I am going to clap my hands presently," said the doctor. "Tell me as
soon as you have heard me do so."

"Yes."

Doctor Levillier made no movement for some time. Then he softly leant
forward, extended his arms in the air, and made the motion of clapping
his hands close to Julian's face. In reality he did not touch one hand
with the other, yet Julian cried out:

"I heard you clap them then."

"I have not clapped them at all," Levillier said.

Julian expressed extreme surprise.

"You see how very easy it is for the senses to be deceived," the doctor
added. "Once stir the nervous system into an acute state of anticipation,
and it will conjure up for you a veritable panorama of sights, sounds,
bodily sensations. But throw it into that state once too often, and the
panorama, instead of passing and disappearing, may remain fixed for a
time, even forever, before your eyes, your ears, your touch. And that
means recurrent or permanent madness. Valentine, I desire you most
especially to remember that."

He uttered the words weightily, with very definite intention. Valentine,
who still seemed to be in an unusually lazy or careless mood, laughed
easily.

"I will remember," he said.

He yawned.

"My trance has made me sleepy," he added.

The doctor got up.

"Yes; bed is the best place for you," he said.

"And for us all, I suppose," added Julian. "Though I feel as if I could
never sleep again."

The doctor went out into the hall to get his coat, leaving the friends
alone for a moment.

"I am still so excited," Julian went on. "Dear old fellow! How good it is
to see you yourself again. I made up my mind that you were dead. This is
like a resurrection. Oh, Val, if you had been dead, really!"

"What would you have done?"

"Done! I don't know. Gone to the devil, probably."

"Do you know where to find him?"

"My dear boy, he is in every London street, to begin with."

"In Victoria Street, even. I was only laughing."

"But tell me, what did you feel?"

"Nothing. As if I slept."

"And you really heard, saw, nothing?"

"Nothing."

"And that hand?"

Valentine smiled again, and seemed to hesitate. But then he replied,
quietly:

"I told you I could not feel it."

"I did, until I heard that dreadful cry, and then it was suddenly drawn
away from me."

Doctor Levillier appeared in the doorway with his overcoat on, but Julian
did not notice him. Again his excitement was rising. He began to pace up
and down the room.

"My God!" he said, vehemently, "what would Marr say to all this? What
does it mean? What can it mean?"

"Don't let us bother too much about it."

"Excellent advice," said Levillier, from the doorway.

Julian stood still.

"Doctor, I can understand your attitude," he said. "But what an amazing
being you are, Val. You are as calm and collected as if you had sat and
held converse with spirits all through your life. And yet something has
governed you, has temporarily deprived you of life. For you were to all
intents and purposes dead while you were in that trance."

"Death is simply nothing, and nothingness does not excite or terrify one.
I never felt better than I do at this moment."

"That's well," said Levillier, cheerfully.

Julian regarded Valentine's pure, beautiful face with astonishment.

"And you never looked better."

"I shall sleep exquisitely to-night, or rather this morning," Valentine
said.

As he spoke he drew away the heavy green curtain that hung across the
window. A very pale shaft of light stole in and lit up his white face.

It was the dawn, and, standing there, he looked like the spirit of the
dawn, painted against the dying night in such pale colours, white, blue,
and shadowy gold, a wonder of death and of life.

In the silence Dr. Levillier and Julian gazed at him, and he seemed a
mystery to them both, a strange enigma of purity and of unearthliness.

"Good-bye, Cresswell," Levillier said at last.

"Good-bye, doctor."

"Good-bye, Valentine."

Julian held out his hand to grasp his friend's, but Valentine began
looping up the curtain and did not take it. In his gentlest voice he said
to Julian:

"Good-bye, dear Julian, good-bye. The dawn is on our friendship, Julian."

"Yes, Valentine."

Valentine added, after a moment of apparent reflection:

"Take Rip away with you just for to-night. I don't want to be bitten in
my sleep."

And when Julian went away, the little dog eagerly followed him, pressing
close to his heels, so close that several times Julian could not avoid
kicking him.

As soon as the flat door had closed on his two friends, Valentine walked
down the passage to the drawing-room, which was shrouded in darkness. He
entered it without turning on the light, and closed the door behind him.
He remained in the room for perhaps a quarter of an hour. At length the
door opened again. He emerged out of the blackness. There was a calm
smile on his face. Two of his fingers were stained with blood, and to one
a fragment of painted canvas adhered.

When Valentine's man-servant went into the room in the morning and drew
up the blinds, he found, to his horror, the picture of "The Merciful
Knight" lying upon the floor. The canvas hung from the gold frame in
shreds, as if rats had been gnawing it.




