CHAPTER III

THE DOCTOR MEETS TWO STRANGERS


Upon seeing the doctor, Valentine paused on the threshold of the door,
and, as he paused, the doctor's horror fled.

"Valentine," he said, holding out his hand.

"Doctor."

Their hands met and their eyes. And then Levillier had an instant
sensation that he shook hands with a stranger. He looked upon the face of
Valentine certainly, but he was aware of a subtle, yet large, change in
it. All the features were surely coarser, heavier. There was a line or
two near the eyes, a loose fullness about the mouth. Yet, as he looked
again, he could not be certain if it were so, or if his memory were at
fault, groping after a transformation that was not there. The words he
now said truthfully expressed his real feeling in the matter.

"You are quite a stranger to me," he said.

Valentine accepted the remark in the conventional sense.

"Yes, quite a stranger. We have not met for an age."

The voice was cool and careless.

"I have been waiting for you," the doctor went on, still unable to feel
at his ease. "By the way, how you have changed your room."

"Yes. Do you like it?"

"Well, frankly, no."

"I am sorry for that," Valentine replied, drawing off his gloves. "Julian
chose a great many of the things in it."

"Julian! Did he devise the colour scheme?"

"That curious red? No, that was my idea. But he had a great deal to do
with the new furniture and the ornaments."

"I should have supposed many minds had been at work here."

Valentine smiled, and the doctor was convinced that both his mouth and
eyes had altered in expression.

"That's true in a way," he answered. "Julian has had various advisers--of
the feminine gender. The love of the moment is visible all over this
room. That is why it amuses me. Those silver ornaments were chosen
by a pretty Circassian. A Parisian picked out that black cabinet in a
warehouse of Boulogne. A little Italian insisted upon that vulgar-painted
sofa--and so on."

"Why do you allow such people to have any intercourse with a room of
yours?"

"Oh, it amused Julian, and I was tired of my room as it was. After 'The
Merciful Knight' went to be cleaned, I resolved on a change."

"For the worse."

"Is it for the worse?"

"Surely."

The eyes of the two men challenged each other. Valentine's glance
was carelessly impudent and hardy. The deference which he had always
given to the doctor was gone. If it had been genuine it was dead. If
it had only been a mask it had apparently served its purpose and was
now contemptuously thrown aside. Doctor Levillier was deeply moved
by the transformation. His friend had become a stranger during the
interval of his absence. The man he admired was less admirable than
of old. He recognized that, although he was not yet fully aware of the
transformation of Valentine. Before he left England he vaguely suspected
a change. Now the change hit him full in the heart. So acute was it
that, in an age of miracles, he could well have believed Cuckoo Bright's
disjointed statement. Valentine was, to his mind, even in some strange
way to his eye, at this moment no longer Valentine. He was talking with a
man whose features he knew certainly, but whose mind he did not know, had
never known. And his former resolution to watch Valentine closely was
consolidated. It became a passion. The doctor woke in the man. Nor was
the old friend and lover of humanity lulled to sleep.

"How is Julian?" the doctor asked, dropping his eyes.

"Very well, I think. He will be here directly. He's coming to fetch me.
We are dining at the Prince's in Piccadilly in the same party. That
reminds me, I must dress. But do stay, and have some coffee."

"No coffee, thank you."

"But you will stay and see Julian. I dare say he will be here early."

"Yes, I will stay. I should like to meet him."

After a word or two more Valentine vanished to dress, and the doctor
was once more alone. He was much perplexed and saddened, but keenly
interested too, and, getting up from the chair in which he had been
sitting, he moved about the grotesque and vulgar room, threading his
way through the graceless furniture with a silent and gentle caution.
And as he walked meditatively he remembered a conversation he had held
with Valentine long ago, when the latter had spoken complainingly of
the tyranny of an instinctive purity. The very words he had used came
back to him now:

"The minds of men are often very carefully, very deftly poised, and a
little push can send them one way or the other. Remember if you lose
heaven, the space once filled by heaven will not be left empty."

Had not the little push been given? Had not heaven been lost? That was
the problem. But Doctor Levillier, if he saw a little way into effect,
was quite at a loss as to cause. And already he had a suspicion that the
change in Valentine was not quite on the lines of one of those strange
and dreadful human changes familiar to any observant man. This suspicion,
already latent, and roused, perhaps, in the first instance long ago by
the mystery of Rip's avoidance of his master, and by the shattering of
Valentine's musical powers, was confirmed in the strongest way when
Julian appeared a few minutes later. Yet the change in Julian would
have seemed to most people far more remarkable.

He came into the drawing-room rather hastily, in evening dress with
a coat over it. Wade had forewarned him of the doctor's presence, and
he entered, speaking loud words of welcome, and holding out a greeting
hand. The too-ready voice and almost premature hand betokened his latent
uneasiness. Vice makes some people unconscious, some self-conscious.
Julian belonged at present to the latter tribe. Whether he was thoroughly
aware of self-alteration or not, he evidently stirred uneasily under an
expectation of the doctor's surprise. This drove his voice to loud notes
and his manner to a boisterous heartiness, belied by the shifting glance
of his brown eyes.

The doctor was astounded as he looked at him. Yet the change here was
far less inexplicable than that other change in Valentine. Its mystery
was the familiar mystery of humanity. Its horror was the horror that we
all accept as one of the elements of life. Deterioration, however rapid,
however complete, does not come upon us like a ghost in the night to
puzzle us absolutely. It is not altogether out of the range of our
experience. Most men have seen a man crumble gradually, through the
action of some vice, as a wall crumbles through the action of time, falls
into dust and decay, filters away into the weed-choked ditches of utter
ruin and degradation. Most women have watched some woman slip from the
purity and hope and innocence of girlhood into the faded hunger and
painted and wrinkled energies of animalism. Such tragedies are no more
unfamiliar to us than are the tragedies of Shakespeare. And such a
tragedy--not complete yet, but at a third-act point, perhaps--now faced
Doctor Levillier in Julian. The wall that had been so straight and trim,
so finely built and carefully preserved, was crumbling fast to decay. A
ragged youth slunk in the face, beggared of virtue, of true cheerfulness,
of all lofty aspiration and high intent. It was youth still, for nothing
can entirely massacre that gift of the gods, except inevitable Time. But
it was youth sadder than age, because it had run forward to meet the
wearinesses that dog the steps of age but that should never be at home
with age's enemy. Julian had been the leaping child of healthy energy.
He was now quite obviously the servant of lassitude. His foot left the
ground as if with a tired reluctance, and his hands were fidgetty, yet
nerveless. The eyes, that looked at the doctor and looked away by swift
turns, burned with a haggard eagerness unutterably different from their
former bright vivacity. Beneath them wrinkles crept on the puffy white
face as worms about a corpse. Busy and tell-tale, they did not try to
conceal the story of the body into which they had prematurely cut
themselves. Nor did Julian's features choose to back up any reserve
his mind might possibly feel about acknowledging the consummate
alteration of his life. They proclaimed, as from a watch-tower, the
arrival of enemies. The cheeks were no longer firm, but heavy and
flaccid. The mouth was deformed by the down-drawn looseness of the
sensualist, and the complexion beaconed with an unnatural scarlet that
was a story to be read by every street-boy.

Yet, even so, the doctor, as he looked pitifully and with a gnawing grief
upon Julian, felt not the mysterious thrill communicated to him by
Valentine. These two men, these old time friends of his, were both in a
sense strangers. But it was as if he had at least heard much of Julian,
knew much of him, understood him, comprehended exactly why he was a
stranger. Valentine was the total stranger, the unknown, the undivined.
Long ago the doctor had foreseen the possibility of the Julian who now
stood before him. He had never foreseen the possibility of the new
Valentine. The one change was summed up in an instant. The other walked
in utter mystery. The doctor had been swift to notice Julian's furtive
glance, and was equally swift in banishing all trace of surprise from
his own manner. So they met with a fair show of cordiality, and Julian
developed a little of his old cheerfulness.

"Val's dressing," he said. "Well, there's plenty of time. By the way,
how's your Russian, doctor?"

"Better."

"You've cured him! Bravo!"

"I hope I have persuaded him to cure himself."

Julian looked up hastily.

"Oh, that sort of complaint, was it?"

He laughed, not without a tinge of bitterness.

"Perhaps he doesn't want to be cured."

"I have persuaded him to want to be, I think."

"Isn't that rather a priest's office?" Julian asked.

The doctor noticed that a very faint hostility had crept into his manner.

"Why?"

"Oh, I don't know. Such an illness is a matter of temperament, I dare
say, and the clergy tinker at our temperaments, don't they? while you
doctors tinker at our bodies."

"A nerve-doctor has as much to do with mind as body, and no doctor can
possibly do much good if he entirely ignores the mind. But you know my
theories."

"Yes. They make you clergyman and doctor in one, a dangerous man."

And he laughed again, jarringly, and shifted in his seat, looking around
him with quick eyes.

"What do you think of the room?" he said abruptly.

"I think it entirely spoilt and ruined," the doctor answered gravely.

"It's altered, certainly."

"Yes, for the worse. It was a beautiful room, one of the most beautiful
in London."

A momentary change came over Julian. He dropped his hard manner, which
seemed an assumption to cover inward discomfort or shame.

"Yes," he said almost regretfully. "I suppose it was. But it's gayer now,
got more things in it. Full of memories this room is."

The last remark was evidently put forth as a feeler, to find out what
Valentine had been talking about. Dr. Levillier was habitually truthful,
although he could be very reserved if occasion seemed to require it. At
present he preferred to be frank.

"Memories of women," he remarked.

"Oh, you've heard?"

"That several tastes helped to make his room the pandemonium which it is.
Yes."

"You're severe, doctor."

"Perhaps you like the room for its memories, Addison."

Julian looked doubtful.

"I don't know. I suppose so," he hesitated.

"By the way, is there among these vagrant memories of Circassians,
Greeks, and Italians anything chosen by Cuckoo Bright?"

Julian started violently.

"Cuckoo Bright," he exclaimed, "what do you know of her?"

As he spoke Valentine strolled into the room dressed for dinner. He was
drawing on a pair of lavender gloves, and looked down sideways at his
coat to see if his buttonhole of three very pale and very perfectly
matched pink roses was quite straight.

"Cuckoo Bright?" he echoed. "Does everybody know her, then? How came she
into your strict life, doctor?"

Doctor Levillier noticed that Valentine, like Julian, carefully set him
aside as a being in some different sphere, much as a great many people
insist on setting clergymen. This fact alone showed that he was talking
with two strangers, and seemed to give the lie to long years of the most
friendly and almost brotherly intercourse.

"Is my life so strict, then?" he asked gently.

"I think little Cuckoo would call it so, eh, Julian?"

He glanced at Julian and laughed softly, still drawing on his gloves. In
evening dress he looked curiously young and handsome, and facially less
altered than the doctor had at first supposed him to be. Still there was
a difference even in the face; but it was so slight that only a keen
observer would have noticed it. The almost frigid and glacial purity had
floated away from it like a lovely cloud. Now it was unveiled, and there
was something hard and staring about it. The features were still
beautiful, but their ivory lustre was gone. A line was penciled, too,
here and there. Yet the doctor could understand that even Valentine's own
man might not appreciate the difference. The manner, however, was more
violently altered. It was that which made the doctor think again and
intensely of Cuckoo's vague yet startling statement.

"Where did you meet Cuckoo, doctor?"

It was Julian who spoke, and the words were uttered with some excitement.

"I have met her," Levillier replied.

It was sufficiently evident that he did not intend to say where.

But Valentine broke in:

"She has called on you again, then, and this time found you at home.
I scarcely thought she would take the trouble."

"Again!" the doctor said.

"Yes. One evening when you were away I saw her at your door and ventured
to give her a piece of advice."

"And that was?"

"Not to trouble you. I told her your patients were of a different class."

"In that case I fear you misrepresented me, Cresswell. I do not choose my
patients. But Cuckoo Bright is no patient of mine."

"If she's not ill," Julian said, "why should she go to you?"

"That is her affair, and mine," the doctor answered, in his quietest and
most finishing tone.

Julian accepted the delicate little snub quietly, but Valentine sneered.

"Perhaps she went to seek you in your capacity of a doctor of the mind
rather than of the body. Perhaps, after all, she sought your aid."

As he spoke the doctor could not help having driven into him the
conviction that the words were spoken with meaning, that Valentine knew
the nature of Cuckoo's mission to Harley Street. There rose in him
suddenly a violent sensation of enmity against Valentine. He strove
to beat it down, but he could not. Never had he felt such enmity against
any man. It was like the fury so obviously felt by Cuckoo. The doctor
was ashamed to be so unreasonable, and believed for a moment that the
poor street-girl had absolutely swayed him, and predisposed him to this
animus that surged up over his normal charity and good, clear impulses
of tenderness for all that lived.

"My aid," he said--and the turmoil within him caused him to speak with
unusual sternness. "And if she did, what then?"

"Poor Cuckoo!" Julian said, and there was a touch of real tenderness in
his voice.

"Oh, I have nothing to say against it," Valentine replied, buttoning
slowly and carefully the last button of the second glove. "Only, Cuckoo
Bright is beyond aid. She can neither help herself nor any one else."

"How do you know, Cresswell?"

"Because I have observed, doctor. Once I, too, thought that even
Cuckoo might--might--well, have some fight in her. I know now that
she has not. Her corruption of body has led to worse than corruption
of mind, to corruption of will. Cuckoo Bright is as helpless as is a
seabird with a shot through its wings, upon the sea. She can only drift
in the present--die in the future."

The doctor listened silently. But Julian said again:

"Poor, poor Cuckoo!"

The exclamation seemed to irritate Valentine, for he caught up his cloak
and cried:

"Bah! Let's forget her. Doctor, we must say good-night. We are due at the
Prince's. It has been good to meet you again."

The last words sounded like the bitterest sarcasm.




