CHAPTER LXXIII.

SUMMARY.--DECLARATION OF THE AUTHOR.


Having reached the end of my difficult enterprise, let me be allowed
to take a retrospective view of the vast space over which I have but
just passed, like the traveller who rests after his labor. The fear of
seeing religious schism introduced into my country; the sight of the
efforts which were made to inculcate Protestant errors amongst us; the
perusal of certain writings, wherein it was stated that the pretended
Reformation had been favorable to the progress of nations,--such were
the motives which inspired me with the idea of undertaking this work.
My object was, to show that neither individuals nor society owe any
thing to Protestantism, either in a religious, social, political, or
literary point of view. I undertook to examine what history tells us,
and what philosophy teaches us, on this point. I was not ignorant
of the immense extent of the questions which I had to enter upon; I
was far from flattering myself that I was able to clear them up in a
becoming manner; nevertheless I set forth upon my journey, with that
courage which is inspired by the love of truth, and the confidence that
one is defending its cause.

When considering the birth of Protestantism, I have endeavored to
take as lofty a view as possible. I have rendered to men that justice
which is due to them; I have attributed a large portion of the evil
to the wretched condition of mankind, to the weakness of our minds,
and to that inheritance of perverseness and ignorance which has been
transmitted to us by the fall of our first parent. Luther, Calvin,
and Zuinglius have disappeared from my eyes; placed in the immense
picture of events, they have been viewed by me as small imperceptible
figures, whose individuality was far from deserving the importance
which was given to them at other periods. Honest in my convictions,
and unreserved in my words, I have acknowledged with candor, but with
sorrow, that there existed certain abuses, and that these abuses were
taken as pretexts when it was wished to break the unity of the faith.
I have allowed that a portion of the blame shall also fall upon men;
but I have also pointed out, that the more you here lay stress upon
the weakness and wickedness of man, the more do you illustrate the
providence of Him who has promised to be with His Church till the
consummation of ages.

By the aid of reasoning and irrefragable experience, I have proved
that the fundamental dogmas of Protestantism show little knowledge of
the human mind, and were a fruitful source of errors and catastrophes.
Then, turning my attention to the development of European civilization,
I have made a continued comparison between Protestantism and
Catholicity; and I believe that I may assert, that I have not hazarded
any proposition of importance without having supported it by the
evidence of historical facts. I have found it necessary to take a
survey of all ages, dating from the commencement of Christianity, and
to observe the different phases under which civilization has appeared;
without this, it would have been impossible to give a complete
vindication of the Catholic religion.

The reader may have observed that the prevailing idea of the work is
this: "Before Protestantism European civilization had reached all the
development which was possible for it; Protestantism perverted the
course of civilization, and produced immense evils in modern society;
the progress which has been made since Protestantism, has been made not
by it, but in spite of it." I have only consulted history, and I have
taken extreme care not to pervert it; I have borne in mind this passage
of holy writ: "Has God, then, need of thy falsehood?" The documents to
which I refer are there; they are to be found in all libraries, ready
to answer; read them, and judge for yourselves.

I am not aware, in the multitude of questions which have presented
themselves to me, and which it has been indispensable for me to
examine, that I have resolved any in a manner not in conformity with
the dogmas of the religion which I was desirous of defending. I am
not aware that, in any passage of my book, I have laid down erroneous
propositions, or expressed myself in ill-sounding terms. Before
publishing my work, I submitted it to the examination of ecclesiastical
authority; and without hesitation, I complied with the slightest
hint on its part, purifying, correcting, and modifying what had been
pointed out as worthy of purification, correction, or modification.
Notwithstanding that, I submit my whole work to the judgment of the
Catholic, Apostolic, and Roman Church; as soon as the Sovereign
Pontiff, the Vicar of Jesus Christ upon earth, shall pronounce sentence
against any one of my opinions, I will hasten to declare that I
consider that opinion erroneous, and cease to profess it.




NOTES.

NOTE 1, p. 26.

The _History of the Variations_ is one of those works which exhaust
their subject, and which do not admit of reply or addition. If
this immortal _chef-d'œuvre_ be read with attention, the cause of
Protestantism, with respect to faith, is forever decided: there is no
middle way left between Catholicity and infidelity. Gibbon read it in
his youth, and he became a Catholic, abandoning the Protestant religion
in which he had been brought up. When, at a later period, he left the
Catholic Church, he did not become a Protestant, but an unbeliever.
My readers will perhaps like to learn from the mouth of this famous
writer what he thought of the work of Bossuet, and the effect which was
produced on him by its perusal. These are his words: "In the _History
of the Variations_, an attack equally vigorous and well-directed," says
he, "Bossuet shows, by a happy mixture of reasoning and narration,
the errors, mistakes, uncertainties, and contradictions of our first
reformers, whose variations, as he learnedly maintains, bear the
marks of error; _while the uninterrupted unity of the Catholic Church
is a sign and testimony of infallible truth_. I read, approved, and
believed." (Gibbon's _Memoirs_.)


NOTE 2, p. 27.

It has been wished to represent Luther to us as a man of lofty ideas,
of noble and generous feelings, and as a defender of the rights
of the human race. Yet he himself has left us in his writings the
most striking testimony of the violence of his character, of his
disgusting rudeness, and his savage intolerance. Henry VIII., king of
England, undertook to refute the book of Luther called _De Captivitate
Babylonica_; and behold the latter, irritated by such boldness, writes
to the king, and calls him _sacrilegious, mad, senseless, the grossest
of all pigs and of all asses_. It is evident that Luther paid but
little regard to royalty; he did the same with respect to literary
merit. Erasmus, who was perhaps the most learned man of his age, or
who at least surpassed all others in the variety of his knowledge, in
the refinement and _éclat_ of his mind, was not better treated by the
furious innovator, in spite of all the indulgence for which the latter
was indebted to him. As soon as Luther saw that Erasmus did not think
proper to be enrolled in the new sect, he attacked him with so much
violence, that the latter complained of it, saying, "_that in his old
age he was compelled to contend against a savage beast, a furious wild
boar_." Luther did not confine himself to mere words; he proceeded to
acts. It was at his instigation that Carlostad was exiled from the
states of the Duke of Saxony, and was reduced to such misery, that he
was compelled to carry wood, and do other similar things, to gain his
livelihood. In his many disputes with the Zwinglians, Luther did not
belie his character; he called them _damned_, _fools_, _blasphemers_.
As he lavished such epithets on his dissenting companions, we cannot
be astonished that he called the doctors of Louvain _beasts_,
_pigs_, _Pagans_, _Epicureans_, _Atheists_; and that he makes use
of other expressions which decency will not allow us to cite; and
that, launching forth against the Pope, he says, "_He is a mad wolf,
against whom every one ought to take arms, without waiting even for
the order of the magistrates; in this matter there can be no room left
for repentance, except for not having been able to bury the sword in
his breast_;" adding, "that all those who followed the Pope ought to
be pursued like bandit-chiefs, were they kings or emperors." Such
was the spirit of tolerance which animated Luther. And let it not be
imagined that this intolerance was confined to him; it extended to
all the party of the innovators, and its effects were cruelly felt.
We have an unexceptionable witness of this truth in Melancthon, the
beloved disciple of Luther, and one of the most distinguished men
that Protestantism has had. "I find myself under such oppression,"
wrote Melancthon to his friend Camerarius, "that I seem to be in the
cave of the Cyclops; it is almost impossible for me to explain to you
my troubles; and every moment I feel myself tempted to take flight."
"These are," he says, in another letter, "ignorant men, who know
neither piety nor discipline; behold what they are who command, and you
will understand that I am like Daniel in the lions' den." How, then,
can it be maintained that such an enterprise was guided by a generous
idea, and that it was really attempted to free the human mind? The
intolerance of Calvin, sufficiently shown by the single fact mentioned
in the text, is manifested in his works at every page, by the manner in
which he treats his adversaries. _Wicked men_, _rogues_, _drunkards_,
_fools_, _madmen_, _furies_, _beasts_, _bulls_, _pigs_, _asses_,
_dogs_, and _vile slaves of Satan_. Such are the polite terms which
abound in the writings of the famous reformer. And how many wretched
things of the same kind could I not relate, if I did not fear to
disgust my readers!


NOTE 3, p. 27.

The Diet of Spires had made a decree concerning the change of religion
and worship; fourteen towns of the empire refused to submit to it,
and presented a Protest; hence men began to call the dissenters
_Protestants_. As this name is a condemnation of the separated
churches, they have several times attempted to assume others, but
always in vain; the names which they took were false, and false names
do not last. What was their meaning when they called themselves
_Evangelicals_? That they adhered to the Gospel alone? In that case
they ought rather to call themselves _Biblicals_; for it was not to the
Gospel that they professed to adhere, but to the Bible. They are also
sometimes called _Reformers_; and many people have been accustomed to
call _Protestantism, reformation_; but it is enough to pronounce this
word, to feel how inappropriate it is; _religious revolution_ would be
much more proper.


NOTE 4, p. 27.

Count de Maistre, in his work _Du Pape_, has developed this question
of names in an inimitable manner. Among his numerous observations,
there is one very just one: it is, that the Catholic Church alone has
a positive and proper name, which she gives to herself, and which is
given to her by the whole world. The separated Churches have invented
many, but without the power of appropriating them.--"Each one was free
to take what name he pleased," says M. de Maistre; "_Lais_, in person,
might be able to write upon her door, _Hôtel d'Artémise_. The great
point is, to compel others to give us a particular name, which is not
so easy as to take it of our own authority."

Moreover, it must not be imagined that Count de Maistre was the
inventor of this argument; a long time before him St. Jerome and St.
Augustin had used it. "If you," says St. Jerome, "hear them called
Marcionites, Valentinians, Montanists, know that they are not the
Church of Christ, but the synagogue of Antichrist.--Si audieris
nuncupari Marcionitas, Valentinianos, Montanenses, scito, non Ecclesiam
Christi, sed Antichristi esse synagogam." (Hieron. lib. _Adversus
Luciferianos_.) "I am retained in the Church," says St. Augustin, "by
her very name of Catholic; for it was not without a cause that she
alone, amid so many heresies, obtained that name. All the heretics
desire to be called Catholics; yet if a stranger asks them which is the
church of the Catholics, none of them venture to point out their church
or house.--Tenet me in Ecclesia ipsum Catholicæ nomen, quod non sine
causa inter tam multas hæreses, sic ipsa sola obtinuit, ut cum omnes
hæretici se Catholicos dici velint, quærenti tamen peregrino alicui,
ubi ad Catholicam conveniatur, nullus hæreticorum, vel basilicam suam
vel domum audeat ostendere." (St. Augustin.) What St. Augustin observed
of his time is again realized with respect to the Protestants. I
appeal to the testimony of those who have visited the countries where
different communions exist. An illustrious Spaniard of the seventeenth
century, who had lived a long time in Germany, tells us, "They all
wish to be called Catholic and Apostolical; but notwithstanding this
pretension, they are called Lutherans, or Calvinists.--Singuli volunt
Catholici et Apostolici, sed volunt, et ab aliis non hoc prætenso illis
nomine, sed Luterani potius aut Calviniani nominantur." (Caramuel.)
"I have dwelt in the towns of heretics," continues the same writer,
"and I have seen with my eyes and heard with my ears a thing on which
the heterodox should reflect: _it is, that with the exception of the
Protestant preacher, and a few others, who desire to know more of
the thing than is necessary, all the crowd of heretics gave the name
of Catholics to the Romans_.--Habitavi in hæreticorum civitatibus;
et hoc propriis oculis vidi, propriis audivi auribus, quod deberet
ab hæterodoxis ponderari, _præter prædicantem, et pauculos qui plus
sapiunt quam oportet sapere, totum hæreticorum vulgus Catholicos vocat
Romanos_." Such is the force of truth. The ideologists know well
that these phenomena have deep causes, and that these arguments are
something more than subtilties.


NOTE 5, p. 38.

So much has been said of abuses, the influence which they may have had
on the disasters which the Church suffered during the last centuries
has been so much exaggerated, and at the same time so much care has
been taken, by hypocritical praise, to exalt the purity of manners and
strictness of discipline in the primitive Church, that some people
have at last imagined a line of division between ancient and modern
times. These persons see in the early times only truth and sanctity;
they attribute to the others only corruption and falsehood; as if,
in the early ages of the Church, all the faithful were angels--as if
the Church, at all times, had not errors to correct and passions to
control. With history in our hands, it would be easy to reduce these
exaggerated ideas to their just value, to which Erasmus himself,
certainly little disposed to exculpate his contemporaries, does
justice. He clearly shows us, in a parallel between his own times and
those of the early ages of the Church, how puerile and ill-founded
was the desire, then so widely diffused, of exalting antiquity at the
expense of the present time. We find a fragment of this parallel in the
works of Marchetti, among his observations on Fleury's history.

It would not be less curious to pass in review the regulations made by
the Church to check all kinds of abuses. The collections of councils
would furnish us with so many materials thereupon, that many volumes
would not suffice to make them known; or rather, these collections
themselves, with alarming bulk, from one end to the other, are nothing
but an evident proof of these two truths: 1st, that there have been
at all times many abuses to be corrected, an effect, in some measure
necessary, of the weakness and corruption of human nature; 2dly, that
at all periods the Church has labored to correct these abuses, so that
it may be affirmed without hesitation, that you cannot point out one
without immediately finding a canonical regulation by its side to check
or punish it. These observations clearly show that Protestantism was
not caused by abuses, but that it was a great calamity, as it were,
rendered unavoidable by the fickleness of the human mind, and the
condition in which society was placed. In the same sense Jesus Christ
has said, _that it was necessary that there should be scandal_; not
that any one in particular is forced to give it, but because such is
the corruption of the human heart, that the natural course of things
must necessarily bring it.


NOTE 6, p. 42.

This concert and unity, which are found in Catholicity, are
things which ought to fill every sensible man with admiration and
astonishment, whatever his religious ideas may be. If we do not suppose
that _the finger of God is here_, how can we explain or understand the
continuance of the centre of unity in the see of Rome? So much has
been said of the supremacy of the Pope, that it is very difficult to
add any thing new; but perhaps our readers will not be displeased to
see a passage of St. Francis de Sales, where the various remarkable
titles given to the Sovereign Pontiff and to his see, by the Church in
ancient times, are collected. This work of the holy Bishop is worthy of
being introduced, not only because it interests the curiosity, but also
because it furnishes matter for grave reflection, which we leave to the
reader.


TITLES OF THE POPE.

 Most Holy Bishop of the Catholic Church--Council of Soissons, of 300
 Bishops.

 Most Holy and Blessed Patriarch--Ibid., t. vii., Council.

 Most Blessed Lord--St. Augustine, Ep. 95.

 Universal Patriarch--St. Leo, P., Ep. 62.

 Chief of the Church in the World--Innoc. ad P. P. Concil. Milevit.

 The Bishop elevated to the Apostolic eminence--St. Cyprian, Ep. 3, 12.

 Father of Fathers--Council of Chalcedon, Sess. iii.

 Sovereign Pontiff of Bishops--Id., in præf.

 Sovereign Priest--Council of Chalcedon, Sess. xvi.

 Prince of Priests--Stephen, Bishop of Carthage.

 Prefect of the House of God and Guardian of the Lord's
 Vineyard--Council of Carthage, Ep. to Damasus.

 Vicar of Jesus Christ, Confirmer of the Faith of Christians--St.
 Jerome, præf. in Evang. ad Damasum.

 High-Priest--Valentinian, and all antiquity with him.

 The Sovereign Pontiff--Council of Chalcedon, in Epist. ad Theodos.
 Imper.

 The Prince of Bishops--Ibid.

 The Heir of the Apostles--St. Bern., lib. de Consid.

 Abraham by the Patriarchate--St. Ambrose, in 1 Tim. iii.

 Melchisedech by ordination--Council of Chalcedon, Epist. ad Leonem.

 Moses by authority--St. Bernard, Epist. 190.

 Samuel by jurisdiction--Id. ib., et in lib. de Consider.

 Peter by power--Ibid.

 Christ by unction--Ibid.

 The Shepherd of the Fold of Jesus Christ--Id. lib ii. de Consider.

 Key-Bearer of the House of God--Id. ibid. c. viii.

 The Shepherd of all Shepherds--Ibid.

 The Pontiff called to the plentitude of power--Ibid.

 St. Peter was the Mouth of Jesus Christ--St. Chrysost., Hom. ii., in
 Div. Serm.

 The Mouth and Head of the Apostleship--Orig., Hom. lv. in Matth.

 The Cathedra and Principal Church--St. Cypr., Ep. lv. ad Cornel.

 The Source of Sacerdotal Unity--Id., Epist. iii. 2.

 The Bond of Unity--Id. ibid. iv. 2.

 The Church where resides the chief power (_potentior
 principalitas_)--Id. ibid. iii. 8.

 The Church the Root and Mother of all the others--St. Anaclet. Papa,
 Epist. ad omnes Episc. et Fideles.

 The See on which our Lord has built the Universal Church--St. Damasus,
 Epist. ad Univ. Episcop.

 The Cardinal Point and Head of all the Churches--St. Marcellinus, R.
 Epist. ad Episc. Antioch.

 The Refuge of Bishops--Conc. Alex., Epist. ad Felic. P.

 The Supreme Apostolic See--St. Athanasius.

 The Presiding Church--Emperor Justin., in lib. viii., Cod. de Sum.
 Trinit.

 The Supreme See which cannot be judged by any other--St. Leo, in Nat.
 SS. Apost.

 The Church set over and preferred to all the others--Victor d'Utiq.,
 in lib. de Perfect.

 The first of all the Sees--St. Prosper, in lib. de Ingrat.

 The Apostolic Fountain--St. Ignatius, Epist. ad Rom. in Subscript.

 The most secure Citadel of all Catholic Communion--Council of Rome
 under St. Gelasius.


NOTE 7, p. 45.

I have said that the most distinguished Protestants have felt the void
which is found in all sects separated from the Catholic Church. I am
about to give proofs of this assertion, which perhaps some persons may
consider hazardous. Luther, writing to Zwinglius, said, "If the world
lasts for a long time, it will be again necessary, on account of the
different interpretations which are now given to the Scriptures, to
receive the decrees of Councils, and take refuge in them, in order to
preserve the unity of the faith.--Si diutius steterit mundus, iterum
erit necessarium, propter diversas Scripturæ interpretationes quæ
nunc sunt, ad conservandam fidei unitatem, ut conciliorum decreta
recipiamus, atque ad ea confugiamus."

Melancthon, deploring the fatal results of the want of spiritual
jurisdiction, said, "There will result from it a liberty useless to the
world;" and in another place he utters these remarkable words: "There
are required in the Church inspectors, to maintain order, to observe
attentively those who are called to the ecclesiastical ministry, to
watch over the doctrine of priests, and pronounce ecclesiastical
judgments; so that if bishops did not exist, it would be necessary to
create them. The _monarchy of the Pope would be of great utility to
preserve among such various nations uniformity of doctrine_."

Let us hear Calvin: "God has placed the seat of his worship in the
centre of the earth, and has placed there only one Pontiff, whom
all may regard, the better to preserve unity.--Cultus sui sedem in
medio terræ collocavit, illi _unum_ Antisticem præfecit, quem omnes
respicerent, quo melius in unitate continerentur."--(Calvin, _Inst._ 6,
§ 11.)

"I have also," says Beza, "been long and greatly tormented by the same
thoughts which you describe to me. I see our people wander at the
mercy of every wind of doctrine, and after having been raised up, fall
sometimes on one side, and sometimes on the other. What they think of
religion to-day you may know; what they will think of it to-morrow you
cannot affirm. _On what point of religion are the Churches which have
declared war against the Pope agreed? Examine all, from beginning to
end, you will hardly find one thing affirmed by the one which the other
does not directly cry out against as impiety._--Exercuerunt me diu et
multum illæ ipsæ quas describis cogitationes. Video nostros palantes
omni doctrinæ vento, et in altum sublatos, modo ad hanc, modo ad illam
partem deferri. Horum, quæ sit hodie de religione sententia scire
fortasse possis; sed quæ cras de eadem futura sit opinio, neque tu
certo affirmare queas. In quo tandem religionis capite congruunt inter
se Ecclesiæ, quæ Romano Pontifici bellum indixerunt? A capite ad calcem
si percurras omnia, nihil propemodum reperias ab uno affirmari, quod
alter statim non impium esse clamitet." (Th. Bez. _Epist. ad Andream
Dudit_.)

Grotius, one of the most learned of Protestants, also felt the weakness
of the foundation on which the separated sects repose. Many people have
believed that he died a Catholic. The Protestants accused him of having
the intention of embracing the Roman faith; and the Catholics, who had
relations with him at Paris, thought the same thing. It is said that
the celebrated Petau, the friend of Grotius, at the news of his death,
said mass for him; an anecdote the truth of which I do not guarantee.
It is certain that Grotius, in his work entitled _De Antichristo_,
does not think, with other Protestants, that the Pope is Antichrist.
It is certain that, in his work entitled _Votum pro Pace Ecclesiæ_,
he says, without circumlocution, "that without the supremacy of the
Pope, it is impossible to put an end to disputes;" and he alleges
the example of the Protestants: "as it happens," says he, "among the
Protestants." It is certain that, in his posthumous work, _Rivetiani
Apologetici Discussio_, he openly lays down the fundamental principle
of Catholicity, namely, that "the dogmas of faith should be decided
by tradition and the authority of the Church, and not by the holy
Scriptures only."

The conversion of the celebrated Protestant Papin, which made so much
noise, is another proof of what we are endeavoring to show. Papin
reflected on the fundamental principle of Protestantism, and on the
contradiction which exists between this principle and the intolerance
of Protestants, who, relying only on private judgment, yet have
recourse to authority for self-preservation. He reasoned as follows:
"If the principle of authority, which they attempt to adopt, is
innocent and legitimate, it condemns their origin, wherein they refused
to submit to the authority of the Catholic Church; but if the principle
of private judgment, which they embraced in the beginning, was right
and just, this is enough to condemn the principle of authority invented
by them for the purpose of avoiding its excesses; for this principle
opens and smooths the way to the greatest disorders of impiety."

Puffendorf, who will certainly not be accused of coldness when
attacking Catholicity, could not help paying his tribute also to the
truth, when, in a confession for which all Catholics ought to thank
him, he says, "The suppression of the authority of the Pope has sowed
endless germs of discord in the world: as there is no longer any
sovereign authority to terminate the disputes which arise on all sides,
we have seen the Protestants split among themselves, and tear their
bowels with their own hands." (Puffendorf, _de Monarch. Pont. Roman_.)

Leibnitz, that great man, who, according to the expression of
Fontenelle, advanced all sciences, also acknowledged the weakness
of Protestantism, and the organizing power which belongs to the
Catholic Church. We know that, far from participating in the anger of
Protestants against the Pope, he regarded the religious supremacy of
Rome with the most lively sympathy. He openly avows the superiority of
the Catholic over the Protestant missions; the religious communities
themselves, the objects of so much aversion to so many people, were
to him highly respectable. These anticipations with respect to the
religious ideas of this great man have been more and more confirmed
by one of his posthumous works, published for the first time at Paris
in 1819. _The Exposition of the Doctrine of Leibnitz on Religion,
followed by Thoughts extracted from the writings of the same Author,
by M. Emery, formerly General Superior of St. Sulpice_, contains
the posthumous work of Leibnitz, whereof the title, in the original
manuscript, is, _Theological System_. The commencement of this work,
remarkable for its seriousness and simplicity, is certainly worthy
of the great soul of this distinguished thinker. It is this: "After
having long and profoundly studied religious controversies, after
having implored the divine assistance, and laid aside, as far as it is
possible for man, all spirit of party, I have considered myself as a
neophyte come from the new world, and one who had not yet embraced an
opinion; behold, therefore, the conclusions at which I have arrived,
and what appeared to me, out of all that I have examined, worthy to be
received by all unprejudiced men, as what is most conformable to the
holy Scriptures and respectable antiquity; I will even say, to right
reason and the most certain historical facts."

Leibnitz afterwards lays down the existence of God, the Incarnation,
the Trinity, and the other dogmas of Christianity; he adopts with
candor, and defends with much learning, the doctrine of the Catholic
Church on tradition, the sacraments, the sacrifice of the Mass, the
respect paid to relics and holy images, the Church hierarchy, and the
supremacy of the Pope. He adds, "In all cases which do not admit the
delay of the convocation of a general Council, or which do not deserve
to be considered therein, it must be admitted that the first of the
Bishops, or the Sovereign Pontiff, has the same power as the whole
Church."


NOTE 8, p. 49.

Some persons may suppose that what we have said with respect to the
emptiness of human knowledge and the weakness of our intellect, has
been said only for the purpose of making the necessity of a rule in
matters of faith more sensibly felt. It is not so. It would be easy for
me to insert here a long list of texts, drawn from the writings of the
most illustrious men of ancient and modern times, who have insisted
upon this very point. I will only quote here an excellent passage from
an illustrious Spaniard, one of the greatest men of the sixteenth
century, Louis Vives. "_Jam mens ipsa, suprema animi et celsissima
pars, videbit quantopere sit tum natura sua tarda ac præpedita, tum
tenebris peccati cæca, et a doctrina, usu, ac solertia imperita et
rudis, ut ne ea quidem quæ videt, quæque manibus contrectat, cujusmodi
sint, aut quid fiant assequatur, nedum ut in abdito illa naturæ,
arcana possit penetrare; sapienterque ab Aristotele illa est posita
sententia: Mentem nostram ad manifestissima naturæ non aliter habere
se, quam noctuæ oculum ad lumen solis._ Ea omnia, quæ universum
hominum genus novit, quota sunt pars eorum quæ ignoramus? Nec solum
id in universitate artium est verum, sed in singulis earum, in quarum
nulla tantum est humanum ingenium progressum, ut ad medium pervenerit,
etiam in infimis illis ac villissimis; ut nihil existimetur verius
esse dictum ab Academicis quam Scire nihil." (Ludovic. Vives, _de
Concordia et Discordia_, lib. iv. c. iii.) So thought this great man,
who, to vast erudition in sacred and profane things, added profound
meditation on the human intellect itself; who followed the progress of
the sciences with an observant eye, and undertook to regenerate them,
as his writings prove. I regret that I cannot copy his words at length,
as well those in the passage which I have just cited, as those of his
immortal work on the causes of the decline of the arts and sciences,
and on the manner of teaching them. If any one complain that I have
told some truths as to the weakness of our minds, and fear lest this
should impede the progress of knowledge by checking its flights, I will
remind him that the best way of promoting the progress of our minds is,
to give them a knowledge of themselves. On this point, the profound
sentence of Seneca may be quoted: "I know that many persons would
have attained to wisdom, if they had not presumed that they already
possessed it." "Puto multos ad sapientiam protuisse pervenire, nisi se
jam crederent pervenisse."


NOTE 9, p. 53.

Dense clouds surround the intellect as soon as it approaches the first
principles of the sciences. I have said that even the mathematics,
the clearness and certainty of which have become proverbial, are not
exempted from this universal rule. The infinitesimal calculation,
which, in the present state of science, may be said to play the
leading part, nevertheless depends on a few ideas which, up to this
time, have not been well explained by any one--ideas with respect to
_limits_. I do not wish to throw any doubt on the certainty of this
calculation: I only wish to show, that, if it were attempted to examine
the ideas which are as it were the elements of it, before the tribunal
of metaphysical philosophy, the consequence would be, that shades
would be cast upon their certainty. Without going further than the
elementary part of science, we might discover some points which would
not bear a continued metaphysical and ideological analysis without
injury: a thing which it would be very easy to prove by example, if
the nature of this work allowed it. We may recommend to the reader on
this subject, the valuable letter addressed by the Spanish Jesuit,
Eximeno, a distinguished philosopher and mathematician, to his friend,
Juan Andres; he will there find some appropriate observations made by a
man who certainly will not be rejected on the ground of incompetency.
It is in Latin, and is called _Epistola ad clarissimum virum Joannem
Andresium_.

As to the other sciences, it is not necessary to say much to prove that
their first principles are surrounded with darkness; and it may be
said that the brilliant reveries of the most illustrious men have had
no other source than this very obscurity. Led away by the feeling of
their own strength, these men pursued truth even to the abyss; there,
to use the expression of an illustrious contemporary poet, _the torch
was extinguished in their hands_; lost in an obscure labyrinth, they
were then abandoned to the mercy of their fancies and inspirations;
it was thus that reality gave place to the beautiful dreams of their
genius.


NOTE 10, p. 54.

Nothing is better for understanding and explaining the innate weakness
of the human mind, than to survey the history of heresies; a history
which we owe to the Church, to the extreme care which she has taken to
define and classify errors. From Simon Magus, who called himself the
legislator of the Jews, the renovator of the world, and the paraclete,
while paying a worship of latria to his mistress Helena, under the
name of Minerva, down to Hermann, preaching the massacre of all the
priests and all the magistrates of the world, and affirming that he
was the real son of God; a vast picture, very unpleasant to behold, I
acknowledge, if it were only on account of the extravagances with which
it abounds, presents itself to the observer, and suggests to him very
grave and profound reflections on the real character of the human mind;
there it is easy to see the wisdom of Catholicity, in attempting, in
certain cases, to subject this inconstant spirit to rule.


NOTE 11, p. 57.

If any persons find difficulty in persuading themselves that illusion
and fanaticism are, as it were, in their proper element among
Protestants, behold the irresistible testimony of facts in aid of
our assertion. This subject would furnish large volumes; but I must
be content with a rapid glance. I begin with Luther. Is it possible
to carry raving further than to pretend to have been taught by the
devil, to boast of it, and to found new doctrines on so powerful an
authority? Yet this was the raving of Luther himself, the founder
of Protestantism, who has left us in his works the evidence of his
interview with Satan.--Whether the apparition was real, or produced
by the dreams of a night agitated by fever, it is impossible to carry
fanaticism further than to boast of having had such a master. Luther
tells us himself that he had many colloquies with the devil; but
what is above all worthy of attention is, the vision in which, as he
relates in the most serious manner, Satan, by his arguments, compelled
him to proscribe private masses. He gives us a lively description of
this adventure. He wakes in the middle of the night; Satan appears to
him.--Luther is seized with horror; he sweats, he trembles; his heart
beats in a fearful manner. Nevertheless the discussion begins, and the
devil, like a good disputant, presses him so hard with his arguments,
that he leaves him without reply. Luther is conquered; which ought
not to astonish us, since he tells us that the logic of the devil was
accompanied by a voice so alarming, that the blood froze in his veins.
"I then understood," says this wretched being, "how it often happens
that people die _at the break of day_; it is because the devil is able
to kill or suffocate men; and without going so far as that, when he
disputes with them, he places them in such embarrassment, that he can
thus occasion their death. I have often experienced this myself." This
passage is certainly curious.

The phantom which appeared to Zwinglius, the founder of Protestantism
in Switzerland, affords us another example of extravagance no less
absurd. This heresiarch wished to deny the real presence of Jesus
Christ in the Eucharist; he pretended that what exists under the
consecrated species is only a sign. As the authority of the sacred
text, which clearly expresses the contrary, embarrassed him, behold,
suddenly, at the moment when he imagined that he was disputing with
the secretary of the town, a white or black phantom, so he tells
us himself, appeared to him, and showed him a means. This pleasant
anecdote we have from Zwinglius himself.

Who does not regret to see such a man as Melancthon also given up
to the prejudices and manias of the most ridiculous superstition,
stupidly credulous with respect to dreams, extraordinary phenomena,
and astrological prognostics? Read his letters, which are filled with
such pitiful things. At the time when the diet of Augsburg was held,
Melancthon regarded as favourable presages for the new gospel an
inundation of the Tiber, the birth at Rome of a monstrous mule with a
crane's foot, and that of a calf with two heads in the territory of
Augsburg,--events which to him were the undoubted announcements of a
change in the universe, and particularly of the approaching ruin of
Rome by the power of schism. He himself makes the horoscope of his
daughter, and he trembles for her because Mars presents an alarming
aspect; he is not the less alarmed at the tail of a comet appearing
within the limits of the north. The astrologers had predicted that in
autumn the stars would be more favorable to ecclesiastical disputes;
this prognostic sufficed to console him for the slowness of the
conferences of Augsburg on the subject of religion: we see, moreover,
that his friends--that is, the leaders of the party--allowed themselves
to be ruled by the same powerful reasons. As if he had not troubles
enough, it is predicted that Melancthon will be shipwrecked in the
Baltic; he avoids sailing on those fatal waters. Certain Franciscans
had prophesied that the power of the Pope was about to decline, and
then to fall for ever; also that, in the year 1600, the Turks were to
become masters of Italy and Germany; Melancthon boasts of having the
original prophecy in his possession; moreover, the earthquakes which
occur confirm him in his belief.

The human mind had but just set itself up as the only judge of faith,
when the atrocities of the most furious fanaticism already inundated
Germany with blood. Mathias Harlem, the Anabaptist, at the head of a
ferocious troop, orders the churches to be sacked, the sacred ornaments
to be broken in pieces, and all books, except the Bible, to be burnt,
as impious or useless. Established at Munster, which he calls Mont
Sion, he causes all the gold, silver, and precious stones possessed
by the inhabitants to be brought to him, and places them in a common
treasury, and names deacons to distribute them. All his disciples are
compelled to eat in common, to live in perfect equality, and to prepare
for the war which they would have to undertake, _quitting Mount Sion_,
as he himself said, _to subject all the nations of the earth to his
power_. He at length dies in a rash attempt, wherein, like another
Gideon, he undertook nothing less than to exterminate the army of the
impious with a handful of men. Mathias immediately found an heir to his
fanaticism in Becold, perhaps better known under the name of John of
Leyden. This fanatic, a tailor by trade, ran naked through the streets
of Munster, crying out, "_Behold, the king of Sion comes_." He returned
to his house, shut himself up there for three days; and when the
people came to inquire for him, he pretended that he could not speak;
like another Zachary, he made signs that he wanted writing materials,
and wrote that it had been revealed to him by God, that the people
should be governed by judges, in imitation of the people of Israel.
He named twelve judges, choosing the men who were the most attached
to himself; and until the authority of the new magistrates had been
acknowledged, he took the precaution not to allow himself to be seen
by any body. Already was the authority of the new prophet secured in a
certain manner; but not content with the real command, he desired to
surround himself with pomp and majesty; he proposed nothing less than
to have himself proclaimed king. Now the blindness of the sectarian
fanatics was so great, that it was not difficult for him to complete
his mad enterprise; it was enough for him to play off a gross farce. A
goldsmith who had an understanding with the aspirant to royalty, and
was also initiated in the art of prophecy, presented himself before the
judges of Israel, and spoke to them thus: "Behold, this is the will of
the Lord God, the Eternal: as in other times I established Saul over
Israel, and after him David, who was only a simple shepherd, so I now
establish my prophet Becold king of Sion." The judges would not resolve
on abdication; but Becold assured them that he also had had the same
vision, that he had concealed it from humility, but that God having
spoken by another prophet, it was necessary for him to resign himself
to mount the throne, and _accomplish the orders of the Most High_.
The judges persisted in wishing to call the people together; they
assembled in the market-place; there a _prophet_, on the part of God,
presented to Becold a drawn sword, as a sign of the _power of justice,
which was conferred on him over all the earth, to extend to the four
quarters of the world the empire of Sion_; he was proclaimed king with
the most boisterous joy, and solemnly crowned on the 24th of June,
1534. As he had espoused the wife of his predecessor, he raised her to
the royal dignity; but while reserving to her the exclusive privilege
of being queen, he continued to have seventeen wives, in conformity
with the _holy_ liberty which he had proclaimed in this matter. The
orgies, assassinations, atrocities, and ravings of all kinds which
followed cannot be related; it may be affirmed that the sixteen
months of the reign of this madman were only a series of crimes. The
Catholics cried out against such horrible excesses. The Protestants
cried out also; but who was to blame? Was it not they who, after
having proclaimed resistance to the authority of the Church, had thrown
the Bible into the midst of these wretched men, at the risk of their
heads being turned by the ravings of individual interpretation, and of
precipitating them into projects as criminal as they were senseless?
The Anabaptists were well aware of this; and they were exceedingly
indignant with Luther, who condemned them in his writings; and indeed,
what right had he, who had established the principle, to desire to
check its consequences? If Luther found in the Bible that the Pope
was Antichrist, if he arrogated to himself, of his own authority, the
mission of destroying the reign of the Pope, by exhorting all the world
to conspire against him, why could not the Anabaptists say, in their
turn, _that they had intercourse with God, and had received the order
to exterminate all the wicked, and to establish a new kingdom, in which
were to be seen only wise, pious, and innocent men, having become the
masters of all things_.

Hermann preaching the massacre of all the priests and all the
magistrates of the world; David George proclaiming that his doctrine
alone was perfect, that that of the _Old and New Testaments was
imperfect, and that he was the true Son of God_; Nicholas rejecting
faith and worship as useless, treading under foot the fundamental
precepts of morality, and teaching _that it was good to continue in
sin, that grace might abound_; Hacket pretending that the spirit of
the Messiah had descended upon him, and sending two of his disciples
to cry out in the streets of London, "_Behold Christ coming here with
a vase in his hand!_" Hacket himself crying out, at the sight of the
gibbet, and in the agony of punishment, "Jehovah! Jehovah! do you not
see that the heavens open, and that Jesus Christ comes to deliver me?"
are not all these deplorable spectacles, and a hundred others that I
might mention, proofs sufficiently evident that the Protestant system
nourishes and inflames a fearful fanaticism? Venner, Fox, William
Simpson, J. Naylor, Count Zinzendorf, Wesley, Baron Swedenborg, and
other similar names, are sufficient to remind us of an assemblage
of sects so extravagant, and a series of crimes such as would fill
volumes, which would afford us the most ridiculous and the most odious
pictures, the greatest miseries and the most deplorable errors of the
human mind. I have not invented or exaggerated. Open history, consult
authors--I do not mean Catholics, but Protestants, or whatever they may
be--and you will every where find a multitude of witnesses who depose
to the truth of these facts; notorious facts, which have taken place in
the light of day, in great capitals, and in times bordering on our own;
and let it not be supposed that this abundant source of illusion and
fanaticism has been exhausted in the course of ages; it does not seem
that it is yet near being dried up, and Europe appears condemned to
hear the recital of visions, such as those of Baron Swedenborg in the
inn in London; and we shall still see passports for heaven with three
seals given out, like those of Johanna Southcote.


NOTE 12, p. 60.

Nothing is more palpable than the difference which exists on this point
between Protestants and Catholics. On both sides there are persons who
consider themselves to be favored with heavenly visions; but these
visions render Protestants proud, turbulent, and raving mad, while
among Catholics they increase the spirit of humility, peace, and love.
Even in that very sixteenth century, in which the fanaticism of the
Protestants agitated and stained Europe with blood, there lived in
Spain a woman who, in the judgment of unbelievers and Protestants, is
certainly one of those who have been the most deeply infected with
illusion and fanaticism; but has the supposed fanaticism of this woman
ever caused the spilling of a drop of blood, or the shedding of a tear?
Were her visions, like those of Protestants, orders from heaven for the
extermination of men? After the desolate and horrible picture which I
have given in the preceding note, perhaps the reader will be glad to
let his eyes rest upon a spectacle as peaceful as it is beautiful. It
is St. Theresa writing her own life out of pure obedience, and relating
to us her visions with angelic candor and ineffable sweetness. "The
Lord (she says) willed that I should once have this vision: I saw
near to me, on the left hand, an angel in a corporeal form; this is
what I do not usually see, except by a prodigy; although angels often
present themselves to me without my seeing them, as I have said in the
preceding vision. In this the Lord willed that I should see him in the
following manner: he was not tall, but small and very beautiful, his
face all in a flame, and he seemed to be one of the angels very high
in the hierarchy, who apparently are all on fire. Without doubt, he
was one of those who are called seraphim.--These angels do not tell
me their names; but I clearly see that there is so great a difference
among the angels, between some and others, that I do not know how to
express it. I saw in his hands a long dart of gold, which appeared to
me to have some fire at the end of the point. It seemed to me that
the angel buried this dart from time to time in my heart, and made it
penetrate to my bowels, and that when withdrawing it, he carried them
away, leaving me all inflamed with a great love of God." (_Vie de St.
Thérèse_, c. xxix. no. 11.) Another example: "At this moment I see on
my head a dove very different from those of earth; for this one had
no feathers, but wings as it were of the shell of mother of pearl,
which shone brightly. It was larger than a dove; it seemed to me that
I heard the noise of its wings. It moved them almost for the time of
an Ave Maria. The soul was already in such a condition that, herself
swooning away, she also lost sight of this divine dove. The mind grew
tranquil with the presence of such a guest, although it seemed to me
that so wonderful a favor ought to fill it with perturbation and alarm;
but as the soul began to enjoy it, fear departed, repose came with
enjoyment, and the mind remained in ecstacy." (_Vie_, c. xxviii. no.
7.) It would be difficult to find any thing more beautiful, expressed
in more lively colors, and with a more amiable simplicity. It will not
be out of place to copy here two other passages of a different kind,
which, while they enforce what we wish to show, may contribute to
awaken the taste of our nation for a certain class of Spanish writers,
who are every day falling into oblivion with us, while foreigners
seek for them with eagerness, and publish handsome editions of them.
"I was once at office with all the rest; my soul was suddenly fixed
in attention, and it seemed to me to be entirely as a clear mirror
without reverse or side, neither high nor low, but shining every where.
In the midst of it, Christ our Saviour presented himself to me, as
I am accustomed to see Him. He appeared to me to be at once in all
parts of my soul. I saw Him as in a clear mirror, and this mirror also
(I cannot say how) was entirely imprinted on our Lord himself, by a
communication which I cannot describe--a communication full of love. I
know that this vision has been of great advantage to me every time that
I recollect it, principally when I have just received communion. I was
given to understand that when a soul is in a state of mortal sin, this
mirror is covered with great darkness, and is extremely obscure, so
that our Lord cannot appear or be seen therein, although He is always
present as giving being; as to heretics, it is as if the mirror were
broken, which is much worse than if it were obscured. There is a great
difference between seeing this and telling it; it is difficult to make
such a thing understood. I repeat, that this has been very profitable
to me, and also very afflicting, on account of the view of the various
offences by which I have obscured my soul, and have been deprived of
seeing my Lord." (_Vie_, c. xi. no. 4.)

In another place she explains a manner of seeing things in God; she
represents the idea by an image so brilliant and sublime, that we
appear to be reading Malebranche, when developing his famous system.

"We say that the Divinity is like a bright diamond, infinitely larger
than the world; or rather like a mirror, as I have said of the soul in
another vision; except that here it is in a manner so sublime, that I
know not how to exalt it sufficiently. All that we do is seen in this
diamond, which contains all in itself; for there is nothing which is
not comprised in so great a magnitude. It was alarming to me to see in
so short a time so many things assembled in this bright diamond; and I
am profoundly afflicted every time that I think that things so shocking
as my sins appeared to me in this most pure brightness." (_Vie_, c. xl.
no. 7.)

Let us now suppose, with Protestants, that all these visions were
only pure illusions: at least it is evident that they do not pervert
ideas, corrupt morals, or disturb public order; and assuredly, had they
served only to inspire these beautiful pages, we should not know how
to regret the illusion. This is a confirmation of what I have said of
the salutary effects which the Catholic principle produces in souls,
by preventing them from being blinded by pride, or throwing themselves
into dangerous courses. This principle confines them to a sphere where
it is impossible for them to injure any one; but it does not deprive
them of any of their force or energy to do good, supposing that the
inspiration is real. Although it would have been easy for me to cite a
thousand examples, I was compelled, for the sake of brevity, to confine
myself to one, when selecting St. Theresa as one of those who are the
most distinguished in this respect, and because she was contemporary
with the great aberrations of Protestantism. In fine, as she was a
daughter of Spain, I seized the opportunity of recalling her to the
memories of Spaniards, who begin too much to forget her.

NOTE 13, p. 64.

Some of the leaders of the Reformation have left suspicions that they
taught with insincerity, that they did not themselves believe what
they preached, and that they had no other object than to deceive their
proselytes. As I am unwilling to have it imputed to me that I have made
this accusation rashly, I will adduce some proofs in support of my
assertion. Let us hear Luther himself. "Often," he says, "do I think
within myself that I scarcely know where I am, and whether I teach the
truth or not (Sæpe sic mecum cogito, propemodum nescio, quo loco sim,
et utrum veritatem doceam, necne)." (Luther, _Col. Isleb. de Christo_.)
And it is the same man who said: "It is certain that I have received
my dogmas from heaven. I will not allow you to judge of my doctrine,
neither you nor even the angels of heaven (Certum est dogmata mea
habere me de cœlo. Non sinam vel vos vel ipsos angelos de cœlo de mea
doctrina judicare)." (Luther, _contra Reg. Ang._) John Matthei, the
author of many writings on the life of Luther, and who is not scanty
in eulogies on the heresiarch, has preserved a very curious anecdote
touching the convictions of Luther. It is this: "A preacher called John
Musa related to me that he one day complained to Luther that he could
not prevail on himself to believe what he taught to others: '_Blessed
be God_ (said Luther) _that the same thing happens to others as to
myself: I believed till now that THAT was a thing which happened only
to me_.'" (Johann. Matthesius, _conc._ 12.)

The doctrines of infidelity were not long delayed; but would it be
believed that they are found expressed in various parts of Luther's own
works? "It is likely," says he, speaking of the dead, "that, except a
few, they all sleep deprived of feeling." "I think that the dead are
buried in so ineffable and wonderful a sleep, that they feel or see
less than those who sleep an ordinary sleep." "The souls of the dead
enter neither into purgatory nor into hell." "The human soul sleeps;
all its senses buried." "There is no suffering in the abode of the
dead." ("Verisimile est, exceptis paucis, omnes dormire insensibiles."
"Ego puto mortuos sic ineffabili et miro somno sopitos, ut minus
sentiant aut videant, quam hi qui alias dormiunt." "Animæ mortuorum
non ingrediuntur in purgatorium nec infernum." "Anima humana dormit,
omnibus sensibus sepultis." "Mortuorum locus cruciatus nullos habet.")
(Tom. ii. _Epist. Lat. Isleb._ fol. 44; t. vi. _Lat. Wittenberg_,
in cap. ii., cap. xxiii., c. xxv., c. xlii. et xlix. _Genes._ et t.
iv. _Lat. Wittenberg_, fol. 109.) Persons were not wanting ready to
receive such doctrines; and this teaching caused such ravages, that
the Lutheran Brentzen, disciple and successor of Luther, hesitates
not to say: "_Although no one among us publicly professes that the
soul perishes with the body, and that there is no resurrection of the
dead, nevertheless the impure and wholly profane lives which they for
the most part lead, show very clearly that they do not believe that
there is another life. Some even allow words of this kind to escape
them, not only in the intoxication of libations, but even when fasting,
in their familiar intercourse._ (Et si inter nos nulla sit publica
professio quod anima simul cum corpore intereat, et quod non sit
mortuorum resurrectio, tamen impurissima et profanissima illa vita,
quam maxima pars hominum sectatur, perspicue indicat quod non sentiat
vitam post hanc. Nonnullis etiam tales voces, tam ebriis inter pocula,
quam sobriis in familiaribus colloquiis.)" (Brentius, _Hom._ 35, in
cap. 20, Luc.) There were in this same sixteenth century some men who
cared not to give their names to this or that sect, but who professed
infidelity and scepticism without disguise. We know that the famous
Gruet paid with his head for his boldness in this way; and it was not
the Catholics who cut it off, but the Calvinists, who were offended
that this unhappy man had taken the liberty to paint the character
and conduct of Calvin in their true colors. Gruet had also committed
the crime of posting up placards at Geneva, in which he charged the
pretended reformers with inconsistency, on account of the tyranny which
they attempted to exercise over consciences, after having shaken off
the yoke of authority on their own account. This took place soon after
the birth of Protestantism, as the sentence on Gruet was executed in
1549.

Montaigne, who has been pointed out as one of the first sceptics who
acquired reputation in Europe, carries the thing so far, that he does
not even admit the natural law. "_They are not serious_ (he says)
_when, to give some certainty to laws, they say that there are any
laws fixed, perpetual, and immutable, which they call natural, which
are impressed on the human race by the condition of their peculiar
essence_." (Montaigne, _Ess._ l. ii. c. 12.)

We have already seen what Luther thought of death, or at least the
expression which escaped him on this subject; and we cannot be
astonished after that, that Montaigne wished to die like a real
unbeliever, and that he says, speaking of the terrible passage: "_I
plunge my head, insensibly sunk in death, without considering or
observing it, as in a silent and obscure depth, which swallows me up
at once, stifles me in a moment with powerful sleep full of insipidity
and indolence._" (Montaigne, l. iii. c. 9.) But this man, who wished
that death should find him planting his cabbages, and without thinking
of it (_Je veux que la mort me trouve plantant mes choux, mais sans me
soucier d'elle_), was not of the same opinion in his last moments. When
he was near breathing his last, he wished that the holy sacrifice of
the Mass should be celebrated in his apartment, and he expired while
making an effort to raise himself on his bed, in the act of adoring
the sacred Host. We see that he had profited in his heart by some of
his ideas with respect to the Christian religion. "It is pride," he
had said, "that leads man out of the common path, and urges him to
embrace novelties, loving rather to be the chief of a wandering and
undisciplined band, than to be a disciple of the school of truth." In
another place, at once condemning all the dissenting sects, he had
said, "In religious matters it is necessary to adhere to those who are
the established judges of doctrine, and who have legitimate authority,
not to the most learned and the cleverest."

From all that I have just said, it is clear that if I accuse
Protestantism of having been one of the principal causes of infidelity
in Europe, I do not accuse it without reason. I repeat here, that it is
by no means my intention to overlook the efforts of some Protestants
to oppose infidelity; I do not assail _persons_, but _things_, and I
honor merit wherever I find it. In fine, I will add, that if at the
end of the seventeenth century a considerable number of Protestants
displayed a tendency towards Catholicity, we must seek the reason
for it in the progress which they saw infidelity making,--a progress
which it was impossible to check, at least without holding fast to the
anchor of authority which the Catholic Church offered to the whole
world. I cannot, without exceeding the limits which I have marked out
for myself, give a circumstantial detail of the correspondence between
Molanus and the Bishop of Tyna, of Leibnitz and Bossuet. Readers who
desire to become thoroughly acquainted with that affair, may examine it
partly in the works of Bossuet himself, and partly in the interesting
work of M. de Beausset, prefixed to some editions of Bossuet.


NOTE 14, p. 86.

In order to form an idea of the state of knowledge at the time of the
appearance of Christianity, and become convinced that there was nothing
to be expected from the human mind abandoned to its own strength, it
is enough to recall to mind the monstrous sects which every where
abounded in the first ages of the Church, the doctrines whereof
formed the most shapeless, extravagant, and immoral compound that it
is possible to conceive. The names of Cerinthus, Menander, Ebion,
Saturninus, Basilides, Nicolas, Carpocrates, Valentinus, Marcion,
Montanus, and so many others, remind us of the sects in which delirium
was connected with immorality. When we throw a glance over these
philosophico-religious sects, we see that they were capable neither
of conceiving a philosophical system with any degree of concert, nor
of imagining a collection of doctrines and practices to which the
name of religion can be applied. These men overturned, mixed, and
confounded all; Judaism, Christianity, and the recollections of the
ancient schools, were all amalgamated in their deluded heads; what they
never forgot was, to give a loose rein to all kinds of corruption and
obscenity.

In the spectacle of these ages, a wide field is opened to the
conjectures of true philosophy. What would have become of human
knowledge, if Christianity had not come to enlighten the world with her
celestial doctrines; if that divine religion, confounding the foolish
pride of man, had not come to show him how vain and senseless were his
thoughts, and how far he was removed from the path of truth? It is
remarkable that these same men, whose aberrations make us shudder, gave
themselves the name of Gnostics, on account of the superior knowledge
with which they supposed themselves to be endowed. We see that man is
at all times the same.


NOTE 15, p. 115.

I have thought that it would not be useless to transcribe here, word
for word, the canons which I have mentioned in the text. My readers may
thereby acquire for themselves a complete knowledge of what is found
there; and there will be no room left to suppose that the real sense of
the regulations has been perverted in the extracts which I have given.


CANONS AND OTHER DOCUMENTS,

 _Which show the solicitude of the Church to improve the lot of slaves,
 and the various means she has used to accomplish the abolition of
 slavery:_


§ I.

 _A penance is imposed on the mistress who maltreats her slave_
 (_ancillam_).

(Concilium Eliberitanum, anno 305.)

"Si qua domina furore zeli accensa flagris verberaverit ancillam
suam, ita ut in tertium diem animam cum cruciatu effundat; eo quod
incertum sit, voluntate an casu occiderit; si voluntate, post septem
annos, si casu, post quinquennii tempora, acta legitima pœnitentia, ad
communionem placuit admitti. Quod si infra tempora constituta fuerit
infirmata, accipiat communionem." (Canon 5.)

It must be observed, that the word 'ancillam' means a slave properly
so called, and not any kind of servant. This appears, indeed, from the
words _flagris verberaverit_, which express a chastisement reserved for
slaves.


 _They excommunicate the master who, of his own authority, beats his
 slave to death._

(Concilium Epaoense, anno 517.)

"Si quis servum proprium sine conscientia judicis occiderit,
excommunicatione biennii effusionem sanguinis expiabit." (Canon 34.)

This same regulation is repeated in the 15th canon of the 17th Council
of Toledo, held in 694; even the words of the Council of Epaon are
there copied with very slight change.


 (Ibid.) _The slave guilty of an atrocious crime was to escape
 corporeal punishments by taking refuge in a church._

"Servus reatu atrociore culpabilis si ad ecclesiam confugerit, a
corporabilibus tantum suppliciis excusetur. De capillis vero, vel
quocumque opere, placuit, a dominis juramenta non exigi." (Canon 39.)


 _Very remarkable precautions to prevent masters from maltreating the
 slaves who had taken refuge in churches._

(Concilium Aurelianense quintum, anno 549.)

"De servis vero, qui pro qualibet culpa ad ecclesiæ septa confugerint,
id statuimus observandum, ut, sicut in antiquis constitutionibus
tenetur scriptum, pro concessa culpa datis a domino sacramentis,
quisquis ille fuerit, expediatur de venia jam securus. Enim vero si
immemor fidei dominus trascendisse convincitur quod juravit, ut is qui
veniam acceperat, probetur postmodum pro ea culpa qualicumque supplicio
cruciatus, dominus ille qui immemor fuit datæ fidei, sit ab omnium
communione suspensus. Iterum si servus de promissione veniæ datis
sacramentis a domino jam securus exire noluerit, ne sub tali contumacia
requirens locum fugæ, domino fortasse dispereat, egredi nolentem
a domino eum liceat occupari, ut nullam, quasi pro retentatione
servi, quibuslibet modis molestiam aut calumniam patiatur ecclesia:
fidem tamen dominus, quam pro concessa venia dedit, nulla temeritate
transcendat. Quod si aut gentilis dominus fuerit, aut alterius sectæ,
qui a conventu ecclesiæ probatur extraneus, is qui servum repetit,
personas requirat bonæ fidei Christianas, ut ipsi in persona domini
servo præbeant sacramenta: quia ipsi possunt servare quod sacrum est,
qui pro transgressione ecclesiasticum metuunt disciplinam." (Canon 22.)

It is difficult to carry solicitude for the lot of slaves further. This
document is very curious.


 _They forbid bishops to mutilate their slaves: they order that the
 duty of chastising them should be left to the judge of the town, who,
 nevertheless, could not cut off their hair, a punishment which was
 considered too ignominious._

(Concilium Emeritense, anno 666.)

"Si regalis pietas pro salute omnium suarum legum dignata est ponere
decreta, cur religio sancta per sancti concilii ordinem non habeat
instituta, quæ omnino debent esse cavenda? Ideoque placuit huic sancto
concilio, ut omnis potestas episcopalis modum suæ ponat iræ; nec
pro quolibet excessu cuilibet ex familia, ecclesiæ aliquod corporis
membrorum sua ordinatione præsumat extirpare aut auferre. Quod si talis
emerserit culpa, advocato judice civitatis, ad examen ejus deducatur
quod factum fuisse asseritur. Et quia omnino justum est, ut pontifex
sævissimam non impendat vindictam; quidquid coram judice verius
patuerit, per disciplinæ severitatem absque turpi decalvatione maneat
emendatum." (Canon 15.)


 _Priests are forbidden to have their slaves mutilated._

(Concilium Toletanum undecimum, anno 675.)

"His a quibus domini sacramenta tractanda sunt, judicium sanguinis
agitare non licet: et ideo magnopere talium excessibus prohibendum
est, ne indiscretæ præsumptionis motibus agitati, aut quod morte
plectendum est, sententia propria judicare præsumant, aut truncationes
quaslibet membrorum quibuslibet personis aut per se inferant, aut
inferendas præcipiant. Quod si quisquam horum immemor præceptorum, aut
ecclesiæ suæ familiis, aut in quibuslibet personis tale quid fecerit,
et concessi ordinis honore privatus, et loco suo, perpetuo damnationis
teneatur religatus ergastulo: cui tamen communio exeunti ex hac vita
non neganda est, propter domini misericordiam, _qui non vult peccatoris
mortem, sed ut convertatur et vivat_." (Canon 6.)

It should be remarked, that the word _familia_, employed in the two
last canons which we have just cited, should be understood of slaves.
The real meaning of this word is clearly shown us by the 74th canon of
the 4th Council of Toledo.

"De _familiis_ ecclesiæ constituere presbyteros et diaconos per
parochias liceat ..... ea tamen ratione ut _antea manumissi libertatem
status sui percipiant_."

We see this word employed in the same sense by Pope St. Gregory.
(Epist. xliv. l. 4.)


 _A penance is imposed on the master who kills his slave of his own
 authority._

 (Concilium Wormatiense, anno 868.)

"Si quis servum proprium sine conscientia judicum qui tale quid
commiserit, quod morte sit dignum, occiderit, excommunicatione vel
pœnitentia biennii, reatum sanguinis emendabit." (Canon 38.)

"Si qua femina furore zeli accensa, flagris verberaverit ancillam suam,
ita ut intra tertium diem animam suam cum cruciatu effundat, eo quod
incertum sit voluntate, an casu occiderit; si voluntate, septem annos,
si casu, per quinque annorum tempora legitimam peragat pœnitentiam."
(Canon 39.)


 _They check the violence of those who, to revenge themselves for the
 asylum granted to slaves, take possession of the goods of the Church._

(Concilium Arausicanum primum, anno 441.)

"Si quis autem mancipia clericorum pro suis mancipiis ad ecclesiam
fugientibus crediderit occupanda, per omnes ecclesias districtissima
damnatione feriatur." (Canon 6.)


§ II.

 (Ibid.) _They check all attempts made against the liberty of slaves
 enfranchised by the Church, or who have been recommended to her by
 will._

"In ecclesia manumissos, vel per testamentum ecclesiæ commendatos,
si quis in servitutem, vel obsequium, vel ad colonariam conditionem
imprimere tentaverit, animadversione ecclesiastica coerceatur." (Canon
7.)


 _They secure the liberty of those who have received the benefit of
 manumission in the Churches. The latter are enjoined to take upon
 themselves the defence of the enfranchised._

(Concilium quintum Aurelianense, anno 549.)

"Et quia plurimorum suggestione comperimus, eos qui in ecclesiis juxta
patrioticam consuetudinem a servitiis fuerunt absoluti, pro libito
quorumcumque iterum ad servitium revocari, impium esse tractavimus, ut
quod in ecclesia Dei consideratione a vinculo servitutis absolvitur,
irritum habeatur. Ideo pietatis causa communi concilio placuit
observandum, ut quæcumque mancipia ab ingenuis dominis servitute
laxantur, in ea libertate maneant, quam tunc a dominis perceperunt.
Hujusmodi quoque libertas si a quocumque pulsata fuerit, cum justitia
ab ecclesiis defendatur, præter eas culpas, pro quibus leges collatas
servis revocare jusserunt libertates." (Canon 7.)


 _The Church is charged with the defence of the enfranchised, whether
 they have been emancipated within her enclosure, whether they have
 been so by letter or testament, or have gained their liberty by
 prescription. They restrain the arbitrariness of the judges towards
 these unfortunate persons. It is decided that the Bishops shall take
 cognizance of these causes._

(Concilium Matisconense secundum, anno 585.)

"Quæ dum postea universo cœtui secundum consuetudinem recitata
innotescerent, Prætextatus et Pappulus viri beatissimi dixerunt:
Decernat itaque, et de miseris libertis vestræ auctoritatis vigor
insignis, qui ideo plus a judicibus affliguntur, quia sacris sunt
commendati ecclesiis: ut si quas quispiam dixerit contra eos actiones
habere, non audeat eos magistratus contradere; sed in episcopi tantum
judicio, in cujus præsentia litem contestans, quæ sunt justitiæ
ac veritatis audiat. Indignum est enim, ut hi qui in sacrosancta
ecclesia jure noscuntur legitimo manumissi, aut per epistolam, aut
per testamentum, aut per longinquitatem temporis libertatis jure
fruuntur, a quolibet injustissime inquietentur. Universa sacerdotalis
Congregatio dixit: Justum est, ut contra calumniatorum omnium versutias
defendantur, qui patrocinium immortalis ecclesiæ concupiscunt. Et
quicumque a nobis de libertis latum decretum, superbiæ ausu prævaricare
tentaverit, irreparabili damnationis suæ sententia feriatur. Sed si
placuerit episcopo ordinarium judicem, aut quemlibet alium sæcularem,
in audientiam eorum accersiri, cum libuerit fiat, et nullus alius
audeat causas pertractare libertorum nisi episcopus cujus interest, aut
is cui idem audiendum tradiderit." (Canon 7.)


_The defence of the freed is confided to the priests._

 (Concilium Parisiense quintum, anno 614.)

"Liberti quorumcumque ingenuorum a sacerdotibus defensentur, nec ad
publicum ulterius revocentur. Quod si quis ausu temerario eos imprimere
voluerit, aut ad publicum revocare, et admonitus per pontificem ad
audientiam venire neglexerit, aut emendare quod perpetravit distulerit,
communione privetur." (Canon 5.)


_The enfranchised recommended to the Churches shall be protected by the
Bishops._

(Concilium Toletanum tertium, anno 589.)

"De libertis autem id Dei præcipiunt sacerdotes, ut si qui ab episcopis
facti sunt secundum modum quo canones antiqui dant licentiam, sint
liberi; et tantum a patrocinio ecclesiæ tam ipsi quam ab eis progeniti
non recedant. Ab aliis quoque libertati traditi, et ecclesiis
commendati, patrocinio episcopali tegantur, a principe hoc episcopus
postulet." (Canon 6.)


 _The Church undertakes to defend the liberty and the property acquired
 by industry of the enfranchised who have been recommended to her._

(Concilium Toletanum quartum, anno 633.)

"Liberti qui a quibuscumque manumissi sunt, atque ecclesiæ patrocinio
commendati existunt, sicut regulæ antiquorum patrum constituerunt,
sacerdotali defensione a cujuslibet insolentia protegantur; sive in
statu libertatis eorum, seu in peculio quod habere noscuntur." (Cap.
72.)


 _The Church will defend the enfranchised: a regulation which does not
 distinguish whether they have been recommended to her or not._

(Concilium Agathense, anno 506.)

"Libertos legitime a dominis suis factos ecclesia, si necessitas
exegerit, tueatur; quod si quis ante audientiam, aut pervadere, aut
expoliare præsumpserit, ab ecclesia repellatur." (Canon 29.)


§ III.

 _The Church shall regard the ransom of captives as her first care; she
 shall give their interests the preference over her own, however bad
 may be the state of her affairs._

"Sicut omnino grave est, frustra ecclesiastica ministeria venundare,
sic iterum culpa est, imminente hujusmodi necessitate, res maxime
desolatæ Ecclesiæ captivis suis præponere, et in eorum redemptione
cessare." (Caus. xii. q. 2, canon 16.)


 _Remarkable words of St. Ambrose touching the ransom of captives.
 To perform this pious duty, the holy Bishop breaks up and sells the
 sacred vessels._

(S. Ambrosius de Off. lib. ii. cap. 15.)

(§ 70.) "Summa etiam liberalitas captos redimere, eripere ex hostium
manibus, subtrahere neci homines, et maxime feminas turpidini, reddere
parentibus liberos, parentes liberis, cives patriæ, restituere. Nota
sunt hæc nimis Illyriæ vastitate et Thraciæ: quanti ubique venales
erant captivi orbe....

Ibid. (§ 71.) "Præcipua est igitur liberalitas, redimere captivos
et maxime ab hoste barbaro, qui nihil deferat humanitatis ad
misericordiam, nisi quod avaritia reservaverit ad redemptionem."

Ib. l. ii. c. 2 (§ 13.) "_Ut nos aliquando in invidiam incidimus, quod
confregerimus vasa mystica, ut captivos redimeremus_, quod Arianis
displicere potuerat, nec tam factum displiceret, quam ut esset quod in
nobis reprehenderetur."

These noble and charitable sentiments were not those of St. Ambrose
only; his words are but the expression of the feelings of the whole
Church. Without referring to numberless proofs which I might adduce
here, and before I pass to the canons which I mean to insert, I will
copy some passages from a touching letter of St. Cyprian, which
contains the motives which animated the Church in her pious enterprise,
and gives a lively description of her zeal and charity in these
admirable efforts.

"Cyprianus Januario, Maximo, Proculo, Victori, Modiano, Nemesiano,
Nampulo, et Honorato, fratribus salutem. Cum maximo animi nostri gemitu
et non sine lacrymis legimus litteras vestras, fratres carissimi, quas
ad nos pro dilectionis vestræ sollicitudine de fratrum nostrorum et
sororum captivitate fecistis. Quis enim non doleat in ejusmodi casibus,
aut quis non dolorem fratris sui suum proprium computet cum loquatur
apostolus Paulus et dicat: _Si patitur unum membrum, compatiuntur et
cætera membra: si lætatur membrum unum, collætantur et cætera membra._
(1 ad Cor. xii. 26.) Et alio loco: _Quis infirmatur, inquit, et non ego
infirmor?_ (2 ad Cor. xi. 29.) Quare nunc et nobis captivitas fratrum
nostra captivitas computanda est, et periclitantium dolor pro nostro
dolore numerandus est, cum sit scilicet adunationis nostræ corpus
unum, et non tantum dilectio sed et religio instigare nos debeat et
confortare ad fratrum membra redimenda. Nam cum denuo apostolus Paulus
dicat: _Nescitis quia templum Dei estis, et Spiritus Dei habitat in
vobis?_ (1 ad Cor. iii. 16), etiamsi charitas nos minus adigeret ad
opem fratribus ferendam, considerandum tamen hoc in loco fuit, Dei
templum esse quæ capta sunt, nec pati nos longa cessatione et neglecto
dolore debere, ut diu Dei templa captiva sint; sed quibus possumus
viribus elaborare et velociter gerere ut Christum judicem et Dominum
et Deum nostrum promereamur obsequiis nostris. Nam cum dicat Paulus
apostolus, _Quotquot in Christo baptizati estis, Christum induistis_
(ad Gal. iii. 27,) in captivis fratribus nostrus contemplandus est
Christus et redimendus de periculo captivitatis, qui nos de diaboli
faucibus exuit, nunc ipse qui manet et habitat in nobis de barbarorum
manibus exuatur, et redimatur nummaria quantitate qui nos cruce redemit
et sanguine.

       *       *       *       *       *

Quantus vero communis omnibus nobis mœror atque cruciatus est de
periculo virginum quæ illic tenentur? pro quibus non tantum libertatis,
sed et pudoris jactura plangenda est, nec tam vincula barbarorum quam
lenonum et lupanarium stupra defienda sunt, ne membra Christo dicata
et in æternum continentiæ honorum pudica virtute devota, insultantium
libidine et contagione fœdentur? Quæ omnia istic secundum litteras
vestras fraternitas nostra cogitans et dolenter examinans, prompte
omnes et libenter ac largiter subsidia nummaria fratribus contulerunt.

       *       *       *       *       *

Misimus autem sestertia centum millia nummorum, quæ istic in
ecclesia cui de Domini indulgentia præsumus, cleri et plebis apud
nos consistentis collatione, collecta sunt, quæ vos illic pro vestra
diligentia dispensabitis.

       *       *       *       *       *

Si tamen ad explorandam nostri anima charitatem, et examinandi nostri
pectoris fidem tale aliquid acciderit, nolite cunctari nuntiare hæc
nobis litteris vestris, pro certo habentes ecclesiam nostram et
fraternitatem istic universam, ne hæc ultra fiant precibus orare, si
facta fuerint, libenter et largiter subsidia præstare." (Epist. 60.)

Thus the zeal for the redemption of captives, a zeal which was exerted
with so much ardor in later ages, had appeared in the earliest times of
the Church; this zeal was founded on grand and sublime motives, which
render this work in some measure divine, and secure to those who devote
themselves to it an unfading crown. Important information on this
subject will be found also in the works of St. Gregory. (V. lib. iii.
ep. 16; lib. iv. ep. 17; lib. vi. ep. 35; lib. vii. ep. 26, 28, and 38;
lib. ix. ep. 17.)


 _The property of the Church employed for the redemption of captives._

(Concilium Matisconense secundum, anno 585.)

"Unde statuimus ac decernimus, ut mos antiquus a fidelibus reparetur;
et decimas ecclesiasticis famulantibus ceremoniis populus omnis
inferat, quas sacerdotes aut in pauperum usum _aut in captivorum
redemptionem prærogantes_, suis orationibus pacem populo ac salutem
impetrent: si quis autem contumax nostris statutis saluberrimis fuerit,
a membris ecclesiæ omni tempore separetur." (Canon 5.)


 _It is allowed to break up the sacred vessels, in order to devote the
 price of them to the redemption of captives._

(Concilium Rhemense, anno 625 vel 630.)

"Si quis episcopus, excepto si evenerit ardua necessitas pro
redemptione captivorum ministeria sancta frangere pro qualicumque
conditione presumpserit, ab officio cessabit ecclesiæ." (Canon 22.)

The following canon informs us that the Bishops gave letters of
recommendation to the captives; they are desired to state therein the
date and price of the ransom; they are requested also to mention there
the wants of those who are thus restored to liberty.

(Concilium Lugdunense tertium, anno 583.)

"Id etiam de epistolis placuit captivorum, ut ita sint sancti
pontifices cauti, ut in servitio pontificibus consistentibus qui eorum
manu vel subscriptione agnoscat epistolæ aut quælibet insinuationum
litteræ dari debeant, quatenus de subscriptionibus nulla ratione
possit Deo propitio dubitari: et epistola commendationis pro
necessitate cujuslibet promulgata dies datarum et pretia constituta,
vel necessitates captivorum quos cum epistolis dirigunt, ibidem
inserantur." (Canon 2.)


 _Excess into which some ecclesiastics allowed themselves to fall, by
 an indiscreet zeal in favor of captives._

 (Synodus S. Patricii, Auxilii et Isernini Episcoporum in Hibernia
 celebrata, circa annum Christi 450 vel 456.)

"Si quis clericorum voluerit juvare captivo cum suo pretio illi
subveniat, nam si per furtum illum inviolaverit, blasphemantur multi
clerici per unum latronem, qui sic fecerit excommunionis sit." (Canon
32.)

The church employed her property in the ransom of captives; and when
the latter had afterwards acquired the means of repaying the sums
advanced for them, she refused all reimbursement and graciously gave up
the price of the ransom.

(Ex epistolis S. Gregorii.)

"Sacrorum canonum statuta et legalis permittit auctoritates, lici
res ecclesiasticas in redemptionem captivorum impendi. Et ideo, quia
edocti a vobis sumus, ante annos fere 18, virum reverendissimum
quemdam Fabium, Episcopum Ecclesiæ Firmanæ, libras 11 argenti de eadem
ecclesia pro redemptione vestra, ac patris vestri Passivi, fratris et
co-episcopi nostri, tunc vero clerici, necnon matris vestræ, hostibus
impendisse, atque ex hoc quamdam formidinem vos habere, ne hoc
quod datum est, a vobis quolibet tempore repetatur, hujus præcepti
auctoritate suspicionem vestram prævidimus auferendam; constituentes,
nullam vos exinde, hæredesque vestros quolibet tempore repetitionis
molestiam sustinere, nec a quoquam vobis aliquam objici quæstionem."
(L. 7, ep. 14, et hab. Cuas. 12, q. 2, c. 15.)


 _The property of the Church served to ransom captives._

(Concilium Vernense secundum, anno 844.)

"Ecclesiæ facultates quas reges et reliqui christiani Deo voverunt,
ad alimentum servorum Dei et pauperum, ad exceptionem hospitum,
_redemptionis captivorum_, atque templorum Dei instaurationem, nunc
in usu sæcularium detinentur. Hinc multi servi Dei penuriam cibi et
potus ac vestimentorum patiuntur, pauperes consuetam eleemosynam non
accipiunt, negliguntur hospites, _fraudantur captivi_, et fama omnium
merito laceratur." (Canon 12.)

Let us observe in this canon the use which the Church made of her
property; after having supported the clergy, and maintained divine
worship, she devoted it to succor the poor, travellers or pilgrims,
and to redeem captives. I make this observation here, because the
opportunity offers; not because this canon is the only proof of the
excellent use which the Church made of her property. Indeed, a great
number of others might be cited, beginning with the canons called
Apostolical. It is necessary also to remark the expression which is
sometimes made use of to stigmatize the wickedness of the spoilers of
the Church, or of those who administer her property badly; they are
called _pauperum necatores_, 'murderers of the poor;' to make it well
understood that one of the principal objects of this property is the
support of the necessitous.


§ IV.

 _Those who attempt to take away the liberty of persons are
 excommunicated._

(Concilium Lugdunense secundum, anno 566.)

"Et qui peccatis facientibus multi in perniciem animæ suæ ita conati
sunt, aut conantur assurgere, ut animas longa temporis quiete sine
ulla status sui competitione viventes, nunc improba proditione atque
traditione, aut captivaverint aut captivare conentur, si juxta
præceptum domini regis emendare distulerint, quousque hos quos
obduxerunt, in loco in quo longum tempus quiete vixerint, restaurare
debeant, ecclesiæ communione priventur." (Canon 3.)

We see in this canon that private individuals, by too frequent
attempts, employed violence to reduce free persons to slavery. At
this time, on account of the irruptions of the barbarians, the state
of Europe was such, that public authority, weak in the extreme, did
not, properly speaking, exist. This is the reason why it is so noble
to see the Church struggling every where to support public order, to
defend liberty, and excommunicating those who attacked that liberty, in
contempt of the commands of the king.


 _The same abuse repressed._

(Concilium Rhemense, anno 625 vel 630.)

"Si quis ingenuum aut liberum ad servitium inclinare voluerit, aut
fortasse jam fecit, et commonitus ab episcopo se de inquietudine ejus
revocare neglexerit, aut emendare noluerit, tamquam calumniæ reum
placuit sequestrari." (Canon 17.)


 _It is declared that he who leads away a Christian to sell him, is
 guilty of homicide._

(Concilium Confluentinum, anno 922.)

"Item interrogatum est, quid de eo faciendum sit qui christianum
hominem seduxerit, et sic vendiderit: responsumque est ab omnibus,
homicidii reatum, ipsum hominem sibi contrahere." (Canon 7.)


 _The traffic in men, practised at that time in England, is proscribed;
 it is forbidden to sell men like ignoble animals._

(Concilium Londinense, anno 1102.)

"Ne quis illud _nefarium negotium_ quo hactenus in Anglia solebant
homines sicut bruta animalia venundari, deinceps ullatenus facere
præsumat."

We see, from the canon which I have just cited, to what point the
Church had attained in all that affects true civilization. We are in
the nineteenth century, and it is considered that a great step has been
gained in modern civilization by the consent of the great European
nations to sign treaties to suppress the slave-trade; now the canon
which we have just cited tells us, that at the beginning of the twelfth
century, and in that very town of London, where the famous Convention
was lately held, the traffic in men was forbidden, and stigmatized as
it deserves. _Nefarium negotium_--detestable trade--it is called by the
Council: _infamous traffic_, it is called by modern civilization, the
unconscious heir of the thoughts and even the words of those men who
are treated by it as barbarians, of those Bishops, whom calumny has
more or less represented as a band of conspirators against the liberty
and happiness of the human race.


 _It is ordered that persons who have been sold or pledged, shall
 immediately recover their liberty by restoring the price received; it
 is ordained that more shall not be required of them than they shall
 have received for their liberty._

(Synodus incerti loci, circa annum 616.)

"De ingenuis qui se pro pecunia aut alia revendiderint, vel
oppignoraverint, placuit ut quandoquidem pretium, quantum pro ipsis
datum est, invenire potuerunt, absque dilatione ad statum suæ
conditionis reddito pretio reformentur, nec amplius quam pro eis datum
est requiratur. Et interim, si vir ex ipsis, uxorem ingenuam habuerit,
aut mulier ingenuum habuerit maritum, filii qui ex ipsis nati fuerint,
in ingenuitate permaneant." (Canon 14.)

The text of this Council, held, according to some, at Boneuil, well
deserves to have some remarks made on it. The beneficial regulation
which allowed a man who had been sold to regain his liberty by paying
the sum received, checked an evil which was deeply rooted in the
customs of Gaul at that time, for we find it at a very early period. We
know, indeed, from Cæsar, whose testimony we have cited in the text,
that many men of that country sold their liberty to relieve themselves
from difficulties. Let us also remark the regulation contained in the
same canon with respect to the children of the person who was sold;
whether it be the father or mother, the canon prescribes, in both
cases, that the children shall be free; and it here departs from the
well known rule of civil law: _partus sequitur ventrem_.


§ V.

 _It is forbidden to give up to the Jews the slaves who have taken
 refuge in the churches; it matters little whether they have chosen
 that asylum because their masters obliged them to things contrary to
 the Christian faith, or because they have been maltreated by them
 after having been once withdrawn from the sacred asylum under the
 promise of pardon._

(Concilium Aurelianense tertium, anno 538.)

"De mancipiis Christianis, quæ in Judæorum servitio detinentur, si eis
quod Christiana religio vetat, a dominis imponitur, aut si eos quos de
ecclesia excusatos tollent, pro culpa quæ remissa est, affligere aut
cædere fortasse præsumpserint, et ad ecclesiam iterato confugerint,
nullatenus a sacerdote reddantur, nisi pretium offeratur ac detur, quod
mancipia ipsa valere pronuntiaverit justa taxatio." (Canon 13.)


 _The precept given in the preceding canon is renewed; a precept
 contained in the canon which we have just cited._

(Concilium Aurelianense quartum, anno 541.)

"Cum prioribus canonibus jam fuerit definitum ut de mancipiis
Christianis, quæ apud Judæos sunt, si ad ecclesiam confugerint, et
redimi se postulaverint, etiam ad quoscumque Christianos refugerint, et
servire Judæis noluerint, taxato et oblato a fidelibus justo pretio, ab
eorum dominio liberentur, ideo statuimus, ut tam justa constitutio ab
omnibus catholicis conservetur." (Canon 30.)


 _The Jew who perverts a Christian slave is punished with the loss of
 all his slaves._ (Ibid.)

"Hoc etiam decernimus observandum, ut quicumque Judæus proselytum, qui
advena dicitur, Judæum facere præsumpserit, aut Christianum factum ad
Judaicam superstitionem adducere; vel si Judæus Christianam ancillam
suam sibi crediderit sociandam; vel si de parentibus Christianis natum,
Judæum sub promissione fecerit libertatis, mancipiorum amissione
mulctetur." (Canon 31.)


 _Jews are forbidden to have Christian slaves henceforth; as to those
 who are in their power, all Christians are allowed to ransom them by
 paying their Jewish masters twelve solidi._

(Concilium Matisconense primum, anno 581.)

"Et liceat quid de Christianis qui aut de captivitatis incursu, aut
fraudibus Judæorum servitio implicantur, debeat observari, non solum
canonicis statutis, sed et legum beneficio pridem fuerit constitutum;
tamen quia nunc item quo rumdam querela exorta est, quosdam Judæos,
per civitates aut municipia consistentes, in tantam insolentiam et
proterviam prorupisse, ut nec reclamantes Christianos liceat vel
pretio de eorum servitute absolvi: idcirco præsenti concilio, Deo
auctore, sancimus, ut nullus Christianus Judæos deinceps debeat
deservire; sed datis pro quolibet bono mancipio 12 solidis, ipsum
mancipium quicumque Christianus, seu ad ingenuitatem, seu ad servitium,
licentiam habeat redimendi; quia nefas est, ut quos Christus Dominus
sanguinis sui effusione redemit, persecutorum vinculis maneant
irretiti. Quod si acquiescere his quæ statuimus quicumque Judæus
noluerit, quamdiu ad pecuniam constitutam venire distulerit, liceat
mancipio ipsi cum Christianis ubicumque voluerit habitare. Illud etiam
specialiter sancientes, quod si quis Judæus Christianum mancipium ad
errorem Judaicum convictus fuerit suasisse, ut ipse mancipio careat, et
legandi damnatione plectatur." (Canon 16.)

       *       *       *       *       *

The preceding canon is almost equivalent to a decree for the entire
emancipation of Christian slaves; for if, on the one hand, Jews were
forbidden to acquire new Christian slaves, and, on the other, those who
were in their possession could be redeemed by the first Christian who
came, it is clear that the charity of the faithful thus finding a door
open to it, the number of Christian slaves who groaned in the power of
the Jews must have diminished in an extraordinary manner. It is not
said that these canonical regulations of the Church from the first
moment obtained all the result which was intended; but, as she was
the only power that remained standing at that time, and the only one
that exercised influence on the nations, it cannot be doubted that her
regulations were infinitely advantageous to those in whose favor they
were established.


 _Jews are forbidden to acquire Christian slaves. If a Jew perverts to
 Judaism, or circumcises a Christian slave, the latter becomes free
 without having any thing to pay to his master._

(Concilium Toletanum tertium, anno 589.)

"Suggerente concilio, id gloriossimus dominus noster canonibus
inserendum præcipit, ut Judæis non liceat Christianas habere uxores,
_neque mancipia comparare in usus proprios_....

"Si qui vero Christiani ab eis Judaico ritu sunt maculati, vel etiam
circumcisi, non reddito pretio ad libertatem et religionem redeant
Christianam." (Canon 14.)

This canon is remarkable, both because it protects the conscience of
the slave, and imposes on masters a punishment favorable to liberty.
This manner of checking the arbitrary power of those who violated the
consciences of their slaves, is found, during the following century, in
a curious example contained in the collection of the laws of Ina, queen
of the West Saxons. It is this:


 _If a master makes his slave work on Sunday, the slave becomes free._

(Leges Ynæ reginæ Saxonum Occiduorum, anno 692.)

"Si servus operetur die dominica per præceptum domini sui, sit liber."
(Leg. iii.)

Another curious example:

_If a master gives meat to a slave on a fasting-day, the slave becomes
free._

 (Concilium Berghamstedæ anno 5^o Withredi regis Cantii, id est Christi
 697: sub Bertualdo Cantuariensi archiepiscopo celebratum. Hæc sunt
 judicia Withredi regis Cantuariorum.)

"Si quis servo suo carnem in jejunio dediderit comedendam, servus liber
exeat." (Canon 15.)


 _It is definitively forbidden for Jews to have Christian slaves;
 all contravention of this order shall deprive the Jews of all their
 slaves, who shall obtain their liberty from the prince._

(Concilium Toletanum quartum, anno 633.)

"Ex decreto gloriosissimi principis hoc sanctum elegit concilium, ut
Judæis non liceat Christianos servos habere, nec Christiana mancipia
emere, nec cujusquam consequi largitate: nefas est enim ut membra
Christi serviant Antichristi ministris. Quod si deinceps servos
Christianos, vel ancillas Judæi habere præsumpserint, sublati ab eorum
dominatu libertatem a principe consequantur." (Canon 66.)


 _It is forbidden to sell Christian slaves to Jews or Gentiles; if such
 sales have been made, they shall be annulled._

(Concilium Rhemense, anno 625.)

"Ut Christiani Judæis vel Gentilibus non vendantur; et si quis
Christianorum necessitate cogente mancipia sua Christiana elegerit
venundanda, non aliis nisi tantum Christianis expendat. Nam si
paganis aut Judæis vendiderit, communione privetur, et emptio careat
firmitate." (Canon 11.)

No precaution was too great in those unhappy times. It might appear at
first that such regulations were an effect of the intolerance of the
Church with respect to the Jews and Pagans; and yet, in reality, they
were a barrier against the barbarism which invaded all; they were a
guarantee of the most sacred rights of man; so much the more necessary,
as all the others, it may be said, had disappeared. Read the document
which we are about to transcribe; you will there see that barbarism was
carried so far, that slaves were sold to the Pagans to be sacrificed.

 (Gregorius Papa III. ep. ad Bonifacium Archiepiscopum, anno 731.)

"Hoc quoque inter alia crimina agi in partibus illis dixisti, quod
quidam ex fidelibus ad _immolandum_ paganis sua venundent mancipia.
Quod ut magnopere corrigere debeas, frater, commonemus, nec sinas fieri
ultra; scelus est enim et impietas. Eis ergo qui hæc perpetraverunt,
similem homicidæ indices pœnitentiam."

These excesses must have occupied the active attention of the Church,
as we see the Council of Liptines, held in 743, again insist on this
point, and forbid Christian slaves to be given up to the Gentiles.

"Et ut mancipia Christiana paganis non tradantur." (Canon 7.)


 _It is forbidden to sell a Christian slave out of the territory
 comprised within the kingdom of Clovis._

(Concilium Cabilonense, anno 650.)

"Pietatis est maximæ et religionis intuitus, ut captivitatis vinculum
omnino a Christianis redimatur. Unde sancta Synodus noscitur censuisse,
ut nullus mancipium extra fines vel terminos, qui ad regnum domini
Clodovei regis pertinent, debeat venundare, ne quod absit, per tale
commercium, aut captivitatis vinculo, vel quod pejus est, Judaica
servitute mancipia Christiana teneantur implicita." (Canon 9.)

This canon, which forbids the selling of Christian slaves out of the
kingdom of Clovis, for fear that they should fall into the power of
the Pagans and Jews, and the other of the Council of Rheims, cited
above, which contains a similar regulation, are worthy of remark,
under two aspects; they show, 1st, the high respect which we ought
to have for the soul of man, even of him who is a slave, since it
is forbidden to sell him where his conscience might be in danger: a
respect which it was very important to maintain, both in order to
eradicate the erroneous maxims of antiquity on this point, and because
it was the first step towards emancipation. 2d. By limiting the power
of sale, there was introduced into that kind of property a law which
distinguished it from others, and placed it in a different and more
elevated category. This was a great step made towards declaring open
war against this property itself, and abolishing it by legitimate means.


 _Clerics who sold their slaves to Jews are severely reproved: they are
 threatened with alarming punishments._

(Concilium decimum Toletanum, anno 656.)

"Septimæ collationis immane satis et infandum operationis studium
nunc sanctum nostrum adiit concilium; quod plerique ex sacerdotibus
et levitis, qui pro sacris ministeriis, et pietatis studio,
gubernationisque augmento sanctæ ecclesiæ deputati sunt officio,
malunt imitari turbam malorum, potius quam sanctorum patrum insistere
mandatis: ut ipsi etiam qui redimere debuerunt, venditiones facere
intendant, quos Christi sanguine præsciunt esse redemptos; ita
duntaxat, ut eorum dominio qui sunt empti in ritu Judaismo convertantur
oppressi, et fit execrabile commercium, ubi nitente Deo justum est
sanctum adesse conventum; quia majorum canones vetuerunt ut nullus
Judæorum conjugia vel servitia habere præsumat de Christianorum cœtu."

Here the Council eloquently reprimands the guilty; it continues:

"Si quis enim post hanc definitionem talia agere tentaverit, noverit se
extra ecclesiam fieri, et præsenti, et futuro judicio cum Juda simili
pœna percelli, dum modo Dominum denuo proditionis pretio malunt ad
iracundiam provocare." (Canon 7.)


§ VI.

 _Pope St. Gregory the First gives freedom to two slaves of the Church
 of Rome. Remarkable passage, in which this holy pope explains the
 motives which induced the Christians to enfranchise their slaves._

"Cum Redemptor noster totius conditor creaturæ ad hoc propitiatus
humanam voluerit carnem assumere, ut divinitatis suæ gratia, diruto
quo tenebamur captivi vinculo servitutis, pristinæ nos restitueret
libertati; salubriter agiter, si homines quos ab initio natura creavit
liberos et protulit, et jus gentium jugo substituit servitutis, in
ea natura in qua nati fuerant, manumittentis beneficio, libertati
reddantur. Atque ideo pietatis intuitu, et hujus rei consideratione
permoti, vos Montanam atque Thomam famulos sanctæ Romanæ Ecclesiæ, cui
Deo adjutore deservimus, liberos ex hac die civesque Romanos efficimus,
omneque vestrum vobis relaxamus servitutis peculium." (S. Greg. l. v.
ep. 12.)


 _Bishops are directed to respect the liberty of those who have been
 enfranchised by their predecessors. Mention is made of the power given
 to Bishops to free their slaves who deserve well, and the sum is fixed
 which they may give them to aid them in living._

(Concilium Agathense, anno 506.)

"Sane si quos de servis ecclesiæ benemeritos sibi episcopus libertate
donaverit, collatam libertatem a successoribus placuit custodiri, cum
hoc quod eis manumissor in libertate contulerit, quod tamen jubemus
viginti solidorum numerum, et modum in terrula, vineola, vel hospitiolo
tenere. Quod amplius datum fuerit, post manumissoris mortem ecclesia
revocabit." (Canon 7.)


 _What has been mortgaged or alienated from the property of the Church
 by a Bishop who has left nothing of his own, must be restored; but
 enfranchised slaves are excepted from this rule: they shall preserve
 their liberty._

(Concilium Aurelianense quartum, anno 541.)

"Ut episcopus qui de facultate propria ecclesiæ nihil relinquit, de
ecclesiæ facultate si quid aliter quam canones eloquunter obligaverit,
vendiderit, aut distraxerit, ad ecclesiam revocetur. Sane si de servis
ecclesiæ libertos fecerit numero competenti, in ingenuitate permaneant,
ita ut ab officio ecclesiæ non recedant." (Canon 9.)

An English Council ordains that, at the death of each Bishop, all his
English slaves shall be freed. The solemnization of the obsequies is
regulated; to terminate the funeral ceremonies, each Bishop and abbot
shall enfranchise three slaves, by giving them each three solidi.

 (Synodus Cellichytensis, anno 816.)

"Decimo jubetur, et hoc firmiter statuimus asservandum, tam in nostris
diebus, quamque etiam futuris temporibus, omnibus successoribus
nostris qui post nos illis sedibus ordinentur quibus ordinati sumus:
ut quandocumque aliquis ex numero episcoporum migraverit de sæculo,
hoc pro anima illius præcipimus, ex substantia uniuscumque rei
decimam partem dividere, ac distribuere pauperibus in eleemosynam,
sive in pecoribus, et armentis, seu de ovibus et porcis, vel etiam in
cellariis, _nec non omnem hominem Anglicum liberare, qui in diebus suis
sit servituti subjectus_, ut per illud sui proprii laboris fructum
retributionis percipere mereatur, et indulgentiam peccatorum. Nec
ullatenus ab aliqua persona huic capitulo contradicatur, sed magis,
prout condecet, a successoribus augeatur, et ejus memoria semper in
posterum per universas ecclesias nostræ ditioni subjectas cum Dei
laudibus habeatur et honoretur. Prorsus orationes et eleemosynas quæ
inter nos specialiter condictam habemus, id est, ut statim per singulas
parochias in singulis quibusque ecclesiis, pulsato signo, omnis
famulorum Dei cœtus ad basilicam conveniant, ibique pariter XXX psalmos
pro defuncti animæ decantent. Et postea unusquisque antistes et abbas
sexcentos psalmos, et centum viginti missas celebrare faciat, _et tres
homines liberet et eorum cuilibet tres solidos distribuat_." (Canon 10.)


 _A curious document, which shows the generous resolution made by the
 Council of Armagh in Ireland, to give liberty to all the English
 slaves._

 (Concilium Ardamachiense in Hibernia celebratum, anno 1171: ex Giraldo
 Cambrensi, cap. xxviii. Hiberniæ expugnatæ.)

"His completis convocato apud Ardamachiam totius Hiberniæ clero, et
super advenarum in insulam adventu tractato diutius et deliberato,
tandem communis omnium in hoc sententia resedit: propter peccata
scilicet populi sui, eoque præcipue quod Anglos olim, tam a
mercatoribus, quam prædonibus atque piratis, emere passim, et in
servitutem redigere consueverant, divinæ censura vindictæ hoc eis
incommodum accidisse, ut et ipsi quoque ab eadem gente in servitutem
vice reciproca jam redigantur. Anglorum namque populus adhuc integro
eorum regno, communi gentis vitio, liberos suos venales exponere, et
priusquam inopiam ullam aut inediam sustinerent, filios proprios et
cognatos in Hiberniam vendere consueverant. Unde et probabiliter credi
potest, sicut venditores olim, ita et emptores, tam enormi delicto juga
servitutis jam meruisse. Decretum est itaque in prædicto concilio,
et cum universitatis consensu publice statutum, ut Angli ubique
per insulam, servitutis vinculo mancipati, in pristinam revocentur
libertatem."

It is thus that religious ideas influence and soften the ferocious
manners of nations. When a public calamity occurs, they immediately
find its cause in the divine anger, justly excited by the traffic which
the Irish carried on by buying English slaves of merchants, robbers,
and pirates. It is not less curious to learn, that at that time the
English were barbarous enough to sell their children and relations,
like the Africans of our days. This frightful custom must have been
pretty general, as we read in the passage quoted, that it was the
common vice of those nations: _communi gentis vitio_. This makes us
better understand the necessity of a regulation inserted above, that
of the Council of London, held in 1102, which proscribes this infamous
traffic in men.


 _It is forbidden to change the slaves of the Church for other slaves,
 unless the exchange procured their liberty._

(Ex concilio apud Sylvanectum, anno 864.)

"Mancipia ecclesiastica, nisi ad libertatem non convenit commutari;
videlicet ut mancipia, quæ pro ecclesiastico homine dabuntur, in
ecclesiæ servitute permaneant, et ecclesiasticus homo, qui commutatur,
fruatur perpetua libertate. Quod enim semel Deo consecratum est, ad
humanos usus transferri non decet." (V. Decret. Greg. IX., l. iii. tit.
19, cap. 3.)


 _A Canon containing the same regulation as the preceding; and whence,
 moreover, it appears, that the faithful, for the salvation of their
 souls, were accustomed to offer their slaves to God and the Saints._

(Ex eodem, anno 864.)

"Injustum videtur et impium, ut mancipia, quæ fideles Deo et sanctis
ejus pro remedio animæ suæ consecrarunt, cujuscumque muneris mancipio,
vel commutationis commercio iterum in servitutem secularium redigantur,
cum canonica auctoritas servos tantummodo permittat distrahi fugitives.
Et ideo ecclesiarum rectores summopere caveant, ne eleemosyna unius,
alterius peccatum fiat. Et est absurdum, ut ab ecclesiastica dignitate
servus discedens, humanæ sit obnoxius servituti." (Ibid. cap. 4.)


 _Freedom shall be granted to slaves who wish to embrace the monastic
 state, yet without neglecting useful precautions to ascertain the
 reality of their vocation._

(Concilium Romanum sub S. Gregorio I., anno 597.)

"Multos de ecclesiastica seu sæculari familia, novimus ad omnipotentis
Dei servitium festinare, ut ab humana servitute liberi in divino
servitio valeant familiarius in monasteriis conversari, quos si passim
dimittimus, omnibus fugiendi ecclesiastici juris dominium occasionem
præbemus: si vero festinantes ad omnipotentis Dei servitium, incaute
retinemus, illi invenimur negare quædam qui dedit omnia. Unde necesse
est, ut quisquis ex juris ecclesiastici vel sæcularis militiæ servitute
ad Dei servitium converti desiderat, probetur prius in laico habitu
constitutus: et si mores ejus atque conversatio bona desiderio ejus
testimonium ferunt, absque retractatione servire in monasterio
omnipotenti Domino permittatur, ut ab humano servitio liber recedat,
qui in divino obsequio districtiorem appetit servitutem." (S. Greg.
epist. 44. lib. iv).


 _The abuse of ordaining slaves without the consent of their masters
 had spread; this abuse is checked._

(Ex epistolis Gelasii Papæ.)

"Ex antiquis regulis et novella synodali explanatione comprehensum est,
personas obnoxias servituti, cingulo cœlestis militiæ non præcingi. Sed
nescio utrum ignorantia an voluntate rapiamini, _ita ut ex hac causa
nullus pene Episcoporum videatur extorris_. Ita enim nos frequens et
plurimorum querela nos circumstrepit, ut ex hac parte nihil penitus
putetur constitutum." (Distin. 54. c. 9.)

"_Frequens equidem, et assidua nos querela, circumstrepit_ de his
pontificibus, qui nec antiquas regulas nec decreta nostra noviter
directa cogitantes, obnoxias possessionibus obligatasque personas,
venientes ad clericalis officii cingulum non recusant." (Ibid. c. 10.)

"Actores siquidem filiæ nostræ illustris et magnificæ feminæ, Maximæ,
petitorii nobis insinuatione conquesti sunt, Sylvestrum atque Candidum,
originarios suos, contra constitutiones, quæ supradictæ sunt, et
contradictione præeunte a Lucerino Pontifice diaconos ordinatos." (Ibid
c. 11.)

"_Generalis etiam querelæ vitanda præsumptio est, qua propemodum
causantur universi_, passim servos et originarios, dominorum jura,
possessionumque fugientes, sub religiosæ conversationis obtentu,
vel ad monasteria sese conferre, vel ad ecclesiasticum famulatum,
conniventibus quippe præsulibus, indifferenter admitti. Quæ modis
omnibus est amovenda pernicies, ne per Christiani nominis institutum
aut aliena pervadi, aut publica videatur disciplina subverti." (Ibid.
c. 12.)


 _The parish priests are allowed to choose some clerics from the slaves
 of the Church._

(Concilium Emeritense, anno 666.)

"Quidquid unanimiter digne disponitur in sancta Dei ecclesia,
necessarium est ut a parochitanis presbyteris custoditum maneat. Sunt
enim nonnulli, qui ecclesiarum suarum res ad plenitudinem habent, et
sollicitudo illis nulla est habendi clericos, cum quibus omnipotenti
Deo laudum debita persolvant officia. Proinde instituit hæc sancta
synodus, ut omnes parochitani presbyteri, juxta ut in rebus sibi a Deo
creditis sentiunt habere virtutem, de ecclesiæ suæ familia clericos
sibi faciant; quos per bonam voluntatem ita nutriant, ut et officium
sanctum digne paragant, et ad servitium suum aptos eos habeant. Hi
etiam victum et vestitum dispensatione presbyteri merebuntur, et domino
et presbytero suo, atque utilitati ecclesiæ fideles esse debent. Quod
si inutiles apparuerint ut culpa patuerit, correptione disciplinæ
feriantur; si quis presbyterorum hanc sententiam minime custodierit, et
non adimpleverit, ab episcopo suo corrigatur: ut plenissime custodiat,
quod digne jubetur." (Canon 18.)


 _It is prescribed to the Bishops to confer liberty on the slaves of
 the Church before they admit them into the clerical body._

(Concilium Toletanum nonum, anno 655.)

"Qui ex familiis ecclesiæ servituri devocantur in clerum ab episcopis
suis, necesse est, ut libertatis percipiant donum: et si honestæ vitæ
claruerint meritis, tunc demum majoribus fungantur officiis." (Canon
11.)


 _It is allowed to ordain the slaves of the Church, liberty having been
 previously conferred on them._

(Concilium quartem Toletanum, anno 633.)

"De familiis ecclesiæ constituere presbyteros ut diaconos per parochias
liceat; quos tamen vitæ rectitudo et probitas morum commendat: ea
tamen ratione, _ut antea manumissi libertatem status sui percipiant_,
et denuo ad ecclesiasticos honores succedant; irreligiosum est enim
obligatos existere servituti, qui sacri ordinis suscipiunt dignitatem."


§ VII.

We have shown in the text by what means, with what wisdom and
perseverance Christianity abolished slavery in the ancient world;
Christian and Catholic Europe was free at the time when Protestantism
appeared. Let us now see what Catholicity has done in modern times,
with respect to slaves in other parts of the world. We can present to
our readers in one document, which is the evidence of the ideas and
feelings of the Sovereign Pontiff Gregory XVI., an interesting history
of the solicitude of the Roman See in favor of the slaves of the whole
universe. I mean the apostolical letters published at Rome, November
3, 1839, against the slave-trade; and I recommend the perusal of them.
It will be there seen, in the most authentic and decisive manner, that
the Catholic Church, on this important subject of slavery, has always
showed, and shows still, the most lively spirit of charity, without in
the least offending against justice, or for a moment departing from the
path of prudence.


 "_Gregorius P. P._ XVI. _ad futuram rei memoriam_.

"Raised to the supreme degree of the apostolical dignity, and filling,
although without any merit on our part, the place of Jesus Christ, the
Son of God, who, by the excess of His charity, has deigned to become
man, and die for the redemption of the world; we consider that it
belongs to our pastoral solicitude to exert all our efforts to prevent
Christians from engaging in the trade in blacks or any other men,
whoever they may be.

"As soon as the light of the Gospel began to spread, the unfortunate
men who fell into the hard fate of slavery during the numerous wars
of that period, felt their condition improved; for the apostles,
inspired by the Spirit of God, on the one hand, taught slaves to obey
their earthly masters, as Jesus Christ Himself, and to be resigned
from the bottom of their heart to the will of God; but, on the other,
they commanded masters to behave well to their slaves, to grant them
what was just and equitable, and not to treat them with anger, knowing
that the Lord of both is in heaven, and that with Him there is no
distinction of persons.

"The law of the Gospel having very soon universally and fundamentally
ordained sincere charity towards all, and the Lord Jesus having
declared that He would regard as done or refused to Himself all the
acts of beneficence and mercy done or refused to the poor and little
ones--it naturally followed that Christians not only regarded their
slaves as brethren, above all when they were become Christians, but
that they were more inclined to give liberty to those who rendered
themselves worthy of it. This usually took place particularly on the
solemn feasts of Easter, as St. Gregory of Nyssa relates. There were
even found some who, inflamed with more ardent charity, _embraced
slavery for the redemption of their brethren_; and an apostolic man,
our predecessor, Pope Gregory I., of sacred memory, attests that he
had known a great many who performed this work of mercy. Wherefore
the darkness of Pagan superstition being entirely dissipated in the
progress of time, and the manners of the most barbarous nations being
softened,--thanks to the benefit of faith working by charity,--things
advanced so far, that for many centuries there have been no slaves
among the greater part of Christian nations. Yet (we say it with
profound sorrow) men have been since found, even among Christians, who,
shamefully blinded by the desire of sordid gain, have not hesitated
to reduce into slavery, in distant countries, Indians, Negroes, and
other unfortunate races; or to assist in this scandalous crime, by
instituting and organizing a traffic in these unfortunate beings, who
had been loaded with chains by others. A great number of the Roman
Pontiffs, our predecessors of glorious memory, have not forgotten to
stigmatize, throughout the extent of their jurisdiction, the conduct
of these men as injurious to their salvation, and disgraceful to the
Christian name; for they clearly saw that it was one of the causes
which tended most powerfully to make infidel nations continue in their
hatred to the true religion.

"This was the object of the apostolical letters of Paul III., of the
29th of May, 1537, addressed to the Cardinal Archbishop of Toledo,
under the ring of the fisherman, and other letters, much more copious,
of Urban VIII., of the 22d April, 1639, addressed to the collector of
the rights of the Apostolic Chamber in Portugal,--letters, in which
the most severe censures are cast upon those who venture to reduce the
inhabitants of the East or West Indies into slavery, buy, sell, give,
or exchange them, separate them from their wives and children, strip
them of their property, take or send them into strange places, or
deprive them of their liberty in any way; to retain them in slavery;
or aid, counsel, succor, or favor those who do these things under any
color or pretence whatever; or preach or teach that this is lawful,
and, in fine, co-operate therewith in any way whatever. Benedict XIV.
has since confirmed and renewed these pontifical ordinances before
mentioned by new apostolical letters to the Bishops of Brazil and some
other countries, dated the 20th December, 1741, by means of which he
calls forth the solicitude of the Bishops for the same purpose. A
long time before, another of our more ancient predecessors, Pius II.,
whose pontificate saw the empire of the Portuguese extended in Guinea
and in the country of the blacks, addressed letters, dated the 7th of
October, 1482, to the Bishop of Ruvo, who was ready to depart for those
countries: in these letters he did not confine himself to giving to
this prelate the means requisite for exercising the sacred ministry
in those countries with the greatest fruit, but he took occasion very
severely to blame the conduct of those who reduced the neophytes into
slavery. In fine, in our days, Pius VII., animated by the same spirit
of charity and religion as his predecessors, zealously interposed his
good offices with men of authority for the entire abolition of the
slave-trade among Christians.

"These ordinances, and this solicitude of our predecessors, have
availed not a little, with the aid of God, in defending the Indians,
and other nations who have just been mentioned, against the barbarity
of conquest, and the cupidity of Christian merchants; but the Holy See
is far from being able to boast of the complete success of its efforts
and zeal, for, if the slave-trade has been partially abolished, it
is still carried on by a great many Christians. Wherefore, desiring
to remove such a disgrace from all Christian countries, after having
maturely considered the matter with many of our venerable brethren, the
Cardinals of the Holy Roman Church, assembled in Council, following
the example of our predecessors, by virtue of the apostolic office,
we warn and admonish in the Lord all Christians, of whatever condition
they may be, and enjoin upon them that, for the future, no one shall
venture unjustly to oppress the Indians, Negroes, or other men, whoever
they may be; to strip them of their property or reduce them into
servitude: or give aid or support to those who commit such excesses, or
carry on that infamous traffic, by which the blacks, as if they were
not men, but mere impure animals, reduced like them into servitude,
without any distinction, contrary to the laws of justice and humanity,
are bought, sold, and devoted to endure the hardest labors; and on
account of which dissensions are excited and almost continual wars are
fomented among nations by the allurements of gain offered to those who
first carry away the Negroes.

"Wherefore, by virtue of the apostolical authority, we condemn all
these things aforesaid, as absolutely unworthy of the Christian name;
and, by the same authority, we absolutely prohibit and interdict all
ecclesiastics and laymen from venturing to maintain that this traffic
in blacks is permitted, under any pretext or color whatsoever; or
to preach or teach in public or in private, in any way whatever,
anything, contrary to these apostolic letters. And in order that these
letters may come to the knowledge of all, and that no one may pretend
ignorance, we ordain and decree that they be published and posted
up, according to custom, by one of our officers, on the doors of the
basilica of the Prince of the Apostles, of the Apostolic Chancery, of
the Palace of Justice, of Monte Citorio, and at the Campo di Fiori.
Given at Rome, at St. Mary Major's, under the seal of the fisherman,
the 3d of November, 1839, the ninth year of our Pontificate.

  LOUIS, CARDINAL LAMBRUSCHINI."

I again particularly invite attention to the document which I have just
inserted--to these letters which magnificently crown the united efforts
of the Church for the abolition of slavery. As the abolition of the
slave-trade--the object of a treaty recently made between the great
powers--is at this moment one of the affairs which occupy the chief
attention of Europe, it is proper to pause a few moments, to reflect on
the contents of the apostolic letters of the Sovereign Pontiff Gregory
XVI. Let us observe, in the first place, that in the year 1482, Pope
Pius II. addressed apostolical letters to the Bishop of Ruvo, about to
depart for the newly discovered countries--letters, in which he did not
exclusively confine himself to giving the prelate the powers necessary
to exercise his holy ministry with the greatest fruit in those
countries, but in which he takes occasion to censure very severely
the conduct of Christians who reduced the neophytes into slavery.
Exactly at the end of the fifteenth century, at the time when it may be
said that the Church gathering the last fruit of her long labors, at
length saw Europe emerge from the chaos in which the irruption of the
barbarians had plunged her; at the time when the social and political
institutions were developed with daily increasing ardor, and began to
form a regular and coherent body; at this moment the Church resumes
her secular contest with another barbarism which reappeared in distant
countries; she opposes the abuse of the superiority of strength and
intelligence, which the conquerors possessed over the conquered nations.

This fact alone proves that, for the true liberty and well-being of
nations, for the just pre-eminence of right over might, and for the
triumph of justice over force, the intelligence and refinement of
nations are not enough--religion also is required. In ancient times,
we see nations cultivated to the highest point commit unheard of
atrocities; and in modern times, Europeans, so proud of their knowledge
and advancement, introduce slavery among the unfortunate nations who
have fallen under their dominion. Now, who was the first to raise a
voice against such injustice--against such horrible barbarity? It was
not policy, which perhaps rejoiced to see its conquests consolidated
by slavery; it was not commerce which found in this infamous traffic
an easy means of making shameful but abundant profits; it was not
philosophy, which, fully explaining the doctrines of Plato and
Aristotle, would perhaps have seen without concern the resuscitation
of the degrading theory of _races born for slavery_; but it was the
Catholic religion, expressing herself by the mouth of the Vicar of
Jesus Christ.

It is certainly a consolatory spectacle for Catholics to see a Roman
Pontiff, four centuries ago, condemn what Europe, with all her
civilization and refinement, condemns only at the present day. Still,
Europe only does so with difficulty; and all those who take part in
this tardy condemnation are not exempt from the suspicion of being
actuated by motives of interest. No doubt the Roman Pontiff did not
effect all the good he intended; but doctrines do not remain sterile
when they emanate from a high quarter, whence, diffusing themselves
to great distances, they descend on persons who receive them with
veneration, if it were only on account of him who teaches them. The
conquering nations were then Christians, and sincere ones; it is
therefore indubitable, that the admonitions of the Pope, transmitted by
the mouths of Bishops and other priests, must have had very salutary
effects. If, in cases like this, where we see a measure taken against
an evil, the evil nevertheless resists and continues, we imagine, by a
grievous mistake, that the measure has been vain, and that its author
has produced no effect. It is one thing to extirpate, and another
to diminish an evil; and it cannot be doubted that, if the Bulls of
the Popes had not all the effect intended, they must nevertheless
have served to diminish the evil, by improving the lot of nations
fallen under the yoke. The evil prevented and avoided is not seen;
the preservative has hindered its existence: but the existing evil is
palpable--it affects us, it excites our regret, and we often forget the
gratitude due to the hand which has preserved us from greater evils.
How often is it thus with respect to religion! She cures many things,
but she prevents still more. If she takes possession of the heart of
man, it is in order to destroy there even the very roots of a thousand
evils.

Let us imagine the Europeans of the fifteenth century invading the East
and West Indies, without any check, guided only by the inspirations of
cupidity, and by the caprices of arbitrary power, full of the pride
of conquerors, and of the contempt with which the Indians must have
inspired them, on account of the inferiority of their knowledge, and
of their backwardness in civilization and refinement: what must have
happened? If, in spite of the incessant cries of religion, in spite of
the influence which she had on laws and manners, the conquered nations
have had so much to suffer, would not the evil have been carried to an
intolerable extent, without those powerful causes which incessantly
combated, prevented or diminished it? The conquered would have been
reduced into slavery _en masse_; they would have been condemned _en
masse_ to perpetual degradation; they would have been deprived even of
the hope of one day entering on the career of civilization.

If the conduct of Europeans at that time with respect to men of
other races--if the conduct of some nations of our own days is to be
deplored, it cannot be said at least that the Catholic religion has not
opposed such excesses with all her strength; it cannot be said that the
Head of the Church has ever allowed these evils to pass without raising
his voice to recall to mind the rights of men, to stigmatize injustice,
to excite abhorrence of cruelty, and energetically to plead the cause
of humanity, without distinction of races, climates, or colors.

Whence does Europe derive this lofty idea and this generous feeling,
which urge her to declare herself so strongly against the traffic in
men, and to demand the complete abolition of slavery in the colonies?
When posterity shall call to mind these glorious facts; when it shall
adopt them as marking a new era in the annals of civilization; when,
studying and analyzing the causes which have conducted European
legislation and manners to so high a pitch, and, passing over temporary
and unimportant motives, insignificant circumstances, and secondary
agents, it shall seek for the vital principle which impelled European
civilization towards so glorious an end, it will find that this
principle was Christianity; and if, desiring to fathom the question
more and more, it should inquire whether this was Christianity, under
a vague and general form--Christianity without authority--Christianity
without Catholicity--the answer of history will be this: Catholicity,
exclusively prevailing in Europe, abolished slavery among the European
races; she introduced the principle of the abolition of slavery into
European civilization, by showing practically, and in opposition to the
opinion of antiquity, that slavery was not necessary for society; and
she made it understood, that the sacred work of enfranchisement was the
foundation of all great and life-giving civilization. She has therefore
inoculated European civilization with the principle of the abolition
of slavery; it is owing to her that, wherever this civilization has
come into contact with slavery, it has been profoundly disturbed--an
evident proof that there were at the bottom two opposite elements, two
contending principles, which were compelled to struggle incessantly,
until the more powerful, noble, and fruitful prevailing, and reducing
the other under the yoke, in the end annihilated it. I will say
more: by searching whether facts really confirm this influence of
Catholicity, not only in all that concerns the civilization of Europe,
but also in the countries which Europeans have conquered two centuries
ago, in the East and West, we shall meet with Catholic Bishops and
priests working without intermission in improving the lot of colonial
slaves; we shall call to mind what is due to the Catholic missions; we
shall read and understand the apostolical letters of Pius II., issued
in 1482, and mentioned above; those of Paul III., in 1537; those of
Urban VIII., in 1639; those of Benedict XIV., in 1741; and those of
Gregory XVI., in 1839.

In these letters there is taught and defined all that has been or
can be said on this point in favor of humanity. We shall there find
blamed, condemned, and punished, all that European civilization has
at length resolved to condemn and punish; and when calling to mind
also that it was Pius VII., who, at the beginning of this century,
_zealously interposed his good offices with men in power for the
complete abolition of slavery among Christians_, we shall not be
able to avoid acknowledging and confessing that Catholicity has had
the principal share in this great work. It is she indeed who has
laid down the principle on which the work rests, who has established
the precedents which guide it, who has constantly proclaimed the
principles which have suggested it and has constantly condemned those
who have opposed it; it is she, in fine, who at all times has declared
open war against cruelty and cupidity,--the support and perpetual
motives for injustice and inhumanity. Let us hear the testimony of a
celebrated Protestant author, Robertson, the historian of America:
"From the time that ecclesiastics were sent as instructors into
America, they perceived that the rigor with which their countrymen
treated the natives rendered their ministry altogether fruitless. The
missionaries, in conformity with the mild spirit of that religion
which they were employed to publish, soon remonstrated against the
maxims of the planters with respect to the Americans, and condemned
the _repartimientos_, or distributions, by which they were given
up as slaves to their conquerors, as no less contrary to natural
justice and the precepts of Christianity, than to sound policy. The
Dominicans, to whom the instruction of the Americans was originally
committed, were the most vehement in attacking the _repartimientos_.
In the year 1511, Motesino, one of their most eminent preachers,
inveighed against this practice in the great church at St. Domingo,
with all the impetuosity of his natural eloquence. Don Diego Columbus,
the principal officers of the colony, and all the laymen who had
been his hearers, complained of the monk to his superiors; but they,
instead of condemning, applauded his doctrine, as equally pious and
seasonable. The Franciscans, influenced by the spirit of opposition
and rivalship which subsists between the two orders, discovered some
inclination to take part with the laity, and to espouse the defence of
the _repartimientos_. But as they could not with decency give their
approbation to a system of oppression so repugnant to the spirit of
religion, they endeavored to palliate what they could not justify,
and alleged in excuse for the conduct of their countrymen, that it
was impossible to carry on any improvement in the colony, unless the
Spaniards possessed such dominion over the natives, that they could
compel them to labor. The Dominicans, regardless of such political and
interested considerations, would not relax in any degree the rigor
of their sentiments, and even refused to absolve, or admit to the
sacrament, such of their countrymen as continued to hold the natives
in servitude. Both parties applied to the king for his decision in a
matter of such importance. Ferdinand empowered a committee of his Privy
Council, assisted by some of the most eminent civilians and divines in
Spain, to hear the deputies sent from Hispaniola in support of their
respective opinions. After a long discussion, the speculative point
in controversy was determined in favor of the Dominicans; the Indians
were declared to be a free people, entitled to all the natural rights
of man; but notwithstanding this decision, the _repartimientos_ were
continued upon their ancient footing. As this determination admitted
the principle upon which the Dominicans founded their opinion, they
renewed their efforts to obtain relief for the Indians with additional
boldness and zeal. At length, in order to quiet the colony, which was
alarmed by their remonstrances and censures, Ferdinand issued a decree
of his Privy Council (1513), declaring that after mature consideration
of the apostolic Bull, and other titles by which the Crown of Castile
claimed a right to its possessions, in the new world, the servitude of
the Indians was warranted both by the laws of God and man; that unless
they were subjected to the dominion of the Spaniards, and compelled
to reside under their inspection, it would be impossible to reclaim
them from idolatry, or to instruct them in the Christian faith; that
no further scruple ought to be entertained concerning the lawfulness
of the _repartimientos_, as the King and Council were willing to take
the charge of that upon their own consciences; and that therefore the
Dominicans, and monks of other religious orders, should abstain for
the future from those invectives which, from an excess of charitable
but ill-informed zeal, they had uttered against the practice. That
his intention of adhering to this decree might be fully understood,
Ferdinand conferred new grants of Indians upon several of his
courtiers. But in order that he might not seem altogether inattentive
to the rights of humanity, he published an edict in which he endeavored
to provide for the mild treatment of the Indians under the yoke to
which he subjected them; he regulated the nature of the work which they
should be required to perform; he prescribed the mode in which they
should be clothed and fed, and gave directions with respect to their
instruction in the principles of Christianity. But the Dominicans, who,
from their experience of what had passed, judged concerning the future,
soon perceived the inefficacy of those provisions, and foretold that,
as long as it was the interest of individuals to treat the Indians
with rigor, no public regulations would render their servitude mild
or tolerable. They considered it as vain to waste their own time and
strength in attempting to communicate the sublime truths to men whose
spirits were broken, and their faculties impaired by oppression. Some
of them, in despair, requested the permission of their superiors to
remove to the continent, and pursue the object of their mission among
such of the natives as were not hitherto corrupted by the example of
the Spaniards, or alienated by their cruelty from the Christian faith.
Such as remained in Hispaniola continued to remonstrate, with decent
firmness, against the servitude of the Indians.

"The violent operations of Albuquerque, the new distributor of
the Indians, revived the zeal of the Dominicans against the
_repartimientos_, and called forth an advocate for that oppressed
people who possessed all the courage, the talents, and the activity
requisite in supporting such a desperate cause. This was Bartholomew
de las Casas, a native of Seville, and one of the clergymen sent out
with Columbus in his second voyage to Hispaniola, in order to settle in
that Island. He early adopted the opinion prevalent among ecclesiastics
with respect to the unlawfulness of reducing the natives to servitude;
and that he might demonstrate the sincerity of his conviction, he
relinquished all the Indians who had fallen to his share in the
division of the inhabitants among their conquerors, declaring that he
should ever bewail his own misfortune and guilt, in having exercised
for a moment this impious dominion over his fellow-creatures. From
that time he became the avowed patron of the Indians; and by his bold
interpositions in their behalf, as well as by the respect due to his
abilities and character, he had often the merit of setting some bounds
to the excesses of his countrymen." (_History of America_, book 3.)

It would be too long to relate here the energetic efforts of De las
Casas in favor of the colonies of the new world; all know them--all
must know that, filled with zeal for the liberty of the Indians, he
conceived and undertook an attempt at civilization analogous to that
which was realized later, to the immortal honor of the Catholic clergy,
in Paraguay. If the efforts of De las Casas had not all the success
that might naturally have been expected, we find the cause of this
in the thousand passions with which history makes us acquainted, and
perhaps also in the impetuosity of this man, whose sublime zeal was not
always accompanied by the consummate prudence which the Church displays.

However this may be, Catholicity has completely accomplished her
mission of peace and love; without injustice or catastrophe, she
has broken the chains under which a large portion of the human
race groaned; and if it had been given her to prevail for some
time in Asia and Africa, she would have achieved their destruction
in the four quarters of the globe, by banishing the degradations
and the abominations introduced and established in those countries
by Mahometanism and idolatry. It is melancholy, no doubt, that
Christianity has not yet exercised over these latter countries all the
influence which would have been necessary to ameliorate the social
and political condition of those nations, by changing their ideas and
manners. But if we seek for the causes of this lamentable delay, we
certainly shall not find them in the conduct of Catholicity. This is
not the place to point out these causes; nevertheless, while reserving
the analysis and complete examination of this matter for another part
of the work, I will make the remark _en passant_, that Protestantism
may justly criminate itself for the obstacles which, during three
centuries, it has opposed to the universality and efficacy of the
Christian influence on infidel nations. These few words will suffice
here; we shall return to this important subject later.


NOTE 16, p. 131.

We can scarcely believe how far the ideas of the ancients went astray
with regard to the respect which is due to man. Can it be believed
that they went so far, as to regard the lives of all who could not be
useful to society as of no value? and yet nothing is more certain.
We might lament that this or that city had adopted a barbarous law;
that a ferocious custom was introduced among a people by the effect of
particular circumstances; yet as long as philosophy protested against
such attempts, human reason would have been unstained, and could not
have been accused without injustice of taking part in infamous attempts
at abortion or infanticide. But when we find crime defended and taught
by the most important philosophers of antiquity; when we see it triumph
in the minds of the most illustrious men, who, with fearful calmness
and serenity, prescribe the atrocities which we have named, we are
confounded, and our blood runs cold; we would fain shut our eyes, not
to see so much infamy thrown upon philosophy and human reason. Let us
hear Plato in his _Republic_, in that book in which he undertook to
collect all the theories in his opinion the most distinguished and
the best adapted to lead human society towards its _beau ideal_. This
is his scandalous language: "Oportet profecto secundum ea quæ supra
concessimus, optimos viros mulieribus optimis ut plurimum congredi:
deterrimos autem contra, deterrimis. Et illorem quidem prolem nutrire,
horum minime, si armentum excellentissimum sit futurum. Et hæc omnia
dum agantur, ab omnibus præterquam a principibus ignorari, si modo
armentum custodum debeat seditione carere." "Prope admodum;" "Very
good," replies another speaker. (_Plat. Rep._ l. v.)

Behold, then, the human race reduced to the condition of mere
brutes; in truth, the philosopher had reason to use the word flock
(_armentum_)! There is this difference, however, that magistrates
imbued with such feelings must have been more harsh towards their
subjects than a shepherd towards his flock. If the shepherd finds among
the lambs which have just been born a weak and lame one, he does not
kill it or allow it to die of hunger; he carries it to the sheep who
ought to nourish it, he caresses it to stop its cries.

But perhaps the expressions which we have just quoted escaped the
philosopher in a moment of inadvertence; perhaps the idea which they
reveal was only one of those sinister inspirations which glide into the
mind of a man, and pass away without leaving any more impression than
is made by a reptile moving through the grass. We wish it were so, for
the fame of Plato; but unhappily he returns to it so often, and insists
on the point with so systematic a coldness, that no means of justifying
him are left. "With respect," he says lower down, "to the children of
citizens of inferior rank, and even those of other citizens, if they
are born deformed, the magistrates shall hide them, as is proper,
in some secure place, which it shall be forbidden to reveal." "Yes,"
replies one of the interlocutors; "if we desire to preserve the race of
warriors in its purity."

Plato also lays down various rules with respect to the relations
of the two sexes; he speaks of the case in which the man and woman
shall have reached an advanced age: "Quando igitur jam mulieres et
viri ætatem generationi aptam egressi fuerint, licere viris dicemus,
cuicumque voluerint, præterquam filiæ atque matri et filiarum natis
matrisve majoribus: licere et mulieribus cuilibet, præterquam filio
atque patri, ac superioribus et inferioribus eorumdem. Cum vero hæc
omnia mandaverimus, interdicemus fœtum talem (si contigeret) edi et
in lucem produci. Si quid autem matrem parere coegerit, ita exponere
præcipiemus, quasi ei nulla nutritio sit."

Plato seems to have been very well pleased with his doctrine; for, in
the very book in which he writes what we have just seen, he lays down
the famous maxim, that the evils of states will never be remedied, that
societies will never be well governed, until philosophers shall become
kings, or kings become philosophers. God preserve us from seeing on the
throne a philosophy such as his! Moreover, his wish for the reign of
philosophy has been realized in modern times. What do I say? It has had
more than empire; it has been deified, and divine honors have been paid
to it in public temples. I do not believe, however, that the happy days
of the worship of reason are now much regretted.

The horrible doctrine which we have just seen in Plato was transmitted
with fidelity to future schools. Aristotle, who on so many points took
the liberty of departing from the doctrines of his master, did not
think of correcting those which regard abortion and infanticide. In
his _Politics_ he teaches the same crimes with the same calmness as
Plato: "In order," he says, "to avoid nourishing weak or lame children,
the law should direct them to be exposed or made away with." "Propter
multitudinem autem liberorum, ne plures sint quam expediat, si gentium
instituta et leges vetent procreata exponi, definitum esse oportet
procreandorum liberorum numerum. Quod si quibus inter se copulatis et
congressis, plures liberi, quam definitum sit, nascantur, priusquam
sensus et vita inseratur, abortus est fœtui inferendus." (_Polit._ l.
vii. c. 16.)

It will be seen how much reason I had to say that man, _as man_, was
esteemed as nothing among the ancients; that society entirely absorbed
him; that it claimed unjust rights over him, and regarded him as an
instrument to be used when of service, and which it had a right to
destroy.

We observe in the writings of the ancient philosophers, that they make
of society a kind of _whole_, consisting of individuals, as the mass
of iron consists of the atoms that compose it; they make of it a sort
of unity, to which all must be sacrificed; they have no consideration
for the sphere of individual liberty; they do not appear to dream
that the object of society is the good, the happiness of individuals
and families. According to them, this unity is the principal good,
with which nothing else can be compared; the greatest evil that can
happen is, that this unity should be broken--an evil which must be
avoided by all imaginable means. "Is not the worst evil of a state,"
says Plato, "that which divides it, and _makes many out of one_? and
is not the greatest excellence of a state, that which binds all its
parts together, and makes it _one_?" Relying on this principle, and
pursuing the development of his theory, he takes individuals and
families, and kneads them, as it were, in order to form them into ONE
compact whole. Thus, besides education and life in common, he wishes
also to have women and children in common; he considers it injurious
that there should be personal enjoyments or sufferings; he desires
that all should be common and social; he allows individuals to live,
think, feel, and act only as parts of a great whole. If you read his
_Republic_ with attention, and particularly the fifth book, you will
see that the prevailing idea of this philosopher is what we have just
explained. Let us hear Aristotle on the same point: "As the object of
society," he says, "is _one_, it is clear that the education of all
its members ought necessarily to be one and identical. Education ought
to be public, and not private; as things now are, each one takes care
of his children as he thinks proper, and teaches them as he pleases.
Each citizen is a particle of society, and the care to be given to
a particle ought naturally to extend to what the whole requires."
(_Polit._ l. viii. c. 1.) In order to explain to us what he means by
this common education, he concludes by quoting with honor the education
which was given at Sparta, which every one knows consisted in stifling
all feelings except a ferocious patriotism, the traits of which still
make us shudder.

With our ideas and customs, we do not know how to confine ourselves
to considering society in this way. Individuals among us are attached
to the social body, forming a part of it, but without losing their
own sphere--that of the family; and they preserve around them a vast
career, where they are allowed to exert themselves, without coming
into collision with the colossus of society. Nevertheless, patriotism
exists; but it is no longer a blind instinctive passion, urging man
on to the sacrifice, like a victim, with bandaged eyes, but it is no
reasonable, noble, and exalted feeling, which forms heroes like those
of Lepanto and Baylen; which converts peaceful citizens, like those
of Gyronna and Saragossa, into lions; which, as by an electric spark,
makes a whole people rise on a sudden without arms, and brave death
from the artillery of a numerous and disciplined army: such was Madrid,
following the sublime _Mourons_ of Daoiz and of Velarda.

I have already hinted, in the text, that society among the ancients
claimed the right of interfering in all that regards individuals.
I will add, that the thing went to a ridiculous extent. Who would
imagine that the law ought to interfere in the food of a woman who
was _enceinte_, or in the exercise which she should take every day?
This is what Aristotle gravely says: "It is necessary that women who
are _enceinte_ should take particular care of their bodies; that
they should avoid indulgence in luxury, and using food which is too
light and weak. The legislator easily attains his end by prescribing
and ordering them a daily walk, in order to go to honor and venerate
the gods, to whom it has been confided by fate to watch over the
formation of beings. Atque hoc facile assequitur scriptor legum, si
eis iter aliquod quotidianum ad cultum venerationemque deorum eorum,
quibus sorte obtigit, ut præsint gignendis animantibus, injunxerit ac
mandaverit." (_Polit._ l. vii. c. 16.)

The action of laws extended to every thing; it seems that, in certain
cases, even the tears of children could not escape this severity.
"Those," says Aristotle, "who, by means of laws, forbid children to cry
and weep, are wrong; cries and tears serve as exercise for children,
and assist them in growing; they are an effort of nature, which
relieves and invigorates those who are in pain." (_Polit._ l. vii. c.
17.)

These doctrines of the ancients--this manner of considering the
relations of individuals with society--very well explain how castes
and slavery could be regarded as natural among them. Who can be
astonished at seeing whole races deprived of liberty, or regarded as
incapable of partaking of the rights of other superior classes, when
we see generations of innocent beings condemned to death, and these
conscientious philosophers not having the slightest scruple with
respect to the legitimacy of so inhuman an act? It was not that these
philosophers had not happiness in view as the object of society; but
they had monstrous ideas with respect to the means of obtaining that
happiness.


NOTE 17, p. 146.

The reader will easily dispense with my entering into details on the
abject and shameful condition of women among the ancients, and in which
they still are among the moderns where Christianity does not prevail;
moreover, my pen would be checked every moment by strict laws of
modesty, if I were to attempt to represent the characteristic features
of this wretched picture. The _inversion_ of ideas was such, that we
hear men the most renowned for their gravity and moderation rave in
the most incredible manner on this point. We will lay aside hundreds
of examples which it would be easy to adduce; but who is ignorant of
the scandalous advice of the _sage_ Solon, with respect to the lending
of women for the purpose of improving the race? Who has not blushed to
read what the _divine_ Plato, in his _Republic_, says of the propriety
and manner of making women share in the public games? Let us throw
a veil over recollections so dishonourable to human wisdom. When
the chief legislators and sages so far forgot the first elements of
morality, and the most ordinary inspirations of nature, what must have
been the case with the vulgar? How fearfully true those words of the
sacred text which represent to us the nations deprived of the light of
Christianity as sitting _in darkness and in the shadow of death!_

There is nothing more fatal to woman, nothing more apt to degrade
her, than that which is injurious to modesty; and yet we see that
the unlimited power granted to man over woman contributed to this
degradation, and reduced her, among certain nations, to be nothing but
a slave. Losing sight of the manners of other nations, let us consider
those of the Romans for a moment. Among them the formula, _ubi tu
Cayus ego Caya_, seemed to indicate a subjection so slight, that it
might almost be called an equality; but in order to appreciate this
equality, it is enough to recollect that, at Rome, a husband could
put his wife to death by his own authority, and that not only in the
case of adultery, but for offences infinitely less serious. In the
time of Romulus, Egnacius Menecius was acquitted of a similar crime,
although his wife had done nothing more than drink wine from a cask.
These traits describe a nation, whatever importance you may besides
think proper to attach to the solicitude of the Romans to prevent their
matrons from becoming addicted to wine. When Cato directed an embrace,
as a proof of affection, among relations, for the purpose, as Pliny
relates, of ascertaining whether the women smelt of wine, _an temetum
olerent_, it is true he showed his strictness; but it was an unworthy
outrage offered to the honor of the women themselves whose virtue it
pretended to preserve. There are some remedies worse than the disease.


NOTE 18, p. 157.

The antichristian philosophy must have had considerable influence on
the desire to find among the barbarians the origin of the elevation
of the female character in Europe, and of some other principles of
our civilization. Indeed as soon as you discover the source of these
admirable qualities in the forests of Germany, Christianity is stripped
of a portion of its honors; and what was its own and peculiar glory
is divided among many. I will not deny that the Germans of Tacitus
are sufficiently poetical; but it is difficult to believe that the
real Germans were so to any extent. Some passages inserted in the text
add great force to our conjecture; but what appears to me eminently
calculated to dissipate all these illusions is, the history of the
invasion by the barbarians, above all that which has been written by
eye-witnesses. The picture, far from continuing poetical, then becomes
disgusting in the extreme. This interminable succession of nations
passes before the eyes of the reader, like an alarming vision in an
evil dream; and certainly the first idea which occurs to us at the
sight of this picture is, not to seek for any of the qualities of
modern civilization in these invading hordes; but the great difficulty
is, to know how this chaos has been reduced to order, and how it has
been possible to produce from such barbarism the noblest and most
brilliant civilization that has ever been seen on earth. Tacitus
appears to be an enthusiast; but Sidonius, who wrote at no great
distance from the barbarians, who saw them, and suffered from meeting
them, does not partake of this enthusiasm. "I find myself," he said,
"among long-haired nations, compelled to hear the German language,
and to applaud, at whatever cost, the song of the drunken Burgundian,
with hair plastered with rancid grease. _Happy your eyes who do not
see them; happy your ears who do not hear them?_" If space permitted,
it would be easy for me to accumulate a thousand passages which would
evidently show what the barbarians were, and what could be expected
from them in all respects. It is as clear as the light of day, that it
was the design of Providence to employ these nations to destroy the
Roman empire, and change the face of the world. The invaders seem to
have had a feeling of their terrible mission. They march, they advance,
they know not whither they go; but they know well that they go to
destroy. Attila called himself the scourge of God. The same barbarian
himself defined his formidable duty in these words: "_The star falls,
the sea is moved; I am the hammer of the earth._ Where my horse passes,
the grass never grows." Alaric, marching towards the capital of the
world, said: "_I cannot stop; there is some one urges me, who excites
me to sack Rome._" Genseric prepares a naval expedition; his troops
are on board, he himself embarks: no one knows the point towards which
he will direct his sails. The pilot approaches the barbarian, and asks
him; "_My lord, against what nations will you wage war?_" "_Against
those who have provoked the anger of God_," replies Genseric.

If Christianity, in the midst of this catastrophe, had not existed in
Europe, civilization would have been lost and annihilated, perhaps
forever. But a religion of light and love was sure to triumph over
ignorance and violence. Even during the times of the calamities of
the invasion, that religion prevented many disasters, owing to the
ascendency which it began to exercise over the barbarians; the most
critical moment being past, the conquerors having become in some degree
settled, she immediately employed a system so vast, so efficacious, so
decisive, that the conquerors found themselves conquered, not by arms,
but by charity. It was not in the power of the Church to prevent the
invasion; God had decreed it, and His decree must be accomplished. Thus
the pious monk who went to meet Alaric approaching Rome, could not stop
him on his march, because the barbarian answered him, that he could not
stop,--that there was some one who urged him on, and that he advanced
against his own will. But the Church awaited the barbarians after the
conquest, knowing that Providence would not abandon His own work, that
the hope of the future lot of nations was left in the hands of the
spouse of Jesus Christ; on this account does Alaric advance on Rome,
sack, and destroy it; but on a sudden, finding himself in presence of
religion, he stops, becomes mollified, and appoints the Churches of
St. Peter and St. Paul as places of refuge. A remarkable fact, and an
admirable symbol of the Christian religion preserving the universe from
total ruin.


NOTE 19, p. 165.

The great benefit conferred on modern society by the formation of
a pure and correct public conscience, would acquire extraordinary
value in our eyes, if we compared our moral ideas with those of all
other nations, ancient and modern; the result of such an examination
would be, to show in how lamentable a manner good principles become
corrupted, when they are confided to the reason of man. I will content
myself, however, with a few words on the ancients, in order to show how
correct I was in saying that our manners, however corrupt they may be,
would have appeared a model of morality and dignity to the heathens.

The temples consecrated to Venus in Babylon and Corinth are connected
with abominations such as to be even incomprehensible. Deified passion
required sacrifices worthy of it; a divinity without modesty required
the sacrifice of modesty; and the sacred name of Temple was applied
to asylums of the most unbridled licentiousness. There was not a veil
even for the greatest crimes. It is known how the daughters of Chypre
gained a dowry for their marriage; all have heard of the mysteries of
Adonis, Priapus, and other impure divinities. There are vices which,
as it were, want a name among the moderns; or if they have one, it is
accompanied by the recollection of a terrible chastisement inflicted on
some criminal cities. In reading the histories of antiquity descriptive
of the manners of their times, the book falls from our hands. On this
subject we must be content with these few hints, calculated to awaken
in the minds of our readers the recollection of what has a thousand
times excited their indignation in reading the history and studying the
literature of pagan antiquity. The author is compelled to be satisfied
with a recollection: he abstains from a description.


NOTE 20, p. 171.

It is now so common to exalt beyond measure the power of ideas, that
some persons will perhaps consider exaggerated what I have said with
respect to their want of power, not only to influence society, but even
to preserve themselves, while, remaining in the mere sphere of ideas,
they do not become realized in institutions, which are their organ, and
at the same time their rampart and defence.

I am very far, as I have clearly stated in the text, from denying or
calling in question what is called the power of ideas: I only mean to
show that, alone and by themselves, ideas have little power; and that
science, properly so called, as far as the organization of society is
concerned, is a much less important thing than is generally supposed.
This doctrine has an intimate connection with the system followed by
the Catholic Church, which, while constantly endeavoring to develop
the human mind by means of the propagation of the sciences, has
nevertheless assigned to them a secondary part in the regulation of
society. While religion has never been opposed to true science, never,
on the other hand, has she ceased to show a certain degree of mistrust
with respect to all that was the exclusive production of human thought;
and observe that this is one of the chief differences between religion
and the philosophy of the last age; or, we should rather say, it was
the cause of their violent antipathy. Religion did not condemn science;
on the contrary, she loved, protected, and encouraged it; but at the
same time she marked out its limits, warned it that it was blind on
some points, announced to it that it would be powerless in some of its
labors, and that in others its action would be destructive and fatal.
Philosophy, on the contrary, loudly proclaimed the sovereignty of
science, declared it to be all-powerful, and deified it; it attributed
to it strength and courage to change the face of the world, and wisdom
and foresight enough to work this change for the good of humanity. This
pride of knowledge, this deification of thought, is, if you observe
closely, the foundation of Protestant doctrine. All authority being
taken away, reason is the only competent judge, the intellect receives
directly and immediately from God all the light which is necessary.
This is the fundamental doctrine of Protestantism, that is to say, the
pride of the mind.

If we closely observe, even the triumph of revolutions has in no degree
nullified the wise anticipations of religion; and knowledge, properly
so called, instead of gaining any credit from this triumph, has
entirely lost what it had: there remains nothing of the revolutionary
knowledge; what remains is the effects of the revolution, the interests
created by it, the institutions which have arisen from those interests,
and which, since that time, have sought in the department of science
itself our principles to support them,--principles altogether different
from those which had been proclaimed in the beginning.

I have said that every idea has need of being realized in an
institution; this is so true, that revolutions themselves, warned
by the instinct which leads them to preserve, with more or less
integrity, the principles whence they have arisen, tend from the first
to create those institutions in which the revolutionary doctrines may
be perpetuated, or to constitute successors to represent them when
they shall have disappeared from the schools. This may lead to many
reflections on the origin and present condition of several forms of
governments in different countries of Europe.

When speaking of the rapidity with which scientific theories succeed
each other, when pointing out the immense development which the press
has given to the field of discussion, I have shown that this was not an
infallible sign of scientific progress, still less a guarantee for the
fertility of human thought in realizing great things in the material
and social order. I have said that grand conceptions proceed rather
from _intuition_ than from _discourses_; and on this subject I have
recalled to mind historical events and personages which place this
matter beyond a doubt. In support of this assertion, ideology might
have furnished us with abundant proofs, if it were necessary to have
recourse to science itself to prove its own sterility. But mere good
sense, taught by the lessons of experience daily, is enough to convince
us that the men who are the most able in theory are, often enough, not
only mediocre, but even weak in the exercise of authority. With regard
to the hints which I have thrown out with respect to "intuition" and
"discourses," I leave them to the judgment of any one who has applied
to the study of the human mind. I am confident that the opinion of
those who have reflected will not differ from my own.


NOTE 21, p. 175.

I have attributed to Christianity the gentleness of manners which
Europe now enjoys. Yet, in spite of the decline of religious belief
in the last century, this gentleness of manners, instead of being
destroyed, has only been raised to a higher degree. This contrast, the
effect of which, at first sight, is to destroy what I have established,
requires some explanation. First of all, we must recollect the
distinction pointed out in the text between effeminacy and gentleness
of manners. The first is a fault, the second a valuable quality; the
first emanates from enervation of the mind and weakening of the body;
the second is owing to the preponderance of reason, the empire of the
mind over the body, the triumph of justice over force, of right over
might. There is a large portion of real gentleness in manners at the
present day, but luxury has also a considerable part therein. This
luxury of manners has certainly not arisen from religion, but from
infidelity; the latter, never extending its view beyond the present
life, causes the lofty destinies, and even the very existence of the
soul, to be forgotten, puts egotism upon the throne, constantly excites
and keeps alive the love of pleasure, and makes man the vile slave of
his passions. On the contrary, at the first sight, we perceive that
our manners owe all their gentleness to Christianity; all the ideas,
all the feelings, on which this gentleness is founded, bear the mark
of Christianity. The dignity of man, his rights, the obligation of
treating him with the respect which is due to him, and of appealing to
his mind by reason rather than to his body by violence, the necessity
imposed on every one of keeping within the line of his duty, of
respecting the property and the persons of others,--all this body of
principles, to which real gentleness of manners is owing, is due, in
Europe, to the influence of Christianity, which, after a struggle of
many centuries against the barbarism and ferocity of invading nations,
succeeded in destroying the system of violence which these same nations
had made general.

As philosophy has taken care to change the ancient names consecrated
by religion, and authorized by the usage of a succession of ages,
it happens that some ideas, although the produce of Christianity,
are scarcely acknowledged as such, only because they are disguised
under a worldly dress. Who does not know that mutual love among men
and fraternal charity are ideas entirely due to Christianity? Who
does not know that pagan antiquity did not acknowledge them, that
it even despised them? And nevertheless, this affection, which was
formerly called _charity_, because charity was the virtue from which
it took its legitimate origin, has constantly taken care to assume
other names, as if it were ashamed to be seen in public with any
appearance of religion. The mania for attacking the Christian religion
being passed, it is openly confessed that the principle of universal
charity is owing to her; but language remains infected with Voltairian
philosophy even since the discredit into which that philosophy has
fallen. Whence it follows, that we very often do not appreciate as we
ought the influence of Christianity on the society which surrounds us,
and that we attribute to other ideas and other causes the phenomena
which are evidently owing to religion. Society at present, in spite of
all its indifference, is more indebted to religion than is commonly
supposed; it resembles those men, who, born of an illustrious family,
in which good principles and a careful education are transmitted as an
inheritance from generation to generation, preserve in their manners
and behavior, even in the midst of their disorders, their crimes, and I
will even venture to say, their degradation, some traits which denote
their noble origin.


NOTE 22, p. 183.

A few regulations of Councils, quoted in the text, are sufficient to
give an idea of the system pursued by the Church for the purpose of
reforming and softening manners. It may be remarked that, on previous
occasions during this work, I have a strong inclination to call to mind
monuments of this kind; I will state here that I have two reasons for
doing this: 1. When having to compare Protestantism with Catholicity,
I believe that the best means of representing the real spirit of the
latter is, to show it at work; this is done when we bring to light the
measures which were adopted, according to different circumstances,
by Popes and Councils. 2. Considering the direction which historical
studies take in Europe, and the taste, which is daily becoming more
general, not for histories, but for historical documents, it is proper
always to bear in mind that the proceedings of Councils are of the
highest importance, not only in historical and ecclesiastical matters,
but also in political and social ones; so that to pay no attention to
the data which are found in the records of Councils, is monstrously to
mutilate, or rather wholly to destroy, the history of Europe.

On this account it is very useful, and even necessary in many things,
to consult these records, although it may be painful to our indolence,
on account of their enormous extent and the ennui of finding many
things devoid of interest for our times. The sciences, above all those
which have society for their object, lead to satisfactory results only
by means of painful labors. What is useful is frequently mixed and
confounded with what is not. The most valuable things are sometimes
found by the side of repulsive objects; but in nature, do we find gold
without having removed rude masses of earth?

Those who have attempted to find the germ of the precious qualities
of European civilization among the barbarians of the north, should
undoubtedly have attributed the gentleness of our manners to the same
barbarians; they would have had in support of this paradox a fact
certainly more specious than that which they have relied on to give
the honor of elevating European women to the Germans. I allude to the
well-known custom of avoiding the infliction of corporal punishments,
and of chastising the gravest offences by fines only. Nothing is more
likely to make us believe that these nations were happily inclined to
gentleness of manners, since, in the midst of their barbarism, they
used the right of punishment with a moderation which is not found even
among the most civilized and refined nations. If we regard the thing
in this point of view, it seems as if the influence of Christianity on
the barbarians had the effect of rendering their manners more harsh
instead of more gentle; indeed, after Christianity was introduced, the
infliction of corporal punishments became general, and even that of
death was not excluded.

But when we attentively consider this peculiarity of the criminal code
of the barbarians, we shall see that, far from showing the advancement
of their civilization and the gentleness of their manners, it is, on
the contrary, the most evident proof that they were behindhand; it is
the strongest index of the harshness and barbarism which reigned among
them. In the first place, inasmuch as crimes among them were punished
by means of fines, or, as it was called, by _composition_, it is clear
that the law paid much more attention to _repairing an injury_ than to
_punishing a crime_; a circumstance which clearly shows us how little
they thought about the morality of the action, as they attended not
so much to the action itself, as to the wrong which it inflicted.
Therefore this was not an element of civilization but of barbarism;
this tended to nothing less than the banishment of morality from the
world. The Church combated this principle, as fatal in public as in
private affairs; she introduced into criminal legislation a new set of
ideas, which completely changed its spirit. On this point M. Guizot has
done full justice to the Catholic Church. I am delighted to acknowledge
and to insert this homage here by transcribing his own words. After
having pointed out the difference which existed between the laws of
the Visigoths, derived in great part from the Councils of Toledo, and
the other barbarian laws, M. Guizot signalizes the immense superiority
of the ideas of the Church in matters of legislation, of justice, and
in all that concerns the search after truth and the lot of men; he
adds: "In criminal matters, the relation of crimes to punishments is
fixed (in the laws of the Visigoths) according to sufficiently just,
philosophical, and moral notions. We there perceive the efforts of an
enlightened legislator, who contends against the violence and rashness
of barbarian manners. The chapter _De cæde et morte hominum_, compared
with the corresponding laws of other nations, is a very remarkable
example of this. Elsewhere, it is almost exclusively the injury
which seems to constitute the crime, and the punishment is sought in
that material reparation which is the result of composition. Here,
the crime is referred to its real and moral element, the intention.
The different shades of criminality, absolutely voluntary homicide,
homicide by inadvertence, provoked homicide, homicide with or without
premeditation, are distinguished and defined almost as well as in our
own codes, and the punishments vary in a proportion equally just. The
justice of the legislator has gone still further. He has attempted,
if not to abolish, at least to diminish the diversity of legal value
established among men by the other barbarian laws. The only distinction
which it preserves is that of freeman and slave. With respect to
freeman, the punishment varies neither with the origin nor the rank
of the deceased, but only according to the different degrees of the
culpability of the murderer. With regard to slaves, not venturing
completely to withdraw from the masters the right of life and death, it
has been attempted at least to restrain it by subjecting it to a public
and regular procedure. The text of the law deserves to be cited.

"'If no one guilty of, or an accomplice in, a crime ought to remain
unpunished, with how much more reason ought he to be condemned who
has wickedly and rashly committed a homicide! Thus, as masters, in
their pride, often put their slaves to death without any fault of
the latter, it is proper altogether to extirpate this license, and
to ordain that the present law shall be forever observed by all. No
master or mistress shall put to death, without public trial, any of
their slaves, male or female, or any person dependent on them. If a
slave or any other servant shall commit a crime which may subject him
to capital punishment, his master or his accuser shall immediately
inform the judge or the count or duke of the place where the deed
has been committed. After the affair has been inquired into, if the
crime be proved, let the criminal undergo, either by the judge or his
own master, the sentence of death which he has deserved; so that,
nevertheless, if the judge be unwilling to put the accused to death,
he shall draw up in writing a capital sentence, and then it shall be
in the power of the master to put him to death or not. Indeed, if the
slave, with a fatal audacity, resisting his master, has struck, or
attempted to strike, him with a weapon, with a stone, or with any other
kind of blow, and if the master, in defending himself, has killed the
slave in his passion, the master shall be in no way subject to the
punishment of homicide. But it shall be necessary to prove that the
event took place thus, and that by the testimony or oath of the slaves,
male or female, who shall have been present, and by the oath of the
author of the deed himself. Whoever from mere malice, either by his own
hand or that of another, shall have killed his slave without public
trial, shall be marked with infamy, declared incapable of appearing as
a witness, shall be obliged to pass the rest of his life in exile and
penance, and his goods shall go to the nearest relations to whom they
are given by the law.'--For. Jud. liv. vi. tit. xv. l. 12." (_Hist.
Génér. de la Civilisation en Europe_, leçon 6.)

I have copied this passage from M. Guizot with pleasure, because I
find there a confirmation of what I have just said on the subject of
the influence of the Church in softening manners, and of what I have
before stated with respect to the great amelioration which the Church
made in the condition of slaves, by limiting the excessive power of
their masters. This truth is proved in its place by so many documents,
that it seems useless to revert to it here; it is enough now for my
purpose, to point out that M. Guizot fully allows that the Church gave
morality to the legislation of the barbarians, by making them consider
the wickedness of the crime, whereas they had previously attended only
to the injury of which it was the cause; she has thus transferred the
action from the physical to the moral order, giving to punishments
their real character, and not allowing them to remain reduced to the
level of a mere material reparation. Hence we see that the criminal
system of the barbarians, which, at the first _view_, seemed to
indicate progress in civilization, was, in reality, owing to the little
ascendency which moral principles exercised over these nations, and to
the fact, that the views of the legislator were very slightly raised
above the purely material order.

There is another observation to be made on this point, viz. that
the mildness with which crimes were punished is the best proof of
the frequency with which they were committed. When in a country
assassinations, mutilations, and other similar attempts are very
rare, they are regarded with horror; those who are guilty of them are
chastised with severity. But when crimes are very frequently committed,
they insensibly lose their enormity; not only those who commit them,
but all the world become accustomed to their hideous aspect, and the
legislator is then naturally induced to treat them with indulgence.
This is shown us by the experience of every day; and the reader will
have no difficulty in finding in society at the present time more than
one crime to which the remark which I have just made is applicable.
Among the barbarians, it was common to appeal to force, not only with
respect to property, but also to persons; wherefore it was natural
that crimes of this kind should not be regarded by them with the same
aversion, it may be said with the same horror, as among a people where
the triumph of the ideas of reason, justice, right, and law, render
it impossible to conceive even the existence of a society where each
individual should believe himself self-entitled to do justice to
himself. Thus the laws against these crimes naturally became milder,
the legislator contenting himself with repairing the injury, without
paying much attention to the culpability of the delinquent. And this
is intimately connected with what I have said above with respect to
public conscience; for the legislator is always more or less the organ
of this public conscience. Where an action, in any society whatever,
is regarded as a heinous offence, the legislator cannot decree a mild
punishment for it; on the other hand, it is not possible for him to
chastise with great severity what the society absolves or excuses. It
will sometimes happen that this proportion will be altered, that this
harmony will be destroyed; but things soon quitting the path into which
violence forced them, will not be long in returning to their ordinary
course. Manners being chaste and pure, offences against them will be
covered with abhorrence and infamy; but if morals be corrupted, the
same acts will be regarded with indifference; at the most they will be
denominated slight weaknesses. Among a people where religious ideas
exercise great influence, the violation of all that is consecrated
to God is regarded as a horrible outrage, worthy of the greatest
chastisements; among another people, where infidelity has made its
ravages, the same violation is not even placed on the list of ordinary
offences; instead of drawing on the guilty the justice of the law,
scarcely does it draw on them the slight correction of the police.
The reader will understand the appropriateness of this digression on
the criminal legislation of the barbarians, when he reflects that,
in order to examine the influence of Catholicity on the civilization
of Europe, it is indispensable to take into consideration the other
elements which have concurred in forming that civilization. Without
this, it would be impossible properly to appreciate the respective
action of each of these elements, either for good or evil; impossible
to bring to light the share which the Church can exclusively claim in
the great work of our civilization; impossible to resolve the high
question which has been raised by the partisans of Protestantism on the
subject of the assumed advantages which the religious revolution of
the sixteenth century has conferred on modern society. It is because
the barbarian nations are one of these elements, that it is so often
necessary to attend to them.


NOTE 23, p. 189.

In the middle ages, almost all the monasteries and colleges of canons
had a hospital annexed to them, not only to receive pilgrims, but also
to aid in the support and consolation of the poor and the sick. If you
desire to see the noblest symbol of religion sheltering all kinds of
misfortune, consider the houses devoted to prayer and the most sublime
virtues converted into asylums for the miserable. This was exactly what
took place at that time, when the public authority not only wanted the
strength and knowledge necessary to establish a good administration for
the relief of the unfortunate, but did not even succeed in covering
with her ægis the most sacred interests of society; this shows us
that when all was powerless, religion was still strong and fruitful;
that when all perished, religion not only preserved herself, but even
founded immortal establishments. And pay attention to what we have
so many times pointed out, viz. that the religion which worked these
prodigies was not a vague and abstract religion--the Christianity of
the Protestants; but religion with all her dogmas, her discipline, her
hierarchy, her supreme Pontiff, in a word, the Catholic Church.

They were far from thinking in ancient times that the support of the
unfortunate could be confided to the civil administration alone,
or to individual charity; it was then thought, as I have already
said, that it was a very proper thing that the hospitals should be
subjected to the Bishops; that is to say, that there should be a kind
of assimilation made between the system of public beneficence and the
hierarchy of the Church. Hence it was that, by virtue of an ancient
regulation, the hospitals were under the control of the Bishops as well
in temporals as in spirituals, whether the persons appointed to the
care of the establishments were clerical or lay, whether the hospital
had been erected by order of the Bishop or not.

This is not the place to relate the vicissitudes which this discipline
underwent, nor the different causes which produced the successive
changes; it is enough to observe, that the fundamental principle, that
is, the interference of the ecclesiastical authority in establishments
of beneficence, always remained unimpaired, and that the Church never
allowed herself to be entirely deprived of so noble a privilege. Never
did she think that it was allowable for her to regard with indifference
the abuses which were introduced on this point to the prejudice of the
unfortunate; wherefore she has reserved at least the right to remedy
the evils which might result from the wickedness or the indolence
of the administrators. The Council of Vienne ordains, that if the
administrators of a hospital, lay or clerical, become relaxed in the
exercise of their charge, proceedings shall be taken against them by
the Bishops, who shall reform and restore the hospital of their own
authority, if it has no privilege of exemption, and by delegation, if
it has one. The Council of Trent also granted to Bishops the power
of visiting the hospitals, even with the power of delegates of the
Apostolic See in the cases fixed by law; it ordains, moreover, that the
administrators, lay or clerical, shall be obliged every year to render
their accounts to the ordinary of the place, unless the contrary has
been provided in the foundation; and that if, by virtue of a particular
privilege, custom, or statute, the accounts must be presented to any
other than the ordinary, at least he shall be added to those who are
appointed to receive them.

Without paying attention to the different modifications which the laws
and customs of various countries may have introduced in this matter,
we will say that one thing remains manifest, viz. the vigilance of the
Church in all that regards beneficence; it is her constant tendency, by
virtue of her spirit and maxims, to take part in affairs of this kind,
sometimes to direct them exclusively, sometimes to remedy the evils
which may have crept in. The civil power acknowledged the motives of
this holy and charitable ambition; we see that the Emperor Justinian
does not hesitate to give public authority over the hospitals to the
Bishops, thereby conforming to the discipline of the Church and the
general good.

On this point there is a remarkable fact, which it is necessary to
mention here, in order to signalize its beneficent influence; I mean,
the regulation by which the property of hospitals was looked upon as
Church property,--a regulation which was very far from being a matter
of indifference, although at first sight it might appear so. Their
property, thereby invested with the same privileges as that of the
Church, was protected by an inviolability so much the more necessary as
the times were the more difficult, and the more abounding in outrages
and usurpations. The Church which, notwithstanding all the public
troubles, preserved great authority and a powerful ascendency over
governments and nations, had thus a simple and powerful claim to extend
her protection over the property of hospitals, and to withdraw them as
much as possible from the cupidity and the rapacity of the powerful.
And it must not be supposed that this doctrine was introduced with any
indirect design, nor that this kind of community, this assimilation
between the Church and the poor, was an unheard-of novelty; on the
contrary, this assimilation was so well suited to the common order of
things, it was so entirely founded on the relations between the Church
and the poor, that if the property of the hospitals had the privilege
of being considered as the property of the Church, that of the Church,
on the other hand, was called the property of the poor. It is in these
terms that the holy Fathers express themselves on this point: these
doctrines had so much affected the ordinary language, that when, at
a later period, the canonical question with respect to the ownership
of the goods of the Church had to be solved, there were found by the
side of those who directly attributed this property to God, to the
Pope, to the clergy, some who pointed out the poor as being the real
proprietors. It is true that this opinion was not the most conformable
to the principles of law; but the mere fact of its appearing on the
field of controversy is a matter for grave consideration.


NOTE 24, p. 196.

A few reflections, in the form of a note, on a certain maxim of
toleration professed by a philosopher of the last century, Rousseau,
would not be out of place here; but the analogy of the following
chapter with that which we have just finished induces us to reserve
them for note 25. The considerations to which the opinion of Rousseau
will lead, apply to the question of toleration in religious matters, as
well as to the right of coercion exercised by the civil and political
power; I therefore beg my reader to reserve for the following note the
attention which he might be willing to afford me now.


NOTE 25, p. 203.

For the purpose of clearing up ideas on toleration as far as lay
in my power, I have presented this matter in a point of view but
little known; in order to throw still more light upon it, I will say
a few words on religious and civil intolerance,--things which are
entirely different, although Rousseau absolutely affirms the contrary.
Religious or theological intolerance consists in the conviction,
that the only true religion is the Catholic,--a conviction common to
all Catholics. Civil intolerance consists in not allowing in society
any other religions than the Catholic. These two definitions are
sufficient to make every man of common sense understand that the two
kinds of intolerance are not inseparable; indeed, we may very easily
conceive that men firmly convinced of the truth of Catholicity may
tolerate those who profess another religion, or none at all. Religious
intolerance is an act of the mind, an act inseparable from faith;
indeed, whoever has a firm belief that his own religion is true,
must necessarily be convinced that it is the only true one; for the
truth is one. Civil intolerance is an act whereby the will rejects
those who do not profess the same religion; this act has different
results, according as the intolerance is in the individuals or in
the government. On the other hand, religious tolerance consists in
believing that all religions are true; which, when rightly understood,
means that none are true, since it is impossible for contradictory
things to be true at the same time. Civil tolerance is, to allow men
who entertain a different religion to live in peace. This tolerance,
as well as the co-relative intolerance, produces different effects,
according as it exists in individuals or in the government.

This distinction, which, from its clearness and simplicity, is within
the reach of the most ordinary minds, has nevertheless been mistaken
by Rousseau, who affirms that it is a vain fiction, a chimera, which
cannot be realized, and that the two kinds of intolerance cannot be
separated from each other. Rousseau might have been content with
observing, that religious intolerance, that is to say, as I have
explained above, the firm conviction that a religion is true, if it is
general in a country, must produce, in the ordinary intercourse of life
as well as in legislation, a certain tendency not to tolerate any one
who thinks differently, principally when those who dissent are very
limited in number; his observation would then have been well founded,
and would have agreed with the opinion which I have expressed on this
point, when I attempted to represent the natural course of ideas and
events in this matter. But Rousseau does not consider things under this
aspect: desiring to attack Catholicity, he affirms that the two kinds
of intolerance are inseparable; "for," says he, "it is impossible to
live in peace with those whom one believes to be damned; to love them
would be to hate God, who punishes them." It is impossible to carry
misrepresentation further: who told Rousseau that the Catholics believe
in the damnation of any man, whoever he may be, as long as he lives;
and that they think that to love a man who is in error would be to
hate God? On the contrary, could he be ignorant that it is a duty, an
indispensable precept, a dogma, for Catholics to love all men? Could
he be ignorant that even children, in the first rudiments of Christian
doctrine, learn that we are obliged to love our neighbor as ourselves,
and that by this word neighbor is meant whoever has gained heaven,
or may gain it; so that no man, so long as he lives, is excluded
from this number? But Rousseau will say, you are at least convinced
that those who die in that fatal state are condemned. Rousseau does
not observe that we think exactly the same with respect to sinners,
although their sin be not that of heresy; now, it has not come into
the head of any body that good Catholics cannot tolerate sinners, and
that they consider themselves under the obligation of hating them.
What religion shows more eagerness to convert the wicked? The Catholic
Church is so far from teaching that we ought to hate them, that she
causes to be repeated a thousand times, in pulpits, in books, and in
conversations, those words whereby God shows that it is His will that
sinners shall not perish, that He wills that they shall be converted
and live, that there is more joy in heaven when one of them has
done penance, than upon the ninety-nine just who need not penance.
And let it not be imagined that the man who thus expresses himself
against the intolerance of Catholics was the partizan of complete
toleration; on the contrary, in society, such as he imagined it, he
did not desire toleration for those who did not belong to the religion
which the civil power thought proper to establish. It is true that
he is not at all anxious that the citizens should belong to the true
religion. "Laying aside," he says, "political considerations, let us
return to the right, and let us lay down principles on this important
point. The right which the social pact gives to the sovereign over
his subject does not exceed, as I have said, the bounds of public
utility. Subjects, therefore, are accountable to their sovereign for
their opinions, inasmuch as those opinions are of importance to the
community. Now, it is of great importance to the state, that every
citizen should have a religion which shall make him love his duties;
but the dogmas of that religion interest the state and its members only
inasmuch as those dogmas affect morality and the duties which those who
profess it are bound to perform towards others. As for the rest, each
one may have what opinions he pleases, without being subject to the
cognizance of the sovereign, for he has no power in the other world;
it is not his affair what may be the lot of his subjects in the life
to come, provided they be good citizens in this. There is, therefore,
a profession of faith purely civil, the articles whereof it belongs to
the sovereign to fix, not exactly as dogmas of religion, but as social
sentiments, without which it is impossible to be a good citizen or
a faithful subject. Without being able to compel any one to believe
them, it can banish from the state him who does not believe them; it
can banish him, not as wicked, but as anti-social, as incapable of
sincerely loving the laws and justice, and of sacrificing his life to
his duty. If any one, after having publicly acknowledged these dogmas,
conducts himself as if he did not believe them, let him be punished
with death; he has committed the greatest of crimes, he has lied
against the laws." (_Du Contrat Social_, l. iv. c. 8.)

Such, then, is the final result of the toleration of Rousseau, viz.
to give to the sovereign the power of fixing articles of faith, to
grant to him the right of punishing with banishment, or even death,
those who will not conform to the decisions of this new Pope, or
who shall violate after having embraced them. However strange the
doctrine of Rousseau may appear, it is not excluded from the general
system of those who do not acknowledge the supremacy of authority in
religious matters. When this supremacy is to be attributed to the
Catholic Church, or its head, it is rejected; and, by the most striking
contradiction, it is granted to the civil power. It is very singular
that Rousseau, when banishing or putting to death the man who quits the
religion fashioned by the sovereign, does not wish him to be punished
as impious, but as anti-social. Rousseau, following an impulse very
natural in him, did not wish that impiety should be at all taken into
account when punishments were to be inflicted; but of what consequence
is the name given to his crime to the man who is banished or put to
death? In the same chapter, he allows an expression to escape him,
which reveals at once the object which he had in view in all this show
of philosophy: "Whoever dares to affirm that _out of the Church there
is no salvation_, ought to be driven from the state." Which means, in
other words, that toleration ought to be given to all except Catholics.
It has been said, that the _Contrat Social_ was the code of the French
revolution; and, indeed, the latter did not forget what the tolerant
legislator has prescribed with respect to Catholics. Few persons
now venture to declare themselves the disciples of the philosopher
of Geneva, although some of his timid partisans still lavish on him
unmeasured eulogies. Let us have sufficient confidence in the good
sense of the human race, to hope that all posterity, with a unanimous
voice, will confirm the stamp of ignominy with which all men of sense
have already marked that turbulent sophist, the impudent author of the
_Confessions_.

When comparing Protestantism with Catholicity, I was obliged to
treat of intolerance, as it is one of the reproaches which are most
frequently made against the Catholic religion; but my respect for truth
compels me to state, that all Protestants have not preached universal
toleration; and that many of them have acknowledged the right of
checking and punishing certain errors. Grotius, Puffendorf, and some
more of the wisest men that Protestantism can boast of, are agreed on
this point; therein they have followed the example of all antiquity,
which, in theory as well as in practice, has constantly conformed to
these principles. A cry has been raised against the intolerance of
Catholics, as if they had been the first to teach it to the world;
as if intolerance was a cursed monster, which was engendered only
where the Catholic Church prevailed. In default of any other reason,
good faith at least required that it should not be forgotten that the
principle of universal toleration was never acknowledged in any part
of the world; the books of philosophers, and the codes of legislators,
contain the principle of intolerance with more or less rigor. Whether
it were desired to condemn this principle as false, or to limit it, or
to leave it without application, it is clear that an accusation ought
not to have been made against the Catholic Church in particular, on
account of a doctrine and conduct, wherein she only conformed to the
example of the whole human race. Refined as well as barbarous nations
would be culpable therein, if there were any crime; and the stigma,
far from deserving to fall upon governments directed by Catholicity,
or on Catholic writers, ought to be inflicted on all the governments
of antiquity, including those of Greece and Rome; on all the ancient
sages, including Plato, Cicero, and Seneca; on modern governments and
sages, including Protestants. If men had had this present to their
minds, the doctrine would not have appeared so erroneous, nor the facts
so black; they would have seen that intolerance, as old as the world,
was not the invention of Catholics, and that the whole world, ought to
bear the responsibility of it.

Assuredly the toleration which, in our days, has become so general,
from causes previously pointed out, will not be affected by the
doctrines, more or less severe, more or less indulgent, which shall be
proclaimed in this matter; but for the very reason, that intolerance,
such as it was practised in other times, has at last become a mere
historical fact, whereof no one can fear the reappearance, it is proper
to enter into an attentive examination of questions of this kind, in
order to remove the reproach which her enemies have attempted to cast
upon the Catholic Church.

The recollection of the encyclical letter of the Pope against the
doctrines of M. de Lamennais, and the profound wisdom contained
therein appropriately presents itself here. That writer maintained
that universal toleration, the absolute liberty of worship, is the
normal and legitimate state of society,--a state which cannot be
changed without injury to the rights of the man and the citizen. M. de
Lamennais, combating the encyclical letter, attempted to show that it
established new doctrines, and attacked the liberty of nations. No; the
Pope, in his encyclical letter, does not maintain any other doctrines
than those which have been professed up to this time by the Church--we
may say by all governments--with respect to toleration. No government
can sustain itself if it is refused the right of repressing doctrines
dangerous to social order, whether those doctrines are covered with
the mantle of philosophy, or disguised under the veil of religion. The
liberty of man is not thereby assailed; for the only liberty which is
worthy of the name, is liberty in conformity with reason. The Pope did
not say that governments cannot, in certain cases, tolerate different
religions; but he did not allow it to be established as a principle,
that absolute toleration is an obligation on all governments. This
proposition is contrary to sound religious doctrines, to reason, to
the practice of all governments, in all times and countries, and the
good sense of mankind. The talent and eloquence of the unfortunate
author have not availed against this, and the Pope has obtained the
most solemn assent of all sensible men of all creeds; while the man
of genius, covering his brow with the shades of obstinacy, has not
feared to seize upon the ignoble arms of sophistry. Unhappy genius! who
scarcely preserves a shadow of himself, who has folded up the splendid
wings on which he sailed through the azure sky, and now, like a bird of
evil omen, broods over the impure waters of a solitary lake.


NOTE 26, p. 219.

When speaking of the Spanish Inquisition, I do not undertake to
defend all its acts either in point of justice, or of the public
advantage. Without denying the peculiar circumstances in which this
institution was placed, I think that it would have done much better,
after the example of the Inquisition of Rome, to avoid as much as
possible the effusion of blood. It might have perfectly watched over
the preservation of the faith, prevented the evils wherewith religion
was threatened by the Moors and the Jews, and preserved Spain from
Protestantism, without employing that excessive rigor, which drew upon
it the severe and deserved reprimands and admonitions of the Sovereign
Pontiffs, provoked the complaints of the people, made so many accused
and condemned persons appeal to Rome, and furnished the adversaries
of Catholicity with a pretext for charging _that_ religion with being
sanguinary which has a horror of the effusion of blood. I repeat, that
the Catholic religion is not responsible for any of the excesses which
have been committed in her name; and when men speak of the Inquisition,
they ought not to fix their eyes principally on that of Spain, but on
that of Rome. There, where the Sovereign Pontiff resides, and where
they best understand how the principle of intolerance should be
understood, and what use ought to be made of it, the Inquisition has
been mild and indulgent in the extreme. Rome is the part of the world
where humanity has suffered the least for the sake of religion; and
that, without the exception of any countries, either of those where
the Inquisition has existed, or of those where it has been unknown; of
those where Catholicity has been predominant, or where Protestantism
has triumphed. This fact, which cannot be denied, should suffice to
convince every sincere man what is the spirit of Catholicity in this
matter.

I make these remarks in order to show my impartiality, to prove that
I am not ignorant of evils, and that I do not hesitate to admit them
wherever I find them. Notwithstanding this, I am desirous that the
facts and the observations contained in the text, as well with respect
to the Inquisition itself, and to the different epochs of its duration,
as to the policy of the kings who founded and established it, shall not
be forgotten. The same desire makes me transcribe here a few documents
likely to throw a stronger light upon this important subject. In the
first place, I will quote the preamble of the Pragmatic Sanction of
the Catholic princes Ferdinand and Isabella, for the expulsion of the
Jews; we there find stated in a few words, the outrages which the Jews
inflicted on religion, and the dangers with which they threatened the
state.

"Book viii. chap. 2, second law of the new _Recopilacion_. Don
Ferdinand and Donna Isabella, at Granada, 30th March, 1492. Pragmatic
Sanction.

"Having been informed that there existed in these kingdoms bad
Christians, who judaized and apostatized from our holy Catholic faith,
whereof the communication between the Jews and Christians was in great
part the cause, we ordained, in the Cortes held by us in Toledo, in
1480, that the Jews in all the cities, towns, and other places of
our kingdoms and lordships, should be confined in the Juiferies and
places appointed for them to live and dwell in, hoping that this
separation would serve as a remedy; we also provided and gave orders
that an Inquisition should be appointed in our said kingdoms; which
Inquisition, as you know, is and has been practised for more than
twelve years, and has discovered a great number of delinquents, as
is notorious. As we have been informed by the Inquisitors, and many
other religious persons, lay and ecclesiastical, it is certain that
great injury to the Christians had been and is the result of the
participation, intercourse, and communication which they have had,
and still have, with the Jews; it has been proved that the latter, by
all the means in their power, constantly labor to subvert the faith
of Christians, to withdraw them from our holy Catholic faith, to lead
them away from it, to attract them, and to pervert them to their own
noxious creed and opinions; instructing them in the ceremonies and
observances of their own law; holding meetings to teach them what
they ought to believe and observe according to that law; taking care
to circumcise them and their children, giving them books in order to
recite their prayers, teaching them the fasts which they ought to
observe, assembling to read with them, teaching them the histories of
their laws; notifying to them the Paschal times before they arrive,
admonishing them as to what they ought to do and observe during those
times; giving them, bringing for them, from their own homes, the bread
of azimes, meats killed according to their ceremonies; instructing
them as to the things from which they ought to abstain, in order to
obey the law, as well in eating as in other things; persuading them,
as far as they can, to adopt and keep the Law of Moses, and making
them understand that no other law than that is true. All these things
are certain from numerous testimonies, from the acknowledgments of the
Jews themselves, and of those who have been perverted and deceived by
them, which has inflicted great injury, detriment, and dishonor on our
holy Catholic faith. Although we were already informed of these things
from many quarters, and although we were aware that the real remedy
for all these evils and inconveniences was to place an insurmountable
barrier to the communication of the Jews with the Christians, and to
banish the Jews from our kingdoms, we wished to be satisfied with
enjoining them to quit all the cities, towns, and places of Andalusia,
where it seemed that they had done the most mischief, believing that
that would be enough to hinder those of the other cities, towns, and
places of our kingdoms and lordships from doing and committing what has
been mentioned. But being informed that this measure, as well as the
acts of justice exercised on some of the Jews who were found guilty
of these offences and crimes against our holy Catholic faith, do not
suffice to remedy the evil thoroughly; for the purpose of obviating
and abolishing so great an opprobrium, such an offence against the
faith and the Christian religion, since it appears that the same Jews,
with a fatal ardor, redouble their perverse attempts wherever they
live and associate; wishing to suppress the occasion of offending more
against our holy Catholic faith, as well on account of those persons
whom it has pleased God up to this time to preserve, as of those who,
after having fallen, have repented and returned to our holy mother
the Church; wishing to prevent the offences which, on account of the
weakness of our human nature, and the suggestions of the devil, which
continually make war on us, might easily occur, if the principal cause
of the evil were not removed by the expulsion of the Jews from our
kingdoms; considering, besides, that when a great and detestable crime
has been committed by some members of a college or university, it is
reasonable that that college or that university should be dissolved
and destroyed, that some may be punished on account of the others, and
the lesser number on account of the greater; that those who pervert
the good and virtuous mode of life of cities and towns, by a contagion
which may injure others, may be banished from those towns; and that
if it be allowed to act thus for other slight causes prejudicial to
the state, there is still more reason to allow it for the greatest,
the most dangerous, the most contagious of crimes, that which is in
question: for all these reasons we, having consulted our Council, and
taken the advice of some prelates," &c.

We are not now examining whether or not there is any exaggeration
in these imputations against the Jews, although, according to all
appearances, there must have been a great deal of foundation for
them, in consequence of the situation in which the two rival nations
were placed. Observe, besides, that if the preamble of the Pragmatic
Sanction is silent with respect to a hundred accusations brought
against the Jews by the generality of the people, the report of these
crimes had not the less weight with the public; consequently, the
situation of the Jews was aggravated in an extraordinary degree, and
the princes were so much the more inclined to treat them with severity.

With respect to the mistrust with which the Moors and their descendants
must have been regarded, besides the facts pointed out above, others
might be related which show the disposition of men's minds to see
in the presence of these men a permanent conspiracy against the
Christians. Almost a century had elapsed since the conquest of Granada,
and it was still feared that this kingdom might be the centre of plots
contrived by the Moors against the Christians, the source of perfidious
projects, and the place whence came the means of maltreating in all
ways the defenceless persons upon our coasts.

Thus spoke Philip II. in 1567:

"Book viii. chap. 2, of the new _Recopilacion_.

"Law xx., which decrees severe punishments against the inhabitants of
the kingdom of Granada who shall have hidden, received, or favored the
Turks, Moors, or Jews, or given them intelligence, or corresponded with
them.

"D. Philip II., Madrid, 10 December, 1567.

"Having been informed that, notwithstanding what has been ordained
by us, as well by sea as by land, particularly for the kingdom of
Granada, for the purpose of insuring the defence and security of our
kingdoms, the Turks, Moors, and corsairs have already committed, and
still commit, in the ports of this kingdom, on the coasts, in maritime
places, and those bordering on the sea, robberies, misdeeds, injuries,
and seizures of Christians; evils which are notorious, and which, it
is said, have been, and are, committed with ease and security, by
favor of the intercourse and understanding which the ravishers have
had, and still have, with some of the inhabitants of the country, who
give them intelligence, guide them, receive them, hide them, and lend
them favor and assistance; some of them even going away with the Moors
and Turks, leading away and carrying with them their wives, their
children, their goods, Christian captives, and the things which they
were able to ravish from the Christians; while other inhabitants of the
same kingdom, who have participated in these projects, or have been
acquainted with them, remain in the country, without having been or
being punished; for it appears that measures are not executed with due
severity, nor as completely, or with as much care as they ought to be:
as, moreover, it seems very difficult to get accurate information, as
it appears that even the justices and the judges, to whom it belongs to
make inquiries and to punish, have displayed remissness and negligence
in their employment;--this having been agitated and discussed in our
Council, with the view of providing, as is proper in a thing of such
great importance, for the service of God our Master, for our own and
the public good; the thing having been consulted upon by us, it has
been agreed that we ought to publish this present letter," &c.

Years passed away; the hatred between the two nations still endured; in
spite of the numerous checks which the Mahometan race had received, the
Christians were not satisfied. It was very probable that a nation who
had suffered, and might still suffer, such great humiliations, would
attempt to avenge them. It is also by no means difficult to believe in
the reality of the conspiracies which were charged against the Moors.
However this may be, the report of these conspiracies was general, and
the government was seriously alarmed by them. Those who desire a proof
of this, may read what Philip III. said, in 1609, in the law which
expelled the Moriscoes.

"Book viii. chap. 2, of the new _Recopilacion_.

"Law XXV. By virtue of which the Moriscoes were banished from the
kingdom: causes of this expulsion--means which were adopted for the
execution of the measure.

"D. Philip III., Madrid, 9 December, 1609.

"For a long time it has been endeavored to save the Moriscoes in these
kingdoms: the holy office of the Inquisition has inflicted divers
punishments; numerous edicts of mercy have been granted; neither means
nor diligence have been spared to instruct them in our holy faith,
without being able to obtain the desired result, for none of them have
been converted. On the contrary, their obstinacy has increased; the
peril which threatens our kingdoms, if we keep the Moriscoes, has been
represented to us by persons very well informed and full of the fear of
God, who, thinking it proper that a prompt remedy should be applied to
this evil, have represented to us that the delay might be charged upon
our royal conscience, considering the grave offences which our Lord
receives from that people. We have been assured that we might, without
scruple, punish them in their lives and properties, since they were
convicted by their continued offences of being heretics, apostates,
and traitors of _lèse-majesté_ divine and human. Although it would
have been allowable to proceed against them with the rigor which their
offences deserve, nevertheless, desiring to bring them back by means of
mildness and mercy, I ordained, in the city and kingdom of Valencia,
an assembly of the patriarchs, and other prelates and wise men, in
order to ascertain what could be resolved upon and settled; but having
learned that, at the very time they were engaged in remedying the
evil, the Moriscoes of the said kingdom of Valencia, and of our other
domains, continued to urge forward their pernicious projects; knowing,
moreover, from correct and certain intelligence, that they had sent to
treat at Constantinople with the Turks, and at Morocco with the king,
Muley Fidon, in order that there might be sent into the kingdom of
Spain the greatest number of forces possible to aid and assist them;
being sure that there would be found in our kingdom more than 150,000
men, as good Moors as those from the coasts of Barbary, all ready to
assist them with their lives and fortunes, whereby they were persuaded
of the facility of the enterprise; knowing that the same treaties have
been attempted with heretics and other princes our enemies: considering
all that we have just said, and to fulfill the obligation which we are
under of preserving and maintaining the holy Roman Catholic faith in
our kingdoms, as well as the security, peace, and repose of the said
kingdoms, with the counsel and advice of learned men, and others, very
zealous for the service of God and for our own, we ordain that all the
Moriscoes, inhabitants of these kingdoms, men, women, and children, of
all conditions," &c.

I have said that the Popes labored, from the commencement, to soften
the rigors of the Spanish Inquisition, sometimes by admonishing the
kings and inquisitors, sometimes by giving the accused and condemned a
right of appeal. The kings feared that the religious innovations would
produce a public disturbance; I add, that their policy embarrassed
the Popes, and prevented them from carrying as far as they would have
wished their measures of mildness and indulgence. Among the other
documents which support this assertion, I will cite one which proves
the irritation of the Spanish kings at the assistance which the accused
found at Rome.

"Book viii. chap. 3, law 2, of the new _Recopilacion_, enjoining
persons condemned by the Inquisition, and absent from these kingdoms,
not to return there under pain of death and losing their goods.

"D. Ferdinand and D. Isabella, at Saragossa, 2d August, 1498. Pragmatic
Sanction.

"Some persons condemned as heretics by the Inquisition have absented
themselves from our kingdoms, and have gone to other countries,
where, by means of false reports and undue formalities, they have
surreptitiously obtained exemptions, absolutions, mandates, securities,
and other privileges, in order to be exempt from the condemnations and
punishments which they had incurred, and to remain in their errors,
which, nevertheless, does not prevent their attempting to return to
these kingdoms, wherefore, wishing to extirpate so great an evil, we
command these condemned persons not to be so bold as to return. Let
them not return into our kingdoms and lordships, by any way, in any
manner, for any cause or reason whatsoever, under pain of death and
the loss of their goods; which punishment we will and ordain to be
incurred by the act itself. One-third of the property shall be for the
persons who shall have denounced, another for the courts, and the third
for our exchequer. Whenever the said justices, in their own places
and jurisdiction, shall know that any of the said persons are in any
part of their jurisdiction, we order all and each of them, without
exception, to go to the place where such persons are, without being
otherwise called upon, to apprehend them forcibly and immediately,
and without delay to execute, and cause to be executed, on them and
their properties the punishments which we have appointed; and this
notwithstanding all exemption, reconciliation, securities, and other
privileges which they may have, these privileges, in the present case,
and with respect to the said penalties, not availing them. We order
them to do and accomplish this under pain of the loss and confiscation
of all their property. The same penalty shall be incurred by all other
persons who shall have hidden or received the said condemned persons,
and who knowing that they were so, shall not have given information
to our courts. We order all great men and councillors, and other
persons of our kingdoms, to give favor and assistance to our courts,
whenever it shall be demanded and required from them, to accomplish and
execute what has been said above, under the penalties which the courts
themselves shall appoint on this subject."

We see from this document, that, after the year 1498, things had
reached such a point, that the kings attempted to maintain against
every one all the rigor of the Inquisition, and that they were offended
that the Popes interfered to soften it. It will be understood thereby
whence proceeded the harshness with which the guilty were treated; and
this shows us one of the causes which made the Inquisition sometimes
use its power with excessive severity. Although it was not a mere
instrument of the policy of kings, as some have said, the Inquisition
felt more or less the influence of that policy; and we know that
policy, when about to defeat an adversary, does not commonly display an
excess of compassion. If the Spanish Inquisition had been at that time
under the exclusive authority and direction of the Popes, it would have
been infinitely milder and more moderate in its method of acting.

At that time the object ardently desired by the kings of Spain was, to
obtain that the judgments of the Inquisition should be definitive in
Spain, without appeal to Rome; Queen Isabella had expressly demanded
this of the Pope. The Sovereign Pontiffs would not accede to these
solicitations, no doubt fearing the abuse which might be made of so
fearful an arm when the restraint of the moderating power should become
wanting.

It will be understood from the facts which I have just quoted, how much
reason I had to say that, if you excuse the conduct of Ferdinand and
Isabella with respect to the Inquisition, you must not condemn that
of Philip II., since the Catholic sovereigns showed themselves still
more harsh and severe than the latter monarch. I have already pointed
out the reason why the conduct of Philip II. has been so rigorously
condemned; but it is also necessary to show why there has been a sort
of obstinacy in excusing that of Ferdinand and Isabella.

When it is wished to falsify an historical fact by calumniating a
person or an institution, it is necessary to begin with an affectation
of impartiality and good faith; great success is obtained in this
by manifesting indulgence for the same thing which it is desired
to condemn, but taking care that this indulgence has strongly the
appearance of being a concession gratuitously made to our adversaries,
or of a sacrifice of our opinions, of our feelings, on the altars
of reason and justice, which are our guide and our idol. We thus
predispose our hearers or readers to regard the condemnation which
we are about to pronounce as a judgment dictated by the strictest
justice; a judgment in which neither passion, nor partiality, nor
perverse views, have any part. How can we doubt the good faith, the
love of truth, the impartiality of the man who begins by excusing what,
according to all appearances, and considering his opinions, ought to
be the object of his anathemas? Such is the situation of the men of
whom we speak. They intended to attack the Inquisition; now it happened
that the protectress, and, in some sort, the foundress of that tribunal
was Queen Isabella,--that distinguished name which Spaniards have
always pronounced with respect, that immortal queen, one of the noblest
ornaments of our history. What was to be done in this difficulty? The
means were simple. Although the Jews and heretics had been treated
with the greatest severity in the time of the Catholic sovereigns, and
although they had carried severity further than all those who have
succeeded them, it was necessary to close the eye to these facts, to
excuse the conduct of these sovereigns, and to point out the important
matters which urged them to employ the rigors of justice. They thus
avoided the difficulty,--for it was one to cast a stigma on the memory
of a great queen cherished and respected by all Spaniards,--and they
thus prepared the way for merciless accusations against Philip II. That
monarch had the unanimous cry of all Protestants against him, for the
simple reason that he had been their most powerful adversary; it would
therefore cost nothing to make all the weight of execration fall upon
him. The enigma is thus explained. Such is the cause of a partiality so
unjust,--such is the hypocrisy of that opinion which, while excusing
the Catholic sovereigns, condemns Philip II. without appeal.

I have not attempted to justify the policy of this monarch in all
respects; but I have presented a few considerations which may serve to
mitigate the violent attacks made upon him by his adversaries: it only
remains for me to transcribe here the documents to which I alluded when
I said that the Inquisition was not a mere instrument of the policy of
Philip II., and that this prince did not intend to establish a system
of _obscurantisme_ in Spain.

Don Antonio Perez, in his _Relations_, gives a letter of the confessor
of the king, Fray Diego de Chaves, in which letter the latter affirms
that the secular prince has power over the lives of his subjects and
vassals, and adds in a note: "I shall not undertake to relate all that
I have heard said on the subject of the condemnation of some of these
propositions; this is not within my province. Those who are concerned
in this will at once understand the import of my words. I shall
content myself with saying that, at the time when I was at Madrid, the
Inquisition condemned the following proposition: a preacher--it matters
not that I should mention his name--maintained in a sermon, at St.
Jerome's, in Madrid, in presence of the Catholic king, _that kings have
an absolute power over the persons of their subjects, as well as over
their properties_. Besides some other separate matters, the preacher
was condemned to retract this publicly, in the same place, with all
the ceremonies of a juridical act, which he did in the same pulpit,
saying that he had advanced such a proposition on such a day, and that
he retracted it as erroneous. 'For, messieurs,' said he, reading
literally from a paper, '_kings have no other power over their subjects
than what is given them by the divine and human law; they have none
proceeding from their own free and absolute will_.' I even know who
condemned the proposition, and appointed the words which the accused,
to the great gratification of the former, was obliged to pronounce;
indeed, he rejoiced to see torn up so poisonous a weed, which he felt
was increasing, as the event proved. Master Fray Hernando del Castillo
(I will mention his name) was the one who prescribed what the accused
was to say; he was consultee of the holy office, and preacher to the
king; he was a man of singular learning and eloquence, very well known
and esteemed by his own nation, and especially by the Italians. Dr.
Velasco, an important personage of that time, said of him, that the
guitar in the hands of Fabricio Dentici was not so sweet as the tongue
of Master Fray Hernandez del Castillo to the ears of those who heard
him." And at page 47 in the text: "I know," says Don Antonio Perez,
"that they were denominated very scandalous by persons very important
by their rank, their learning, and their Christian purity of heart;
there was one among them who had held supreme rank in the spiritual
order in Spain, and had previously filled an office in the tribunal
of the Inquisition." Perez afterwards says, that this person was the
nuncio of his Holiness. (_Relaciones de Anton. Perez._ Paris, 1624.)

The letter of Philip II. to Doctor D. Benito Arias Montano contains the
following, in addition to the remarkable passage which we have quoted.

"Concerning what you, Dr. &c., my chaplain, will have to do at Antwerp,
whither we send you. Dated at Madrid, 25th March, 1568.

"Besides that you will render this good office and service to the said
Plantinus, know that, from this time, in proportion as the six thousand
crowns are recovered from his hands, I apply them to buy books for the
monastery of St. Laurent-le-Royal, of the order of St. Jerome, which
I am building near the Escurial, as you know. Thus you are admonished
that such is my intention; you will comply with this, and will be
diligent in collecting all the choice books, printed and MS., that your
excellent discernment shall think proper, in order to bring them and
place them in the library of the said monastery. Indeed, it is one of
the chief possessions which I would wish to leave to the religious who
are intended to dwell there, for it is the most useful and necessary.
Wherefore I have also commanded my ambassador in France, D. Francis
de Alaba, to collect the best books which he shall be able in that
kingdom: you will communicate with him on that subject. I will direct
him to communicate in writing also with you, to send you a list of the
books which are to be had, as well as their price, before buying them;
you will advise him as to which he had better take or leave, and what
he may give for such. He will send to you at Antwerp those which he has
thus bought; you will acknowledge them, and forward them here, all at
once, at the proper time."

During the reign of Philip II.,--of that prince who is represented
to us as one of the principal authors of _obscurantisme_,--choice
works, both printed and MS., were sought in foreign countries, in order
to enrich the Spanish libraries; in our age, which we call that of
enlightenment, the libraries of Spain have been plundered, and their
treasures have gone to add to those of foreigners. Who is ignorant
of the collections which have been made of our books and MS., in
England? Consult the catalogues of the British Museum and other private
libraries. The author of these lines states only what he has seen with
his own eyes--what he has heard lamented by persons worthy of respect.
While we show so much negligence in preserving our treasures, let us
not be so unjust and so puerile as to lose our time in vain declamation
against those who have bequeathed them to us.


APPENDIX.

 _A few words on Puigblanch, Villeneuve, and Llorente._

Here, in the Spanish edition, the notes relating to the Inquisition
terminate; but I think it may not be useless in the French edition
to add a few words, to explain the matter to my foreign readers:
little versed as they are in the knowledge of our affairs, they might
often happen to drink at corrupted sources, which they imagine to be
pure and salutary. Le Compte de Maistre, with respect to the Spanish
Inquisition, cites _L'Inquisition dévoilée de Natanaël Jomtob_: I will
say a few words, lest the authority of the author who quotes should
give too much importance to him who is quoted. This Natanaël Jomtob
is no other than Dr. D. Antonio Puigblanch, a Spaniard, who died not
long ago in London. This author, in the prologue to his works published
in London, himself explains the reason which made him adopt a strange
name. "These Hebrew words," he says, "are two proper significative
names, which, together, form the inscription, _Dedit Deus diem bonum_.
I wished thus to express the happiness of being able to speak and write
freely against the tribunal of the Inquisition, and the happiness of
seeing it abolished." (_Prolog._ p. cxv.)

In order that the reader may judge of the value that belongs to this
work, I will observe, that the first qualification in an historian,
especially on a matter so delicate, is complete impartiality united
to a great fund of moderation: these two qualifications were wanting
in M. Puigblanch, who was lamentably infected with the contrary
faults. It is impossible to be more violent than he is against all
that he meets with; his ill-humor and anger blind him; he attacks
institutions and men with perfect fury; he respects nothing: add
to this a pitiable vanity. It would be easy for me to produce here
various proofs of the impiety of Puigblanch; but I should fear to soil
my paper by transcribing the impious satires of this man. This is
enough to give an idea of the point of view in which he could regard
things relating to religious affairs and to the clergy. He misses no
opportunity of ridiculing the ministers of religion, of indulging in
invectives against them, and of giving vent to the incomprehensible
rage which he has against them. The unbecoming manner in which he
treats his adversaries, real or imaginary, even when they have more
or less sympathy with his opinions, is a good apology for the things
which he combats on the other hand. I cannot repeat his words here, so
coarse are they; besides, they attack persons who are still living;
suffice it to say, that not content with insulting them in the most
disgusting way, Puigblanch descends so low as to reproach them with
their physical defects, after the manner of a market-woman. What was
to be hoped from such a mind in a matter so important and delicate?
Were such dispositions suitable for an historian of the Inquisition,
who published his work precisely in the year 1811, that is to say,
at a time of reaction and effervescence? With respect to talent and
knowledge, I will not refuse to M. Puigblanch either reading or
erudition, or a certain aptitude for criticism, yet it must not be
forgotten that his mind was far from being so cultivated as it ought
to have been, in order to keep pace with our age. A work like his
required that he should have followed the march of the times, that he
should not have been altogether devoid of the philosophy of history,
that he should not have relied exclusively upon certain books, while
accumulating crude erudition, and incessantly perusing etymologies and
grammatical questions: this is what was wanting in M. Puigblanch. To
sum up all in one sentence, I have found the following description,
which I heard in London, from the mouth of a distinguished man who had
intercourse with Puigblanch for a long time, to be perfectly correct:
"Puigblanch," he told me, "knew what a learned man of the seventeenth
century in Spain might have known." The Christian reader may imagine
what was the result of the amalgamation of this kind of instruction
with all the bile of Voltairian passion.

D. Joaquin Lorenzo Villanueva is another of those Spaniards who have
distinguished themselves by declaiming against the Inquisition; in
his Literary Life (_Vida Literaria_) he had asserted that the public
information on this question, and the abolition of that famous
tribunal, were in great part owing to him. Puigblanch strongly
recriminates against Villanueva, who attempted to usurp his glory
by availing himself of his work without acknowledging it, and other
similar things, which do as little honor to the one as to the other.
Villanueva has been already judged in Spain by all sensible men;
foreigners who desire to understand this question will be under the
unpleasant obligation of reading the two large volumes in 8vo, in
which he has written his literary life. The bile of Villanueva against
all the clergy who are not of his coterie, and, above all, his hatred
against Rome, show themselves at every page of his book, and from time
to time produce explosions which are much too violent to accord with
the extreme mildness which he is pleased to affect. Moreover, let the
reader prepare and arm himself with patience, if he undertake to get
through these two large volumes, which contain, written by the man
himself, who so well deserved it, the most complete panegyric of his
profound knowledge, his vast erudition, his great humility, and his
virtues of all kinds. It certainly would have been very well, if the
author, with a slight recollection of modesty, had not candidly told
us, that they went so far as to call him the _father of the poor_,
that his poetic fire was not cooled by age, that his activity in labor
did not allow him to remain idle, even in the midst of the greatest
persecutions; in fine, if he had not undertaken to make us believe
that all his life was a continual sacrifice on the altars of knowledge
and virtue. To those who desire to derive their information from
Villanueva, we have a right to say: Do not forget that you must beware
of believing all--that the tree is known by its fruits--that the wolf
often assumes sheep's clothing.

Among those who have made the most noise with respect to the
Inquisition, is Llorente, the author of a history of that famous
institution. The impartiality which may be expected from this writer
shows itself every moment in his book, which has evidently been written
for the purpose of blackening, as much as possible, the Catholic clergy
and the Holy See. Happily the author has made himself too well known
by his other works, for any Catholic to allow himself to be deceived
by his insidious writings. No one, especially in Spain, is ignorant
of the project of the religious constitution with which Llorente
attempted to disturb consciences, and introduce schism and heresy into
our country. Does he who attempts to destroy the universal discipline
established from the earliest ages, who expresses doubts on the most
sacred mysteries of our holy religion, who contests the infallible
authority of the Church, and does not hold the first four Œcumenical
Councils to be legitimate, deserve the least credit when writing
the history of the Inquisition,--that history which affords so many
opportunities of declaiming against the clergy and against Rome? Here
is a proof of his impartiality. In his history of the Inquisition, he
could not avoid relating the conduct of the Apostolic See in the early
times of the Inquisition in Spain, and the efforts made by the Holy See
for the purpose of softening the rigors of that tribunal, the appeals
which were made, and the merciful judgments which were almost always
obtained at Rome; all these facts clearly showed that Rome, far from
being, as he pretended, a monster of cruelty, was rather a model of
mildness and prudence. How do you think he gets out of this difficulty?
By saying, that what the Court of Rome wanted was, to extort money from
us. An explanation as unworthy as it is impudent--an odious means of
depriving the most beneficent and generous actions of their lustre, and
which shows a fixed design to find evil every where, even to the extent
of assigning evil motives for benefits which are the most worthy of
gratitude.

With respect to Llorente, I am unwilling to pass over in silence a
remarkable fact which he has had the kindness to communicate to the
public in the same work. King Joseph, the intruder, intrusted Llorente,
by express orders, with the archives of the Supreme Council and the
Tribunal of the Inquisition of the capital. This excellent man was so
perfect an archivist, that he burnt all the reports of proceedings,
with the approbation of his master (as he himself tells us), with the
exception of those which could appertain to history, by the celebrity
or the renown of the persons who figured in them, such as those of
Caranza, of Macanaz, and a few others; although he preserved entire,
he adds, the registers of the decisions of the Council, the royal
ordinances, and the bulls and briefs from Rome. (Edition Française,
1818, t. 4, p. 145.) After having heard this remarkable confession, we
will ask every impartial man, whether there is not room for greatly
mistrusting an historian who claims to be sole and _unique_, because he
has had the opportunity of consulting the original documents whereon
he founds his history, and who, nevertheless, burns and destroys these
same documents? Was there no place to be found in Madrid to place them,
where they could be examined by those who, after Llorente, might wish
to write the history of the Inquisition from the original documents?
Llorente has preserved, he tells us, those which belonged to history;
but the history of the Inquisition had equally need of others, even the
most obscure--even the most apparently insignificant; for it not seldom
happens that a fact, a circumstance, a word, shows us an institution,
and paints for us an age. And observe, that this destruction took
place at a critical moment of public disturbance, when the whole
nation, devoted to an immortal struggle in defence of her independence,
could not fix her attention on such matters. The most remarkable
men, scattered on all sides, then led their fellow-citizens in arms,
or were engaged in the most important interests of the country;
consequently they could not watch over the conduct of an archivist,
who, after having left his brethren, whose blood was flowing upon the
battle-field, accepted employment under a foreign intruder, and burned
the documents of an institution whereof he undertook to write the
history.


NOTE 27, p. 281.

The plan of my work required that questions relating to the religious
communities should be examined at some length but it did not allow me
to give to this matter all the development of which it is susceptible.
Indeed, it would be possible, in my opinion, in writing the history of
religious communities, to give side by side that of the nations among
whom these communities arose, so as to show in detail a truth we have
now proved, viz. that the establishment of religious institutions,
besides the superior and divine object which they have had in view,
has been at all times the fulfilment of a social and religious
necessity. Although my strength does not enable me to aspire to such
an enterprise, by which the courage may well be daunted, even by
contemplating the immense extent of such a work, I wish to suggest the
idea of it here; perhaps a man may be found with sufficient capacity,
learning, and leisure, to undertake it, and enrich our age with this
new monument of history and philosophy. By conceiving the plan in this
point of view, and making it subordinate to this unity of object,
whereof the foundation, which shows itself in well-known facts, is
discovered in obscure and conjectured in hidden ones, there would be no
difficulty in giving all desirable variety to this work. The subject
itself leads to variety; for it invites the writer to descend to
extremely interesting particulars, which will be like the episodes of
a grand and unique poem. The disposition of men's minds, now become
favorable to religious institutions, thanks to the deceptions which are
the consequence of vain theories, and to the lessons of experience,
which destroy the calumnies invented by philosophy, render the road
every day more easy. The path is already sufficiently beaten; it is
only required to enlarge and extend it, in order to conduct a greater
number of men towards the region of truth.

Having pointed out this, it only remains for me to state here, in
conclusion, divers facts which could not be given in the text, and
which I have preferred to collect in a note. As these facts belonged to
the same subject, it appeared to me proper to collect them apart, while
leaving the reader to pay full attention to the observations which form
the body of my work.

There were known among the pagans, under the name of ascetics, persons
who devoted themselves to abstinence and the practice of the austere
virtues; so that, even before Christianity, there already existed the
idea of those virtues which have been since exercised in Christianity.
The lives of the philosophers are full of examples which prove the
truth of my assertion. Yet it will be understood that, deprived of the
light of faith and the aid of grace, the pagan philosophers afforded
but a very faint shadow of what was afterwards realized in the lives
of the Christian ascetics. We have stated that the monastic life is
founded on the Gospel, inasmuch as the Gospel contains asceticism. From
the foundation of the Church we see the monastic life established under
one form or another. Origen tells us of certain men, who, in order to
reduce their bodies into subjection, abstained from eating meat and
from all that had life. (Origen, _Contr. Celsum_, lib. v.) Tertullian
makes mention of some Christians who abstained from marriage, not
because they condemned it, but in order to gain the kingdom of heaven.
(Tertul. _De Cult. Femin._ lib. ii.)

It is remarkable, that the weaker sex participated in a singular manner
in that strength of mind which Christianity communicated for the
exercise of the heroic virtues. In the early ages of the Church there
were already reckoned, in great numbers, virgins and widows consecrated
to the Lord, bound by a vow of perpetual chastity; and we see that
special care was taken in the ancient Councils of the Church of that
chosen portion of her flock. It is one of the objects of the solicitude
of the Fathers to regulate discipline on this point in a proper manner.
The virgins made their public profession in the church; they received
the veil from the hands of the bishop, and, for greater solemnity, they
were distinguished by a kind of consecration. This ceremony required a
certain age in the person who was consecrated to God; we also observe
that discipline has been very different on this point. In the East
they received persons seventeen years old, and even sixteen, as we
learn from St. Basil (_Epist._ can. 18); in Africa at twenty-five,
as we see from the fourth canon of the third Council of Carthage; in
France at forty, as appears from the nineteenth canon of the Council
of Agde. Even when the virgins and widows dwelt in the houses of
their fathers, they did not cease to be reckoned among ecclesiastical
persons; they received the support of the Church by this title, in
cases of necessity. If they violated their vow of chastity, they were
excommunicated, and could not return to the communion of the faithful,
except by submitting to public penance. (For these details, see the
thirty-third canon of the third Council of Carthage, the nineteenth
canon of the Council of Ancyra, and the sixteenth canon of that of
Chalcedon.)

In the first three centuries, the state of the Church, subject to an
almost continual persecution, must naturally have hindered persons who
loved the ascetic life, men or women, from assembling in the towns to
observe it in common. Some think that the propagation of the ascetic
life in the desert is in great part due to the persecution of Decius,
which was very cruel in Egypt, and made a great number of Christians
retire into the deserts of the Thebais, or other solitudes in the
neighbourhood. Thus commenced the establishment of that method of life
which, in the end, was to gain so prodigious an extension. St. Paul, if
we are to believe St. Jerome, was the founder of the solitary life.

It appears that some abuses were introduced into the monastic life from
the earliest ages, as we see certain monks detested at Rome in the time
of Jerome. _Quousque genus detestabile monacorum urbe non pellitur_,
says the saint by the mouth of the Romans in a letter to Paula; but
the reputation of the monks, which had perhaps been compromised by the
Sarabaïtes and the Gyrovagues, a kind of vagabonds whose last care
was the practice of the virtues of their state, and who indulged in
gluttony and other pleasures with shameful licentiousness, was soon
restored. St. Athanasius, St. Jerome himself, St. Martin, and other
celebrated men, among whom St. Bennet distinguished himself in a
particular manner, renewed the splendor of the monastic life by the
most eloquent apology, that which consisted in giving, as they did, the
most sublime example of the most austere virtues.

It is remarkable that, in spite of the multiplication of monks in
the east and west, they were not divided into different orders, so
that, during the first six centuries, all, as Mabillon observes,
were considered as forming one institute. There was something noble
in this unity, which, as it were, formed all the monasteries into
one family; but it must be acknowledged that the diversity of orders
afterwards introduced was essentially calculated to attain the various
and numerous objects which successively attracted the attention of
religious institutions.

The discipline, by virtue whereof no new order could be instituted
without the previous approbation of the sovereign Pontiff, it may be
said, was very necessary, considering the ardor which afterwards urged
many persons to establish new institutions; so that, without this
prudent check, disorder would have been introduced in consequence of
the exaggerated transports which urged some imaginations to exceed all
bounds.

Some people take delight in relating the excesses into which some
individuals of the mendicant orders fell; and they borrow the
narratives of Matthew Paris, without forgetting the lamentations of
St. Bonaventura himself. I wish not to excuse evil, wherever it is
found; but I will observe, that the circumstances of the times when
the mendicant orders were established, and the kind of life they were
obliged to embrace, in order to fulfill the purpose for which they were
intended, as I have pointed out in the text, rendered almost inevitable
those evils which pious men sincerely deplored, and which the enemies
of the Church lament with no less affectation than exaggeration.


NOTE 28, p. 305.

I have already shown, by numerous testimonies of scholastic
theologians, how the divine origin of the civil power is to be
understood; and it is evident that it contains nothing but what is
perfectly conformable to sound reason, and adapted, at the same
time, to the high aims of society. It would have been easy for me to
accumulate testimonies; but I think I have adduced a sufficient number
to throw light on the subject, and to satisfy every reader who, free
from unjust prejudices, is sincerely desirous of listening to truth. In
order, however, to view this subject under every aspect, I will add a
few explanations on that celebrated passage of St. Paul to the Romans,
chap. xiii., in which the Apostle speaks of the origin of powers, and
of the submission and obedience due to them. Let it not be thought,
however, that I purpose attaining this end by any reasoning more or
less specious. Whenever a passage of Scripture is to be expounded in
its true sense, we should not rely principally upon what our wavering
reason suggests to us, but rather upon the interpretation of the
Catholic Church; for this reason we should consult those writers whose
high authority, founded on their wisdom and their virtue, leads us to
hope that they have not deviated from the maxim, _Quod semper, quod
ubique, quod ab omnibus traditum est_.

We have already seen a remarkable passage of St. John Chrysostom,
explaining this point with as much clearness as solidity; we have
also learned, from the testimony of the Fathers, what motives induced
the Apostles to inculcate so pressingly the obligation of obedience
to the lawful authorities. It only remains for us to insert here the
commentaries of some illustrious writers on the text of the Apostle. In
them we shall find, as it were, a code of doctrine; and when we come to
appreciate the reasons on which the precepts inculcated in the sacred
text are founded, we shall more easily discover their true meaning.

Observe, in the first place, with what wisdom, prudence, and piety this
important subject is expounded by a writer who was not of the golden
era, but, on the contrary, who lived in what is generally termed the
barbarous age--St. Anselm. In his commentaries on the 13th chapter of
the Epistle to the Romans, this doctor thus expresses himself:

"_Omnis anima potestatibus sublimioribus subdita sit. Non est enim
potestas nisi a Deo. Quæ autem sunt, a Deo ordinatæ sunt. Itaque qui
resistit potestati, Dei ordinationi resistit. Qui autem resistunt, ipsi
sibi damnationem acquirunt._

"Sicut superius reprehendit illos, qui gloriabantur de meritis, ita
nunc ingreditur illos redarguere, qui postquam erant ad fidem conversi
nolebant subjici alicui potestati. Videbatur enim quod infideles, Dei
fidelibus non deberent dominari, etsi fideles deberent esse pares. Quam
superbiam removet, dicens: _Omnis anima_, id est, _omnis_ homo, _sit_
humiliter _subdita potestatibus_ vel secularibus, vel ecclesiasticis,
sublimioribus se: hoc est, omnis homo sit subjectus superpositis sibi
potestatibus. A parte enim majore significat totum hominem, sicut
rursum a parte inferiore totus homo significatur ubi Propheta dicit:
_Quia videbit omnis caro salutare Dei_. Et recte admonet, ne quis ex
eo quod in libertatem vocatus est, factusque Christianus, extollatur
in superbiam, et non arbitretur in hujus vitæ itinere servandum esse
ordinem suum, et _potestatibus_, quibus pro tempore rerum temporalium
gubernatio tradita est, non se putet esse subdendum. Cum enim constemus
ex anima et corpore, et quamdiu in hac vita temporali sumus, etiam
rebus temporalibus ad subsidium ejusdem vitæ utamur, oportet nos ex
ea parte, quæ ad hanc vitam pertinet, subditos esse _potestatibus_,
id est, res humanas cum aliquo honore administrantibus: ex illa vero
parte, qua Deo credimus, et in regnum ejus vocamur, non debemus
subditi esse cuiquam homini, id ipsum in nobis evertere cupienti,
quod Deus ad vitam æternam donare dignatus est. Si quis ergo putat
quoniam Christianus est, non sibi esse vectigal reddendum, sive
tributum, aut non esse honorem exhibendum debitum eis quæ hæc curant
_potestatibus_, in magno errore versatur. Item si quis sic se putat
esse subdendum, ut etiam in suam fidem habere potestatem arbitretur
eum, qui temporalibus administrandis aliqua sublimitate præcellit, in
majorem errorem labitur. Sed modus iste servandus est, quem Dominus
ipse præcipit, ut reddamus _Cæsari quæ sunt Cesaris, et Deo quæ sunt
Dei_. Quamvis enim ad illud regnum vocati simus, ubi nulla erit
potestas hujusmodi, in hoc tamen itinere conditionem nostram pro ipso
rerum humanarum ordine debemus tolerare, nihil simulate facientes,
et in hoc non tam hominibus, quam Deo, qui hoc jubet, obtemperantes.
Itaque _omnis anima sit subdita sublimioribus potestatibus_, id est,
omnis homo sit subditus primum divinæ potestati, deinde mundanæ. Nam si
mundana potestas jusserit quod non debes facere, contemne potestatem,
timendo sublimiorem potestatem. Ipsos humanarum rerum gradus adverte.
Si aliquid jusserit procurator, nonne faciendum est? Tamen si contra
proconsulem jubeat, non utique contemnis potestatem, sed eligis majore
servire. Non hinc debet minor irasci, si major prælata est. Rursus si
aliquid proconsul jubeat, et aliud imperator, numquid dubitatur, illo
contempto huic esse serviendum. Ergo si aliud imperator, et aliud Deus
jubeat, quid faciemus? Numquid non Deus imperatori est præferendus?
Ita ergo _sublimioribus potestatibus anima_ subjiciatur, id est, homo.
Sive idcirco ponitur _anima_ pro homine, qui secundum hanc discernit,
cui subdi debeat, et cui non. Vel homo, qui promotione virtutem
sublimatus est, _anima_ vocatur a digniore parte. Vel, non solum
corpus sit subditum, sed _anima_, id est, voluntas: hoc est, non solum
corpore, sed et voluntate serviatis. Ideo debetis subjici, quia _non
est potestas nisi a Deo_. Numquam enim posset fieri nisi operatione
solius Dei, ut tot homines uni servirent, quem considerant unius
secum esse fragilitatis et naturæ. Sed quia Deus subditis inspirat
timorem et obediendi voluntatem, contigit ita. Nec valet quisquam
aliquid posse, _nisi_ divinitus ei _datum_ fuerit. _Potestas_ omnis
_est a Deo_. Sed ea _quæ sunt, a Deo ordinatæ sunt_. Ergo potestas est
ordinata, id est, rationabiliter a Deo disposita. _Itaque qui resistit
potestati_, nolens tributa dare, honorem deferre, et his similia, _Dei
ordinationi resistit_, qui hoc ordinavit, ut talibus subjiciamur. _Hoc
enim contra illos dicitur, qui se putabant ita debere uti libertate
Christiana, ut nulli vel honorem deferrent, vel tributa redderent._
Unde magnum poterat adversus _Christianam religionem scandalum nasci
a principibus seculi_. De bona potestate patet, quod eam perfecit
Deus rationabiliter. De mala quoque videri potest, dum et boni per
eam purgantur, et mali damnantur, et ipsa deterius præcipitatur.
_Qui potestati resistit_, cum Deus eam ordinaverit, _Dei ordinationi
resistit_. Sed hoc tam grave peccatum est, _quod qui resistunt, ipsi_
pro contumacia et perversitate _sibi damnationem_ æternæ mortis
acquirunt. Et ideo non debet quis resistere, sed subjici."

This remarkable passage contains all--the origin of power, its object,
its duties, and its limits. We must observe, that St. Anselm expressly
confirms what I have hinted in the text on the subject of the wrong
meaning sometimes given in the first centuries to Christian liberty;
many imagining that this liberty carried with it the abolition of the
civil powers, and particularly of those which were infidel. He also
shows the scandal which this doctrine might cause; thus explaining how
the Apostles, without attempting to attribute to the civil power any
extraordinary and supernatural origin, like that of the ecclesiastical
power, had nevertheless powerful reasons for inculcating that this
power emanates from God, and that whoever resists it, resists the
ordinance of God.

Passing on to centuries nearer our own time, we find the same doctrines
in the most eminent commentators. Cornelius a Lapide interprets the
passage of St. Paul in the same way as St. Anselm, and explains, by
the same reasons, the solicitude with which the Apostles recommended
obedience to the civil powers. These are his words:

"_Omnis anima_ (omnis homo) _potestatibus sublimioribus_, id est
principibus et magistratibus, qui potestate regendi et imperandi
sunt præditi; ponitur enim abstractum pro concreto; _potestatibus_,
hoc est potestate præditis, _subdita sit_, scilicet iis in rebus,
in quibus potestas illa sublimior et superior est, habetque jus et
jurisdictionem, puta in temporalibus, subdita sit regi et potestati
civili, quod propie hic intendit Apostolus: per potestatem enim,
civilem intelligit; in spiritualibus vero subdita sit Prælatis,
Episcopis et Pontifici.

"Nota.--Pro _potestatibus sublimioribus_, _potestatibus_
supereminentibus vel _præcellentibus_, ut, Noster vertit, 1 Pet. ii.,
_sive regi quasi præcellenti_, Syrus vertit, _potestatibus dignitate
præditis_: id est magistratibus secularibus, qui potestate regendi
præditi sunt, sive duces, sive gubernatores, sive consules, prætores,
&c.

"Seculares enim magistratus hic intelligere Apostolum patet, quia his
solvuntur tributa et vectigalia quæ hisce potestatibus solvi jubet ipse
v. 7, ita Sanctus Basilius de _Constit. Monast._ c. 23.

"Nota.--Ex Clemente Alexand. lib. iv. _Stromatum_, et S. Aug. in Psal.
cxviii. cont. 31, _Initio Ecclesiæ, puta tempore Christi et Pauli,
rumor erat, per Evangelium politias humanas, regna et respublicas
seculares everti_; uti jam fit ab hæreticis prætendentibus libertatem
Evangelii: unde contrarium docent, et studiose inculcant Christus,
cum solvit didrachma, et cum jussit Cæsari reddi ea quæ Cæsaris sunt;
et Apostoli: idque ne in odium traheretur Christiana religio, et ne
Christiani abuterentur libertate fidei ad omnem malitiam.

"Ortus est his rumor ex secta Judæ et Galilæorum de qua Actor. 5, in
fine, qui pro libertate sua tuenda omne dominium Cæsaris et vectigal,
etiam morte proposita abnuebant, de quo Josephus, libr. xviii.
_Antiqu._ 1. Quæ secta diu inter Judæos viguit; adeoque Christus et
Apostoli in ejus suspicionem vocati sunt, quia origine erant Galilæi,
et rerum novarum præcones. Hos Galilæos secuti sunt Judæi omnes, et
de facto Romanis rebellarunt: quod dicerent populum Dei liberum non
debere subjici et servire infidelibus Romanis; ideoque a Tito excisi
sunt. Hinc etiam eadem calumnia in Christianos, qui origine erant et
habebantur Judæi, derivata est: unde Apostoli, ut eam amoliantur, sæpe
docent principibus dandum esse honorem et tributum.

"Quare octo argumentis probat his Apostolus principibus et
magistratibus deberi obedientiam....

"His rationibus probat Apostolus Evangelium, et Christianismum, regna
et magistratus non evertere, sed firmare et stabilire: quia nil
regna et principes ita confirmat, ac subditorum bona, Christiana et
sancta vita. Adeo, ut etiam nunc principes Japones et Indi Gentiles
ament Christianos, et suis copiam faciant baptismi et Christianismi
suscipiendi, quia subditos Christianos, magis quam Ethnicos, faciles
et obsequentes, regnaque sua per eos magis firmari, pacari et florere
experiuntur."

With regard to the mode in which civil power proceeds from God, the
celebrated commentator agrees with the other theologians. Like them, he
distinguishes between direct and indirect communication, and takes care
to define the particular meaning of the term, _divine origin_ of power,
when applied to ecclesiastical authority.

In his explanation of these words, _all power is from God_, he thus
expresses himself:

"_Non est enim potestas, nisi a Deo_; quasi diceret principatus et
magistratus non a diabolo, nec a solo homine, sed a Deo ejusque divina
ordinatione et dispositione conditi et instituti sunt: eis ergo
obediendum est.

"Nota primo.--_Potestas sæcularis est a Deo mediate; quia natura et
recta ratio, quæ a Deo est, dicat, et hominibus persuasit præficere
reipublicæ magistratus, a quibus regantur. Potestas vero ecclesiastica
immediate est a Deo instituta; quia Christus ipse Petrum et Apostolos
Ecclesiæ præfecit._"

The celebrated Dom Calmet explains the same passage with no less
learning; he quotes numerous passages from the holy Fathers, showing
what ideas the first Christians held on the subject of civil power,
and how calumniously they have been accused of being the disturbers of
public order.

"_Omnis anima potestatibus_, &c. Pergit hic Apostolus docere Fideles
vitæ ac morum officia. Quæ superiori capite vidimus, eo desinunt, ut
bonus ordo et pax in Ecclesia interque Fideles servetur. Hæc potissimum
spectant ad obedientiam, quam unusquisque superioribus potestatibus
debet. Christianorum libertatem atque a Mosaicis legibus immunitatem
commendaverat Apostolus; at ne quis monitis abutatur, docet hic, quæ
debeat esse subditorum subjectio erga Reges et Magistratus.

"Hoc ipsum gravissime monuerant primos Ecclesiæ discipulos Petrus et
Jacobus; repetitque Paulus ad Titum scribens, sive ut Christianos,
insectantium injuriis undique obnoxios, in patientia contineret, _sive
ut vulgi opinionem deleret, qua discipuli Jesu Christi, omnes ferme
Galilæi, sententiam Judæ Gaulonitæ sequi, et principum authoritati
repugnare censebantur_.

"_Omnis anima_, quilibet, quavis conditione aut dignitate,
_potestatibus sublimioribus subdita sit_; Regibus, Principibus,
Magistratibus, iis denique quibus legitima est authoritas, sive
absoluta, sive alteri obnoxia. Neminem excipit Apostolus, non
Presbyteros, non Præsules, non Monachos, ait Theodoretus; illæsa tamen
Ecclesiasticorum immunitate. Tunc solum modo parere non debes, cum
aliquid Divinæ Legi contrarium imperatur: tunc enim præferenda est
debita Deo obedientia; quin tamen vel arma capere adversus Principes,
vel in seditionem abire liceat. Repugnandum est in iis tantum, quæ
justitiam, ac Dei legem violant; in cæteris parendum. Si imperaverint
aut idolorum cultum aut justitiæ violationem cum necis vel bonorum
jacturæ interminatione, vitam et fortunas discrimini objicito, ac
repugnato; in reliquis autem obtempera.

"_Non est enim potestas nisi a Deo._ Absolutissima in libertate
conditus est homo, nulli creatæ rei, at uni Deo subditus. Nisi mundum
invasisset una cum Adami transgressione peccatum, mutuam æqualitatem
libertatemque homines servassent. At libertate abusos damnavit Deus,
ut parerent iis, quos ipse principes illis daret, ob pœnam arrogantiæ,
qua pares Conditori effici voluerunt. At, inquies, quis nesciat,
quorumdam veterum Imperiorum initia et incrementa ex injuria atque
ambitione profecta. Nemrod, exempli causa, Ninus, Nabuchodonosor,
aliique quamplures, an Principes erant a Deo constituti? Nonne
similius vero est, violenta Imperia primum exorta esse ab imperandi
libidine? liberorum vero Imperiorum originem fuisse hominum metum, qui
sese impares propulsandæ externorum injuriæ sentientes, aliquem sibi
Principem creavere, datamque sibi a Deo naturalem ulciscendi injurias
potestatem, volentes libentesque alteri tradiderunt? Quam vere igitur
docet Apostolus, quamlibet potestatem a Deo esse, eumque esse positæ
inter homines authoritatis institutorem?"

He points out four ways in which power may be said to emanate from
God, and it is remarkable that none of them are extraordinary or
supernatural; all of them serve to confirm more and more what reason
and the very nature of things teach us.

"Omnino Deus potestatis autor et causa est. I. Quod, hominibus tacite
inspiraverit consilium subjiciendi se uni, a quo defenderentur.
II. Quod imperia inter homines utilissima sint servandæ concordiæ,
disciplinæ, ac religioni. Porro quicquid boni est, a Deo ceu fonte
proficisciter. III. Cum potestas tuendi ab aggressore vitam vel opes,
hominibus a Deo tradita, atque ab ipsis in Principem conversa, a Deo
primum proveniat, Principes ea potestate ab hominibus donati, hanc ab
ipso Deo accepisse jure dicuntur; quamobrem Petrus humanam creaturam
nuncupat, quam Paulus potestatem a Deo institutam: humana igitur et
divina est, varia ratione spectata, uti diximus. IV. Denique suprema
authoritas a Deo est, utpote quam Deus, a sapientibus institutam,
probavit.

"Nulla unquam gens sæcularibus potestatibus magis paruit, quam primæ
ætatis Christiani, qui a Christo Jesu et ab Apostolis edocti, nunquam
ausi sunt Principibus a Providentia sibi datis repugnare. Discipulos
fugere tantum jubet Christus. Ait Petrus, Christum nobis exemplum
reliquisse, cum sese Judicum iniquitate pessime agi passus est. Monet
hic Paulus, resistere te Dei voluntati, atque æternæ damnationis reum
effici, si potestati repugnas. 'Quamvis nimius et copiosus noster
populus, non tamen adversus violentiam se ulciscitur: patitur,' ait
sanctus Cyprianus. 'Satis virium est ad pugnam; at omnia perpeti
ex Christo didicimus. Cui bello non idonei, non prompti fuissemus,
etiam copiis impares, qui tam libenter trucidamur? si non apud istam
disciplinam magis occidi liceret, quam occidere,' inquit Tertullianus.
'Cum nefanda patimur, ne verbo quidem reluctamur, sed Deo remittimus
ultionem,' scribebat Lactantius. Sanctus Ambrosius: 'coactus, repugnare
non novi. Dolere potero, potero flere, potero gemere: abversus arma,
milites, Gothos quoque; lacrymæ meæ arma sunt. Talia enim sunt
munimenta Sacerdotis. Aliter ne debeo nec possum resistere.'"

I have said in the text, that there was to be remarked a singular
coincidence of opinions on the origin of society between the
philosophers of antiquity, deprived of the light of faith, and those of
our days who have abandoned this light; both wanting the only guide,
which is the Mosaic history, have found in their researches after the
origin of things, nothing more than chaos, in the physical as well as
in the moral order. In support of my assertion, I will insert passages
from two celebrated men, in which the reader will find, with very
little difference, the same language as in Hobbes, Rousseau, and other
writers of the same school.

"There was a time," says Cicero, "when men wandered in the fields like
the brutes, feeding on prey like wild beasts, deciding nothing by
reason, but every thing by force. No religion was then professed, no
morality observed; there were no laws of marriage; the father could not
distinguish his own children, and the possession of property by virtue
of principles of equity was unknown. Hence the blind, unrestrained
passions ruled tyrannically in the midst of error and ignorance, and
used the powers of the body for their gratification as their most
injurious satellites."

"Nam fuit quoddam tempus cum in agris homines passim bestiarum more
vagabantur, et sibi victu ferino vitam propagabant; nec ratione
animi quidquam, sed pleraque viribus corporis administrabant. Nondum
divinæ religionis, non humani officii ratio colebatur; nemo nuptias
viderat legitimas, non certos quisquam inspexerat liberos; non jus
æquabile quid utilitatis haberet, acceperat. Ita propter errorem atque
inscitiam, cæca ac temeraria dominatrix animi cupiditas ad se explendam
viribus corporis abutebatur, perniciosissimis satellitibus." (_De Inv.
1._)

The same doctrine is to be found in Horace:

    "Cum prorepserunt primis animalia terris,
    Mutum et turpe pecus, glandem atque cubilia propter
    Unguibus et pugnis, dein fustibus, atque ita porro
    Pugnabant armis, quæ post fabricaverat usus:
    Donec verba, quibus voces sensusque notarent,
    Nominaque invenere: dehinc absistere bello,
    Oppida cœperunt munire et ponere leges,
    Neu quis fur esset, neu latro, neu quis adulter.
    Nam fuit ante Helenam mulier teterrima belli
    Causa: sed ignotis perierunt mortibus illi,
    Quos Venerem incertam rapientes, more ferarum,
    Viribus editior cædebat, ut in grege taurus.
    Jura inventa metu injusti fateare necesse est,
    Tempora si fastosque velis evolvere mundi,
    Nec natura potest justo secernere iniquum,
    Dividit ut bona diversis, fugienda petendis."

  _Satir._ lib. i. sat. 3.

"When men first began to crawl upon the earth, they were only like a
herd of brute and speechless animals, contending with their nails or
their fists for a few acorns or for a den. They afterwards contended
with sticks and such arms as experience taught them to invent. At
length they discovered the use of words to express their thoughts;
gradually they became weary of fighting, and built cities, and made
laws to prevent theft, robbery, and adultery; for, before Helen, women
had been the cause of terrible wars. He who was the strongest, abusing
his power, after the manner of brutes, attacked the weak, like a bull
among a subject herd; they thus contended for the favors of inconstant
Venus; but their end was inglorious. If you consult the origin of
things, you will acknowledge that laws have been made in apprehension
of injustice. Nature enables us to discern good from evil, what is to
be sought after from what is to be avoided, but she is incapable of
distinguishing justice from injustice."


NOTE 29, p. 311.

Concerning this question, as to the direct or indirect origin of civil
power, it is remarkable, that, in the time of Louis of Bavaria, the
imperial princes solemnly sanctioned the opinion that power emanates
directly from God. In an imperial Constitution, published against the
Roman Pontiff, they established the following proposition: "In order
to avoid so great an evil, we declare that imperial dignity and power
proceed directly from God.--Ad tantum malum evitandum, declaramus,
quod imperialis dignitas et potestas est immediate a Deo solo." That
we may form an idea of the spirit and tendency of this doctrine, let
us see what kind of man this Louis of Bavaria was. Excommunicated by
John XXII., and at a later period by Clement VI., he went so far as
to depose this latter Pontiff, in order to exalt to the Pontifical
Chair the antipope Peter, for which reason the Pope, after repeated
admonitions, divested him of his imperial dignity, substituting Charles
IV. in his stead.

Ziegler the Lutheran, a zealous supporter of direct communication, in
order to explain his doctrine, compares the election of a prince to
that of a minister of the Church. The latter, says he, does not receive
his spiritual authority from the people, but immediately from God. From
this explanation it is evident with how much reason I have said, that
such a doctrine tended to place the temporal and spiritual powers on a
level, by making it appear that the latter could not claim, by reason
of its origin, any superiority over the former. I do not mean, however,
to assert, that this declaration, made in the time of Louis of Bavaria,
had directly this aim, since it may rather be regarded as a sort of
weapon employed against the pontifical authority, the ascendency of
which was dreaded. But it is well known that doctrines, besides the
influence resulting immediately from them, possess a peculiar force,
which continues to develop itself as opportunities occur. Some time
after, we see the kings of England defenders of the religious supremacy
which they had just usurped, supporting the proposition advanced in the
imperial Constitution.

I know not with what foundation it can be said that Ziegler's opinion
was general before the time of Puffendorf; in consulting ecclesiastical
and secular writers, we do not find the least support for such an
assertion. Let us be just even to our adversaries. Ziegler's opinion,
defended by Boecler and others, was attacked by certain Lutherans,
amongst others by Boehmer, who observes, that this opinion is not
favorable, as its partisans pretend, to the security of states and
princes. To repeat what I have already explained in the text, I do
not consider that the opinion of _direct communication_, rightly
understood, is so inadmissible and dangerous as some have imagined; but
as it lay open to an evil interpretation, Catholic theologians have
done well to combat its tendency to encroach upon the divine origin of
ecclesiastical power.


NOTE 30, p. 317.

I might quote a thousand remarkable passages showing the reader how
unjust it is in the enemies of the clergy to accuse them of being
favorable to despotism. But, to be brief, and to spare him the fatigue
of perusing so many texts and quotations, I shall merely present to
him a specimen of the current opinions on this point in Spain at the
beginning of the 17th century, a few years after the death of Philip
II., the monarch who is represented to us as the personification of
religious fanaticism and political tyranny. Among the numerous books
published at that time on these delicate points, there is a very
singular one, which does not appear to be very well known; its title is
as follows:

_A Treatise on the State and Christian Politics, for the use of Kings
and Princes, and those holding government appointments, by Brother John
de Ste.-Marie, a religious in the province of St. Joseph, of the order
of our glorious Father St. Francis._

This book, printed at Madrid in 1615, furnished with all the
privileges, approbations, and other formalities in use, must have
been well received at that epoch, since it was reprinted at Barcelona
in 1616, by Sebastian de Cormellas. Who shall say whether this work
did not inspire Bossuet with the idea of that intituled _Politics
derived from the very words of Scripture_? The title is certainly
analogous, and the idea is in fact the same, although differently
carried out. "I think," says Brother John de Ste.-Marie, "I shall
escape all difficulty, by laying before kings in this work, not my
own reasonings, nor those afforded by eminent philosophers and the
records of profane history, but the words of God and His saints, and
the divine and canonical histories, whose teaching commands respect,
and whose authority cannot be prejudicial to any one, however powerful
a sovereign he may be; in fact, to these a Christian cannot but submit,
since every thing in them is dictated by the Holy Ghost, the author of
these divine maxims. If I cite examples of Gentile kings, if I appeal
to antiquity, and adduce passages from philosophers unconnected with
the people of God, I shall do so incidentally only, and as we resume
possession of what of right belongs to us, and has been unjustly
usurped by others." (Chap. 2.)

The work is dedicated to the king. Addressing him, and praying him to
read it, and not to allow himself to be imposed upon by those who would
dissuade him from its perusal, the good religious says, with a pleasing
candor, "Let no one tell you that these things are metaphysical,
impracticable, and all but impossible."

The following inscription is placed at the head of the 1st chapter:
"Ad vos (O Reges) sunt hi sermones mei, ut discatis sapientiam et non
excidatis: qui enim custodierint justa juste, justificabuntur: et qui
didiscerint ista, invenient quid respondeant." (_Sap._ 6, v. 10.)

In the first chapter, the title of which is, "A treatise in which the
import and definition of this word commonwealth are briefly discussed,"
we read these remarkable words: "So that monarchy must degenerate if
it be absolute and without restraint (for power and authority thus
become unreasonable); in all things falling under the cognizance of
law, it should be bound by the law; and in special and incidental
matters it should be subject to advice, from the connection which it
ought to have with the aristocracy, which is its assistant, and forms
a council of learned and powerful men. Without this wise modification,
monarchy will create great errors of government, will give but little
satisfaction, but, on the contrary, will cause great discontent among
the governed. The wisest and most enlightened men of every age have
invariably considered this form of government the best; and without
such a modification no city or kingdom has ever been considered well
governed. Good kings and the wisest statesmen have always been in favor
of this system; bad kings, on the contrary, elated by their power,
have pursued the opposite course. Hence, if a monarch, whoever he be,
decides by himself, without taking advice, or against the advice of his
councillors, he passes the legitimate bounds of monarchy, and even
when his decisions are fortunate, he is a tyrant. History is full of
these examples and of their disastrous consequences; it will be enough
to adduce one only, that of Tarquin the Proud, as related in the 1st
book of Livy, a king whose pride was unbounded, and who, to render
himself absolute, and to put every thing under his feet, strove to
weaken the authority of the Roman Senate by diminishing the number of
Senators, thus arrogating to himself an absolute right of decision in
all the affairs of the empire."

In chapter 2, in which the author treats of "the meaning of the word
king," we read as follows: "We meet here very opportunely with the
third meaning of the word king, which is the same as that of father;
as we find in Genesis, when the Sichemites gave to their king the
name of Abimelech, which means 'Father and Lord.' Kings were formerly
styled the fathers of their states. Whence King Theodoric, defining
royal majesty (as Cassiodorus relates), makes use of these words:
'_Princeps et Pastor publicus et communis._--The king is the public and
common father of the state.' From the extreme resemblance between the
office of a king and that of a father, Plato was induced to call the
king the father of a family; and the philosopher Xenophon says: _Bonus
Princeps nihil differt a bono Patre_. The difference solely consists
in one having few and the other a great number of persons under his
dominion. And it is certainly very reasonable to give kings this title
of father; for they ought to be the fathers of their subjects and of
their kingdoms, watching over their welfare and preservation with the
love and solicitude of a Father. Royalty, says Homer, is nothing else
than a paternal government, like that of a father over his children:
'_Ipsum namque regnum imperium est suapte natura paternum._' _The best
manner of governing well is, for the king to be possessed with the
love of a father, and to regard his subjects at his own children. The
love of a father for his children, his solicitude that they should
want for nothing, his devotedness to each of them, all this bears the
greatest resemblance to the love of a king for his subjects. He is
called father, and this name lays him under the obligation of acting in
accordance with the meaning it conveys._ This name, so well adapted to
kings, and which, when well considered, is the greatest of all titles
and epithets of majesty and power, since it embraces all, the genus and
the species, the father being alone the lord, the master, or the chief;
this name, I say, is above all human names for expressing authority
and solicitude. Antiquity, with a view to confer upon an emperor an
extraordinary degree of honor, called him the Father of the State,
which was greater than Cæsar, Augustus, or any other glorious name;
it decreed him this title, either to flatter him, or to lay him under
the weighty obligations required by the name of father. In fine, to
give kings this name is to remind them of their duty, viz. to direct,
govern, and maintain their states and kingdoms in justice; like good
pastors, to feed their rational sheep; like physicians, to care for
them and heal them; to take care of their subjects, as a father does of
his children, with prudence, love, and solicitude; for the king is for
_them_, rather than for himself. 'Kings are under greater obligations
to their kingdoms and states than to themselves;' in fact, if we
consider the institution of kings and monarchs, we shall find that the
king was appointed for the good of the kingdom, and not the kingdom for
the good of the king."

In his 3d chapter, of which the following is the title, "Whether
the name of king necessarily implies an office," he thus expresses
himself:--"Besides what we have advanced, it may be proved that the
name of a king is the name of an office, by the common maxim, 'the
benefice is the reward of the office.' Since, therefore, kings receive
such great benefices, not only from the considerable tributes they
receive from the State, but also from the advantage they derive from
benefices and ecclesiastical rents, they certainly do hold an office,
and that the greatest of all, for which reason the entire kingdom so
bountifully assists them. This is what St. Paul says in his Epistle to
the Romans: _Ideo et tributa præstatis_, &c. Kingdoms do not contribute
for nothing; all those states, taxes, and great revenues, that name,
that high authority and eminent dignity, are not given gratuitously.
They would have their title of king for nothing if they had no subjects
to rule and govern, and if they were freed from this obligation: _In
multitudine populi dignitas regis_. This great dignity, wealth, rank,
majesty, and honor, are possessed by them with the perpetual obligation
of ruling and governing their states, so as to preserve them in peace
and justice. _Let kings bear in mind, therefore, that they are only
invested with this title to serve their kingdoms; and the latter,
that kings ought to be paid._ They hold an office requiring them to
labor: _Qui præest in sollicitudine_, says St. Paul. Such is the title
and the name of king, and of him who rules: one who is the first not
only as regards honors and enjoyments, but also as regards cares and
solicitude. _Let them not imagine that they are kings merely in name
and representation, and appointed only to make themselves honored_;
merely to exhibit their royal person and sovereign dignity in a pompous
manner, like some of the kings of the Persians and Medes, who were
mere shadows of kings, forgetful of their office, as though they had
never received it. Nothing is more destitute of life and substance than
the shadowy image which stirs its arm or its head only when some one
acts upon it. God forbade the Israelites to have statues or painted
images, representing a hand where there was none, and a face that
did not exist, exhibiting to the eye an imaginary body, and feigning
by apparently living actions to see and to speak; for God loves not
feigned images, painted men, or sculptured kings, like those spoken of
by David: _Os habent et non loquentur, oculos habent et non videbunt_.
What does it avail to have a tongue that speaks not, eyes that see
not, ears that hear not, or hands which do not work? Is it any thing
more than an idol of stone, bearing only the external representation
of a king? To bear the supreme name and all authority, and not to be
capable of any thing, sounds badly. The names which God has given to
things are like the title of a book, which, in a few words, contains
every thing that is included in the book. This name of king was
given to kings by God himself, and contains every thing to which they
are obliged by virtue of their office. If their actions are not in
accordance with the name, it is as if the mouth should affirm what
the head denies, like a buffoon, whom no one believes in earnest.
Every one would regard as a mockery and a delusion a signboard bearing
the inscription, 'Pure gold sold here,' if, in reality, nothing but
tinsel was sold. The name of king should not be an empty thing, a mere
superfluity in the royal person--it should be what it implies and gives
itself out for. Your name indicates that you rule and govern; rule and
govern, therefore, in reality. Do not be mere pasteboard kings, to use
a common expression, that is, kings in name only. In France, there was
a time when kings had nothing but the name, and the government was
entirely in the hands of their generals, whilst they, like animals,
were occupied only with gluttony and luxurious living. That it might be
known they were living, for they never went out, they used to appear in
public once a year, on the 1st of May, in the squares of Paris, seated
on a throne, as kings in a dramatic representation, and there they
were saluted, gifts were presented to them, and they, on their part,
granted certain favors to whomsoever they thought proper. In order to
show to what a degree of degradation they had fallen, Eginard tells
us, in the beginning of his Life of Charlemagne, that they were devoid
of courage and incapable of great actions; they merely held the empty
name of king; for, in reality they were not kings, neither had they
any participation in the government or riches of the kingdom; every
thing was entrusted to the mayors of the palace, styled majors-domo
of the royal household; and the latter usurped every thing to such a
degree, that they left the wretched king nothing but his title. Seated
on his throne, with his long hair and beard, the monarch played his
part, pretending to give audiences to ambassadors arriving from all
parts, and to furnish them with answers to convey to their masters;
whilst in reality they merely answered according to the instructions
they had received, either by word or writing, although they appeared
to answer on their own responsibility. So that royal power for such a
king was reduced to the mere name, to this throne and this ridiculous
majesty; the real kings and masters were those favorites by whom the
monarch was oppressed. God said of one of the kings of Samaria, that
he was merely to be compared to a little vapor, which, seen from afar,
appeared something, but when touched was no longer any thing. Simia
in tecto rex fatuus in solio suo. (St. Bernard, _de Consider ad Eug._
cap. 7.) _A monkey on a housetop, which, presenting the appearance of
a man, is taken for such by those who know not what it is; such is a
useless king upon a throne. Monkeys also serve to amuse children, and
the king is a laughing-stock to him who looks upon him apart from any
royal act, invested with authority, and making no use of it. A king
dressed in purple, seated on a throne with great majesty, suited to his
grandeur, grave, severe, and terrible in appearance, but in reality
an absolute nonentity. Like a painting_ de la main du Greco, _which,
placed in an elevated position, and seen from a distance, looks very
beautiful, and produces a great effect, but when nearly approached is
but a rough sketch_. All pomp and majesty, properly considered, are
a mere sketch and shadow of a king. _Simulacra gentium_, says David,
speaking of kings who have nothing but the name; and according to the
Hebrew text: _Imago fictilis et contrita_. A figure of pounded earth,
crumbling on all sides; an empty phantom, great in appearance, but
a mere piece of deception. The name which Elifaz unjustly applied
to Job is perfectly applicable here, when he designated this good
and just king, a man void of foundation and substance, bearing only
external appearances; he styled him _Myrmicoleon_, that is, the name
of the animal which, in Latin, is called Formica-leo, because it is a
monstrous conformation, one half of its body, in fact, representing a
fearful lion, an animal always used as an emblem of a king, and the
other half an ant, that is, a most feeble and insignificant thing. Such
are the authority, the name, throne, and majesty of a fierce lion and
of a powerful monarch; but as regards the essence, you will find only
that of an ant. There have been kings whose very name filled the world
with terror; but these kings were void of substance in themselves, in
their kingdoms they were as mere ants; their names and offices were
very great, but without effect. Let the king, therefore, bear in mind
that he has an office to fulfill, and not only an office, but that
he is obliged to speak and labor on all offices, of which he is the
general superintendent. St. Augustine and St. Thomas, explaining that
passage of St. Paul which treats of episcopal dignity, say, that the
word _bishop_, in Greek, is composed of two roots signifying the same
thing as _superintendent_. The name of bishop, king, and every other
superior, are names signifying superintendence over, and co-operation
with, every office. This is what is expressed by the sceptre used by
kings in public acts, a ceremony used by the Egyptians, who borrowed
it from the Israelites. The latter, in order to point out the duty of
a good king, painted an open eye placed in an elevated position on
the point of a rod in the form of a sceptre, representing, on the one
hand, the great power of the king, the solicitude and vigilance which
he ought to exercise; on the other, that he ought not to be satisfied
with holding the supreme power, with occupying the most exalted and
most eminent position, and, in possession of these, passing his life in
sleep and repose; on the contrary, he should be the first in commanding
and counselling, he should appear in every office, incessantly watching
and inspecting, like a man doing the business in which he is engaged.
Jeremiah also understands it in this sense, for when God asked him what
he saw, he answered: _Virgam vigilantem ego video_. Thou hast seen
well; and verily I tell thee, that I who am supreme, will watch over my
flock; I who am a shepherd, will watch over my sheep; I who am a king
and a monarch, will watch without ceasing over all my inferiors. _Regem
festinantem_, says the Chaldean, a king who is in haste; for, although
he has eyes and sees, if he remains in repose, in his pleasures and
amusements, if he does not go about from place to place, if he does
not act so as to become acquainted with all the good and evil that is
going on in his kingdom, he is as though he did not exist. Let him
consider that he is the head, and even the head of the lion, which even
in its sleep keeps its eyes open; that he is the rod with eyes, that he
is the torch; let him open his eyes, therefore, and sleep no longer,
trusting to those who are blinded, and see no better than moles; who,
if they have eyes, only employ them to see their own interest, and to
distinguish at a greater distance what may conduce to their own profit
and aggrandizement. Such persons have eyes for themselves, and it would
be better if they had them not, for their eyes are those of birds of
prey--of vultures."

In his fourth chapter, the title of which is, "On the office of
kings," the author thus explains the origin of royal power and its
obligations:--"From this it follows," says he, "that the institution of
the state of royalty, or king, represented by the head, was not merely
for the use and profit of the king himself, but for that of his whole
kingdom. Hence he ought to see, hear, feel, and understand, not only by
himself and for himself, but by all and for all. He ought not merely
to fix his regards upon his own greatness, but on the good of his
subjects, since it is for them, and not for himself, that he was born
a king. _Adverte_, said Seneca to the Emperor Nero, _rempublicam non
esse tuam, sed te reipublicæ_.--When men first issued from solitude,
and united to live in common, they knew that every one would naturally
labor for himself or his own family, and that no one would take an
interest in all; they agreed to select a man of great merit, that all
might have recourse to him; a man who, distinguished above all the rest
by his virtue, his prudence, and courage, should be the chief over all,
should govern all, watch over all, and should exert himself for the
advantage of all--for the common weal--like a father for his children,
or a shepherd for his sheep. Now, considering that this man, abandoning
his own affairs to look after those of others, could not maintain
himself and his family (every one was then maintained by the labor of
his hands), it was agreed that all should contribute to his support,
in order that he might not be distracted by any other occupations
than those of the common weal and the public government. Such was the
end for which kings were instituted--such was their beginning. The
good king ought to be more solicitous for the public than for his own
private interest. He possesses his grandeur at the expense of great
solicitude; the anxiety, the disquietude of mind and body, which is
fatigue for him, is repose, support, and protection for others. Thus
smiling flowers and fruits, whilst they adorn the tree, exist not so
much for the tree, nor on account of the tree, as for the sake of
others. Do not imagine that all happiness is in the beauty and grace
of the flower, and in those who are the flowers of the world: powerful
kings and princes may be termed the flowers of the world, but flowers
who consume their lives, who are full of solicitude, and whose fruit
will rather contribute to the enjoyment of others than to their own.
'For,' says the Jew Philo, 'the king is to the kingdom what the wise
is to the ignorant man, what the shepherd is to his sheep, the father
to his children, light to darkness, and what God is upon earth to all
his creatures.' The investiture he gave to Moses, when he appointed him
the chief and king over his people, was to tell him that he ought to be
as God, the common father of all; for the office and dignity of a king
require all this. _Omnium domos illius vigila defendit, omnium otium
illius industria, omnium vacationem illius occupatio._ (Seneca, _Lib.
de Consol._) This is what the prophet Samuel says to Saul, recently
elected king, when he expounds to him the obligations of his office:
'Consider, Saul, that God has this day constituted thee king over all
this kingdom; thou art bound by the office to govern the whole of it.
Thou hast not been made a king to enjoy repose, to become proud, and to
glory in the dignity of a king; but to govern thy kingdom, to maintain
it in peace and justice, to defend and protect it against its enemies.'
_Rex eligitur, non, ut sui ipsius curam habeat_, says Socrates, _et
sese molliter curet, sed ut per ipsum ii, qui elegerunt, bene beateque
vivant_. They were not created and introduced into the world for their
own convenience and pleasure or to be fed upon every dainty morsel of
food (if such were the case, no one would willingly submit to them);
but they were appointed for the advantage and common good of all their
subjects, to govern them, protect them, enrich them, preserve and serve
them. All this is perfectly admissible; for although the sceptre and
crown appear to be the emblems of domination, the office of a king
is, strictly speaking, that of a slave. _Servus communis, sive servus
honoratus_, are words which have sometimes been applied to a king,
_quia a tota republica stipendia accipit ut serviat omnibus_. And
the Supreme Pontiff glories in this title, _Servus servorum Dei_. In
ancient times this name of slave was one of infamy; but since Christ
bore it it has become a name full of honor. Now, since it is neither
repugnant nor derogatory to the essence nor nature of the Son of God,
neither can it be derogatory to the nature and grandeur of the king.

"Antigonus, king of Macedon, was perfectly aware of this, and said
candidly to his son, when he rebuked him for the severity with which
he governed his subjects: _An ignoras, fili mi, regnum nostrum nobilem
esse servitutem?_ Before his time Agamemnon expressed himself in
the same manner: 'We live apparently in the midst of grandeur and
exaltation; but in reality we are the servants and slaves of our
subjects.' Such is the office of good kings--an honorable servitude.
From the moment of their being created kings, their actions no longer
depend upon their own will, but on the laws and rules which have been
given them, and on the conditions upon which they have undertaken their
office. And although they may fail to comply with these conditions
(which are the effects of a human convention), they may not fail to
comply with that dictated by natural and divine law, the mistress of
kings as well as of subjects. Now, these rules are almost all included
in the words of Jeremiah, which God, according to St. Jerome, addresses
to kings on giving them the command:--_Facite judicium et justitiam,
liberate vi oppressum de manu calumniatoris, et advenam, et pupillum,
et viduam nolite contristare, neque opprimatis inique, et sanguinem
innocentum non effundatis_. Such is the summary of the obligations
of a king; such the laws of his institution, which lay him under the
obligation of maintaining in peace and justice the orphan, the widow,
the poor, the rich and the powerful man, and him who can do nothing for
himself. Upon him rest the wrongs of his ministers towards some, the
injustice suffered by others, the sorrows of the afflicted, the tears
of those who weep, not to mention many other burdens--a flood of cares
and obligations--imposed upon every prince or chief of a state. For
if he is the head to command and govern, and to bear the burdens of
others, he should also be the feet upon which the whole weight of the
state is sustained. Kings and monarchs, says the holy man Job, as we
have seen, bear and carry the world upon their shoulders, on account
of their office. Hence the figure we meet with in the Book of Wisdom:
_In veste poderis, quam habebat summus sacerdos, totus erat orbis
terrarum_. From the moment a man is created king, let him consider
himself loaded with a burden so heavy that a strong carriage would
not support it. Moses felt this strongly; for God having made him His
viceroy, His captain-general, His lieutenant in the government, instead
of returning thanks for so distinguished a favor, he complains that
so heavy a burden should be placed upon him. _Cur afflixisti servum
tuum? Cur imposuisti pondus universi populi hujus super me?_ Again,
continuing his complaint, he says, _Numquid ego concepi omnem hanc
multitudinem? Aut genui eam, ut dicas mihi: Porta eos?_--'Lord, have
I conceived all this multitude, or begotten them, and thou shouldst
say to me, Carry them on thy shoulders?' Now, it is remarkable that
God said nothing of that to Moses; he merely tells him to rule and
govern them, to fulfill towards them the office of captain and chief.
Nevertheless, what says Moses? That God commanded him to bear them on
his shoulders--_Porta eos_. It appears, then, that he has no reason
to complain, since he is merely told to be the captain, to direct,
rule, and govern. It is a common expression, 'A word to the wise is
sufficient.' He who knows and understands what it is to govern and
to be the chief, knows also that government and obligation are the
same thing. The very words _regere_ and _portare_ are synonymous, and
have the same meaning: there is no government nor employment without
obligation and labor. In the distribution of the offices which Jacob
made among his children, he appointed Reuben to be the first in his
inheritance and the highest in command--_prior in donis, major in
imperio_. And St. Jerome translates _major ad portandum_, for command
and obligation are the same thing; and the obligation and the labor are
so much more considerable as the command is more exalted. St. Gregory,
in his _Morales_, says, that the power, domination, and rule of kings
over the whole world should not be looked upon as an honor but as a
labor. _Potestas accepta non honor, sed onus æstimatur._ And this truth
was ever received by the blindest among the Gentiles. One of them,
taking the same view of the subject, says, speaking of another Pagan,
that his god Apollo had made him all glorious and happy by the gift of
a certain office: _Lætus erat, mixtoque oneri gaudebat honore_. So that
power and command composed of a little honor and weighty obligations.
The Latin word for honor only differs from that for burden by one
letter--_onos_ and _onus_. Besides, there always were and always will
be persons willing to undertake the responsibility for the sake of
the honor, although every one avoids as much as possible any thing
that lays him under an obligation, and seeks after what is glorious; a
dangerous choice, for the latter is not always the most secure."

If such language is taxed with flattery, it would be difficult to
comprehend what is meant by _telling the truth_. And observe, that
the above truths are not told without reflection; the good religious
takes such pains to inculcate them, that were it not for the childlike
candor of his language, which discloses the purest of intentions, we
might accuse him of irreverence. This passage is long, but exceedingly
interesting, for it faithfully reflects the spirit of the age.
Innumerable other texts might be adduced to prove how unjustly the
Catholic clergy are accused of being favorable to despotism. I cannot
conclude without inserting here two excellent passages from the learned
Father Fr. Ferdinand de Zeballos, a religious of the order of St.
Jerome in the Monastery of St. Isidore del Campo, and known by a work
intituled, "False Philosophy, or Atheism, Deism, Materialism, and
other new sects convicted of State Crimes against their Sovereigns and
Rulers, against the Magistrates and Lawful Authorities." Madrid, 1776.
Observe with what tact the learned writer appreciates the influence of
religion upon society. (Book ii. dissertation 12, art. 2.)


 "_A mild and moderate government is most agreeable to the spirit of
 the gospel._

§ I.

"One excellent and estimable point in our holy religion is, that
she offers to human policy, in her important truths, assistance in
preserving good order among men with less trouble. 'The Christian
religion,' says Montesquieu, with much truth, 'is far removed from
pure despotism. Mildness being so strongly recommended in the gospel,
it is opposed to the despotic fury with which princes might administer
justice and practise cruelties.' This opposition on the part of
Christianity to the cruelty of the monarch should not be active,
but passive and full of mildness, which Christianity can never lose
sight of without losing its character. This is the difference between
Catholic Christians and the Calvinists and other Protestants. Basnages
and Jurieu, in the name of all their reformation, wrote that it is
allowable for the people to wage war against their princes whenever
they are oppressed by them, or their conduct appears tyrannical.

"The Catholic Church has never changed the doctrines she received from
Jesus Christ and His Apostles. She loves moderation, she rejoices in
good: but she does not resist evil, she overcomes it by patience.
Governments established under the direction of false religions cannot
be satisfied with a moderate policy. With them the despotism or tyranny
of princes, the ferocity of penalties, the rigor of an inflexible
and cruel legislation, are so many necessary evils. But why has it
been given to the Catholic religion only to purge human governments
from such inhumanity? First, on account of the forcible impression
produced by her dogmas; secondly, through the effect of the grace of
Jesus Christ, which renders men docile in doing good, and energetic
in combating evil. Wherever false religion predominates, and where,
in consequence, these two means of aid are wanting, the government is
under the necessity of supplying them as far as possible by efforts of
a severe, harsh, and terror-inspiring policy, in default of that virtue
which ought to exist in religion to restrain citizens.

"Hence the Catholic religion, by the influence of her dogmas over human
affairs, relieves governments from the necessity of being harsh. In
Japan, where the prevailing religion has no dogmas, and gives no idea
of heaven or hell, laws are made to supply this defect--laws rendered
useful by the cruelty with which they are conceived and the punctuality
with which they are executed. In every society in which deists,
fatalists, and philosophers have promulgated this error, that our
actions are unavoidable, it is impossible to prevent laws from becoming
more terrible and sanguinary than any we have known among barbarian
nations; for in such a society, men, after the manner of brutes, being
urged by palpable motives to do what they are commanded and omit what
they are forbidden, these motives, with chastisements, must be daily
more formidable, in order to avoid losing from habit the power of
making themselves felt. The Christian religion, which admirably teaches
and explains the dogmas of rational liberty, has no need of an iron
rod to govern mankind. The fear of the pains of hell, whether eternal,
to punish crimes unrepented of, or temporal, to wash away the stains
of sins confessed, relieves judges from the necessity of augmenting
punishments. On the other hand, the hope of gaining heaven, as a reward
for laudable actions, words, and thoughts, induces men to be just,
not only in public but also in the secrecy of the heart. What laws or
penalties would avail governments not possessed of this dogma of hell
and of glory, to make their citizens men of real merit? Materialists,
denying the dogma of a future state, and deists, holding out to the
wicked the flattering security of paradise, place governments under
the painful necessity of arming themselves with all the instruments
of terror, and of always inflicting the most cruel punishments, to
restrain the people from destroying one another.

"Protestants have already come to this point by rejecting the dogma
of the eternity of hell, or, at least, by preserving merely the fear
of a temporary pain. The first reformers, as d'Alembert observes to
the clergy of Geneva, denied the doctrine of purgatory, and retained
that of hell; but the Calvinists, and modern reformers, by their
limitation of the duration of hell, leave only what may be properly
termed purgatory. Is not the dogma of the last judgment, when each
one's secret offences, however small, shall be exposed to the whole
world, of singular efficacy in restraining the thoughts and desires,
and all the perversity of the heart and of the passions? It is evident
that this dogma so far relieves political governments from the painful
and continual vigilance which it would have to exercise over a town
in which the idea of this judgment has perished, together with the
thoughts which it inspires."


§ II.

"There are certain aberrations observable among philosophers,
which lead us to think that these men were possessed of some true
discernment in their lucid moments, or whilst they were in the Catholic
religion. Hence they have said, 'that religion was invented for a
political purpose, to spare sovereigns the necessity of being just,
of making good laws, and of governing well.' This folly, which stands
self-condemned when we come to speak of religion previously formed,
supposes, nevertheless, the truth we are speaking of. It is evident
to every one, even to the philosophers whose extravagant assertion
we have just adduced, that the Christian religion, by her dogmas, is
serviceable to human governments, and aids in making good citizens,
even in this world. Yet they avail themselves of this very point to put
forth their insane malice: but, in reality, and in spite of themselves,
they mean to say, that the dogmas of religion are of such service to
governments, and so efficacious in facilitating a great part of their
work, that they appear to be formed on purpose, and according to the
designs of a magistrate or a political government. We cannot say,
on this account, that religion alone is sufficient to govern men,
without any judicial aid, without the intervention of the laws and
of penalties. In speaking of this efficacy of the dogmas inculcated
by religion, we are not rash and presumptuous; we do not reject as
superfluous the office of law and police. We are told by the Apostle,
that for the just there would have been no need of laws; but there are
so many wicked, who, through their forgetfulness of their destiny and
the terrible judgments of God, live under the exclusive rule of their
passions, that it has been found necessary to make laws and institute
punishments, in order to restrain them. Hence, the Catholic religion
does not reject the wise vigilance of police, nor abrogate its office;
she seconds it, on the contrary, and receives assistance from it, to
the very great advantage of good governments; the people, through its
influence, are ruled better, and with less austerity and severity."


§ III.

"The second reason which renders the most mild and moderate governments
sufficient in Catholic States is, the assistance which the grace of
the gospel affords for doing good and avoiding evil,--an assistance
imparted by the use of the sacraments, or other means employed by the
Spirit from above. Without this, every law is harsh; this unction
softens every yoke, renders every burden light."

In his third article, Father Zeballos repels the accusation of
despotism with which the enemies of monarchy reproach it. On this
occasion he points out the just limits of royal authority, and
overthrows an argument which some persons have pretended to found on
the Scriptures, for the exaggeration of the prerogatives of the throne.
He expresses himself as follows:

"When the objection, that the sovereign had the power of seizing the
property of every citizen, was made against monarchy, it was rather
an argument against the nature of despotism than against the form
of monarchical government. 'What does it avail,' says Theseus in
Euripides, 'to amass riches for our heirs, to bring up our daughters
with care, if we are to be deprived of the greater portion of these
riches by a tyrant, if our daughters are to serve the most unruly
passions?' You perceive, then clearly, that in pretending to argue
against the office of a monarch, it is a tyrant only that is spoken
of. True, the frequent abuse of power resorted to by kings has caused
these names and forms to be confounded. Others have already observed
that the ancients were scarcely acquainted with the nature of true
monarchy; this was very natural, since they never witnessed any thing
but the abuse of it. This gives me the opportunity of making a remark
upon the circumstance of the Hebrews asking to be governed by kings.
'Make us a king to judge us, as all nations have,' said they to the
prophet. Samuel saw with grief this levity, which was about to cause
a total revolution in the government appointed by God. Nevertheless,
God commands the prophet to take no notice of this affront, which was
principally offered to the Lord; for they were abandoning Him, being
unwilling that He should rule over them any longer. 'As they have
forsaken Me, and served strange gods, so do they also unto thee,' and
ask for kings like unto those of the nations. Observe what an intimate
connection always exists between a change of government and a change in
religion, especially when the change is from a true to a false one.

"But what is particularly deserving of notice is, the acquiescence
granted to the people's demand. They wish to be ruled by kings, exactly
as all other nations were. The Lord chastises their spirit of revolt by
leaving them to their desires. He commands Samuel to comply with their
request, but to point out to them, at the same time, _the rights of the
king_ who was to rule over them like unto the nations, and said: 'This
will be the right of the king that shall reign over you: he will take
your sons, and will put them in his chariots, and will make them his
horsemen, and his running footmen, to run before his chariots; and he
will appoint them to be his tribunes, and his centurions, and to plough
his fields, and to reap his corn, and to make him arms and chariots.
Your daughters also will he take to make him ointments, and to be his
cooks and bakers; and he will take your fields, and your vineyards, and
your best olive-yards, and give them to his servants. Moreover, he will
take the tenth of your corn, and of the revenues of your vineyards, to
give to his eunuchs and servants. Your servants also, and hand-maids,
and your goodliest young men, and your asses, he will take away, and
put them to his work. Your flocks also he will tithe, and you shall be
his servants; and you shall cry out in that day from the face of the
king whom you have chosen to yourselves; and the Lord will not hear you
in that day, because you desired unto yourselves a king. And the people
would not hear the voice of Samuel, and they said, Nay, but there shall
be a king over us, and we also will be like all nations.' (1st Kings,
chap. viii., from verse 11 to middle of verse 20 inclusively.)

"Some persons, being determined to extend the power of kings beyond
its limits, draw from these words the formula of royal right. A blind
pretension, and reflecting little honor on legitimate monarchs such as
the Catholic sovereigns. Unless a person wishes knowingly to deceive
himself on this portion of the Scripture, or is blind, he may see by
the context, and by comparing this passage with others, that it is not
legitimate right that is here meant, but _de facto_ right. I mean to
say, that the Holy Spirit does not explain what just monarchs ought to
do; but what had been done, and was still done, by the kings of Pagan
nations, mere tyrants, and commonly so called. Observe, that the people
demanded nothing but to be placed on an equality with the Pagan nations
in a political point of view. They had not the prudence to demand a
king such as he ought to be, but such as was common in those days; and
this was what God granted them. If God, as the prophet observes, has
sometimes given the people kings in His wrath, what people were more
deserving of this than those who had abandoned God himself, and refused
to be ruled by Him? Indeed, God did chastise His people severely by
granting them their foolish demand. He did give them a king, but a
king who was to exercise what, according to the perverse custom of the
times, formed the royal right described in the sacred text just quoted.

"What man in our days, conversant with what has been written upon
the different natures of governments, upon their abuse, and without
even understanding what is said in the Scriptures, could imagine that
the text of Samuel contains the legitimate form of royalty or of
monarchy? Does this power impart the right of seizing the property of
the subjects, their lands, their riches, their sons and daughters,
and even their natural liberty? Is this the model of a monarchy, or
of the most tyrannical despotism? To dispel every illusion on this
point, we need only compare with what we have just read the 21st
chap. of the third Book of Kings, in which the history of Naboth, an
inhabitant of Jezrael, is narrated. Achab, the king of Israel, wished
to enlarge the palace, or pleasure-house which he possessed in that
town. A vineyard of Naboth's, near the palace, came within the plan of
the gardens that were to be added. The king did not seize it at once,
of his own authority, but asked the proprietor to let him have it on
the honest condition of paying him the price at which he should value
it, or giving him a better in another place. Naboth would not consent
to this, because it was the inheritance of his ancestors. The king,
not being accustomed to meet with a refusal, threw himself upon his
couch oppressed with grief; the queen, Jezabel, came, and told him to
calm his agitation: 'Thy authority is great indeed,' said she to him;
_Grandis authoritatis es_: she promises to put him in possession of
the vineyard. This abominable woman wrote to the judges of Jezrael to
commence an action against Naboth for a calumny, to be proved against
him by two suborned witnesses; and she demanded that he should be
condemned to death. The queen was obeyed; Naboth was stoned to death.
All this was necessary that the vineyard might enter into the royal
treasury, and that, watered by the blood of the proprietor, it might
produce flowers for the palace of these princes. But, in reality, it
produced none, neither for the king nor for the queen; it furnished
them with nothing but briars and mortal poisons. Elias presents himself
before Achab when he was going to take possession of Naboth's vineyard;
he announces to him that he, and all his house, even to the dog that
approacheth the wall, shall be erased from the face of the earth.

"You look upon royal right as explained to the people by Samuel as
legitimate; tell me, then why Achab and Jezabel are so severely
punished for taking the vineyard and the life of Naboth, _since
the king had a right to take from his subjects their most valuable
vineyards and olive trees_, according to the declaration of the
prophet. If Achab possesses this right after he is established the king
of the people of God, whence comes it that he, so violent a prince,
should entreat Naboth with so much civility? And why is it necessary
to accuse Naboth of some calumny? His resistance to the king's right,
by refusing to accept the just value of what was suitable to the
enlargement of the palace and gardens, would have been a sufficient
motive for instituting an action against him. We find, however, that
Naboth committed no injustice against the king by refusing to sell his
patrimony, not even in the estimation of the queen, who boasted of
her husband's _great authority_. This great authority, which Jezabel
admitted in the king, was neither more nor less than the royal right
spoken of by Samuel to the people; it was, as I have said, a _de facto_
right to take and seize upon every thing by mere force, as Montesquieu
says of the tyrant.

"_Do not therefore, mention this passage, nor any other of the
Scriptures, to justify the idea of a government so ill-conceived. The
doctrine of the Catholic religion is attached to legitimate monarchy,
with its suitable characteristics, and in accordance with the qualities
which modern publicists recognise, viz. as a paternal and sovereign
power, but conformable to the fundamental laws of the state. Within
limits so suitable, nothing can be more regular than this power, the
most extensive of all temporal powers, and that which is most favored
and supported by the Catholic Church._"

Such is the horrible despotism taught by these men so basely
calumniated! Happy the people who are ruled by a prince whose
government is regulated by these doctrines!


NOTE 31, p. 330.

The importance of the matter treated of in this part of my work obliges
me to insert here, at some length, passages proving the truth of what
I have advanced. I did not think it advisable to give a translation
of the Latin passages, that I might avoid augmenting excessively the
number of pages; besides, among the persons who may wish to make
themselves thoroughly acquainted with the subject, and who will
consequently take an interest in consulting the original texts, there
are few ignorant of the Latin language.

Observe how St. Thomas expresses himself on royal power, and with what
solid and generous doctrine he points out its duties in the third book,
chap. 11, of his treatise _De Regimine Principum_.


DIVUS THOMAS.

"_De Regimine Principum_, liber iii. caput XI.

"Hic Sanctus Doctor declarat de dominio regali, in quo consistit, et in
quo differt a politico, et quo modo distinguitur diversimodo secundum
diversas rationes.

"Nunc autem ad regale dominium est procedendum, ubi est distinguendum
de ipso secundum diversas regiones, et prout a diversis varie invenitur
traditum. Et primo quidem, in Sacra Scriptura aliter leges regalis
dominii traduntur in Deuteronomio per Moysen, aliter in 1 Regum
per Samuelem prophetam, uterque tamen in persona Dei differenter
ordinat regem ad utilitatem subditorum, quod est proprium regum,
ut Philosophus tradit in 8 ethic. Cum, inquit, constitutus fuerit
rex, non multiplicabit sibi equos, nec reducet populum in Ægyptum,
equitatus numero sublevatus, non habebit uxores plurimas, quæ alliciant
animam ejus, neque argenti, aut auri immensa pondera: quod quidem
qualiter habet intelligi, supra traditur in hoc lib. describetque sibi
Deuteronomium legis hujus, et habebit secum, legetque illud omnibus
diebus vitæ suæ, ut discat timere dominum Deum suum, et custodire verba
ejus et cæremonias, et ut videlicet possit populum dirigere secundum
legem divinam, unde et rex Salomon in principio sui regiminis hanc
sapientiam a Deo petivit, ad directionem sui regiminis pro utilitate
subditorum, sicut scribitur in 3 lib. Regum. Subdit vero dictus Moyses
in eodem lib. Nec elevetur cor ejus in superfluum super fratres suos,
neque declinet in partem dexteram, vel sinistram, ut longo tempore
regat ipse et filius ejus super Israel. Sed in primo Regum, traduntur
leges regni, magis ad utilitatem Regis, ut supra patuit in lib. 2
hujus operis, ubi ponuntur verba omnino pertinentia ad conditionem
servilem, et tamen Samuel leges quas tradit cum sint penitus despoticæ
dicit esse regales. Philosophus autem in 8 ethic. magis concordat cum
primis legibus. Tria enim ponit de rege in eo. 4, videlicet, quod
ille legitimus est rex qui principaliter bonum subditorum intendit.
Item, ille rex est, qui curam subditorum habet, ut bene operentur
quemadmodum pastor ovium. Ex quibus omnibus manifestum est, quod juxta
istum, modum despoticum multum differat a regali, ut idem Philosophus
videtur dicere in 1 politic. Item, _quod regnum non est propter regem,
sed rex propter regnum_, quia ad hoc Deus _providit de eis, ut regnum
regant et gubernent, et unumquemque in suo jure conservent_: et hic
est _finis regiminis, quod si ad aliud faciunt in seipsos commodum
retorquendo, non sunt reges sed tyranni_. Contra _quos dicit Dominus
in Ezech_. Væ pastoribus Israel, qui pascunt semetipsos. Nonne greges
pascuntur a pastoribus? Lac comedebatis, et lanis operiebamini, et
quod crassum erat occidebatis: gregem autem meum non pascebatis: quod
infirmum fuit, non consolidastis, et quod ægrotum non sanastis, quod
confractum non alligastis, quod abjectum non reduxistis, et quod
perierat non quæsistis; sed cum austeritate imperabatis eis et cum
potentia. In quibus verbis nobis sufficienter forma regiminis traditur
redarguendo contrarium. Amplius autem regnum ex hominibus constituitur,
sicut domus ex parietibus, et corpus humanum ex membris, ut Philos.
dicit in 3 politic. Finis _ergo regis est, ut regimen prosperetur,
quod homines conserventur per regem_. Et hinc habet commune bonum
cujuslibet principatus participationem divinæ bonitatis: unde bonum
commune dicitur a Philosopho in 1 ethic. esse quod omnia appetunt,
et esse bonum divinum, _ut sicut Deus qui est rex regum, et dominus
dominantium, cujus virtute principes imperant, ut probatum est supra,
nos regit et gubernat non propter seipsum, sed propter nostram salutem:
ita et reges faciant et alii dominatores in orbe_."


NOTE 32, p. 336.

I have noticed the opinion of D. Felix Amat, Archbishop of Palmyra,
with respect to the obedience due to _de facto_ governments. I have
remarked, that this writer's principles, besides being false, are
opposed to the rights of the people. The Archbishop of Palmyra appears
to have been at a loss to discover a maxim to which it is possible to
conform under all circumstances that may occur, and which do occur but
too often. He dreaded the obscurity and confusion of ideas when the
legitimacy of a given case was to be defined; he wished to remedy an
evil, but he appears to have aggravated it to an extraordinary degree.
Observe how he sets forth his opinion in his work entitled _Idea of the
Church Militant_, chap. iii. art. 2:

"The more I reflect," says he, "on the difficulties I have just pointed
out, the more I am convinced that it is impossible to resolve them,
even those which are ancient, with any degree of certainty; and it is
equally impossible to derive any light from them to aid us in resolving
those which are formed at the present day by the struggle between the
prevailing spirit of insubordination in opposition to the judgment and
will of the governor, and the contrary effort made to limit more and
more the liberty of those who obey. Starting from the divers points
and notions that I have laid down relative to the supreme power in all
really civil societies, it appears to me, that, instead of losing time
in mere speculative discussions, it will be more useful to propose a
practical, just, and opportune maxim for the preservation of public
tranquillity, especially in Christian kingdoms and states, and for
affording the means of re-establishing it when it has been troubled or
destroyed.

"The _Maxim_.--No one can doubt the legitimacy of the obligation of
every member of any civil society whatever to obey the government which
is de facto and unquestionably established. I say '_unquestionably
established_,' because there is here no question of a mere invasion
or temporary occupation in time of war. From this maxim follow two
consequences: 1st, to take part in insurrections, or assemblages of
people, addressing themselves to the constituted authorities with a
view to compel them to grant what they consider unjust, is always an
act contrary to right reason; always unlawful, condemned by the natural
law and by the Gospel. 2dly, individual members of society, who combine
together and take up arms, in small or large numbers, for the purpose
of attacking the established government by physical force, are always
guilty of rebellion, a crime strongly opposed to the spirit of our
divine religion."

I will not here repeat what I have already said on the unsoundness,
the inconveniences, and the dangers of such a doctrine, but merely
add, that with respect to governments only established _de facto_, to
grant them the right of commanding and exacting obedience involves a
contradiction. To say that a _de facto_ government is bound, whilst
it does exist, to protect justice, to avoid crimes, to prevent the
dissolution of society, is merely to maintain truths universally
admitted, and denied by no one; but to add, that it is unlawful, and
contrary to our holy religion, to combine together and raise forces for
the overthrow of a _de facto_ government, is a doctrine which Catholic
theologians have never professed, which true philosophy has never
admitted, and which no nation has ever observed.


NOTE 33, p. 343.

I insert here certain remarkable passages from St. Thomas and Suarez,
in which these authors explain the opinions to which I have alluded in
the text, respecting the differences which may arise between governors
and the governed. I refer to what I have already pointed out in another
place; we are not about to examine so much whether such or such
doctrines are true, as to discover what were the doctrines at the time
we are speaking of, and what opinion the most distinguished doctors
formed on the delicate questions of which we are treating.


D. THOMAS.

(2. 2. Q. 42. art. 2^o ad tertium.--Utrum seditio sit semper peccatum
mortale?)

3. Arg. Laudantur qui multitudinem a potestate tyrannica liberant, sed
hoc non de facili potest fieri sine aliqua dissensione multitudinis,
dum una pars multitudinis nititur retinere tyrannum, alia vero nititur
eum abjicere, ergo seditio potest fieri sine peccato.

Ad tertium dicendum; quod regimen tyrannicum non est justum quia
non ordinatur ad bonum commune, sed ad bonum privatum regentis ut
patet per Philosophum; et ideo perturbatio hujus regiminis non habet
rationem seditionis, nisi forte quando sic inordinate perturbatur
tyranni regimen, quod multitudo subjecta majus detrimentum patitur
ex perturbatione consequenti quam ex tyranni regimine; magis autem
tyrannus seditiosus est, qui in populo sibi subjecto discordias et
seditiones nutrit, ut tutius dominari possit; hoc enim tyrannicum est,
cum sit ordinatum ad bonum proprium præsidentis cum multitudinis
nocumento.

Cardinalis Cayetanus in hunc textum. "Quis sit autem modus ordinatus
perturbandi tyrannum et qualem tyrannum, puta secundum regimen tantum,
vel secundum regimen et titulum, non est præsentis intentionis: sat est
nunc, quod utrumque tyrannum licet ordinate perturbare absque seditione
quandoque; illum ut bono reipublicæ vacet, istum ut expellatur."


LIB. I.

_De Regimine Principum._ (Cap. x.)

 Quod rex et princeps studere debet ad bonum regimen propter bonum sui
 ipsius, et utile quod inde sequitur, cujus contrarium sequitur regimen
 tyrannicum.

Tyrannorum vero dominium diuturnum esse non potest, cum sit multitudini
odiosum. Non potest enim diu conservari, quod votis multorum repugnat.
Vix enim a quoquam præsens vita transigitur quin aliquas adversitates
patiatur. Adversitatis autem tempore occasio deesse non potest
contra tyrannum insurgendi; et ubi adsit occasio, non deerit ex
multis vel unus qui occasione non utatur. Insurgentem autem populus
votive prosequitur: nec de facili carebit effectu, quod cum favore
multitudinis attentatur. Vix ergo potest contingere, quod tyranni
dominium protendatur in longum. Hoc etiam manifeste patet, si quis
consideret unde tyranni dominium conservatur. Non n. conservatur amore,
cum parva, vel nulla sit amicitia subjectæ multitudinis ad tyrannum
ut ex præhabitis patet: de subditorum autem fide tyrannis confidendum
non est. Non n. invenitur tanta virtus in multis, ut fidelitatis
virtute reprimantur, ne indebitæ servitutis jugum, si possint,
excutiant. Fortassis autem nec fidelitati contrarium reputabitur
secundum opinionem multorum, si tyrannicæ nequitiæ qualitercumque
obvietur. Restat ergo ut solo timore tyranni regimen sustentetur; unde
et timeri se a subditis tota intentione procurant. Timor autem est
debile fundamentum. Nam qui timore subduntur, si occurrat occasio qua
possint impunitatem sperare, contra præsidentes insurgunt eo ardentius,
quo magis contra voluntatem ex solo timore cohibebantur. Sicut si
aqua per violentiam includatur, cum aditum invenerit, impetuosius
fluit. Sed nec ipse timor caret periculo, cum ex nimio timore plerique
in desperationem inciderint. Salutis autem desperatio audacter ad
quælibet attentanda præcipitat. Non potest igitur tyranni dominium esse
diuturnum. Hoc etiam non minus exemplis, quam rationibus apparet.


LIB. I. CAP. VI.

 Conclusio; quod regimen unius simpliciter sit optimum; ostendit
 qualiter multitudo se debet habere circa ipsum, quia auferenda est ei
 occasio ne tyrannizet, ei quod etiam in hoc est tolerandus propter
 majus malum vitandum.

Quia ergo unius regimen præ eligendum est, quod est optimum, et
contingit ipsum in tyrannidem converti, quod est pessimum, ut ex dictis
patet, laborandum est diligenti studio, ut sic multitudini provideatur
de rege, ut non incidat in tyrannum. Primum autem est necessarium,
ut talis conditionis homo ab illis ad quos hoc spectat officium,
promoveatur in regem, quod non sit probabile in tyrannidem declinare.
Unde Samuel Dei providentiam erga institutionem regis commendans, ait,
1 Regum xiii.: Quæsivit sibi Dominus, virum secundum cor suum: deinde
sic disponenda est regni gubernatio, ut regi jam instituto tyrannidis
subtrahatur occasio. Simul etiam sic ejus temperetur potestas, ut
in tyrannidem de facili declinare non possit. Quæ quidem ut fiant,
insequentibus considerandum erit. Demum vero curandum est, si rex
in tyrannidem diverteret, qualiter posset occuri. Et quidem si non
fuerit excessus tyrannidis, utilius est remissam tyrannidem tolerare
ad tempus, quam tyrannum agendo multis implicari periculis, quæ sunt
graviora ipsa tyrannide. Potest, n. contingere ut qui contra tyrannum
agunt prævalere non possint, et sic provocatus tyrannus magis desæviat.
Quod si prævalere quis possit adversus tyrannum, ex hoc ipso proveniunt
multoties gravissimæ dissensiones in populo, sive dum in tyrannum
insurgitur, sive post dejectionem tyranni erga ordinationem regiminis
multitudo separatur in partes. Contingit etiam ut interdum dum
alicujus auxilio multitudo expellit tyrannum, ille potestate accepta
tyrannidem arripiat, et timens pati ab alio quod ipse in alium fecit,
graviori servitute subditos opprimat. Sic enim in tyrannide solet
contingere, ut posterior gravior fiat quam præcedens, dum præcedentia
gravamina non deserit, et ipse ex sui cordis malitia nova excogitat:
unde Syracusis quondam Dyonisii mortem omnibus desiderantibus, anus
quædem ut incolumnis et sibi superstes esset, continue orabat: quod
ut tyrannus cognovit, cur hoc faceret interrogavit. Tum illa, puella,
inquit, existens cum gravem tyrannum haberemus, mortem ejus cupiebam,
quo interfecto, aliquantulum durior successit; ejus quoque dominationem
finiri magnum existimabam, tertium te importuniorem habere cœpimus
rectorem; itaque si tu fueris absumptus, deterior in locum tuum
succedet. Et si sit intolerabilis excessus tyrannidis, quibusdam visum
fuit, ut ad fortium virorum virtutem pertineat tyrannum interimere,
seque pro liberatione multitudinis exponere periculis mortis: cujus
rei exemplum etiam in veteri Testamento habetur. Nam Ajoth quidam
Eglon regem Moab, qui gravi servitute populum Dei premebat, sica
infixa in ejus femore interemit, et factus est populi judex. Sed hoc
Apostolicæ doctrinæ non congruit. Docet n. nos Petrus, non bonis
tantum et modestis, verum etiam discolis Dominis reverenter subditos
esse. 2 Petr. ii. Hæc est enim gratia, si propter conscientiam Dei
sustineat quis tristitias patiens injuste: unde cum multi Romani
Imperatores fidem Christi persequerentur tyrannice, magnaque multitudo
tam nobilium, quam populi esset ad fidem conversa, non resistendo, sed
mortem patienter et armati sustinentes pro Christo laudantur, ut in
sacra Thebæorum legione manifeste apparet; magisque Ajoth judicandus
est hostem interemisse, quam populi rectorem, licet tyrannum; unde
et in veteri Testamento leguntur occisi fuisse hi qui occiderunt
Joas regem Juda, quamvis a cultu Dei recedentem, eorumque filiis
reservatis secundum legis præceptum. Esset autem hoc multitudini
periculosum et ejus rectoribus, si privata præsumptione aliqui
attentarent præsidentium necem etiam tyrannorum. Plerumque enim
hujusmodi periculis magis exponunt se mali quam boni. Malis autem solet
esse grave dominium non minus regum quam tyrannorum, quia secundum
sententiam Salomonis: Dissipat impios rex sapiens. Magis igitur ex
hujus præsumptione immineret periculum multitudini de amissione regis,
quam remedium de subtractione tyranni. Videtur autem magis contra
tyrannorum sævitiam non privata præsumptione aliquorum, sed auctoritate
publica procedendum. Primo quidem, si ad jus multitudinis alicujus
pertineat sibi providere de rege, non injuste ab eadem rex institutus
potest destitui, vel refrænari ejus potestas, si potestate regia
tyrannice abutatur. Nec putanda est talis multitudo infideliter agere
tyrannum destituens, etiamsi eidem in perpetuo se ante subjecerat:
quia hoc ipse meruit in multitudinis regimine se non fideliter gerens,
ut exigit regis officium, quod ei pactum a subditis non reservetur.
Sic Romani Tarquinium superbum quem in regem susceperant, propter
ejus et filiorum tyrannidem a regno ejecerunt substituta minori,
scilicet consularia potestate. Sic etiam Domitianus, qui modestissimis
Imperatoribus Vespasiano patri, et Tito fratri ejus successerat, dum
tyrannidem exercet, a senatu Romano interemptus est, omnibus quæ
perverse Romanis fecerat per Senatusconsultum juste et salubriter
in irritum revocatis. Quo factum est, ut beatus Joannes Evangelista
dilectus Dei discipulus, qui per ipsum Domitianum in Pathmos insulam
fuerat exilio relegatus, ad Ephesum per Senatusconsultum remitteretur.
Si vero ad jus alicujus superioris pertineat multitudini providere
de rege, spectandum est ab eo remedium contra tyranni nequitiam. Sic
Archelai, qui in Judæa pro Herode patre suo regnare jam cœperat,
paternam malitiam imitantis, Judæis contra eum querimoniam ad Cesarem
Augustum deferentibus, primo quidem potestas diminuitur, ablato sibi
regio nomine, et medietate regni sui inter duos fratres suos divisa:
deinde cum nec sic a tyrannide compesceretur a Tiberio Cesare relegatus
est in exilium apud Lugdunum Galliæ civitatem. Quod si omnino contra
tyrannum auxilium humanum haberi non potest, recurrendum est ad regem
omnium Deum, quid est adjutor in opportunitatibus in tribulatione.
Ejus enim potentiæ subest, ut cor tyranni crudele convertat in
mansuetudinem, secundum Salomonis sententiam. Proverb. xii. Cor regis
in manu Dei quocumque voluerit inclinavit illud. Ipse enim regis
Assueri crudelitatem, qui Judæis mortem parabat, in mansuetudinem
vertit. Ipse est qui ita Nabuchodonosor, crudelem regem convertit,
quod factus est divinæ potentiæ prædicator. Nunc igitur, inquit, ego
Nabuchodonosor laudo, et magnifico, et glorifico regem cœli, quia
opera ejus vera et viæ ejus judicia, et gradientes in superbia potest
humiliare. Dan. iv. Tyrannos vero quos reputat conversione indignos,
potest auferre de medio vel ad infimum statum reducere, secundum
illud Sapientes Eccles. x. Sedem ducum superborum destruxit Deus, et
sedere fecit mites pro eis. Ipse enim qui videns afflictionem populi
sui in Ægypto, et audiens eorum clamorem Pharaonem tyrannum dejecit
cum exercitu suo in mare; ipse est qui memoratum Nabuchodonosor prius
superbientem non solum ejectum de regni solio, sed etiam de hominum
consortio, in similitudinem bestiæ commutavit. Nec enim abreviata manus
ejus est, ut populum suum a tyrannis liberare non possit. Promittit
enim populo suo per Isaiam, requiem se daturum a labore et confusione,
ac servitute dura, qua ante servierat, et per Ezech. xxxiv. dicit:
Liberabo meum gregem de ore eorum pastorum, qui pascunt seipsos. Sed
ut, hoc beneficium populus a Deo consequi mereatur, debet a peccatis
cessare, quia in ultionem peccati divina permissione impii accipiunt
principatum, dicente Domino per Osee xiii.: Dabo tibi regem in furore
meo, et in Job. xxxiv. dicitur, quod regnare facit hominem hypocritam
propter peccata populi. Tollenda est igitur culpa, ut cesset a
tyrannorum plaga.


SUAREZ.

(Disp. 13. De Bello. sect. 8.--Utrum seditio sit intrinsece mala?)

Seditio dicitur bellum commune intra eamdem Rempublicam, quod geri
potest, vel inter duas partes ejus, vel inter Principem et Rempublicam.
Dico primo: Seditio inter duas partes Reipublicæ semper est mala ex
parte aggressoris: ex parte vero defendentis se justa est. Hoc secundum
per se est notum. Primum ostenditur: quia nulla cernitur ibi legitima
auctoritas ad indicendum bellum; hæc enim residet in supremo Principe,
ut vidimus sect. 2. Dices, interdum poterit Princeps eam auctoritatem
concedere, si magna necessitas publica urgeat. At tunc jam non censetur
aggredi pars Reipublicæ, sed Princeps ipse; sicque nulla erit seditio
de qua loquimur. Sed, quid si illa Reipublicæ pars sit vere offensa ab
alia neque possit per Principem jus suum obtinere? Respondeo, non posse
plus efficere, quam possit persona privata, ut ex superioribus constare
facile potest.

Dico secundo: Bellum Reipublicæ contra Principem, etiamsi aggressivum,
non est intrinsece malum; habere tamen debet conditiones justi alias
belli, ut honestetur. Conclusio solum habet locum, quando Princeps
est tyrannus; quod duobus modis contingit, ut Cajet. not. 2. 2. q. 64
articulo primo ad tertium: primo si tyrannus sit quoad dominium, et
potestatem: secundo solum quoad regimen. Quando priori modo accidit
tyrannus, tota Respublica, et quodlibet ejus membrum jus habet
contra illum; unde quilibet potest se ac Rempublicam a tyrannide
vindicare. Ratio est; quia tyrannus ille aggressor est, et inique
bellum movet contra Rempublicam, et singula membra; unde omnibus
competit jus defensionis. Ita Cajetanus eo loco, sumique potest ex
D. Thom. in secundo, distinctione 44, quæstione secunda, articulo
secundo. De posteriori tyranno idem docuit Joann. Hus, imo de omni
iniquo superiore; quod damnatum est in Concilio Constant. Sessione
8 et 15. Unde certa veritas est, contra hujusmodi tyrannum nullam
privatam personam, aut potestatem imperfectam posse juste movere bellum
aggressivum, atque illud esset propie seditio. Probatur, quoniam ille,
ut supponitur, verus est Dominus: inferiores autem jus non habent
indicendi bellum, sed defendendi se tantum; quod non habet locum in
hoc tyranno: namque ille non semper singulis facit injuriam, atque
si invaderent, id solum possent efficere, quod ad suam defensionem
sufficeret. At vero tota Respublica posset bello insurgere contra
ejusmodi tyrannum, neque tunc excitaretur propia seditio (hoc siquidem
nomen in malam partem sumi consuevit). Ratio est: quia tunc tota
Respublica superior est Rege: nam, cum ipsa dederit illi potestatem,
ea conditione dedisse censetur, ut politice, non tyrannice regeret,
alias ab ipsa posset deponi. Est tamen observandum, ut ille vere, et
manifeste tyrannice agat; concurrantque aliæ conditiones ad honestatem
belli positas. Lege Divum Thomum 1 de regimine Principum, cap. 6.

Dico tertio: Bellum Reipublicæ contra Regem neutro modo tyrannum, est
propiissime seditio, et intrinsece malum. Est certa, et inde constat:
quia deest tunc et causa justa, et potestas. Ex quo etiam e contrario
constat, bellum Principis contra Rempublicam sibi subditam, ex parte
potestatis posse esse justum, si adsint aliæ conditiones; si vero
desint, injustum omnino esse.[E]

 [E] An extract from Bellarmine de Romano Pont. is here omitted.

       *       *       *       *       *

Listen to the language of P. Marquez in Spain, in the so-called
despotic times: it is well known that his work intituled _El Gobernador
Cristiano_ was not one of those obscure books which are never widely
circulated; it met with such success that it went through several
editions, as well in Spain as in foreign countries. I will give the
title at length, and I will add, at the same time, a note of the
editions published at different epochs, in different countries, in
different languages,--a note which is to be found in the edition of
Madrid in 1773.

"The Christian Magistrate (_El Gobernador Cristiano_), according to
the Life of Moses, the Ruler of the People of God, by the R. P. M. J.
R. John Marquez, O. S. A., preacher to his Majesty King Philip III.,
Examiner of the Holy Office of the Inquisition, and Evening Professor
of Theology at the University of Salamanca. New and sixth edition, with
permission. Madrid, 1773."

"The Christian Magistrate, composed at the request and in honor of His
Excellency the Duke of Feria, first published at Salamanca, in the year
1612; a second edition in the same town in 1619; a third edition at
Alcala in 1634, and a fourth at Madrid in 1640; the fifth edition was
published out of Spain, at Brussels, in 1664. This is the masterpiece
among works of this nature which have been written among us.

"Father Martin of St. Bernard, of the Order of Cîteaux, translated
this work into Italian, and had it printed at Naples, in 1646. It was
also translated into French by M. de Virion, counsellor to the Duke of
Lorraine, and it was printed at Nancy in 1621."


BOOK I. CHAP. 8.

"We have now to answer the contrary objections. We maintain that
neither the divine nor the natural law has given to states the power
of arresting the progress of tyranny by means so violent as that of
shedding the blood of princes, they being the vicars of God, divinely
invested with the right of life and death over other men. But so far
as resisting their cruelty is concerned, it is incontestable that
it may and ought to be done. They are not to be obeyed in any thing
opposed to the law of God; we must, therefore, escape from their wicked
commands, and prevent their blows, as Jonathan did with regard to Saul,
his father, when he saw him take his spear to smite David, and when,
rising from the table, he went in search of the latter, and warned
him of his danger. It is also sometimes allowable to resist princes
by force of arms, in order to prevent them from executing notoriously
rash and cruel determinations; for, according to the words of St.
Thomas, this is not to excite sedition, but to stop and prevent it.
Tertullian affirms the same thing when he says: 'Illis nomen factionis
accommodandum est, qui in odium bonorum et proborum conspirant, cum
boni, cum pii congregantur, non est factio dicenda, sed curia.'

"This is the reason why the blessed St. Hermenegildus, a glorious
Spanish martyr, took up arms and entered the field against King
Leovigildus, an Arian, to resist the great persecution directed
by this prince against the Catholics. This fact is related by the
contemporary historians. True, St. Gregory of Tours condemns this act
of our king-martyr, not for having resisted his sovereign, but because
the former was both his king and his father: and he maintains that
although he was a heretic, his son ought not to have resisted him. This
reply, however, is not well founded, as Baronius observes. Moreover,
the authority of this Gregory was combated by another Gregory, greater
than he, St. Gregory the Great, who, in the preface to his book of
_Morales_, approves of the embassy of Leander, sent to Constantinople
by St. Hermenegildus, to solicit the aid of Tiberius against
Leovigildus, his father. It is indubitable that however strong may be
the obligation of filial piety, that of religion is still stronger. The
latter obliges us to sacrifice every thing if it be necessary; and it
is on account of cases of this nature, that it is written of the tribe
of Levi: 'Qui dixerunt patri suo et matri suæ, nescio vos, et fratribus
suis ignoro vos, nescierunt filios suos.' Such was the conduct of the
Levites when they took up arms, by the command of Moses, to punish
their relations for the sin of idolatry.

"If the prince should go so far as personally to make an attempt upon
the life of the subject who has no other means of defending himself
than killing him,--as when Nero, parading the streets of Rome, followed
by a troop of armed men, attacked the quiet and unsuspecting citizens;
I say, that in such a case it would be allowable to kill him; for
if it is true, as Fr. Dominic de Soto observes, that the subject in
this extremity is to suffer himself to be killed, and so prefer the
monarch's life to his own, it is solely in the case when the death of
the monarch would give rise to great troubles and civil wars in the
state; in any other case it would be monstrously inhuman to force men
to a thing so insupportable. But when the subject's property is merely
to be defended against the cupidity of the monarch, it should not be
allowable to lay hands on him; for it is a privilege granted to princes
by divine and human laws, that their blood shall not be spilt for any
outrage which, committed by any other violator of private property,
would be a sufficient motive for taking away his life. The reason of
this is, that the life of the king is the soul and bond of the state;
that it is of more importance than the property of individuals; that it
is better to tolerate grievances of this nature, than to destroy the
head of the state."


NOTE 34, p. 348.

In order to give an idea of the means employed at this epoch to limit
the power of the monarch, by forming associations, whether among the
people themselves, or between the people, the grandees, and the clergy,
I insert here the letter, or _Charter of Fraternity_ (_Hermandad_),
which the kingdoms of Leon and Galicia made with Castile. I have
extracted this piece literally from the collection intituled _Bullarium
ordinis militiæ sancti Jacobi Gloriosissimi Hispaniarum patroni_, p.
223. It will prove to us the existence already, at a remote epoch of
our history, of a lively instinct for liberty, although ideas were
still limited to a secondary order.

"1. In the name of God and of the blessed Virgin. Amen.

"Be it known to all those who shall read this letter, that on account
of the innumerable acts of injustice, injuries, deeds of violence,
murders, imprisonments, insolent refusals of audience, opprobriums,
and other outrages without measure, committed against us by the king
D. Alphonso, to the contempt of God, of justice, of right, and to the
great detriment of all these kingdoms; we, the infantes, the prelates,
the rich men, the councils, the orders, the knights of the kingdoms
of Leon and Galicia, seeing ourselves overwhelmed with injustice and
ill-treatment, as we have stated above, and finding it insupportable;
our lord the infante Don Sancho has thought good and appointed that we
should be of one mind and of one heart, he with us and we with him, to
maintain our laws, our privileges, and our charters, in our usages,
our manners, our liberties, and franchises, which we enjoyed under
king Don Alphonso, his great-grandfather, the conqueror at the battle
of Merida, and under king Don Ferdinand, his grandfather; under the
emperor and all the other kings of Spain, their predecessors; and under
the king Don Alphonso, his father,--all princes who have best merited
our gratitude; and our said lord the infante Don Sancho has bound us to
this effect by oath and promise, as it is certain by letters between
him and us. Considering that it is agreeable to the service of God, of
the blessed Virgin, of the court of Heaven, to the defence and honor
of the holy Church, of the infante Don Sancho, and of the kings who
shall succeed him, in fine, to the advantage of the whole country, we
ordain and establish fraternity (_hermandad_), now and for ever, we the
whole of the kingdoms above named, with the councils of the kingdom of
Castile, with the infantes, the rich men, the hidalgos, the prelates,
the orders, the knights, and all others who are in this kingdom, and
who are willing to be with us, as it has just been said.

"2. Be it known to them, that we will insure to our lord the infante
Don Sancho, and to all other kings who shall succeed him, all their
rights, all their suzerainty, wholly and entirely, as we have
promised, and as they are contained in the privilege which he has
given us to this effect. Justice shall continue to be decreed by the
suzerainty. The Martiniega[F] shall be paid in the place and in the
manner in which it was customary to pay it, according to right, to Don
Alphonso, the conqueror at the battle of Merida. The money[G] shall be
paid at the end of seven years in the usual place and manner, the kings
not enjoining the coining of money. The repast (_yantar_)[H] shall be
taken in the place in which it was usual for the kings to take it,
according to the _fuero_, once a year, while visiting the very place,
as it was given to the king Don Alphonso, his great-grandfather, and to
the king Don Ferdinand, his grandfather. The _fonsadera_,[I] when the
king is with the army, in the customary place, according to the _fuero_
and right in the days of the above-named kings, guaranteeing to each
the privileges, charters, liberties, and franchises appertaining to us.

 [F] Tribute that was paid on St. Martin's day.

 [G] Another tribute.

 [H] A tribute for the king's repast during his journeys.

 [I] Tribute for maintaining the ditches of the castles in Castile, and
 the armies.

"3. Be it known to them moreover, that we will maintain all our
rights, usages, customs, privileges, charters, all our liberties and
franchises, always and in such a manner, that should the king, the
infante Don Sancho, or the kings who shall succeed them, or any of the
lords, alcades, merinos, or any other persons, attempt to infringe upon
them, in whole or in part, in any way or at any time, we will unite
into one entire whole, and inform the king, the infante Don Sancho, or
those who shall succeed them, of the nature of our complaint, and ask
them if they are willing to reform; and if not, we will unite into one
entire body to defend and protect ourselves, as it is ordained in the
charter granted us by the infante Don Sancho.

"4. Moreover, be it known to them that no member of this _hermandad_
shall be chastised, and nothing shall be taken from him contrary
to right and the custom of the place, in the councils of the said
_hermandad_; and it shall not be allowable to take from him more than
is demanded by the _fuero_, in the place in which he shall be.

"5. We protest, that if an alcade, a merino, or any other person, on
the authority of a letter of the king, of the infante Don Sancho, by
his command, or that of the kings who shall succeed him, shall kill a
man of our _hermandad_ without hearing him and judging him according
to law, that we, the _hermandad_, will take away his life for such an
act. And if we cannot arrest him, he shall be declared an enemy to the
_hermandad_; every member of the _hermandad_ who shall have concealed
him shall fall under the penalty of perjury and felony, and shall be
treated in his turn as an enemy to this _hermandad_.

"6. We declare, moreover, that the port-duties shall be paid by us only
in conformity to the rights and usages of the times of Don Alphonso, or
the king Don Ferdinand, and the councils of the _hermandad_ will not
permit any person to receive them beyond this measure.

"7. Moreover, no infante or rich man shall be a merino or grand bailiff
in the kingdoms of Leon and Galicia. Neither can these functions be
exercised by an infançon, or a knight having notoriously a great number
of knights or other men of the country in vassalage; neither can they
be exercised by a stranger to the country. And we so will it, because
such was the custom in the days of the king Don Alphonso and of the
king Don Ferdinand.

"8. All those who may wish to appeal from the judgment of the king, or
of Don Sancho, or of other kings who shall succeed him, may do so; they
shall have recourse to the book of the _Fuero Juzgo_, in the kingdom of
Leon, as was usual in the days of the kings who preceded this. That if
the right of appeal be refused to any who may wish to invoke it, we,
on our part, will act according to the injunctions contained in the
charters granted us by Don Sancho.

"9. That we may guarantee and execute all the acts of this _hermandad_,
we make a seal of two plates, bearing the following impressions: upon
one of the plates, the figure of a lion; and upon the other, the figure
of St. James on horseback, with a sword in his right hand; in his left,
a standard with a cross at the top, and shells. The inscription shall
be thus expressed: '_The Seal of the Hermandad of the Kingdoms of Leon
and Galicia._' This seal shall be affixed to the documents which shall
be required by this _hermandad_.

"10. We the whole _hermandad_ of Castile, make a promise and render
homage to all the _hermandad_ of the kingdoms of Leon and Galicia,
that we will assist each other well and loyally to keep and maintain
every one of the above-named things. That if we fail to do so, we are
traitors for this alone, like him who slays his lord or surrenders a
castle; and may we never in that case have either hands, or tongues, or
arms to protect ourselves.

"11. But lest there should be any doubt about the pact we are now
making, in order that this pact may be for ever inviolate, we seal this
letter with the two seals of the _hermandad_ of Castile, Leon, and
Galicia, and place it in the hands of D. Pedro Nunez, and the Order of
the Knights of St. John, who are united with us in this _hermandad_.
Given at Valladolid, the 8th day of July, in the year one thousand
three hundred and twenty."

Spain had passed through many centuries without knowing of any other
religion than the Catholic. She still preserved in all its force and
vigor, the idea that the king should be the first to observe the
laws; that he could not rule the people according to his caprice;
that he ought to govern by principles of justice and views of public
expediency. Saavedra, in his _Devises_, thus expressed himself:--

"1st. Laws are vain when the prince who promulgates them does not
confirm and uphold them by his own life and example. A law will appear
lenient to the people when observed by its author.

    "In commune jubes si quid, censesve tenendum,
    Primus jussa sibi, tunc observantior æqui
    Fit populus, nec ferre vetat, cum videri ipsum
    Auctorem parere sibi.

"The laws promulgated by Servius Tullius were not only intended for
the people, but also for kings. The disputes between the monarch
and his subjects were to be settled in conformity with these laws,
as Tacitus relates of Tiberius: 'Although we are not subject to the
laws,' said the emperors Severus and Antonius, 'let us conform our
lives to these laws.' The monarch is bound by the law not merely from
the fact of its being a law, but from the very reason upon which it is
founded, when it is natural and common to all, and not particular and
exclusively destined to the right government of subjects; for in this
case the observance of the law merely concerns the subject, although
the monarch, if it should so happen, is bound to obey it, in order to
render it tolerable to others. Such appears to have been the meaning of
the mysterious command given by God to Ezechiel, _to eat the volume_,
that others seeing him the first to taste the laws and declare them
good, might be induced to imitate him. The kings of Spain are so far
subject to the laws, that the Treasury, in causes relating to the royal
patrimony, is absolutely subject to the same laws as the least of his
subjects; and in doubtful cases, the Treasury is condemned. Philip
II. thus ordained it; and on an occasion in which his grandson Philip
IV., the glorious father of V. A., was personally brought to judgment
in an important trial of the Chamber, before the royal council, the
judges had the noble determination to condemn him, and his majesty had
the rectitude to hear the sentence without expressing any indignation.
Happy empire, in which the cause of the monarch is always the least
favored!"


NOTE 35, p. 356.

Sufficient attention has not perhaps been paid to the merit of the
industrial organization introduced into Europe from the earliest
ages, and which became more and more diffused after the twelfth
century. I allude to the trades-unions, and other associations, which,
established under the influence of the Catholic religion, commonly
placed themselves under the patronage of some Saint, and had pious
foundations for the celebration of their feasts, and for assisting each
other in their necessities. Our celebrated Capmany, in his _Historical
memoirs on the Marine, Commerce, and the Arts of the ancient City of
Barcelona_, has published a collection of documents, very valuable for
the history of the working classes and of the development of their
influence on politics. Few works have appeared in foreign countries,
in the latter part of the last century, of such great merit as that of
our fellow-countryman, published in 1779. One very interesting chapter
of this work is devoted to the institution of trades-corporations. I
give here a copy of the chapter, which I particularly recommend to the
perusal of those persons who imagine that nothing had been thought of
in Europe for the benefit of the laboring classes, of those who are so
foolish as to look upon that as a means of slavery and exclusivism,
which was in reality a means of encouragement and of mutual support.
It also appears to me that, by reading the philosophical remarks of
Capmany, every sensible man will be convinced that Europe, from the
earliest ages, has possessed systems adapted to the encouragement of
industry, to the preservation of it from the fatal agitations of those
times, to secure esteem for it, and to the legitimate and salutary
development of the popular element. It will be no less useful to
present this sketch to certain foreign writers, continually occupied
with social and political economy, and who, nevertheless, in compiling
the history of that science, have not even been acquainted with a work
so important for every thing connected with the middle ages of Europe,
from the eleventh to the eighteenth century.


 _"Of the institution of the Trades-Corporations and other Associations
 of Artisans at Barcelona._

"No memoir has hitherto been discovered which might serve to
enlighten and guide us in fixing the exact epoch of the institution
of the trades-associations at Barcelona.[J] But according to all
the conjectures furnished by ancient monuments, it is very probable
that the political erection or formation of the bodies of laborers
took place in the time of Don Jaime I., under whose glorious reign
the arts were developed under a favorable influence; whilst commerce
and navigation took a higher flight, owing to the expeditions of the
Aragonese arms beyond the seas. Increased facilities in the means
of transport have given an impetus to industry; and an increasing
population, the natural result of labor, by its reaction upon labor,
augmented the demand for it. At Barcelona, as every where else,
trades-corporations naturally arose when the wants and the tastes of
society had, of necessity, grown so multifarious, that artisans were
forced, with a view to secure protection to their industry, to form
themselves into communities. Luxury, and the tastes of society, like
every other object of commerce, are subject to continual change; hence,
new branches of trade are continually springing up and displacing
others; so that at one period each separate art runs into various
branches, whilst at another, several arts are combined into one. At
Barcelona, corporate industry has passed through all these vicissitudes
in the course of five centuries. The hardware trade has comprised at
different periods eleven or twelve branches, and consequently afforded
subsistence to as many classes of families, whilst at the present time
these same branches are reduced to eight, in consequence of certain
changes in fashions and customs.

 [J] "It is extremely difficult to ascertain the origin of the
 trades-corporations, even in those towns which have been the longest
 and the best disciplined.--Sandi, in his _Civil History of Venice_
 (t. ii. part 1, lib. iv. p. 767), after having reckoned sixty-one
 trades-corporations existing in that capital at the beginning of
 his century, declares that it is impossible to assign to each of
 these corporations the date of its origin, or that of its first
 statutes. This historian nevertheless consulted all the archives of
 the republic; he contents himself with observing, that none of the
 corporations are anterior to the fourteenth century." (_The notes
 which accompany this chapter are those of Capmany himself._)

"In accordance with the social system which generally prevailed at
that time in most European countries, it was found necessary to bestow
liberty and privileges upon an industrious and mercantile people, who
thus became a great source of strength and support to kings; and this
could not be effected without classifying the citizens. But these
lines of demarcation could not be maintained distinct and inviolate
without a political division of the various corporations in which both
men and their occupations were classified. This division was the more
necessary in a city like Barcelona, which, ever since the middle of the
thirteenth century, had assumed a sort of democratic independence in
its mode of government. Thus, in Italy, the first country in the West
that re-established the name and the influence of the people, after
these had been effaced in the iron ages by Gothic rule, the industrial
classes had already been formed into corporations, which gave stability
to the arts and trades, and conferred great honors upon them in
those free cities, where, amidst the flux and reflux of invasions,
the artisan became a senator, and the senator an artisan. Wars and
factions, endemic evils in that delightful country at the time of which
we are speaking, could not, in spite of all their ravages, effect the
destruction of the associated trades, whose political existence, when
once their members were admitted to a share in the government, formed
the very basis of the constitution of both nations, inasmuch as both
were industrial and mercantile. At Barcelona the trades were well
regulated, prosperous, and flourishing, under that municipal system,
and that consular jurisprudence, of which commerce, and its invariable
concomitant, industry, have always stood in need. It was thus that this
capital became one of the most celebrated centres of the manufacturing
industry of the middle ages--a reputation which it has maintained and
increased up to the present time. In like manner, it was under the name
and rule of corporations and brotherhoods that trades were established
in Flanders, in France, and in England, countries in which the arts
have been carried to their highest degree of perfection and renown.
The trades-corporations of Barcelona, even when viewed merely as a
necessary institution for the due regulation of the primitive form of
municipal government, should be regarded as most important, whether for
the preservation of the arts, or as forming the basis of the influence
of the artisans themselves. It is at once evident, from the experience
of five centuries, that trades-unions have effected unspeakable good
in Barcelona, were it only by preserving, as an imperishable deposit,
the love, the tradition, and the memory of the arts. They have formed
so many rallying points, so many banners, as it were, under which more
than once the shattered forces of industry have found refuge; and
have thus been enabled to recover their energy and activity, and to
perpetuate their existence to our own days, in spite of pestilence,
wars, factions, and a multitude of other calamities, which exhaust
men's energies, overthrow their habitations, and change their manners.
If Barcelona, so often visited by these physical and political plagues,
had possessed no community, no bond, no common interest among its
artisans, it would certainly have witnessed the destruction of their
skill, their economy, and their activity, as is the case with beavers,
when their communities have been broken up and dispersed by the
hunters.[K]

 [K] We here recognise many ideas taken from a work which saw the
 light in 1774, from the press of Sancha, under the title of _Discours
 économique-politique pour la defense du travail mécanique des
 ouvriers, par D. Ramon Miguel Palacio_. The author of these memoirs,
 fearing to be accused of a gross plagiarism, observes that, being
 obliged here to treat of this same matter, he was forced to adopt many
 of the ideas contained in this work, which at that time he thought it
 proper to publish without affixing his real name.

"By a happy effect of the security enjoyed by families in their
different trades, and thanks to the aid, or _mont-de-piété_,
established in the very bosom of the corporation for its necessitous
members, who, without this assistance, might have been plunged into
misery, these economical establishments at Barcelona have directly
contributed to maintain the prosperity of the arts, by shutting out
misery from the workshop, and preserving the operatives from indigence.
Without this corporate police, by which each trade is surrounded, the
property and the fortune of the artisan would have been exposed to
the greatest risks; moreover, the credit and stability of the trades
themselves would have been perilled; for then the quack, the unskilled
operative, and the obscure adventurer, might have imposed upon the
public with impunity, and a pernicious latitude might have taken the
place of liberty. On the other hand, the trades-corporations being
powerful associations, each one by itself being governed by a unanimity
of intelligence and a community of interests, could purchase their
stocks of raw materials seasonably and advantageously. They supplied
the wants of the masters; they made advances, or stood security, for
those of their members who lacked either time or funds for making
great preliminary disbursements of capital at their own cost. Besides,
these corporations, comprehending and representing the industry of
the nation, and consequently feeling an interest in its maintenance,
addressed from time to time memorials to the Municipal Council, or
to the Cortes, relative to the injuries they were sustaining, or
the approach of which they, as it often happened, foresaw from the
introduction of counterfeit goods, or of foreign productions, which
is a cause of ruin to our industry. In fine, without the institution
of trades-corporations, instruction would have been void of order
and fixed rules; for where there are no masters duly authorized and
permanently established, neither will there be any disciples; and all
regulations, in default of an executive power to see them observed,
will be disregarded and trodden under foot. Trades-corporations
are so necessary to the preservation of the arts, that the various
trades known at the present day in this capital have derived their
appellations and their origin from the economical divisions, and from
the arts established by these corporations. When the blacksmith in his
shop made ploughshares, nails, keys, knives, swords, &c., the names of
the trades of the blacksmith, the nailer, the cutler, the armorer, &c.
were unknown; and as there was no special and particular instruction
in each of these branches of labor, the separation of which afterwards
formed so many new arts maintained by their respective communities,
these trades were unknown.

"The second political advantage resulting from the institution of
trades-corporations at Barcelona was, the esteem and consideration
in which at all times these establishments caused both the artisans
and the arts to be held. This wise institution won respect for the
operative classes, by constituting them a visible and permanent order
in the state. Hence it is that the conduct and the mode of life of the
Barcelonians have ever been such as are to be found only amongst an
honorable people. Never having been confounded with any exempted and
privileged body (for the trades-corporations draw a circle around their
members, and let them know what they are, and what they are worth),
these people learned that there was honor and virtue within their own
sphere, and labored to preserve these qualities; so certain is it that
social distinctions in a nation have more influence than is sometimes
believed in upholding the spirit of each social class.

"Another view of this question shows us that trades-corporations form
communities, governed by an economic code, which assigns to each
corporation certain employments and certain honors, to which every
individual member may aspire. Even men's prejudices, when wisely
directed, sometimes produce admirable effects. Thus the government, the
administration of these bodies, in which the artisan always enjoyed
the prerogative of managing the resources and the interests of his
trade and of his fellow-members, with the title of Counsellor, or Elder
(_Prohombre_), won for the mechanical arts of Barcelona public and
general esteem; whilst the pre-eminence in a festival or an assembly
serves with these men to soften the rigors of manual labor, and the
disadvantages of their inferior condition. At the same time that the
trades of Barcelona, formed into well-organized bodies, fixed and
preserved the arts in that capital, they had the further credit, by
acting as political bodies of the most numerous class of the people, of
gaining a high esteem for their members. The obscure artisan, without
matriculation, or a common bond, continues isolated and wandering;
he dies, and with him perishes his art; or at the first reverse of
fortune, he emigrates and abandons his craft. What consideration can
wretched wandering followers of any trade obtain in a country? Just
such as knife-grinders and tinkers possess in the provinces of Spain.
At Barcelona, all the trades have constantly enjoyed the same general
esteem, because all have been established and governed upon a system
which has rendered them fixed, respectable, and prosperous.

"The esteem in which the trades of Barcelona were held from the
time when the municipal government had formed them into national
corporations, the agents of public economy, gave rise to the laudable
and useful custom of perpetuating trades in the same families. In fact
the people having learned that, without quitting the class to which
they belonged, they could preserve the respect and consideration due
to useful and honorable citizens, no longer desired to quit it, and
were no longer ashamed of their condition. When trades are held in
honor, which is the consequence of the stability and civil properties
of corporations, they naturally become hereditary. Now, the advantages
both to the artisan and the arts, resulting from this transmission
of trades, are so real and so well known, that it is needless to
specify them here, or to dwell upon their salutary effects. This
demarcation and classification of trades caused many of the arts to
become sure possessions for those who adopted them. Hence fathers aimed
at transmitting their trade to their sons; and thus was formed an
indestructible mass of national industry, which made labor honorable,
by implanting steady and homogeneous manners, if we may so speak, in
the bosom of the class of artisans.

"Another circumstance contributed still more to render the exercise
of the mechanical arts honorable at Barcelona, not only more than in
most other parts of Spain, but more than in any other state, ancient
or modern. This was the admission of the trades-corporations upon the
register of municipal offices in this city, which enjoyed so many
royal grants and extraordinary privileges of independence. Thus the
nobility--that Gothic nobility--with their great domains, sought to be
incorporated with the operatives in the _Ayuntamiento_, there to fill
the offices and supreme stations in the political government, which,
during more than five hundred years, continued in Barcelona under a
form and in a spirit truly democratic.[L] All mechanical offices,
without any odious distinction or exclusion, were held worthy to be
declared qualified for the consistorial council of magistrates; all had
a voice and a vote among the conscript fathers who represented this
city, the most highly privileged perhaps that ever existed; one of the
most renowned for its laws, its power, and its influence; one of the
most respected in the middle ages amongst all the states and monarchies
of Europe, Asia, and Africa.[M]

 [L] "Consult the Appendix of Notes, Nos. 28 and 30. You will there
 see what respect and power the town of Barcelona enjoyed at another
 period, by means of the municipal magistrates, who represented it
 under the ordinary name of councillors."

 [M] "In the diplomatic collection of these memoirs, we find a
 multitude of letters and other documents proving the direct and mutual
 relations which existed between the city of Barcelona and the emperors
 of the East, of Germany, the sultans of Egypt, the kings of Tunis, of
 Morocco, and various monarchs and states, or other great powers of
 Europe."

"This political system, and this municipal form of government,
resembled that which prevailed in the middle ages amongst all the
principal towns of Italy, whence Catalonia borrowed many of its
customs and usages. Genoa, Pisa, Milan, Pavia, Florence, Sienna, and
other towns, had a municipal government composed of the leading men
in commerce, and the arts, under the name of consuls, counsellors,
&c. _Priores Artium_--such was the name of a popular form of elective
government, distributed among the different classes of citizens,
without excluding the artisans, who, in the thirteenth and fourteenth
centuries, were in their most flourishing condition, forming the most
respectable part of the population, and consequently the richest, the
most powerful, and the most independent. This democratic liberty,
besides giving stability and permanency to industry in the towns
of Italy, conferred a singular degree of honor on the mechanical
professions. The grand council of these towns was summoned by the
tolling of the bell, when the artisans arranged themselves under the
banners or gonfalons of their respective trades. Such was also the
political constitution of Barcelona from the middle of the thirteenth
to the commencement of the present century. With these facts before
us, need we feel surprise that, in our own days, arts and artisans in
Barcelona still retain undiminished esteem and consideration; that a
love for mechanical professions has become hereditary; that the dignity
and self-respect of the artisan class have become traditional, even to
the last generations, in which the customs of their ancestors have been
transmitted by the succession of example, even after the extinction of
the political reasons in which these customs had their origin? Several
trades-corporations still preserve in the halls of their _juntas_ the
portraits of those of their members who formerly obtained the first
employments in the state. Must not this laudable practice have engraven
on the memory of the members of the corporation all the ideas of honor
and dignity consistent with the condition of an artisan? Assuredly
the popular form of the ancient government of Barcelona could not
fail to imprint itself generally and forcibly on the manners of the
people; indeed, where all the citizens were equal in the participation
of honors, it is easy to see that no one would willingly remain
inferior to another in virtue or in merit, although inferior, in
other respects, by his condition and fortune. This noble emulation,
which must naturally have been awakened to activity in the concourse
of all orders in the state, gave birth to the dignity, the lofty and
inviolate probity of the artisans of Barcelona; and this character they
have maintained to our own times, to the admiration of Spain and of
foreign nations. Such has been the negligence of our national authors,
that this narrative will have the appearance of a discovery: up to
the present time Barcelona and the Principality had not attracted the
scrutinizing notice of the political historian, so that a dark shadow
still concealed the real principles (always unknown to the crowd) from
which in all times, have sprung the virtues and the vices of nations.

"To these causes may be attributed, in great part, the esteem which
the artisans have acquired. Nothing could be more salutary than this
obligation they were always under of comporting themselves with dignity
and distinction in public employments, whether in the corporation or
the municipal government. Moreover the constant example of the master
of the house, who, up to the present time, has always lived in common
with his apprentices in a praiseworthy manner, has confirmed the
children in ideas of order and dignity; for the manners and habits
of a people, which are as powerful as law, must be inculcated from
the tenderest age. Thus, in Barcelona, the operative has never been
confounded by the slovenliness of his dress with the mendicant, whose
idle and dissipated habits, says an illustrious writer, are easily
contracted when the dress of the man of respectability is in no way
distinguished from that of the rabble. Nor are the laboring population
ever seen wearing those cumbersome garments which, serving as a cover
for rags and a cloak for idleness, cramp the movements and activity
of the body, and invite to a life of indolent ease. The people have
not contracted a habit of frequenting taverns, where example leads to
drunkenness and moral disorders. Their amusements, so necessary for
working people to render their daily toils supportable, have always
been innocent recreations, which either afforded them repose from their
fatigues or varied them. The games formerly permitted were either the
ring (_la bague_), nine pins, bowls, ball, shooting at a mark, fencing,
and public dancing, authorized and watched over by the authorities;
an amusement which from time immemorial has been general amongst the
Catalans, in certain seasons and on certain festivals of the year.

"The respect for the artisan of Barcelona has never been diminished
on account of the material on which his art was exercised, whether
it was silver, steel, iron, copper, wood, or wool. We have seen that
all the trades were equally eligible to the municipal offices of the
state; none were excluded--not even butchers. Ancient Barcelona did not
commit the political error of establishing preferences that might have
produced some odious distinctions of trades. The inhabitants considered
that all the citizens were in themselves worthy of esteem, since all
contributed to the growth and maintenance of the property of a capital
whose opulence and power were founded upon the industry of the artisan
and the merchant. In fact, Barcelona has ever been free from that
idea, so generally entertained, that every mechanical profession is
low and vulgar--a mischievous and very common prejudice, which, in the
provinces of Spain, has made an irreparable breach in the progress of
the arts. At Barcelona, admission into certain trades-corporations
has never been refused to the members of other trades: in this city
all the trades are held in the same estimation. In a word, neither
Barcelona nor any other town in Catalonia has ever entertained those
vulgar prejudices that are enough to prevent honorable men from
devoting themselves to the arts, or to cause the son to forsake the art
practised by the father."[N]

 [N] See the remarks of his Excellency M. Campomanes on these abuses
 and false principles of policy, in his _Discourse on the Popular
 Education of Artisans_, from page 119 to 160.


NOTE 36, p. 361.

I have spoken of the numerous Councils held by the Church at different
epochs; why, it will be asked, does she not hold them more frequently
now? I will answer this question by quoting a judicious passage from
Count de Maistre, in his work _On the Pope_, book i. chap. 2:--

"In the first ages of Christianity," says he, "it was more easy to
assemble Councils, because the Church was not so numerous as now, and
because the emperors possessed powers that enabled a sufficient number
of Bishops to assemble, so that their decisions needed only the assent
of other Bishops. Yet these Councils were not assembled without much
difficulty and embarrassment. But in modern times, since the civilized
world has been divided into so many sovereignties, and immeasurably
increased by our intrepid navigators, an Œcumenical Council has become
a chimera.[O] Simply to convoke all the Bishops, and to bring legally
together such a convocation, five or six years would not suffice."

 [O] We ordinarily call a chimera, or an impossibility, that which
 offers great difficulties. On this occasion we cannot help observing
 to sincere persons, that, from these great difficulties, they may
 judge of the lawfulness and sincerity of the desires manifested by the
 _soi-disant_ reformers and appellants to Councils. They do not wish
 for Councils; but, under the shadow of this word, they wish to escape
 the authority of their legitimate superiors. (Note by the authors of
 the _Bibliothèque de Religion_, published in Spain.)

NOTE 37, p. 369.

That my readers may be convinced of the truth and accuracy of what I
here affirm, I invite them to read the history of the heresies that
have afflicted the Church since the first ages, but particularly from
the tenth century down to our own days.


NOTE 38, p. 373.

It was not, I have said, without prejudice to the liberty of the people
that the influence of the clergy was withdrawn from the working of the
political machine. In order to ascertain how far this is true, it may
be well to remark, that a great number of theologians were favorable to
tolerably liberal doctrines in political matters, and that it was the
clergy who exercised the greatest freedom in speaking to kings, even
after the people had almost entirely lost the right of intervention in
political affairs. Observe what opinions St. Thomas held on forms of
government.


(Quest. cv. 1^a 2^æ.)

_De ratione judicialium præceptorum art._ 1. Respondeo dicendum, quod
circa bonam ordinationem principum in aliqua civitate, vel gente, duo
sunt attendenda, quorum unum est, ut omnes aliquam partem habeant
in principatu; per hoc enim conservatur pax populi et omnes talem
ordinationem amant et custodiunt ut dicitur (II. _Polit._, cap. i.);
aliud est quod attenditur secundum speciem regiminis vel ordinationis
principatum, cujus cum sint diversæ species, ut philosophus tradit
in III. _Polit._ cap. v., præcipue tamen unum regimen est, in quo
unus principatur secundum virtutem: et aristocratia, id est potestas
optimorum, in qua aliqui pauci principantur secundum virtutem. Unde
optima ordinatio principum est in aliqua civitate vel regno, in quo
unus præficitur secundum virtutem qui omnibus præsit et sub ipso sunt
aliqui principantes secundum virtutem, et tamen talis principatus ad
omnes pertinet, tum quia ex omnibus eligi possunt, tum quia etiam ab
omnibus eliguntur. Talis vero est omnis politia bene commixta ex regno
in quantam unus præest, et aristocratia in quantum multi principantur
secundum virtutem, et ex democratia, id est potestate populi in quantum
ex popularibus possunt eligi principes, et ad populum pertinet electio
principum, et hoc fuit institutum secundum legem divinam.


Divus Thomas. (1^a 2^æ Q. 90, art. 4^o.)

Et sic ex quatuor prædictis potest colligi definitio legis quæ nihil
est aliud quam quædam rationis ordinatio ad bonum commune ab eo qui
curam communitatis habet promulgata. Q. 95, art. 4.

Tertio est de ratione legis humanæ ut instituatur a gubernante
communitatem civitatis: sicut supra dictum est. (Quest. 90, art. 3.)
Et secundum hoc distinguuntur leges humanæ secundum diversa regimina
civitatum, quorum unum, secundum philosophum in III. _Polit._, cap.
xi., est regnum, quando scilicet civitas gubernatur ab uno, et secundum
hoc accipiuntur constitutiones principum; aliud vero regimen est
aristocratia, id est principatus optimorum vel optimatum, et secundum
hoc sumuntur responsa prudentum et etiam senatusconsulta. Aliud regimen
est oligarchia, id est principatus paucorum divitum et potentum; et
secundum hoc sumitur jus prætorium, quod etiam honorarium dicitur.
Aliud autem regimen est populi, quod nominatur democratia; et secundum
hoc sumuntur plebiscita. Aliud autem est tyrannicum, quod est omnino
corruptum unde ex hoc non sumitur aliqua lex. Est etiam et aliquod
regimen ex istis commixtum, quod est optimum, et secundum hoc sumitur
lex quam majores natu simul cum plebibus sanxerunt, ut Isidorus dicit
lib. 5, _Etym. O._ cap. x.

If certain declaimers are to be believed, it would seem that the
principle, that it is the law which governs, and not the will of
man, is quite a recent discovery. But observe with what solidity and
perspicuity the angelic doctor expounds this doctrine.


(1^a 2^æ Q. 93, art. 1.)

Utrum fuerit utile aliquas leges poni ab hominibus.

Ad 2^m dicendum, quod sicut Philosophus dicit. 1. Rhetor. Melius est
omnia ordinari lege, quam dimittere judicum arbitrio, et hoc propter
tria. Primo quidem, quia facilius est invenire paucos sapientes, qui
sufficiant ad rectas leges ponendas, quam multos; qui requirerentur
ad recte judicandum de singulis. Secundo, quia illi qui leges ponunt,
ex multo tempore considerant quid lege ferendum sit: sed judicia de
singularibus factis fiunt ex casibus subito exortis. Facilius autem ex
multis consideratis potest homo videre quid rectum sit, quam solum ex
aliquo uno facto. Tertio, quia legislatores judicant in universali, et
de futuris: sed homines judiciis præsidentes judicant de præsentibus;
ad quæ afficientur amore vel odio, aut aliqua cupiditate; et sic
eorum depravatur judicium. Quia ergo justitia animata judicis non
invenitur in multis, et quia flexibilis est: ideo necessarium fuit in
quibuscumque est possibile, legem determinare quid judicandum sit, et
paucissima arbitrio hominum committere.

In Spain, the _Procuradores_ of the Cortes dared not raise their voices
against the excesses of power; and their timidity drew down the keen
reproaches of P. Mariana. In the examination to which he was subjected
in the celebrated suit commenced against him on the subject of the
_seven treatises_, he confesses having applied to the _Procuradores_
the epithets of _vile, superficial, and utterly venal_, only striving
to obtain the favor of the prince, and their own particular interests,
without solicitude for the public good. He added, that such was the
public cry, the general complaint, at least at Toledo, where he was
residing.

I will leave unnoticed his work intituled _De Rege et Regis
institutione_, of which I have spoken elsewhere. Confining myself
to his _History of Spain_, I will observe with what liberty he
expresses himself on the most delicate points, without meeting with any
opposition, either from the civil or from the ecclesiastical authority.
In his 1st book, chap. 4, speaking of the Aragonese, in his usual grave
and severe tone, he says: "The Aragonese possess and enjoy laws and
_fueros_ very different from those of the other people of Spain; they
possess every thing most adapted for preserving liberty against the
excessive power of kings, for preventing this power from degenerating
and changing, by its natural tendency, into tyranny; for they are not
ignorant of this truth, that the right of liberty is generally lost by
degrees."

It was precisely at this epoch that the clergy expressed themselves
with the greatest freedom on the most delicate of all subjects, that
of contributions. The venerable Palafox, in his memorial or petition
to the king for ecclesiastical immunity, said: "According to St.
Augustine, to the great Tostat, and other weighty authors, the Son
of God appointed that the children of God--that is the ministers of
the Church, his priests--should not pay tribute to the pagan princes.
In fact, he addressed to St. Peter the following question, already
resolved by the eternal wisdom of the Father: _Reges gentium a quibus
accipiunt tributum, a filiis, an ab alienis?_ St. Peter answered, _Ab
alienis_; and our Lord concluded with these words: _Ergo liberi sunt
filii_. I may be allowed, sire, to make this delicate observation,
that the Divine Majesty does not say, _Reges gentium a quibus capiunt
tributum_, but _a quibus accipiunt_. By this word accipiunt, we
understand the mildness and mansuetude with which the payment of a
tribute should always be exacted, in order to diminish the bitterness
and repugnance accompanying a tribute.

"46. It is doubtless useful for the preservation of the state, that,
in the first place, subjects should give, in order that princes may
then receive. It is proper that kings should receive, and employ the
tribute paid them, for on this depends the safety of crowns; but it is
well that subjects should first give it voluntarily. It is doubtless
from this passage of Scripture, from this expression of the Eternal
Word, that the Catholic Crown, always so pious, has received the holy
doctrine, by virtue of which neither your majesty nor your illustrious
predecessors have ever permitted a tribute to be levied without its
having first received the consent of the kingdoms themselves, and been
offered by them; and your majesty is incomparably more exalted by
limiting and moderating your power, than by exercising it to its utmost
extent.

"47. Sire, if laymen, who have no exemption in matters of tribute,
enjoy that which the kindness of your majesty and of the most Catholic
kings grant them; if they do not pay till they choose to make a
voluntary offering; if nothing is received from them except on this
condition, will religion, your majesty's renowned piety, and the
devoted zeal of the Council, allow the clergy--the sons, the ministers
of God, the privileged, those who are exempt by divine and human law in
all the nations of the world, and among the very pagans--to enjoy less
favor than strangers, who are not, like them, either ministers of the
Church or priests of God? Is the word _capiunt_, sire, to be applied
exclusively to the ministers of God, and the word _accipiunt_ to men of
the world?"

In his work intituled _Historia Real Sagrada_, the same writer raises
his voice against tyranny with extreme severity:

"12. _Such_," says he, "_is the law which the king whom you wish
for will maintain in your regard_. The word law is here employed
ironically, as if God should say: 'You imagine, without doubt, that
this king of yours would govern according to law; on this supposition
you asked for him, since you complained that my tribunal did not govern
you. Now, the law which this king will exercise towards you will be, to
disregard all law; and his law will eventually be tyranny respected.'
The politician who, relying upon this passage, should attribute as a
right to the monarch a power which is merely pointed out by God to the
people as a chastisement, would be an uncivilized being, unworthy of
being treated as a rational creature. The Lord, in this instance, does
not define what is the best; he does not say what he is giving them;
these words are no appreciation of power; he merely declares what would
be the case, and what he condemns. Who shall dare to found the origin
of tyranny on justice itself? God says, that he whom they desire for a
king will be a tyrant--not a tyrant approved of by him, but a tyrant
that he reprobates and chastises. And subsequent events clearly shewed
it, since there were in Israel wicked kings, by whom the prophecy was
fulfilled, and Saints who obtained on the throne the mercy of God.
The wicked kings literally accomplished the divine threat, by doing
what they were forbidden; the good ones established their dignity upon
propriety and justice within prescribed limits."

Father Marquez, in his _Christian Prince or Magistrate_ (_Gobernador
Cristiano_), also enlarges on the same question; he expounds his
opinion both theoretically and practically.


(Chapter xvi. 53.)

"Thus far we have heard the words of Philo, writing on this event. As
these words afforded me an opportunity of reasoning on the obligations
of Christian kings, I have taken care to quote them at length. I
will not expect these kings to act like Moses; for they have not the
miraculous aid which the Hebrew legislator received for the relief of
the people, nor the rod which God gave him to make water flow from the
rock at need. But I will recommend them to reflect maturely on the
additional services they shall attempt to exact from their subjects,
and the burdens they shall impose on them. Let them reflect that they
are bound to justify the motive of their request in all truth, and
without any false coloring; always and constantly aware that they are
in the presence of God, that the eyes of God are fixed on their hands,
that He will require from them a strict account of their actions. For,
as the holy doctor of Nazianzen says, the Son of God came designedly
into the world at the taking of a census and a resettlement of the
imposts, in order to confound kings who would have appointed them
through caprice; so that kings may now know that the Son of God takes
account of every item, and weighs in the balance of his strict justice
things which we should account of little moment.

"The above reflection will serve to dispel the false ideas of certain
flatterers, who, to obtain the favor of princes, persuade them that
they are perfectly independent and the masters of the lives and
property of their subjects, free to dispose of them as they may think
proper. In support of this pretended maxim, they allege, as we have
seen, the history of Samuel, who answered the people on the part of
God, when they were demanding a king, 'You shall have one, but on
terrible conditions.' This king was to take from them their fields,
their vineyards, their olive-yards, to give them to his servants; he
was to take their daughters for slaves, 'to make him ointments, and
to be his cooks and bakers.' And they have not observed that, as John
Bodin says, this is the interpretation of Philip Melancthon, which
alone is sufficient to render it suspicious. Moreover, as St. Gregory,
and after him other doctors, have observed, this passage of Scripture
does not establish the just right of kings, but rather announces
beforehand the tyranny of a great number of princes; in fine, these
words do not explain what good princes might do, but merely what bad
ones would usually do. Hence, when Achab seized upon the vineyard of
Naboth, God was angry with him, and we know how He treated him. When
David, the elect of God, demanded a spot whereon to set up the altar of
Jebusee, he only asked it on condition of paying the value of the land.

"For this reason princes should examine with scrupulous attention
whether contributions are just; for if they are not, doctors decide
that they cannot, without manifest injustice, thus more or less
infringe on the rights of their subjects. This doctrine is so Catholic
and certain, that men holding sound doctrine affirm that, in this case,
princes cannot impose fresh tributes, even though necessary, without
the consent of the nation. For, say they, the prince not being (which
he certainly is not) the master of his subjects' property, cannot make
use of it without the consent of those from whom he is to receive it.
This custom has been long in practice in the kingdom of Castile, where
the laws of royalty prohibit the levying of any new impost without
the intervention of the Cortes: after having received the sanction
of the Cortes, the impost is submitted to the vote of the towns; and
the prince does not consider his demand granted till it has received
the sanction of the majority of the towns. Edward I. of England made
a similar law, according to many authors of weight; and Philip of
Commines says, that it was the same in France till the time of Charles
VII., who, urged by an extreme necessity, suppressed these formalities,
and levied a tax without waiting for the consent of the States, and
this inflicted on the kingdom so deep a wound, that it will long
continue unhealed. If we may credit certain affirmations, this author
reports, that it was then asserted that the king had escaped from the
guardianship exercised by the kingdom; but that his own opinion is,
that kings cannot, without the consent of their people, exact a single
farthing; princes acting otherwise, says he, fall under the Pope's
excommunication; no doubt that of the bull _In Cœna Domini_. For my
own part, I ought to confess that I do not find this in Philip de
Commines.... With respect to this second point, it is evident, that
the prince cannot, on his own authority, impose new tributes without
the consent of the nation, whenever this nation shall have acquired by
any of the reasons mentioned a contrary right, which I consider to be
the case in Castile. No one, in fact, will deny that kingdoms at their
commencement have a right to choose their kings on this condition, or
render them such services as to obtain in return that no new imposts
shall be laid on them without their consent. Now, in either case, there
will be a compact made, from which kings cannot depart; and it is of
no consequence, as some imagine it to be, whether they have obtained
their kingdoms through the election of their subjects, or by mere
force of arms. Although it is probable, indeed, that a State yielding
itself of its own accord, will obtain greater privileges and better
conditions than those acquired by a just war, it would not, however,
be impossible for a State, in choosing a king, to confer upon him all
its power in an absolute manner, and without this restriction, with
a view to lay him under greater obligations, and to testify to him a
greater degree of devotedness; and, on the other hand, a king, who had
subjected a kingdom by force of arms, might nevertheless voluntarily
grant it this privilege, with a view to obtain its gratitude, and more
affectionate obedience on its part. The positive rule, therefore, for
this particular right, will be the contract made, whether virtually or
expressly, between the State and the prince; a contract which should be
inviolable, especially if it is sealed by an oath."


_The Prince, or Christian Magistrate._

(Liv. ii. ch. xxxix. § 2.)

"Princes, it is said, may compel their subjects to sell at half-price,
or to give gratuitously, a part of their property. This opinion is
generally founded on the law which ordains that, when a ship in a
tempest has been saved by throwing overboard a part of the cargo, the
proprietors of the remaining part are obliged to make a proportionate
contribution to indemnify the sufferers for the loss they have
sustained. Bartholus and other authors have inferred from this, that
in a time of necessity and famine the monarch may require his subjects
to give gratuitously, and _a fortiori_ to sell at a lower price, a
portion of their property to those in need. The monarch, say they,
might, without any doubt, render property common, as it was before the
establishment of social rights; he may consequently take it from one of
his subjects and give it to another.

"It is certainly said in the laws of the kings of Israel, that he who
should be chosen by God might seize upon the vineyards and property of
his subjects, to confer them on his own servants; but the doctors do
not support their arguments on this text. In fact, as we have said in
chapter 16th, book i., the question does not concern the rights of a
good prince, but the tyrannical acts of a bad one. Now, a careful study
of the Scriptures will shew, that this passage must be favourable to
one or other of the two opinions; for, if it were intended to establish
that kings would possess in conscience the authority set forth in this
passage, they would certainly have the right of seizing the property of
one of their subjects to give it to another. If this passage is merely
meant as a declaration of the injustices, of the extortions, and the
tyrannies of wicked monarchs, it is no less certain that in Scripture
the deed is considered unjust; for this deed is alleged as an example
of what tyrants would do; now if it had been permitted to a good
king, it would not have been quoted as an example of tyranny, as the
Scriptures suppose it.

"Thus, this text alone, even were there no other in support of this
doctrine, would satisfy me, that kings cannot lawfully compel their
subjects to relinquish their property for less than its value, not even
under pretext of the public good. In fact, were this pretext valid, it
would not have been difficult for the kings of Israel to find an excuse
for their tyranny; they might have alleged, that it was important to
the public good to reward servants whose fidelity was so advantageous
to the interests of the kingdom. Further, King Achab might have urged,
that the amusements of the prince formed a part of the public good,
since the people are so much interested in the health of the prince;
and under this pretext might have deprived Naboth of his vineyard in
order to enlarge his gardens. We find, however, that this pretext did
not justify him in compelling Naboth even to sell his vineyard; the
king, although grieved, was not offended by this man's refusal, neither
was it his intention to seize the vineyard, had not the impious Jezabel
furnished him with the means of doing so.

"Reason is evidently in favour of this opinion. Kings are the ministers
of justice, and have been appointed to administer and uphold justice
among the people. As St. Thomas teaches, the contract in buying and
selling is only just in proportion as the price is equivalent to the
thing purchased. Public, it is true, should be preferred to individual
interest; in case, therefore, that a State is in danger of dissolution,
the monarch might demand property at a less price, or even for nothing,
just as he might compel the citizen to expose his life, which is of
still greater value, in defending the common cause in a just war. This
case, however, as P. Molina observes, is impossible, since the monarch
would always be able to indemnify the individual for the loss he
sustained, by levying for this purpose a general tax, a just tribute,
and one that the State would be bound to pay. To prove this still more
clearly, let us imagine the most urgent case possible; let us suppose
that the king is besieged in his capital by a tyrant; the tyrant is
about to enter sword and torch in hand; he offers to raise the siege on
condition of receiving a statue of gold of great value, formerly the
property of his ancestors, which a subject of the besieged king, the
commander-in-chief of his armies, had taken in the plunder of a town,
and made the inalienable property of the eldest son of his family. To
render the case still more pressing, let us suppose that the tyrant has
a dearly-cherished relation in the service of the besieged king, and
that he will be satisfied if a rich lord of the kingdom, possessing
a great number of estates, be despoiled, and his property conferred
on his relation. It cannot be doubted that, in order to purchase the
lives of all, this arrangement might be entered into; and that the king
would be justified in acceding to the demand, in taking the statue, or
even the whole of this property, to confer it on the tyrant's relation.
But no one will assert that the lord should suffer the whole loss. The
State would be under the obligation of indemnifying him for the loss,
by taking upon itself the indemnification, the lord merely contributing
his quota; for this reason, that it would be opposed to natural justice
for the burdens of the whole body to fall upon a single member, which
would be the case according to the law proposed by the opponents. If,
in a case of shipwreck, all the cargo were thrown overboard to save the
ship and the lives and fortunes of all, the obligation being common
to all, it would not be just that it should fall exclusively upon the
owners; because the cargo could best be thrown overboard and most
endangered the ship's safety: the loss should be borne by all, even
by those who had with them things only of little weight, as jewels or
diamonds, for instance; since neither these latter proprietors nor
the vessel herself could be saved without lightening her by throwing
overboard the heavier portion of the cargo.

"The law decrees also that the owner of the vessel shall pay his quota.
Not that he is obliged to indemnify the owners of the merchandise
lost, because he sees them in need; it may be supposed, indeed, that
these parties are rich, and, although their present loss is extreme,
they will nevertheless be under the obligation of returning what would
then have been lent to them; for, as the doctors decide, there is no
obligation of giving to the rich man when he suffers a heavy loss, when
a loan will answer the same end. But it is said that the obligation of
the master of a ship is founded on the fact, that all the passengers
and the proprietors being interested in saving their lives and their
property, the risk and the loss of what was thrown overboard ought to
fall on all, and not exclusively on the owners of what was lost. As a
proof that this is the correct interpretation, it will be sufficient to
notice the summary of the title, and the very words of the law, which
are: _Eo quod id tributum servatæ mercedes deberent_.

"But, except in this case, or in others equally pressing, if the ruin
of the State would not result from the mere fact of an individual
refusing to yield up his house to the prince, the latter could not
compel the proprietor to give it up for a less price than its just
value, and still less for nothing; for so long as the persons and
the property of the State are safe, it is of no importance to the
body corporate whether such or such persons are rich or poor; no
one, in fact, in the general community possesses a fixed degree from
which he can neither descend nor rise. This instability observable
among the members of the same State, some losing what others gain,
and _vice versâ_, is inseparable from the state of society, such is
the instability of temporal affairs; and the public good, generally
speaking, neither loses nor gains by it."


NOTE 39, p. 382.

Some persons imagine, that in speaking of the loss of liberty in Spain,
the question may be readily reduced to one point of view, as if the
kingdom had always possessed the unity which it only acquired in the
eighteenth century, and only then in an incomplete manner. A perusal
of history, and especially of the codes of the different provinces of
which the monarchy was composed, will convince us that the central
power has been created and fortified among us very slowly; and that
at the time when this difficult task was nearly accomplished in
Castile, much still remained to be done in Aragon and Catalonia. Our
constitutions, our customs, our manners, in the seventeenth century,
evidently prove that the monarchy of Philip II., such as we conceive
it, strong and irresistible, was not yet established in the crown of
Aragon. I will abstain from adducing here documents and quoting facts
with which every one is acquainted; the dimensions of this volume
require me to be brief.


NOTE 40, p. 388.

The immortal work of Count de Maistre, in which he so ably refutes
the calumnies of the enemies of the Apostolic See, is well known.
Among so many and such profound observations, there is one deserving
of particular attention: that on the moderation of the Popes in
every thing relating to the extension of their dominions, when he
points out the difference between the Roman and the other European
Courts. "It is," says he, "a very remarkable circumstance, but either
disregarded or not sufficiently attended to, that the Popes have
never taken advantage of the great power in their possession for the
aggrandisement of their States. What could have been more natural, for
instance, or more tempting to human nature, than to reserve a portion
of the provinces conquered from the Saracens, and which they gave up
to the first occupant, to repel the Turkish ascendency, always on the
increase? But this, however, they never did, not even with regard to
the adjacent countries, as in the instance of the Two Sicilies, to
which they had incontestable rights, at least according to the ideas
then prevailing, and over which they were nevertheless contented with
an empty sovereignty, which soon ended in the _haquenée_, a slight
tribute, and merely nominal, which the bad taste of the age still
disputes with them.

"The Popes may have made too much, at the time, of this universal
sovereignty, which an opinion equally universal allowed them. They may
have exacted homage; may indeed, if you will, have too arbitrarily
imposed taxes. I do not wish to enter into these points here, but it
still remains certain that they have never sought to increase their
dominions at the expense of justice, whilst all other governments
fell under this anathema; and, at the present time even, with all
our philosophy, our civilization, and our fine books, there is not
perhaps one of the European powers in a condition to justify all its
possessions before God and reason." (_Du Pape_, book ii. chap. 6.)


NOTE 41, p. 350.

I will here insert some passages in which St. Anselm explains the
motives that induced him to write, and the method which he intended to
follow in his writings.


 _Præfatio beati Anselmi Episcopi Cantuariensis in Monologuium._

Quidam fratres sæpe me studioseque precati sunt, ut quædam de illis,
quæ de meditanda divinitatis essentia, et quibusdam aliis hujus
meditationi cohærentibus, usitato sermone colloquendo protuleram,
sub quodam eis meditationis exemplo describerem. Cujus scilicet
scribendæ meditationis magis secundum suam voluntatem quam secundum rei
facilitatem aut meam possibilitatem hanc mihi formam præstituerunt:
quatenus auctoritate scripturæ penitus nihil in ea persuaderetur.
Sed quidquid per singulas investigationes finis assereret, id ita
esse plano stylo et vulgaribus argumentis simplicique disputatione,
et rationis necessitas breviter cogeret, et veritatis claritas
patenter ostenderet. Voluerunt etiam ut nec simplicibus peneque fatuis
objectionibus mihi occurrentibus obviare contemnerem, quod quidem diu
tentare recusavi, atque me cum re ipsa comparans, multis me rationibus
excusare tentavi. Quanto enim id quod petebant, usu sibi optabant
facilius: tanto mihi illud actu injungebant difficilius. Tandem
tamen victus, tum precum modesta importunitate, tum studii eorum non
contemnenda honestate, invitus quidem propter rei difficultatem, et
ingenii mei imbecillitatem, quod precabantur incæpi, sed libenter
propter eorum caritatem, quantum potui secundum ipsorum definitionem
effeci. Ad quod cum ea spe sim adductus, ut quidquid facerem illis
solis a quibus exigebatur, esset notum, et paulo post idipsum ut vilem
rem fastidientibus, contemptu esset obruendum, scio enim me in eo non
tam precantibus satisfacere potuisse, quam precibus me prosequentibus
finem posuisse. Nescio tamen quomodo sic præter spem evenit, ut non
solum prædicti fratres sed et plures alii scripturam ipsam, quisque
eam sibi transcribendo in longum memoriæ commendare satagerent, quam
ego sæpe tractans nihil potui invenire me in ea dixisse, quod non
catholicorum patrum, et maxime beati Augustini scriptis cohæreat.


 Idem. _Quod hoc licet inexplicabile sit, tamen credendum sit._ (Cap.
 lxii.)

Videtur mihi hujus tam sublimis rei secretum transcendere omnem
intellectus aciem humani: et idcirco conatum explicandi qualiter
hoc sit, continendum puto. Sufficere namque debere existimo rem
incomprehensibilem indaganti si ad hoc rationando pervenerit, ut eam
certissime esse cognoscat, etiamsi penetrare nequeat intellectu quomodo
ita sit, nec idcirco minus his adhibendam fidei certitudinem, quæ
probationibus necessariis nulla alia repugnante ratione asseruntur,
si suæ naturalis altitudinis incomprehensibilitate explicari non
patiantur. Quid autem tam incomprehensibile, quam id quod supra
omnia est? Quapropter si ea quæ de sua essentia hactenus disputata
sunt necessariis rationibus sunt asserta, quamvis sic intellectu
penetrari non possint ut quæ verbis valeant explicari: nullatenus
tamen certitudinis eorum nutat soliditas. Nam si superior consideratio
rationabiliter comprehendit incomprehensibile esse, quomodo eadem summa
sapientia sciat ea quæ fecit de quibus tam multa non scire necesse est;
quis explicet quomodo sciat aut dicat se ipsam, de qua aut nihil, aut
vix aliquid homini sciri possibile est?

Incipit proœmium in Prosologuion librum Anselmi, Abbatis Beccensis, et
Archiepiscopi Cantuariensis.

Postquam opusculum quoddam velut exemplum meditandi de ratione fidei,
cogentibus me precibus quorumdam fratrum in persona alicujus tacite
secum ratiocinando quæ nesciat investigantis edidi, considerans illud
esse multorum concathenatione contextum argumentorum, cœpi mecum
quærere: si forte posset invenire unum argumentum, quod nullo alio
ad se probandum, quam se solo indigeret, et solum ad astruendum quia
Deus vere est; et quia est summum bonum nullo alio indigens, et quo
omnia indigent ut sint et bene sint, et quæcumque credimus de divina
substantia sufficeret. Ad quod cum sæpe studioseque cogitationes
converterem, atque aliquando mihi videretur jam capi posse quod
quærebam, aliquando mentis aciem omnino fugeret: tandem desperans volui
cessare, velut ab inquisitione rei quam inveniri esset impossibile.
Sed cum illam cogitationem, ne mentem meam frustra occupando ab aliis
in quibus proficere possem impediret, penitus a me vellem excludere,
tunc magis ac magis nolenti et defendenti, se cœpit cum importunitate
quadam ingerere. Quadam igitur die cum vehementer ejus importunitati
resistendo fatigarer, in ipso cogitationum conflictu sic se obtulit
quod desperabam, ut studiose cogitationem amplecterer, quam sollicitus
repellebam. Æstimans igitur quod me gaudebam invenisse, si scriptum
esset alicui, legenti placiturum. De hoc ipso et quibusdam aliis
sub persona conantis erigere mentem suam ad contemplandum Deum,
et quærentis intelligere quod credit, subditum scripsi opusculum.
Et quoniam nec istud nec illud cujus supra memini, dignum libri
nomine, aut cui auctoris præponeretur nomen judicabam: nec tamen sine
aliquo titulo, quo aliquem in cujus manus venirent, quodammodo ad
se legendum invitarent, dimittenda putabam, unicuique dedi titulum:
ut prius exemplum meditandi de ratione fidei, et sequens fides
quærens intellectum diceretur. Sed cum jam a pluribus et his titulis
utrumque transumptum esset, coegerunt me plures et maxime reverendus
Archiepiscopus Lugdunensis Hugo nomine, fungens in Gallia legatione
apostolica, prœcepit auctoritate, ut nomen meum illis præscriberem.
Quod ut aptius fieret illud quidem Monologuium, id est Soliloquium,
istud vero Prosologuion, id est Alloquium nominavi.

       *       *       *       *       *

I have said that St. Anselm excelled Descartes in his manner of proving
the existence of God: let the reader, indeed, peruse the following
passages. I do not, however, intend to pronounce an opinion on the
merits of this demonstration; my business is, to notice the progress of
the human mind, and not to resolve philosophical questions.


PROSOLOGUIUM D. ANSELMI.

 _Quod Deus non possit cogitari non esse._

Quod utique sic vere est, ut nec cogitari possit non esse. Nam potest
cogitari esse aliquid, quod non possit cogitari non esse, quod majus
est quam quod non esse cogitari potest. Quare si id, quo majus nequit
cogitari, potest cogitari non esse: id ipsum, quo majus cogitari
nequit, non est id quo majus cogitari nequit; quod convenire non
potest. Sic ergo vere est aliquid, quo majus cogitari non potest,
ut nec cogitari possit non esse. Et hoc es tu, Domine Deus noster.
Sic ergo vere es, Domine Deus meus, ut nec cogitari possis non esse.
Et merito. Si enim aliqua mens posset cogitare aliquid melius te,
ascenderet creatura super Creatorem; et judicaret de Creatore, quod
valde est absurdum. Et quidem quidquid est aliud præter solum te,
potest cogitari non esse. Solus igitur verissime omnium, et ideo maxime
omnium habes esse, quia quidquid aliud est non sic vere est, et idcirco
minus habet esse. Cur itaque, _dixit insipiens in corde suo non est
Deus?_ Cum causa in promptu sit rationali menti, te maxime omnium esse?
Cur, nisi stultus et insipiens?


 _Quomodo insipiens dixit in corde suo quod cogitari non potest._ (Cap.
 iv.)

Verum quomodo dixit insipiens in corde suo quod cogitare non potuit,
aut quomodo cogitare non potuit quod dixit in corde, cum idem sit
dicere in corde, et cogitare. Quod si vere, imo quia vere, et
cogitavit: quia dixit in corde et non dixit in corde, quia cogitare non
potuit; non uno tantum modo dicitur aliquid in corde vel cogitatur.
Aliter enim cogitatur res, cum vox eam significans cogitatur: aliter
cum idipsum, quod res est, intelligitur. Illo itaque modo, potest
cogitari Deus non esse: isto vero, minime. Nullus quippe intelligens id
quod Deus est, potest cogitare quia Deus non est; licet hæc verba dicat
in corde, aut sine ulla, aut cum aliqua extranea significatione. Deus
enim, est id quo majus cogitari non potest. Quod qui bene intelligit,
utique intelligit id ipsum sic esse, ut nec cogitatione queat non
esse. Qui ergo intelligit sic esse Deum, nequit eum non esse cogitare.
Gratias tibi, bone Domine, gratias tibi, quia quod prius credidi te
donante, jam sic intelligo te illuminante; ut si te esse nolim credere,
non possim non intelligere.


 _Ejusdem beati Anselmi liber pro insipiente incipit._

Dubitanti, utrum sit; vel neganti quod sit aliqua talis natura, qua
nihil majus cogitari possit; tamen esse illam, huic dicitur primo
probari; quod ipse negans vel ambigens de illa, jam habeat eam in
intellectu, cum audiens illam dici, id quod dicitur intelligit: deinde,
quia quod intelligit necesse est, ut non in solo intellectu, sed etiam
in re sit. Et hoc ita probatur; quia majus est esse in intellectu et in
re, quam in solo intellectu. Et si illud in solo est intellectu, majus
illo erit quidquid etiam fuerit in re, at si majus omnibus, minus erit
aliquo, et non erit majus omnibus quod utique repugnat. Et ideo necesse
est ut, majus omnibus, quod est jam probatum esse in intellectu, et
in re sit; quoniam aliter majus omnibus esse non poterit. Responderi
potest, quod hoc jam esse dicitur in intellectu meo, non ob aliud, nisi
quia id quod dicitur intelligo.

       *       *       *       *       *

The passages I have just quoted will have shewn to my readers that
thought was not oppressed in the Catholic Church. The most eminent
doctors were accustomed to reason on the most important subjects
with a just and reasonable independence; and although with profound
respect for the teaching of the Catholic Church, they nevertheless
surveyed, as well as Abelard and better, the field of true philosophy.
We cannot expect from human intelligence at this epoch more than is
to be found in St. Anselm. How is it, therefore, that such eulogiums
have been passed upon Roscelin and Abelard, without ever mentioning
this holy doctor? Why present a picture of the intellectual movement so
incomplete, and not insert in it so noble and beautiful a figure?

If you would know how incorrect it is that Abelard, as M. Guizot
affirms, abstained from attacking the doctrines of the Church--how
incorrect M. Guizot is in his statement of the causes which excited the
zeal of the pastors of the Church against Abelard, read the letter of
the Bishops of Gaul to Pope Innocent, in which you will find a complete
recital of the origin and cause of this important affair. Here is the
letter:


EPISTOLA CCCLXX.

 _Reverendissimo Patri et Domino, INNOCENTIO, Dei gratia summo
 Pontifici, Henricus Senonensium Archiepiscopus, Carnotensis Episcopus,
 Sanctæ Sedis Apostolicæ famulus, Aurelianensis, Antissiodorensis,
 Trecensis, Meldensis Episcopi, devotas orationes et debitam
 obedientiam._

Nulli dubium est quod ea quæ Apostolica firmantur auctoritate, rata
semper existunt; nec alicujus possunt deinceps mutilari cavillatione,
vel invidia depravari. Ea propter ad vestram Apostolicam Sedem,
Beatissime Pater, referre dignum censuimus quædam quæ nuper in
nostra contigit tractari præsentia. Quæ quoniam et nobis, et multis
religiosis ac sapientibus viris rationabiliter acta visa sunt, vestræ
serenitatis expectant comprobari judicio, simul et auctoritate perpetuo
roborari. Itaque cum per totam fere Galliam in civitatibus, vicis, et
castellis, a Scholaribus non solum intra Scholas, sed etiam triviatim:
nec a litteratis, aut provectis tantum, sed a pueris et simplicibus,
aut certe stultis, de Sancta Trinitate, quæ Deus est, disputaretur:
insuper alia multa ab eisdem, absona prorsus et absurda, et plane fidei
catholicæ, sanctorumque Patrum auctoritatibus obviantia proferrentur;
cumque ab his qui sane sentiebant, et eas ineptias rejiciendas esse
censebant, sæpius admoniti corriperentur, vehementius convalescebant,
et auctoritate magistri sui Petri Abailardi, et cujusdam ipsius libri,
cui _Theologiæ_ indiderat nomen; nec non et aliorum ejusdem opusculorum
freti ad astruendas profanas adinventiones illas, non sine multarum
animarum dispendio, sese magis ac magis armabant. Quæ enim et nos, et
alios plures non parum moverant ac læserant; inde tamen quæstionem
facere verebantur.

Verum Dominus Abbas Claræ-vallis, his a diversis et sæpius auditis,
immo certe in prætaxato magistri Petri _Theologiæ_ libro, nec non et
aliis ejusdem libris, in quorum forte lectionem inciderat, diligenter
inspectis; secreto prius; ac deinde secum duobus aut tribus adhibitis
testibus, juxta Evangelicum præceptum, hominem convenit: Et ut
auditores suos a talibus compesceret, librosque suos corrigeret,
amicabiliter satis ac familiariter illum admonuit. Plures etiam
Scholarium adhortatus est, ut et libros venenis plenos repudiarent
et rejicerent: et a doctrina, quæ fidem lædebat Catholicam, caverent
et abstinerent. Quod magister Petrus minus patienter et nimium ægre
ferens, crebro nos pulsare cœpit, nec ante voluit desistere, quoad
Dominum Clara-vellensem Abbatem super hoc scribentes, assignato die,
scilicet octavo Pentecostes, Senonis ante nostram submonuimus venire
præsentiam: quo se vocabat et offerebat paratum magister Petrus ad
probandas et defendendas de quibus illum Dominus Abbas Clara-vallensis,
quomodo prætaxatum est, reprehenderat sententias. Cæterum Dominus
Abbas, nec ad assignatum diem se venturum, nec contra Petrum sese
disceptaturum nobis remandavit. Sed quia magister Petrus interim suos
nihilominus cœpit undequaque convocare discipulos; et obsecrare, ut ad
futuram inter se, Dominumque Abbatem Clara-vallensem disputationem,
una cum illo suam sententiam simul et scientiam defensuri venirent; Et
hoc Dominum Clara-vallensem minime lateret; veritus ipse, ne propter
occasionem absentiæ suæ tot profanæ, non sententiæ sed insaniæ, tam
apud minus intelligentes, quam earumdem defensores majore dignæ
viderentur auctoritate, prædicto quem sibi designaveramus die, licet
eum minime suscepisset, tactus zelo pii fervoris, imo certe Sancti
Spiritus igne succensus, sese nobis ultro Senonis præsentavit. Illa
vero die, scilicet octava Pentecostes, convenerant ad nos Senonis
Fratres et Suffraganei nostri Episcopi, ob honorem et reverentiam
sanctarum, quas in Ecclesia nostra populo revelaturos nos indixeramus,
Reliquiarum.

Itaque præsente glorioso Rege Francorum Ludovico cum Wilhelmo religioso
Nivernis Comite, Domino quoque Rhemensi Archiepiscopo, cum quibusdam
suis suffraganeis Episcopis nobis etiam, et suffraganeis nostris,
exceptis Parisiis et Nivernis, Episcopis præsentibus, cum multis
religiosis Abbatibus et sapientibus, valdeque litteratis clericis
adfuit Dominus Abbas Clara-vallensis; adfuit magister Petrus cum
fautoribus suis. Quid multa? Dominus Abbas cum librum Theologiæ
magistri Petri proferret in medium, et quæ annotaverat absurda, imo
hæretica plane capitula de libro eodem proponeret, ut ea magister
Petrus vel a se scripta negaret, vel si sua fateretur, aut probaret,
aut corrigeret: visus est diffidere magister Petrus Abailardus, et
subterfugere, respondere noluit, sed quamvis libera sibi daretur
audientia, tutumque locum, et æquos haberet judices, ad vestram tamen,
sanctissime Pater, appellans præsentiam, cum suis a conventu discessit.

Nos autem licet appellatio ista, minus Canonica videretur, Sedi tamen
Apostolicæ deferentes, in personam hominis nullam voluimus proferre
sententiam: Cæterum sententias pravi dogmatis ipsius, quia multo
infecerant, et sui contagione adusque cordium intima penetraverant,
sæpe in audientia publica lectas et relectas, et tam verissimis
rationibus, quam Beati Augustini, aliorumque Sanctorum Patrum inductis
a Domino Clara-vallensi auctoritatibus, non solum falsas, sed et
hæreticas esse evidentissime comprobatas, pridie ante factam ad vos
appellationem damnavimus. Et quia multos in errorem perniciosissimum
et plane damnabilem pertrahunt, eas auctoritate vestra, dilectissime
Domine, perpetua damnatione notari; et omnes qui pervicaciter et
contentiose illas defenderint, a vobis, æquissime Pater, juxta pœna
mulctari unanimiter et multa precum instantia postulamus.

Sæpe dicto vero Petro, si Reverentia vestra silentium imponeret, et tam
legendi, quam scribendi prorsus interrumperet facultatem, et libros
ejus perverso sine dubio dogmate respersos condemnaret, avulsis spinis
et tribulis ab Ecclesia Dei, prevaleret adhuc læta Christi seges
succrescere, florere, fructificare. Quædam autem de condemnatis a nobis
capitulis vobis, Reverende Pater, conscripta transmisimus, ut per hæc
audita reliqui corpus operis facilius æstimetis.

Observe how St Bernard explains the system and errors of the celebrated
Abelard. In chapter 1 of the treatise which he wrote, _De erroribus
Petri Abailardi_, he says:

"Habemus in Francia novum de veteri magistro Theologum, qui ab ineunte
ætate sua in arte dialectica lusit; et nunc in scripturis sanctis
insanit. Olim damnata et sopita dogmata, tam sua videlicet quam aliena
suscitare conatur, insuper et nova addit. Qui dum omnium quæ sunt cœlo
sursum, et quæ in terra deorsum, nihil præter solum Nescio nescire
dignatur; ponit in cœlum os suum, et scrutatur alta Dei, rediensque
ad nos refert verba ineffabilia, quæ non licet homini loqui. Et
dum paratus est de omnibus reddere rationem, etiam quæ sunt supra
rationem, et contra rationem præsumit, et contra fidem. Quid enim magis
contra rationem, quam ratione rationem conari transcendere? Et quid
magis contra fidem; quam credere nolle, quidquid non possit ratione
attingere?"

In chapter 4, he sums up, in a few words, the aberrations of the
dialectician:

"Sed advertite cætera. Omitto quod dicit spiritum timoris Domini
non fuisse in Domino: timorem Domini castum in future seculo non
futurum: post consecrationem panis et calicis priora accidentia quæ
remanent pendere in aere: dæmonum in nobis suggestiones contactu
fieri lapidum et herbarum, prout illorum sagax malitia novit; harum
rerum vires diversas, diversis incitandis et incendendis vitiis,
convenire: Spiritum Sanctum esse animam mundi: mundum juxta Platonem
tanto excellentius animal esse, quanto meliorem animam habet Spiritum
Sanctum. Ubi dum multum sudat quomodo Platonem faciat Christianum, se
probat ethnicum. Hæc inquam omnia, aliasque istiusmodi nænias ejus
non paucas prætereo, venio ad graviora. Non quod vel ad ipsa cuncta
respondeam, magnis enim opus voluminibus esset. Illa loquor quæ tacere
non possum.

"Cum de Trinitate loquitur," says he in his letter 192, "sapit Arium,
cum de Gratia sapit Pelagium, cum de persona Christi sapit Nestorium."

Pope Innocent, condemning the doctrines of Abelard, says: "In Petri
Abailardi perniciosa doctrina, et prædictorum hæreses, et alia perversa
dogmata catholicæ fidei obviantia pullulare cœperunt."




APPENDIX.


NOTE (a), p. 289.

Quod necesse est homines simul viventes ab aliquo diligenter regi.

Et siquidem homini conveniret singulariter vivere, sicut multis
animalium, nullo alio dirigente indigeret ad finem, sed ipse sibi
unusquisque esset rex sub Deo summo rege, in quantum per lumen rationis
divinitus datum sibi, in suis actibus seipsum dirigeret. Naturale
autem est homini ut sit animal sociale, et politicum, in multitudine
vivens, magis etiam quam omnia alia animalia; quod quidem naturalis
necessitas declarat. Aliis enim animalibus natura præparavit cibum,
tegumenta pilorum, defensionem, ut dentes, cornua, ungues, vel saltem
velocitatem ad fugam. Homo autem institutus est nullo horum sibi a
natura præparato, sed loco omnium data est ei ratio, per quam sibi hæc
omnia officio manuum posset præparare, ad quæ omnia præparanda unus
homo non sufficit. Nam unus homo per se sufficienter vitam transigere
non posset. Est igitur homini naturale, quod in societate multorum
vivat. Amplius, aliis animalibus insita est naturalis industria ad
omnia ea quæ sunt eis utilia vel nociva, sicut ovis naturaliter extimet
lupum inimicum. Quædam etiam animalia ex naturali industria cognoscunt
aliquas herbas medicinales, et alia eorum vitæ necessaria. Homo autem
horum, quæ sunt suæ vitæ necessaria, naturalem cognitionem habet solum
in communi, quasi eo per rationem valente ex universalibus principiis
ad cognitionem singulorum, quæ necessaria sunt humanæ vitæ, pervenire.
Non est autem possibile, quod unus homo ad omnia hujusmodi per suam
rationem pertingat. Est igitur necessarium homini, quod in multitudine
vivat, et unus ab alio adjuvetur, et diversi diversis inveniendis
per rationem occuparentur, puta, unus in medicina, alius in hoc,
alius in alio. Hoc etiam evidentissime declaratur per hoc, quod est
proprium hominis locutione uti, per quam unus homo aliis suum conceptum
totaliter potest exprimere. Alia quidem animalia exprimunt mutuo
passiones suas, in communi, ut canis in latratu iram, et alia animalia
passiones suas diversis modis. Magis igitur homo est communicativus
alteri, quam quodcumque aliud animal, quod gregale videtur, ut grus,
formica, et apis. Hoc ergo considerans Salomon in Ecclesiaste ait:
"Melius est esse duos, quam unum. Habent enim emolumentum mutuæ
societatis." Si ergo naturale est homini quod in societate multorum
vivat, necesse est in hominibus esse, per quod multitudo regatur.
Multis enim existentibus hominibus et uno quoque id quod est sibi
congruum providente, multitudo in diversa dispergeretur, nisi etiam
esset aliquis de eo quod ad bonum multitudinis pertinet, curam habens,
sicut et corpus hominis, et cujuslibet animalis deflueret, nisi esset
aliqua vis regitiva communis in corpore, quæ ad bonum commune omnium
membrorum intenderet. Quod considerans Salomon dicit: "Ubi non est
gubernator, dissipabitur populus." Hoc autem rationabiliter accidit:
non enim idem est quod proprium, et quod commune. Secundum propria
quidem differunt, secundum autem commune uniuntur: diversorum autem
diversæ sunt causæ. Oportet igitur præter id quod movet ad proprium
bonum uniuscujusque, esse aliquid, quod movet ad bonum commune
multorum. Propter quod et in omnibus quæ in unum ordinantur, aliquid
invenitur alterius regitivum. In universitate enim corporum, per primum
corpus, scilicet celeste, alia corpora ordine quodam divinæ providentiæ
reguntur, omniaque corpora, per creaturam rationalem. In uno etiam
homine anima regit corpus, atque inter animæ partes irascibilis et
concupiscibilis ratione reguntur. Itemque inter membra corporis unum
est principale, quod omnia movet, ut cor, aut caput. Oportet igitur
esse in omni multitudine aliquod regitivum. (D. Th., Opusc. de Regimine
Principum, l. i. cap. 1.)


NOTE (b), p. 290.

Ubi considerandum est, quod dominium, vel prælatio introducta sunt
ex jure humano: distinctio autem fidelium et infidelium est ex jure
divino. Jus autem divinum quod est ex gratia, non tollit jus humanum
quod est ex naturali ratione; ideo distinctio fidelium et infidelium
secundum se considerata, non tollit dominium, et prælationem infidelium
supra fideles. (2. 2. quest. 10, art. 10.)


NOTE (c), p. 290.

Respondeo dicendum quod sicut supra dictum est (quest. 10, art. 10),
infidelitas secundum se ipsam non repugnat dominio, eo quod dominium
introductum est de jure gentium, quod est jus humanum. Distinctio autem
fidelium et infidelium est secundum jus divinum, per quod non tollitur
jus humanum. (2. 2. quest. 12, art. 2.)


NOTE (d), p. 290.

Respondeo dicendum quod sicut actiones rerum naturalium procedunt ex
potentiis naturalibus: ita etiam operationes humanæ procedunt ex humana
voluntate. Oportuit autem in rebus naturalibus, ut superiora moverent
inferiora ad suas actiones per excellentiam naturalis virtutis collatæ
divinitus. Unde et oportet in rebus humanis, quod superiores moveant
inferiores per suam voluntatem ex vi auctoritatis divinitus ordinatæ.
Movere autem per rationem et voluntatem est præcipere; et ideo sicut ex
ipso ordine naturali divinitus instituto inferiora in rebus naturalibus
necesse habent subjici motioni superiorum, ita etiam in rebus humanis
ex ordine juris naturalis et divini, tenentur inferiores suis
superioribus obedire. (2. 2. quest. 105, art. 1.)


NOTE (e), p. 291.

Obedire autem superiori debitum est secundum divinum ordinem rebus
inditum ut ostensum est. (2. 2. quest. 104, art. 2.)


NOTE (f), p. 291.

Respondeo dicendum quod fides Christi est justitiæ principium, et
causa, secundum illud Rom. iii. "Justitia Dei per fidem Jesu Christi;"
et ideo per fidem Christi non tollitur ordo justitiæ sed magis
firmatur. Ordo autem justitiæ requirit, ut inferiores suis superioribus
obediant: aliter enim non posset humanarum rerum status conservari.
Et ideo per fidem Christi non excusantur fideles, quin principibus
secularibus obedire teneantur. (2. 2. quest. 105, art. 6.)


NOTE (g), p. 291.

Certum est politicam potestatem a Deo esse a quo non nisi res bonæ et
licitæ procedunt, et quod probat Aug. in toto fere 4 et 5 libr. de
Civit. Dei. Nam sapientia Dei clamat, Proverb. viii.: Per me reges
regnant; et infra: Per me principes imperant. Et Daniel ii.: Deus cœli
regnum et imperium dedit tibi, &c.; et Daniel iv.: Cum bestiis ferisque
erit habitatio tua, et fenum, ut bos comedes, et rore cœli infunderis:
septem quoque tempora mutabuntur super te, donec scias quod dominetur
Excelsus super regnum hominum, et cuicumque voluerit, det illud. (Bell.
de Laicis, l. iii. c. 6.)


NOTE (h), p. 291.

Sed hic observanda sunt aliqua. Primo politicam potestatem in
universum consideratam, non descendendo in particulari ad monarchiam,
aristocratiam, vel democratiam immediate esse a solo Deo; nam
consequitur necessario naturam hominis, proinde esse ab illo, qui fecit
naturam hominis; præterea hæc potestas est de jure naturæ, non enim
pendet ex consensu hominum, nam velint, nolint, debent regi ab aliquo,
nisi velint perire humanum genus, quod est contra naturæ inclinationem.
At jus naturæ est jus divinum, jure igitur divino introducta est
gubernatio, et hoc videtur proprie velle Apostolus, cum dicit Rom.
xiii: Qui potestati resistit, Dei ordinationi resistit. (Ib.)


NOTE (i), p. 292.

Secundo nota, hanc potestatem immediate esse tanquam in subjecto, in
tota multitudine, nam hæc potestas est de jure divino. At jus divinum
nulli homini particulari dedit hanc potestatem, ergo dedit multitudini;
præterea sublato jure positivo, non est major ratio cur ex multis
æqualibus unus potius, quam alius dominetur: igitur potestas totius est
multitudinis. Denique humana societas debet esse perfecta respublica,
ergo debet habere potestatem se ipsam conservandi, et proinde puniendi
perturbatores pacis, &c. (Ib.)

NOTE (k), p. 293.

Tertio nota, hanc potestatem transferri a multitudine in unum vel
plures eodem jure naturæ: nam Respub. non potest per seipsam exercere
hanc potestatem, ergo tenetur eam transferre in aliquem unum vel
aliquos paucos; et hoc modo potestas principum in genere considerata,
est etiam de jure naturæ, et divino; nec posset genus humanum, etiamsi
totum simul conveniret, contrarium statuere, nimirum, ut nulli essent
principes vel rectores. (Ib.)


NOTE (l), p. 293.

Quarto nota, in particulari singulas species regiminis esse de jure
gentium, non de jure naturæ; nam pendet a consensu multitudinis,
constituere super se regem vel consules, vel alios magistratus, ut
patet: et si causa legitima adsit, potest multitudo mutare regnum in
aristocratiam, aut democratiam, et e contrario ut Romæ factum legimus.

Quinto nota, ex dictis sequi, hanc potestatem in particulari esse
quidem a Deo, sed mediante consilio, et electione humana, ut
alia omnia, quæ ad jus gentium pertinent, jus enim gentium est
quasi conclusio deducta ex jure naturæ per humanum discursum. Ex
quo colliguntur duæ differentiæ inter potestatem politicam, et
ecclesiasticam: una ex parte subjecti, nam politica est in multitudine,
ecclesiastica in uno homine tanquam in subjecto immediate; altera ex
parte efficientis, quod politica universe considerata est de jure
divino, in particulari considerata est de jure gentium; ecclesiastica
omnibus modis est de jure divino, et immediate a Deo. (Ib.)


NOTE (m), p. 294.

In hac re communis sententia videtur esse, hanc potestatem dari
immediate a Deo ut auctore naturæ, ita ut homines quasi disponant
materiam et efficiant subjectum capax hujus potestatis; Deus autem
quasi tribuat formam dando hanc potestatem. Cita a Cajet. Covar.
Victor. y Soto. (De Leg. l. iii. c. 3.)


NOTE (n), p. 294.

Secundo sequitur ex edictis, potestatem civilem, quoties in uno homine,
vel principe reperitur, legitimo, ac ordinario jure, a populo, et
communitate manasse, vel proxime vel remote, nec posse aliter haberi,
ut justa sit. (Ibid. cap. 4.)


NOTE (o), p. 294.

Defensio Fidei Catholicæ et Apostolicæ adversus Anglicanæ sectæ
errores, cum responsione ad apologiam pro juramento fidelitatis et
præfationem monitoriam serenissimi Jacobi Angliæ Regis, Authore P.
D. Francisco Suario Gratanensi, e Societate Jesu, Sacræ Theologiæ in
celebri Conimbricensi Academia Primario Professore, ad serenissimos
totius Christiani orbis Catholicos Reges ac Principes.

Lib. 3. De Primatu Summi Pontificis, cap. 2. Utrum Principatus
politicus sit immediate a Deo, seu ex divina institutione.

..... In qua rex serenissimus non solum novo, et singulari modo opinatur,
sed etiam acriter invehitur in Cardinalem Bellarminum, eo quod
asseruerit, non regibus authoritatem a Deo _immediate_, perinde ac
pontificibus esse concessam. Asserit ergo ipse, regem non a populo,
sed _immediate_ a Deo suam potestatem habere; suam vero sententiam
quibusdam argumentis, et exemplis suadere conatur, quorum efficaciam in
sequenti capite expendemus.

_Sed quamquam controversia hæc ad fidei dogmata directe non pertineat_
(_nihil enim ex divina Scriptura, aut Patrum traditione in illa
definitum ostendi potest_), nihilominus diligenter tractanda, et
explicanda est. Tum quia potest esse occasio errandi in aliis
dogmatibus; tum etiam quia prædicta regis sententia, prout ab ipso
asseritur et intenditur, nova et singularis est, et ad exaggerandam
temporalem potestatem, et spiritualem extenuandam videtur inventa. Tum
denique quia sententiam illustrissimi Bellarmini _antiquam, receptam,
veram, ac necessariam esse censemus_.


NOTE (p), p. 295.

R. P. Hermanni Busembaum Societatis Jesu Theologia Moralis, nunc
pluribus partibus aucta a R. P. D. Alphonso de Ligorio Rectore majore
congregationis SS. Redemptoris; adjuncta in calce operis, præter
indicem rerum, et verborum locupletissimum, perutili instructione ad
praxim confessariorium Latine reddita.

Lib. 1, Tract. 2. De legibus, cap. 1. De natura, et obligatione legis.
Dub. 2.

104. Certum est dari in hominibus potestatem ferendi leges; sed
potestas hæc quoad leges civiles a natura nemini competit, nisi
communitati hominum, et ab hac transfertur in unum, vel in plures, a
quibus communitas regatur.


NOTE (q), p. 295.

Theologia Christiana Dogmatico-Moralis Auctore P. F. Daniele Concina
ordinis Prædicatorum. Editio novissima, tomus sextus, de Jure nat. et
gent., &c. Romæ, 1768.

Lib. 1. De Jure natur. et gent., &c. Dissertatio 4, De leg. hum. C. 2.

Summæ potestatis originem a Deo communiter arcessunt scriptores omnes.
Idque declaravit Salomon, Prov. viii. "Per me reges regnant, et legum
conditores justa decernunt." Et profecto quemadmodum inferiores
principes a summa majestate, ita summa majestas terrena a supremo Rege,
Dominoque dominantium pendeat necesse est. Illud in disputationem
vocant tum theologi, tum jurisconsulti, sit ne a Deo proxime, an tantum
remote hæc potestas summa? Immediate a Deo haberi contendunt plures,
quod ab hominibus neque conjunctim, neque sigillatim acceptis haberi
possit. Omnes enim patres familias æquales sunt, solaque œconomica
in propias familias potestate fruuntur. Ergo civilem politicamque
potestatem, qua ipsi carent, conferre aliis nequeunt. Tum si potestas
summa a communitate, tanquam a superiore, uni, aut pluribus collata
esset, revocari ad nutum ejusdem communitatis posset; cum superior pro
arbitrio retractare communicatam potestatem valeat; quod in magnum
societatis detrimentum recideret.

Contra disputant alii, et _quidem probabilius ac verius_, advertentes
omnem quidem potestatem a Deo esse; sed addunt, non transferri in
particulares homines immediate, sed mediante societatis civilis
consensu. Quod hæc potestas sit immediate, non in aliquo singulari,
sed in tota hominum collectione, docet conceptis verbis S. Thomas
1. 2. qu. 90. art. 3 ad 2. et qu. 97. art. 3 ad 3 quem sequuntur
Dominicus Soto, lib. 1. qu. 1. art. 3. Ledesma 2. Part. qu. 18. art.
3. Covarruvias in pract. cap. 1. Ratio evidens est: quia omnes homines
nascuntur liberi, respectu civilis imperii; ergo nemo in alterum civili
potestate potitur. Neque ergo in singulis, neque in aliquo determinato
potestas hæc reperitur. Consequitur ergo in tota hominum collectione
eamdem extare. Quæ potestas non confertur a Deo per aliquam actionem
peculiarem a creatione distinctam; sed est veluti proprietas ipsam
rectam rationem consequens, quatenus recta ratio præscribit ut homines
in unum moraliter congregati, expresso aut tacito concensu modum
dirigendæ, conservandæ, propugnandæque societatis præscribant.


NOTE (r), p. 296.

Hinc infertur, potestatem residentem in principe, rege, vel in
pluribus, aut optimatibus, aut plebeiis, ab ipsa communitate aut
proxime, aut remote proficisci. Nam potestas hæc a Deo immediate non
est. Id enim nobis constare peculiari revelatione deberet; quemadmodum
scimus, Saulem et Davidem electos a Deo fuisse. Ab ipsa ergo
communitate dimanet oportet.

Falsam itaque reputamus opinionem illam quæ asserit, potestatem hanc
immediate et proxime a Deo conferri regi, principi, et cuique supremæ
potestati, excluso Reipublicæ tacito, aut expresso consensu. Quamquam
lis hæc verborum potius quam rei est. Nam potestas hæc a Deo auctore
naturæ est, quatenus disposuit, et ordinavit ut ipsa Respublica pro
societatis conservatione, et defensione, uni, aut pluribus supremam
regiminis potestatem conferret. Immo facta designatione imperantis, aut
imperantium, potestas hæc a Deo manare dicitur, quatenus jure naturali,
et divino tenetur, societas ipsa parere imperanti. Quoniam reipsa Deus
ordinavit ut per unum, aut per plures hominum societas regatur. Et
hac via omnia conciliantur placita: et oracula Scripturarum vero in
sensu exponuntur. Qui resistit potestati, Dei ordinationi resistit. Et
iterum: Non est potestas nisi a Deo: ad Rom. viii. Et Petrus Epist. 1,
cap. ii. Subjecti igitur estote omni humanæ creaturæ propter Deum: sive
Regi, &c. Item Joan. xix. Non haberes potestatem adversum me ullam,
nisi tibi datum esset desuper. Quæ, alia testimonia evincunt, omnia
a Deo, supremo rerum omnium moderatore, disponi, et ordinari. At non
propterea humana consilia, et operationes excluduntur; ut sapienter
interpretantur S. Augustinus tract. 6, in Joan. et lib. 22. cont.
Faustum, cap. 47, et S. Joannes Chrysostomus Hom. 23, in Epist. ad Rom.


NOTE (s), p. 296.

Quinam possint ferre leges? Dico 1. Potestas legislativa competit
communitati vel illi, qui curam communitatis gerit. (Ibid. art. 3. 0.)

Prob. 1. Ex Isidoro L. 5. Etymol. C. 10 et refertur C. Lex, Dist. 4.
ubi dicit: Lex est constitutio populi, secundum quam majores natu simul
cum plebibus aliquid sanxerunt. (Ibid. in art. 1. 0.)

Prob. 1. Ratione. (Ibid. 0.) Illius est condere legem, cujus est
prospicere bono communi; quia, ut dictum est, leges feruntur propter
bonum commune: atqui est communis, vel illius, cui curam communitatis
habet, prospicere bono communi: sicut enim bonum particulare est
finis proportionatus agenti particulari, ita bonum commune est finis
proportionatus communitati, vel ejus vices gerenti; ergo. Confirmatur:
(Ibid. ad 2.) lex habet vim imperandi et coercendi; atqui nemo privatus
habet vim imperandi multitudini et eam coercendi, sed sola ipsa
multitudo, vel ejus Rector: Ergo. (Tract. de Legi. Art. 4.)


NOTE (t), p. 296.

Dices: Superioris est imperare et coercere; atqui communitas non
est sibi superior: Ergo R. D. Min. Communitas, sub eodem respectu
considerata, non est sibi superior, C. Sub diverso respectu, N. Potest
itaque communitas considerari collective, per modum unius corporis
moralis, et sic considerata est superior sibi consideratæ distributive
in singulis membris. Item potest considerari vel ut gerit vices Dei,
a quo omnis potestas legislativa descendit, juxta illud Proverb. Per
me reges regnant, et legum conditores justa decernunt; vel ut est
gubernabilis in ordine ad bonum commune: primo modo considerata est
superior et legislativa; secundo modo considerata est inferior et legis
susceptiva.


NOTE (u), p. 297.

Quod ut clarius percipiatur, observandum est hominem inter animalia
nasci maxime destitutum pluribus tum corporis cum animæ necessariis,
pro quibus indiget aliorum consortio et adjutorio, consequenter eum
ipsapte natura nasci animal sociale: societas autem quam natura,
naturalisve ratio dictat ipsi necessariam, diu subsistere non potest,
nisi aliqua publica potestate gubernetur; juxta illud Proverb. Ubi
non est gubernator, populus corruet. Ex quo sequitur, quod Deus,
qui dedit talem naturam, simul ei dederit potestatem gubernativam
et legislativam, qui enim dat formam, dat etiam ea, quæ hæc forma
necessario exigit. Verum, quia hæc potestas gubernativa et legislativa
non potest exerceri a tota multitudine; difficile namque foret,
omnes et singulos simul convenire toties quoties providendum est de
necessariis bono communi, et de legibus ferendis; ideo solet multitudo
transferre suum jus seu potestatem gubernativam, vel in aliquos de
populo ex omni conditione, et dicitur Democratia; vel in paucos
optimates, et dicitur Aristocratia; vel in unum tantum, sive pro se
solo, sive pro successoribus jure hæreditario, et dicitur Monarchia. Ex
quo sequitur, omnem potestatem esse a Deo, ut dicit Apost. Rom. xiii.
immediate quidem et jure naturæ in communitate, mediate autem tantum et
jure humano in Regibus et aliis Rectoribus: nisi Deus ipse immediate
aliquibus hanc potestatem conferat, ut contulit Moysi in populum
Israel, et Christus SS. Pontifici in totam Ecclesiam.

_Hanc potestatem legislativam_ in Christianos, _maxime justos, non
agnoscunt, Lutherani et Calvinistæ, secuti in hoc Valdenses, Wicleffum,
et Joan. Hus damnatos in Conc. Constant. sess. 6. can. 15. Et quamvis
Joannes Hus eam agnosceret in principibus bonis, eam tamen denegabat
malis, pariter ideo damnatus in eodem Concil. sess. 8._


NOTE (x), p. 297.

Compendium Salmatic. authore R. P. F. R. Antonio a S. Joseph olim
Lectore, priore ac examinatore Synodali in suo collegio Burgensi, nunc
procuratore generali in Romana Curia pro Carmelitarum Discalceatorum
Hispanica Congregatione. Romæ, 1779. Superiorum permissu. Tractatus 3,
De Legibus, cap. 2. De potestate ferendi leges.

Punctum 1. De potestate legislativa civili.

Inq. 1. An detur in hominibus potestas condendi leges civiles? R.
Affirm. constat ex illo Prov. viii. Per me reges regnant, et legum
conditores justa decernunt. Idem patet ex Apost. ad Rom. xiii. et
tanquam de fide est definitum in Conc. Const. sess. 8, et ultima.
Prob. ration. quia ad conservationem boni communis requiritur publica
potestas, qua communitas gubernetur: nam ubi non est gubernator,
corruet populus, sed nequid gubernator communitatem nisi mediis legibus
gubernare: ergo certum est dari in hominibus potestatem condendi leges,
quibus populus possit gubernari. Ita D. Th. lib. i. de regim. princip.
c. 1 et 2.

Inq. 2. An potestas legislativa civilis conveniat principi immediate a
Deo? R. omnes asserunt dictam potestatem habere principes a Deo. Verius
tamen dicitur, non _immediate_ sed _mediante_ populi consensu illam
eos a Deo recipere. Nam omnes homines sunt in natura æquales, nec unus
est superior, nec alius inferior ex natura, nulli enim dedit natura
supra alterum potestatem, sed hæc a Deo data est hominum communitati,
quæ judicans rectius fore gubernandum per unam vel per plures personas
determinatas, suam transtulit potestatem in unam, vel plures, a quibus
regeretur, ut ait D. Th. 1. 2. q. 90. a. 3. ad. 2.

Ex hoc naturali principio oritur discrimen regiminis civilis. Nam si
Respublica transtulit omnem suam potestatem in unum solum, appellatur
Regimen Monarchicum; si illam contulit Optimatibus populi, nuncupatur
Regimen Aristocraticum; si vero populus, aut Respublica sibi retineat
talem potestatem, dicitur Regimen Democraticum. Habent igitur Principes
regendi potestatem a Deo, quia supposita electione a Republica facta,
Deus illam potestatem, quæ in communitate erat, Principi confert.
Unde ipse nomine Dei regit, et gubernat, et qui illi resistit, Dei
ordinationi resistit, ut dicit Apost. loco supra laudato.




INDEX.


  Abbon, a monk--his poem on the siege of Paris, 241.

  Abelard, account of, 401;
    error of M. Guizot with regard to him, 402;
    document proving this, 486.

  Abuses, checked by the Church, 422.

  Adhemar, his chronicle, 241.

  Adon, Archbishop of Vienne--his work on universal history, 241.

  Adrian (Pope) protects the marriages of slaves, 113;
    his doctrine on the right of slaves to marry, 113.

  Agde, Councils of, 103;
    ibid. decree against those who refused to be reconciled, 176.

  Aix-la-Chapelle, Council of, enjoins bishops to found hospitals to
   contain all the poor that their revenues can support, 188.

  Albigenses described, 252.

  Alphonsus (of Ligouri), on power of making laws, 295.

  Amat (Don Felix), his false political theory, 333;
    ibid. on resistance to government, 471.

  Ambrose (St.), conduct of towards the Emperor Theodosius, 178;
    sells the sacred vessels to redeem slaves, 432.

  Anabaptists, excesses committed by, in Germany in the 16th century, 197.

  Angers, Council of, its decree against acts of violence, 176.

  Anselm (St.), writings of, 403;
    ibid. on St. Paul to the Romans, 459;
    extracts from, showing his way of viewing religious matters, 485;
    intellectual movement in the Church within the limits of faith, 486;
    he anticipates Descartes' demonstration of the existence of a God, 485.

  Arabians, their civilization described, 237;
    probability that they were indebted to the eastern monasteries for
     much of their knowledge, 237;
    the connexion between their science and that of antiquity may yet be
     found, 237.

  Arbogen, Council of, forbids church burial to be given to pirates,
   ravishers, &c., 182.

  Aristocracy in the 16th century, consisted of the nobles and clergy, 348;
    differences between them, 349;
    intermediate class between the throne and the people, 349.

  Aristotle, immoral doctrine of, 443;
    his views on public education, 443;
    his absurd interference of the State in domestic matters, 443;
    his doctrines reformed by Christianity, 351.

  Arles, Council of, its decree against feuds, 177.

  Armagh, Council of, 109;
    ibid. frees all the English slaves, 437.

  Association, a favorite principle of Catholicity, 189.

  Atheism, tendency towards, in the 17th century, 61.

  Augustin (St.), his description of paganism, 89;
    his noble sentiments on slavery, 111;
    remarkable passages from, on political forms, 390;
    on the name Catholic being given to the true Church only, 422.

  Author, declaration of, 419.

  Authority in religion, tendency towards, in the 17th century, 61.

  Avignon, Council of, its decree in favor of the truce of God, 181.

  Aymon (of Aquitaine), writes the history of the French, 241.


  Barbarians, those who invaded the Roman Empire described, 122;
    their real condition, 444;
    their laws and manners, 447.

  Barcelona, councillors of, their bold language to the king of Spain, 340;
    its trades-associations described by Capmany, 477.

  Bayle, dictionary of, described, 63; its effects, 63.

  Bellarmine, doctrine of, on the divine law, 291;
    on the civil power, 292;
    on the distinction between political and ecclesiastical power, 293;
    vindication of, 294.

  Benedict (St.), described, 238;
    his monastic institute, 238.

  Beneficence, public, unknown to the ancients, 184;
    was the work of Christianity, 184;
    it required permanent institutions, 184;
    they were conceived and founded by the Church, 185;
    institutions of, founded by Catholicity, 185;
    they require the support of Christian charity, 189.

  Bernard (St.), observations on, 409.

  Beza, evidence of, against Protestantism, 423.

  Bible, why forbidden in the vulgar tongue in Spain, 215.

  Bible Societies, effects of, 64.

  Billuart, F., on the right of making laws, 296;
    on the origin of society and the civil power, 296.

  Bishops, slaves of, set free at their death by decree of Council, 108.

  Bonald, on the Esprit des Lois, 186;
    his doctrines, 283.

  Boneuil, Council of, described, 106.

  Bossuet, his negotiations with Leibnitz to re-unite the Churches, 61;
    school of, 283;
    his Universal History the first great work on the philosophy of
     history, 418.

  Brentzen, testimony of, to the incredulity prevailing among the early
   reformers, 429.

  Brescia, Arnauld of, troubles excited by, 251.

  Bruis (Pierre de), his iconoclastic fanaticism, 251.

  Buchanan, his remark on the degradation of women wherever Christianity
   does not prevail, 136.

  Bull-fights, those of Spain discussed, 174.

  Busenbaum, on the power of making laws, 295.

  Bull (Cœna Domini) containing an excommunication against those who
   levy excessive taxes, 360.


  Cæsar (J.), on the manners of the Germans and Britons, 153.

  Calmet, on St. Paul to the Romans, 461.

  Calvin, intolerance of, 421;
    his vulgar abuse, 421;
    evidence of, in favor of the Pope, 423.

  Calvinism, as connected with democracy, 355.

  Capmany on the trades-corporations of Barcelona, 477.

  Carranza, trial of, 212;
    its duration, 212;
    carried to Rome, 212;
    his dying declaration, 212;
    conduct of Philip II. towards him, 213;
    causes of his trial, 213;
    nature of his writings, 214;
    his reason why the Scriptures in the vulgar tongue were forbidden in
     Spain, 215.

  Cassian, his account of the origin of religious institutions, 223.

  Cathari, the, described, 251.

  Catholicity, its doctrines always the same, 65;
    its past services to society, and what may be expected from it for
     the future, 73;
    its progress in several countries of Europe, 74;
    not opposed to the true spirit of liberty, 80;
    its effects on European civilization, 80;
    was strong in the west and weak in the east, 81;
    importance of the unity produced by it for the safety of Europe amid
     perils, 81;
    degraded condition of society when it appeared, 90;
    not opposed to the feeling of individuality, but promotes it, 131;
    the elevation of woman due to it alo ne, 135, 155;
    places women on an equality with men, 135;
    mistake of its opponents, 149;
    its institutions falsely assailed by Protestants and philosophers, 147;
    its exertion in favor of beneficence impeded by Protestantism, which
     compelled it to stand on its defence, 188;
    unfairly treated with regard to tolerance, 190;
    its doctrine with respect to errors of the mind, 200;
    was the work of God, 256;
    its fertility in resources, 257;
    its charity, 257;
    its true doctrines with regard to the civil power, 323;
    its relations with the people, 353;
    its relations with liberty, 357;
    its effects on the development of the intellect, 392;
    effects of its principle of submission to authority, 393;
    effects of the same on the sciences, 393;
    ancient and modern philosophy compared with it, 395;
    its morality, 397;
    its revealed dogmas, 397;
    is not opposed to true philosophy, 397;
    compared with Protestantism with respect to learning, universities,
     &c., 412;
    its unity and concert, 423;
    its services against slavery.--(See _Slavery_.)

  Celchite, Council of, 109.

  Celibacy, influence of that of the clergy in preventing an hereditary
   succession, according to Guizot, 351;
    what would have happened without it, 352.

  Censors, among the ancients, they took the place of religious
   authority, 161.

  Chalons, Council of, 108.

  Chalons-sur-Saone, Council of, excommunicates those who fight within
   the precincts of churches, 176.

  Chanoinesses, enjoined by the Council of Aix to keep an hospital for
   poor women, 188.

  Charity, its effects on toleration, 192.

  Charles V., why released from his oath by the Pope, 210.

  Chateaubriand, writings of, described, 71;
    describes Zachary as selling himself as a slave to buy the liberty
     of a husband for his wife and children, 104;
    extract from, on the effects of Catholicity and Protestantism, 415.

  Chivalry, its relations with women, 150;
    did not elevate them, but found them elevated by Christianity, 151.

  Christ, all his miracles beneficent, 184;
    his whole life spent in doing good, 184.

  Christians, the early, their constancy in martyrdom, 224;
    they seek asylums for retirement and prayer in the deserts, 224.

  Christianity, effects of, on society, 67;
    effects produced by its appearance, 88;
    opposes slavery, 102;
    could not endure the savage heroism of the Romans, 104;
    development of the moral life by means of, 134;
    was unknown to the ancients, 134;
    the effects which would have followed from the loss of its influence
     on Europe, 134;
    ideas of some modern philosophers with regard to it, 156;
    how it is embodied in Catholicity, 156;
    its progress in the early ages described, 230;
    its effects on the invading barbarians, 235.

  Church, the Catholic, services of, to society, in combating the
   fatalist doctrines of the Reformation, 68;
    her opposition to slavery, 102;
    she protects the freedom of newly emancipated slaves, 103;
    consecrates manumission by having it performed in the churches, 103;
    protects slaves recommended to her by will, 103;
    allows her sacred vessels to be sold to redeem slaves, 104;
    gives letters of recommendation to emancipated slaves, 105;
    causes tending to promote slavery with which she had to contend, 105;
    she makes a law enabling those who had been compelled to sell
     themselves as slaves to recover their liberty by paying back the
     price, 106;
    she allows her ministers to give their liberty to slaves belonging
     to her, while she forbids other property to be alienated, 108;
    summary of her measures for the abolition of slavery,
     114--(see _Councils_);
    its abolition due to her alone, 114;
    reforms marriage, 136;
    preserves its sanctity, 137;
    great evils thereby prevented, 137;
    her unity in doctrines and fixity in conduct not inconsistent with
     progress, 145;
    her struggles with the corrupted Romans and savage barbarians, 176;
    decrees of her Councils against animosities, 176;
    her persevering efforts, 177;
    treats kings and great men as severely as the lowly, 177;
    her boldness in checking the crimes of kings, 178;
    her interference in civil affairs of old justified by the
     circumstances of the times, 182;
    her Councils protect the weak--viz. clergy, monks, women, merchants
     and pilgrims--against the strong, 182;
    her exertions in favor of the vanquished in war, 183;
    she preserves unity of faith, and founds institutions for doing
     good, 185;
    what she would have done for the cure of pauperism if the
     Reformation had not plunged Europe into revolutions and
     reactions, 188;
    encourages the aristocracy of talent, 361;
    service which she did to the human mind by opposing the spirit of
     subtlety of the innovators, 407;
    her interference in the management of hospitals, 449.

  Churches, the Protestant, only the instruments of the civil power, 186.

  Cicero, on the necessity of religion to the State, 316.

  Civilization, that of Europe during the 16th century not owing to
   Protestantism, 82;
    characteristics of that of modern Europe described, 115;
    compared with ancient and modern non-Christian civilization, 116;
    its superiority owing to Catholicity, 117;
    may be reduced to three elements--the individual, the family, and
     society, 117;
    its universal progress impeded, and unity broken, by
     Protestantism, 260.

  Clement, St. (Pope), passage from, on Christians selling themselves as
   slaves to redeem their brethren, 104.

  Clergy, the effects on society of their power and influence, 175;
    fatal effects of the diminution of their political influence in the
     16th century, 370;
    advantages which might have resulted from it to popular
     institutions, 373;
    their relations with all the powers and classes of society, 373.

  Clermont, Council of, its decree in favor of the truce of God, 181.

  Coblentz, Council of, 106.

  Concina (P.), on the origin of power, 295;
    how it exists in governments, 296.

  Conduct, firmness of, its powerful effects in the world, 145.

  Conscience, the public, described, 157;
    that of Europe contrasted with that of ancient times, 159;
    how influenced by the Church, 160;
    both illustrated by the story of Scipio, 165;
    the former was formed by Catholicity alone, 166.

  Conscience, the individual, described, 158.

  Constance, Council of, its doctrine on the murder of kings, 336.

  Cornelius a Lapide, on St. Paul to the Romans, 460.

  Cortes, severe measures of that of Toledo against the Jews, 205;
    decline of, in Spain, 331.

  Cottereaux, excesses of, 252.

  Councils of the Church, their influence on political laws and
   customs, 360;
    canons of, which improve the condition of slaves, 430;
    check all attempts against the liberty of the enfranchised slaves
     of the Church, or who had been recommended to her by will, 431;
    undertake that the Church will defend the liberty and property of
     the freed who have been recommended to her, 431;
    make the redemption of captives the first care of the Church, and
     give their interests precedence over her own, 432;
    excommunicate those who attempt to reduce men into slavery, 433;
    declare those who make Christians slaves to be guilty of homicide, 434;
    ordain that those who have sold themselves as slaves shall recover
     their liberty by repaying the price, 434;
    protect the slaves belonging to Jews, 434;
    provide means for their becoming free, 434;
    forbid Jews to acquire new Christian slaves, 435;
    ordain that if a master gives meat to a slave on a fasting day, the
     latter becomes free, 435;
    forbid Jews to hold Christian slaves at all, 435;
    forbid Christian slaves to be sold to Jews or pagans, 435;
    or to be sold out of the kingdom of Clovis, 436;
    severely condemn clerics who sell their slaves to Jews, 436;
    command bishops to respect the liberty of those freed by their
     predecessors, 436;
    they mention the power given to bishops to free deserving slaves,
     and fix the sum which they may give them to live on, 436;
    exempt them from the general
    rule, that alienations made by bishops who leave nothing of their
     own must be restored, 436;
    ordain that when a bishop dies, all his slaves shall be set at
     liberty, and that at the funeral each bishop or abbot may set three
     slaves free, giving them three solidi each, 436;
    free all the English slaves in Ireland, 437;
    forbid slaves of the Church to be exchanged for others, 437;
    grant liberty to slaves who wish to embrace the monastic life, with
     proper precautions to prevent abuses, 437;
    check the abuse of ordaining slaves without the consent of their
     masters, 437;
    allow parish priests to select some clerics from the slaves of the
     Church, 438;
    allow slaves to be ordained, having been first freed, 438.

  Crusades vindicated, 242.

  Cyprian (St.), on the redemption of captives, 432.


  De Maistre on the word "catholic," 422;
    on general Councils, 480;
    compares the conduct of the Popes with that of other rulers, 484.

  Democrats, difference between ancient and modern, 130.

  Democracy, its alliance with kings against the aristocracy, 303;
    notion formed of, in the 16th century, 350;
    two kinds of, 364;
    their progress in the history of Europe, 365;
    their characters, 366;
    their causes and effects, 366;
    historical facts with regard to, in France, England, Sweden,
     Denmark, and Germany, 367.

  Descartes, his demonstration of the existence of God anticipated by
   St. Anselm, 486.

  Divorce, consequences of the facility of, in Germany, according to
   M. de Staël, 139.

  Divines, spirit of the writings of the old Catholic, compared with
   that of modern writers, 288.

  Doctrines, their effects on society, 311;
    those prevalent in the 16th century with regard to democracy, 350;
    those prevalent in political matters in Europe before the appearance
     of Protestantism compared with those of the school of the 18th
     century and those of modern publicists, 374.

  Dominicans, their exertions in favor of the native Americans, as
   stated by Robertson, 441.


  East, the, injury caused there by breaking unity in religion, 235.

  Elvira, Council of, its decree in favor of slaves, 100.

  England, policy of, towards Spain, 76.

  Eon, his fanatical delusion, 251.

  Epaone, Council of, 100.

  Erigena, account of, 400.

  Errors, those of the mind not always innocent, 200.

  Error described, 70.

  Europe, characteristics of her civilization, 116;
    condition of, in the 13th century, 245 et seq.;
    singular contrasts therein, 246;
    struggle between barbarism and Christianity there, 247;
    instances of great and good principles sometimes abused in
     practice, 247;
    barbarism therein improved by religion, and religion disfigured by
     barbarism, 248;
    effects of the crusades, 249;
    increasing power of the commonalty, 249;
    decline of the feudal system, 249;
    power of great ideas, 250;
    critical epochs, 250;
    great agitation prevailing, and horrible doctrines spread, among the
     people at that time, 250--(see _Tanchème_, _Eon_, _Cathari_,
     _Vaudois_, _Albigenses_);
    what she would have done for civilization if she had not been
     impeded by Protestantism, 261;
    her condition when it appeared, 261;
    great increase of power and development of mind, 262;
    divisions occasioned by it, 262;
    the nations thereof require religious institutions for organizing
     beneficence and education on a large scale, 277;
    state of, at the end of the 15th century, 344;
    social movement at that time, 344;
    its causes, 344;
    its effects and object, 345;
    development of the industrial classes there, 354;
    this took place under the influence of Catholicity alone, 385;
    picture of, from the 11th century to the 14th, 382;
    religion and the human mind there, 404;
    intellectual condition of the nations of modern, distinguished from
     that of those of antiquity, 405;
    causes which have accelerated it among the former, 406.

  Eximeno, letter of, on the sciences, 425.


  Facts, consummated, how they are to be treated, 333.

  Faith, unity of, not adverse to political liberty, 388.

  Forms, political, their value, 357.

  Francis I. (of France), his opinion on the necessity of expelling the
   Moors from Spain, 210.

  Francis, St. (de Sales), his list of titles given to the Popes, 423.

  Franks, their custom of going armed to church forbidden by Councils, 176.

  Free-will, its denial discarded by Protestants themselves, 68;
    its effects, 68;
    its noble results, 134;
    supported by Catholicity against the Reformation, 135.


  Gambling, passion of, described, 142.

  Games, public, those of the Romans prohibited by the Christian
   Church, 175.

  Gerbet (l'Abbé), his excellent refutation of Lammenais' doctrines, 338.

  Germans, manners of the ancient, described by Tacitus, 152; why
   embellished by him, 153;
    are but little known to us, 154;
    their struggles with the Romans, 154.

  Gibbon, testimony of, to the merits of Bossuet's History of the
   Variations, 421.

  Gilles (St.), Council of, its decree in favor of the truce of God, 179.

  Gironne, Council of, in favor of the truce of God, 180.

  Glaber (Monk), of Cluny, his history of France, 241.

  Gotti (Cardinal), doctrines of, on the origin of power, 295.

  Gouget (l'Abbé), on Catholic Hebrew studies, 413.

  Government, three principles of--monarchy, aristocracy, and
   democracy, 344.

  Governments, revolutionary ones are cruel in self-defence, not being
   based on right, 128;
    right of resistance to _de facto_ ones, 330;
    falsehood of the theory which imposes the obligation of obeying them
     merely as such 331;
    difficulties on this point explained, 332.

  Grace, effects of the Catholic doctrine of, 234.

  Gratian, merit of his literary labors, 241.

  Gregory (Pope), passage from, 108;
    frees two slaves of the Roman Church, 436;
    his reason why Christians liberated their slaves, 436.

  Gregory III. (Pope), on selling slaves to the pagans for sacrifice, 435.

  Gregory IX. (Pope), his decretals on slavery, 109;
    against the hereditary succession of the clergy, 352.

  Gregory XVI. (Pope), his apostolic letters against the slave trade, 438.

  Grotius, his servile doctrine on the civil power, 323;
    his evidence in favor of Catholicity, 424.

  Gruet, his incredulity and execution, 429.

  Guibert, historical labors of, 241.

  Guizot, on the effects of the Church upon slavery, 113;
    his doctrine of the personal independence of individuals among the
     barbarians stated and discussed, 119;
    true theory thereon, 121;
    incoherence of his own doctrines, 124;
    cause of his error, 125;
    his acknowledgment with regard to the reformation and liberty, 343;
    extract from, shewing that the clergy were not a caste, 351;
    an opinion of, refuted, 399;
    extract from, shewing the immense superiority of the Church to the
     barbarians in legislation, 447;
    documents shewing his error with respect to Abelard, 486.


  Hacket, fanaticism of, 427.

  Harlem, Mathias, mad fanaticism of, 426.

  Heresy, held a sin by the Catholic Church, 200.

  Heretics, characteristics of those of the early ages, 425.

  Herman, preaches the murder of all priests and magistrates, 426.

  Hermandad, charter of, between the kingdoms of Leon and Castile, for
   the preservation of their liberties, 475.

  History, difficulties in its study, 248;
    necessity  of taking into account times and circumstances of events
     therein, 248.

  Hobbes, his false theory of society, 304;
    his  servile doctrine, 323.

  Honor, principle of, in monarchies, according to Montesquieu, 161.

  Horace, on the origin of society, 462.

  Hospitals, destroyed by Henry VIII. in England, 185;
    Catholic bishops the protectors and inspectors of, 187;
    laws made respecting them by the Church, 187;
    attached to monasteries and colleges in the middle ages, 449;
    superintended by the bishops, 449;
    their property protected by being considered as belonging to the
     Church, 449.

  Hugh of St. Victor, historical labors of, 241.

  Humility, its effects with regard to toleration, 193.


  Ideas, irreligious ones cannot be confined to theory, but enter on the
   field of practice, 70;
    destroy themselves, 71;
    power of, 169;
    they are divided into those that flatter the passions, and those
     that check them, 170;
    they require an institution to preserve and enforce them, 170;
    how they became corrupted among mankind before Christianity, 170;
    how effected by the press, 171;
    their natural progress, 171;
    their rapid succession in modern times, 171.

  Impiety allies itself with liberty or despotism to suit its
   purpose, 388.

  Incredulity in Europe the fruit of Protestantism, 60;
    spirit of, has lost much of its strength, 70.

  Independence, personal, feeling of, existed among the Greeks and
   Romans, 124.

  Indifference, religious, in Europe, the fruit of Protestantism, 60.

  Individual, the, how absorbed by the state among the ancients, 127;
    fatal effects of the complete annihilation of the feelings of
     respect for, in society, 129;
    witnessed among nations not Christians, 129.

  Individuals, how the freedom of, was fettered among the ancient
   republics, 130;
    every thing ruled by the state, 130.

  Inquisition, the, misrepresentations with regard to that of Spain, 203;
    its duration may be divided into three periods, 205;
    appeals from it to Rome, 207;
    indulgence of the latter, 203;
    interference of the Popes to soften the rigours of, 203;
    mildness of that of Rome, 203;
    no case of capital sentence pronounced by it, 203;
    rigours of that of Spain in the time of Philip II. caused by the
     Protestants themselves, 214;
    compels a preacher to retract who, in the presence of Philip II.,
     had maintained that kings have absolute power over their
     subjects, 218;
    became milder with the spirit of the age, 218;
    remarks thereon, 452;
    appellants to Rome from, forbidden to return to Spain under pain of
     death by pragmatic sanction of Ferdinand and Isabella, 454;
    how affected by the policy of the Spanish kings, 455;
    the latter earnestly endeavoured to have the judgment in Spain made
     final, without appeal, which the Popes refused, 455;
    affected impartiality of writers with regard to it, 455.
    See _Perez_, _Puigblanch_, _Villanueva_, _Llorente_, and _Jomtob_.

  Institutions, religious, opposed by Protestantism and philosophers, 219;
    their importance and connexion with religion herself, 221;
    have survived the attempts made to destroy them, 221;
    their nature described, 222;
    their object, 222;
    are perfectly conformable to the spirit of the Christian religion, 223;
    their commencement, according to Cassian, 223;
    have always existed in the Church from the time of Constantine, 223;
    conduct of the Popes towards them, 224;
    their accordance with the Gospel precepts, 225;
    their effects on the human mind, 226;
    their services and necessity, 227;
    their necessity for the salvation of society, 275;
    not inconsistent with the improvements of modern times, 280;
    historical view of them, 458;
    _coup d'œil_ at their origin and development, 458-9.

  Institutions, free, injured by Protestantism, 363.

  Institutions, their study, 248;
    necessity of understanding the times when they existed, 248.

  Intellect, the, its development, how affected by Catholicity, 392;
    influence thereof upon, historically examined, 393;
    its relations with religion, 404;
    its development among the nations of Europe different from that of
     those of antiquity, 405;
    causes that have hastened its development in Europe, 405;
    origin of the spirit of subtlety, 406;
    service rendered to it by the Church in opposing the subtleties of
     the innovators, 403;
    its progress from the eleventh century to our times, 412;
    different phases, 412.

  Intolerance, that of some irreligious men, 194;
    of the Romans, 196;
    of the pagan emperors, 196;
    has continued from the establishment of Christianity by the state,
     in various forms, down to the present time, 196;
    recent instances of it, 196;
    case of France examined, 197;
    doctrine which condemns all intolerance with regard to doctrines
     and actions discussed and refuted, 198;
    consequences which would flow from it, 198;
    would produce impunity for crimes, 198;
    civil and religious, distinguished, 450;
    mistaken by Rousseau, 450;
    its existence in ancient and modern times held by some
     Protestants, 451.

  Irreligion, spirit of, has lost much of its strength, 70.

  Isabella, part taken by, in the establishment of the Inquisition in
   Spain, 205.


  Jansenists, the, described, 62.

  Jerome, (St.), on the name Catholic not being given to heretics, 422.

  Jesuits, importance of, in the history of civilization, 268;
    their eminent services, 269;
    error and contradiction of M. Guizot in their regard, 270;
    false charges against, 271.

  Jews, the slaves of, protected by decrees of Councils, 107;
    struggle between truth and error among, 170;
    how the truth was preserved, 170;
    their avarice, 206;
    popular hatred against, 206;
    atrocities charged against them by the people, 207;
    pragmatic sanction of Ferdinand and Isabella with regard to, 454;
    law of Philip II. against, 455.

  John de Ste. Marie, extracts from, on Christian politics, 463.

  Jomtob, Nathaniel, his work called _The Inquisition Unveiled_, 456;
    his prejudice and vulgar abuse, 456.

  Judaizers pursued by the Inquisition, 209.

  Justin, on martyrdom, 132;
    his _Apology_, 286.

  Justinian gives bishops the control of hospitals, 450.


  Kings, inviolability of, 337;
    greatest increase of the power of, in Europe, dates from the
     appearance of Protestantism, 363.

  Knowledge, state of, when Christianity appeared, 85;
    sterility of, in creating social institutions, 85.


  Laborers, protected by the Council of Rheims, 182.

  Lacordaire (l'Abbé) on the Spanish Inquisition, 210.

  Lamennais (l'Abbé), his attempt to ally Catholicity with extreme
   democracy, 131;
    his doctrines on government compared with those of St. Thomas, 338.

  Las Casas, exertions of, in favor of the native Americans related by
   Robertson, 442.

  Lateran, general Council of, confirms the truce of God, 181;
    eleventh general Council of, forbids the maltreatment of monks,
    clergy, pilgrims, merchants, peasants, and the shipwrecked, 182.

  Law, the divine, false interpretation of, 284;
    St. John Chrysostom on, 285;
    according to Bellarmine, 291.--See _St. Thomas_, _Suarez_, _Gotti_,
     _Busenbaum_, _Liguori_, _Billuart_, _and the Compendium
     Salmaticense_.

  Law.--See _St. Thomas_.

  League, the Hanseatic, described, 354.

  Legislation, that of Rome described, 86;
    was probably influenced by Christianity, 86.

  Leibnitz, his negotiations with Bossuet to re-unite the Churches, 61;
    his theological system contains the chief dogmas of Catholicity, 424.

  Lepers, ordered to be maintained at the expense of the Church, 187.

  Lerida, Council of, excludes those at variance from the body and blood
   of Christ, 176;
    decrees seven years' penance against infanticide, 184.

  Leyden, John of, his excesses at Munster, 426.

  Liberty, a word ill understood, 79;
    examples of, 79;
    how limited, 79;
    Catholicity favorable to its true spirit, 80;
    true nature of, 228;
    according to Catholic doctors, 311;
    political freedom owes nothing to Protestantism, 352;
    Catholicity favorable to it, 352;
    why it has fallen into bad repute with some, 362;
    considered in relation to religious intolerance, 382;
    cannot subsist without morality, 389;
    remarkable passage from Augustin on the subject, 390.

  Lillebonne, Council of, enforces the truce of God, 180.

  Llandaff, Council of, 177.

  Llorente, his History of the Inquisition, 457;
    his attempt to introduce schism and heresy into Spain, 457;
    his misrepresentation, 457;
    burns a portion of the documents belonging to the Inquisition of
     Madrid, 457.

  London, Council of, 106.

  Louis of Bavaria, the doctrine that the imperial power comes
   immediately from God maintained by the princes of the empire in his
   time, 462.

  Love, passion of, its effects, 143;
    how treated by Catholicity and Protestantism, 144;
    advantages of the course pursued by the former, 145.

  Luther, his opinion on polygamy, 138;
    effects which his doctrines would have had, had they been proclaimed
     sooner, 138;
    his intolerance towards the Jews, 209;
    specimens of his violence, grossness, and intolerance, 421;
    his evidence against Catholicity, 423;
    his interview with the Devil, 425;
    infidel passages from his writings, 428.

  Lyons, Council of, 105;
    Council of, see _Lepers_;
    poor men of, described, 251.


  Mâcon, Councils of, 104.

  Manichees, unusual severities exercised towards, 204;
    description of, 252.

  Manners, gentleness of, one of the characteristics of European
   civilization, 172;
    wherein it consists, 172;
    exists in advanced societies, 172;
    not found in young nations, 172;
    did not exist among the Greeks and Romans, 173;
    causes of this, 173;
    their excessive corruption among the ancients, 445.

  Mariana, his popular doctrines, 312;
    on the liberties of Spain, 481.

  Marquez, P., on the disputes between rulers and their subjects, 482;
    on the levying of taxes, and the right of rulers over the property
     of their subjects, 483.

  Marriage, doctrines of Catholicity and Protestantism with regard to,
   compared, 136;
    importance of guarding the sanctity of, 139;
    not admitted as a sacrament by Protestantism, 139;
    different conduct of Catholicity and Protestantism with regard to, 140.

  Martyrs, heroism of the Christian, 132.

  Matha, John of, one of the founders of the Order of the most holy
   Trinity for the Redemption of Captives, 259.

  Mathematics, obscurity of their first principles, 425.

  Melancthon, his complaints against the other Reformers, 421;
    superstitions of, 426.

  Merchants protected by Councils, 182.

  Merida, Council of, 100.

  Missions, their unity broken by Protestantism, 260;
    injury thereby done to them, 263;
    what they might have effected had it not appeared, 263;
    what united efforts effected in earlier times, 264;
    need of, on a large scale, for the conversion of the heathen, 265;
    zeal displayed by the Church in the promotion of, in latter times, 266;
    powerful means for promoting at the command of Rome before unity was
     broken, 266.

  Monarchy, why hereditary is preferable, 143;
    idea formed of, in the sixteenth century, 346;
    application thereof, 347;
    in what it differed from despotism, 347;
    what it was in the sixteenth century, 347;
    its relations with the Church, 348;
    when necessary in Europe, 356;
    different character of, in Europe and Asia, 357;
    passage from De Maistre on, 358;
    institutions for limiting it, 358;
    it acquired strength in the sixteenth century, 361;
    prevailed over free institutions, 362;
    causes of this, 370.

  Monasteries, those in the east established in imitation of the
   solitaries, 235;
    causes of their decline, 235;
    services they might have rendered to literature, 236;
    what they did for knowledge, 236;
    those of the west established, 238;
    their effects, 238;
    property rendered sacred, 239;
    their property, 239;
    their claims thereto, 239;
    their improvements, 240;
    encouragement given to the country life, 240;
    their services to Germany, France, Spain, and England, 240;
    great men they produced, 240;
    their services to science and letters, 240;
    their civilizing effects, 242;
    new forms assumed by them in the twelfth and thirteenth centuries, 242;
    their objects, 243;
    benefits they conferred on mankind, 243.

  Monks, protected by Councils, 180.

  Monogamy not owing to climate, 138.

  Montaigne on the Reformation, 61;
    his infidel sentiments changed at his death, 429.

  Montanus, Arias, employed by Philip II. to collect books and MSS., 218.

  Montesquieu on the principle of honor in monarchies, 162;
    that of virtue in republics, 161;
    he is bound by his theory, 165;
    on the destruction of monasteries and hospitals in England by
     Henry VIII., 185;
    his doctrine with regard to the latter, 186.

  Montpellier, Council of, its decrees to secure peace, 181.

  Moors, the, dread of their power in Spain, 205;
    papal bull in favor of, 209;
    law of Philip III., expelling them, 454.


  Napoleon and the Spanish nation, 331.

  Narbonne, Council of, its decree in favor of
  the truce of God, 179.

  Nationality, importance of, 76.

  Nicholas, a fanatic who taught that it was good to continue in sin
   that grace might the more abound, 427.

  Nuns, protected by the Council of Rouen, 181.


  Obedience, motives of, founded on the will of God, 97.

  Olive trees, why protected by the Council of  Narbonne, 180.

  Opinions, the rapid succession of, in modern times, 171.

  Opinion, public, influence of, on morals, 163.

  Orange, Council of, its decree in favor of slaves, 103.

  Orders, the religious-military described, 242;
    the mendicant ditto, 252;
    the necessity for the latter, 253;
    their popular nature, 254;
    their influence, 254;
    were the work of God, 254;
    their relations with the Pontiffs, 256;
    those for the redemption of captives, 257;
    visions inspiring them, 259;
    their founders, 259.

  Orleans, Council of, its decree in favor of slaves, 100, 103, 107;
    forbids any one to be armed at church, 176;
    protects hospitals, 187;
    the poor and prisoners, 187.

  Oxford, Council of, its decree against robbers, 182.


  Pacts, 298.

  Paganism described by St. Augustin, 89.

  Palafox, on the duties of kings, princes, and magistrates, 321;
    on taxes and tyranny, 483.

  Palentia, Council of, protects the defenceless, 182.

  Papin, evidence of, in favor of Catholicity, 424.

  Paris, trades-union of, 354.

  Passions, the, differently treated by Catholicity and by
   Protestantism, 140;
    why so active in times of public disturbance, 143.

  Patrick, (St.), Council of, 105.

  Paul, (St.), his Epistle to the Romans, 459.

  Peasants.--See _Lateran_.

  Penance, efficacy of the sacrament of, 167.

  Perez, on the condemnation of a preacher for absolutist doctrines by
   the Inquisition of Spain, 455.

  Peter, (St.), of Arbues, his murder by the Jews not a proof of the
   unpopularity of the Inquisition, 207;
    tumult occasioned thereby, 207.

  Peter, (St.), Nolasco, founds the Order of Mercy for the Redemption of
   Captives, 259.

  Philanthropy, inadequate for works of beneficence without Christian
   Charity, 189.

  Philosophers, the irreligions of the last century preferred pagan to
   Christian institutions, 161.

  Philosophy, schools of, can destroy but not create, 171.

  Philip II. of Spain did not institute the Inquisition, but continued
   it, 210;
    why so much attacked by Protestants, 210;
    probability that the attempts made to introduce Protestantism into
     Spain in his time would succeed, owing to the circumstances of the
     times, 211;
    his conduct to Carranza, 213;
    his services to Catholicity, 215;
    general feeling in his reign with regard to cruel punishments very
     different from the present, 217;
    his patronage of literature, 218;
    his letter to Arias Montanus, 456.
      --See _Inquisition_.

  Pilgrims protected by Councils, 181.

  Pitt, anecdote of, 76.

  Pius II. (Pope), his apostolic letters against slavery, 439.

  Pius VII. (Pope), interposes to abolish the slave trade, 441.

  Plato, immoral doctrines of, 422.

  Polygamy, not the effect of climate, 138.

  Poor, the, regulations of Councils in favor of, 187.

  Popes, the, services they rendered to society by preserving the
   sanctity of marriage, 137;
    support the truce of God, 181;
    their attempts to mitigate the rigour of the Spanish Inquisition, 208;
    appoint judges of appeal, 208;
    their intolerance compared with the tolerance of Protestantism, 208;
    their temporal powers, 340;
    doctrines of theologians with regard to them in case they should
     fall into heresy, 342;
    nature, origin, and effects of their temporal power, 386;
    list of titles given to, in ancient times, 423.

  Power, origin of, 284;
    the paternal, considered with regard to the civil, 286;
    the latter, according to Bellarmine, resides _immediately_ in the
     people, 292;
    divine origin of, 298;
    violence of, when illegitimate, 303;
    _mediate_ and _immediate_ transmission of, 305;
    this distinction important in some respects and unimportant in
     others, 306;
    why Catholic divines have so zealously supported the _mediate_, 308;
    faculties of the civil, 317;
    calumnies of the opponents of the Church on this point, 317;
    resistance to the civil, 324;
    comparison between Catholicity and Protestantism on this point, 327;
    vain timidity of some minds on this point, 324;
    obedience to the civil, taught by Catholicity when legitimate, 325;
    civil distinguished from spiritual, 326;
    conduct of Catholicity and Protestantism with respect to the
     separation of the two, 326;
    the independence of the spiritual, a guarantee for the liberty of
     the people, 326;
    doctrines of St. Thomas on obedience to the civil, 328;
    doctrines of St. Thomas, Bellarmine, Suarez, &c. on resistance to
     the civil, in extreme cases, 338.

  Preaching, that of Protestantism without authority, 167.
    --See _Protestantism_.

  Prebendaries, bound to give a tenth of their fruits to an hospital, 188.

  Press, the effects of, on opinions, 171.

  Prisoners, exertions of the Church in favor of, 187.

  Protestantism, present condition of, 64;
    attempts to preserve itself by violating its fundamental principle, 64;
    causes of its continuance, 64;
    has almost entirely disappeared as a fixed creed, but remains as a
     body of sects, 65;
    its positive doctrines repugnant to the instinct of civilization, 68;
    its essential principle one of destruction, 69;
    can boast only of its ruins, 69;
    was the work of human passions, and not of God, 69;
    effects which even its partial introduction into Spain would
     produce, 74, 76, 78;
    advantages of the practice of preaching preserved by, 90, 166;
    its preaching is without authority, 167;
    its doctrine with respect to errors of the mind, 199;
    effects which its introduction into Spain would have produced, 216;
    would have broken the unity of the Spanish monarchy, 216;
    is opposed to vows and celibacy, 219;
    its appearance, 262;
    its effects in breaking the unity of European civilization, 262;
    divided the missionaries among themselves, 263;
    disastrous effects of, 267;
    exalts the temporal power at the expense of the spiritual, 308;
    its relations with liberty, 343;
    real state of the case on this point, 344;
    its origin aristocratic, 355;
    not favorable to the poor, 355;
    has contributed to destroy free institutions, 363;
    fearful state of Europe after it appeared, 369;
    political doctrines prevailing in Europe before its appearance
     compared with those of modern publicists and the school of the
     eighteenth century, 374;
    has prevented the homogeneity of European civilization, 375;
    historical proofs, 376;
    compared with Catholicity with regard to learning, criticism, the
     learned languages, the foundation of universities, the progress of
     literature and the arts, mysticism, high philosophy, metaphysics,
     morals, religious philosophy, and the philosophy of history, 412;
    evidences against, from Luther, Melancthon, Calvin, Beza, Grotius,
     Papin, Puffendorf, and Leibnitz, 423;
    its superstition and fanaticism, 425;
    bad faith of its founders, 428;
    passages proving this, 428;
    progress of infidelity soon after its appearance proved from Luther,
     Brentzen, Gruet, and Montaigne, 428.

  Puffendorf, his false theory of society, 304;
    evidence of, against Protestantism, 423.

  Puigblanch.--See _Jomtob_.

  Punishments, right of inflicting capital, derived from God, 300;
    cannot come from pacts, 300;
    mildness of, among barbarian nations not a proof of civilization but
     of indifference to crime, 447;
    immense superiority of the legislation of the Church with respect
     to, according to M. Guizot, 447.


  Regulus, virtue bordering on ferocity, 104.

  Religion, always existed in some shape among the greater part of
   mankind, 66;
    power of, in Spain, 76;
    condition of, when Christianity appeared, 84;
    atrocities committed in the name of, by Catholics and Protestants, 204;
    importance of, to the civil power, 311;
    corruption of, among the ancients, 445.

  Revolutions, those of modern times, 389;
    difference between that of the United States of America and that of
     France, 389.

  Rheims, Councils of, 104;
    commands that the clergy, monks, women, travellers, laborers, and
     vine-dressers shall be respected during war, 182;
    protects the poor, 187.

  Robertson.--See _Dominicans_ and _Las Casas_.

  Romans, the, their savage heroism not tolerated by the mild spirit of
   Christianity, 104;
    futile attempts made to imitate them, 128;
    their manners effeminate without being gentle, 173.

  Rome, legislation of, 86;
    how affected by Christianity, 86;
    vice of her political organization, 87;
    Council of, its decrees in favor of slaves, 109;
    the court of, endeavors to mitigate the severity of the Spanish
     Inquisition, 208;
    mildness of the Inquisition at Rome compared with that in other
     places, 208;
    no instance of a capital sentence having been pronounced thereby, 208;
    the decline and fall of the empire of, 229.

  Roscelin described, 400;
    compared with St. Anselm, 407.

  Rouen, Council of, its decree in favor of the truce of God, 181.

  Rousseau, doctrines of, 282;
    his appeal to the passions, 288;
    his _Contrat Social_, 299;
    his misrepresentation of Catholicity, 450;
    doctrines of his _Contrat Social_, 451;
    his intolerance, 451.


  Saavedra, his popular doctrines, 313.

  Salamanca, Compendium of, on the transmission of power by the people's
   consent, 295.

  Sciences, the natural and social compared, 85.

  Scipio, story of, 165.

  Self-defence, right of, alleged as a plea for the intolerance of
   governments, 202.

  Seneca, on the worship of the gods, 316.

  Sigebert, historical labors of, 241.

  Slaves, their large numbers among the ancients, 91;
    their numbers at Athens, Sparta, Rome, and in the eastern
     countries, 91;
    opinions of Plato and Aristotle regarding them, 91;
    their treatment, 91;
    dangers from their numbers, 91;
    their rebellions, 92;
    their immediate emancipation impracticable, 93;
    the Church did all that could be done in their favor, 94;
    difficulties she had to contend with in their emancipation, 94;
    conduct, designs, and tendencies of the Church favorable to them, 94;
    their natural inferiority to freemen proclaimed by the heathen
     philosophers, 95;
    their natural equality with them inculcated by the Scriptures and
     the Church, 97;
    motives for their obedience, 97; their ill-treatment, 98;
    spirit of hatred and revolts thereby caused, 98;
    St. Paul's instructions to them, 98;
    power of life and death possessed over them by their masters, and
     cruelties exercised, 99;
    scene from Tacitus, 99;
    St. Paul intercedes for one of them, 100;
    ill-treatment of them forbidden by Councils of the Church, 100;
    she substitutes public trial for private vengeance in their
     regard, 101;
    the clergy forbidden to mutilate them, 101;
    she condemns to penance those who put them to death of their own
     authority, 101;
    she protects those newly emancipated, 103;
    those of the Church not allowed to be sold or exchanged, 109;
    those who embrace the monastic state are freed by decree of the
     Council of Rome, 109;
    abuse thereof, 109;
    were raised to the priesthood, but not until they had been freed, 110;
    prevalence of the abuse of ordaining slaves without the consent of
     their masters, 110;
    the Church protects their marriages, and forbids them to be
     dissolved by their masters, 113.--See _Councils_.

  Slavery, the offspring of sin, 112.

  Society, will always be either religious or superstitious, 67;
    modern, described, 72;
    its progress, 82;
    condition of, when Christianity appeared, 84;
    present state of, 274;
    administration alone not adequate to its wants 276;
    principle of charity required, 276;
    physical means of restraining the masses of, 278;
    moral means required, 280;
    origin of, according to St. Thomas, 289;
    not the work of man, 291;
    not to be saved by strict political doctrines, without religion and
     morality, 314;
    why modern conservative schools are powerless in preserving it, 315;
    struggle therein between the three elements, monarchy, aristocracy,
     and democracy, 369.

  Solitaries, the early, described, 231;
    numbers of, 231;
    influence of, in spiritualising ideas and improving morals, 232;
    overcome the difficulties of the luxurious and enervating climate, 234;
    great men who received their inspirations from them, 234.

  Spain, effects which the partial introduction of Protestantism would
   have produced there, 74, 76, 77;
    power of religious ideas there, 76;
    peculiar manner in which revolutionary ideas have come into
     operation there, 77;
    has not yet obtained the government which she requires, 78;
    effects of the loss of her national unity, 78;
    her intolerance in religious matters not so great as it has been
     represented, 218;
    bold language used there with regard to politics, 312;
    industrial progress therein, 354;
    Catholicity and politics there, 377;
    real state of the question, 377;
    causes of the ruin of her free institutions, 378;
    ancient and modern freedom, 378;
    _Communeros_ of Castile, 379;
    policy of her rulers, 380;
    Ferdinand, Ximenes, Charles V., and Philip II., 381.

  Stephen, (Abbot), his account of the excesses committed by the
   Manichees in France, 252.

  Suarez, on the origin of power, 294;
    his reply to King James I. of England, 294;
    on the disputes between subjects and their rulers, 473.

  Subtlety, spirit of, in the middle ages, its causes, 406.


  Tacitus, scene from, of cruelty to slaves, 99;
    on the ancient Germans with regard to women, 152;
    his description of their manners, why embellished, 152.

  Tact, value of, 171.

  Tanchème, excesses of, 250.

  Telugis, Council of, ordains the truce of God, 180.

  Tertullian, apology of, 286.

  Theodosius, the emperor, excluded from the Church by St. Ambrose, for
   the slaughter at Thessalonica, 178.

  Theories, rapid succession of, in modern times, 171.

  Theresa, St., extracts from the visions of, 427.

  Thierry, M., his history of the Conquest of England by the Normans, 120.

  Thomas, St., of Aquin, extract from, on the origin of society, 289;
    on the Divine law, 290;
    his definition of law, 319;
    his doctrines with regard to laws and royal power, 319;
    on obedience to laws, 328;
    utility of his dictatorship in the schools in the middle ages to the
     human mind, 411;
    passages from, on the duties of rulers and subjects, 470;
    his doctrines on the forms of government, 480.

  Times, superiority of the primitive, has been exaggerated, 422.

  Toledo, Councils of, 103, 107, 108, 111.

  Toleration, how misunderstood and misrepresented, 190;
    prejudices against Catholicity with regard to, 190;
    principle of, considered, 191;
    in religious men is the produce of two principles, charity and
     humility, 191;
    illustrations, shewing how they are affected by intercourse with the
     world on this point, 192;
    that of some irreligious men, 194;
    considered in society and governments, 194;
    its existence in society not owing to the philosophers, 195;
    its causes, 195; principle of universal, discussed, 196.

  Tours, Council of, ordains that the poor shall be supported in their
   own town or parish, 187.

  Trades-corporations, origin and salutary effects of, 477.

  Trades-union.--See _Paris_.

  Trajan, the emperor, 6000 gladiators slain at his games, 174.

  Transubstantiation, discussion with regard to, in consequence of the
   philosophy of Descartes, 397.

  Trent, Council of, gives bishops the power of visiting hospitals, 449.

  Troja, Councils of, promote the truce of God, 180.

  Truce of God described, 179;
    established by Church Councils, 179;
    supported by Popes, 180.

  Truth, described, 69.

  Tubuza, Council of, establishes the truce of God, 179.


  Unbelievers, doctrines of, with regard to errors of the mind, 200.

  Universities, those founded by Catholicity, 414.


  Vaison, Council of, decree of, in favor of foundlings and against
   infanticide, 184.

  Valois, Felix of, one of the founders of the Order of the Most Holy
   Trinity for the Redemption of Captives, 259.

  Vaudois, described, 252.

  Verneul, Council of, 105.

  Villanueva, prejudice and egotism of, 457.

  Vine-dressers, protected by the Council of Rheims, 182.

  Virginity, respected by the ancients, &c., but not by Protestantism, 146;
    how important that it should be respected, 146;
    not injurious to the state, 147;
    its effects on the female character, 149.

  Visions, (see _Orders_);
    effects of, 259;
    those of Catholics, 427.

  Vives, Louis, on human knowledge, 424.

  Voltaire described, 63;
    extract from, on the importance of the morals of courts to
     society, 137.

  Vows, vindication of religious, 228;
    those of chastity in the early ages of the Church, 458.


  Widows, their vows of chastity in the early ages of the Church, 458.

  Witmar, a German monk, his chronicles much esteemed 241;
    used by Leibnitz, 241.

  Women, degraded condition of, among the ancients, 136, 441;
    their elevation due entirely to Catholicity, 136, 156;
    how affected by chivalry, 150;
    their elevation falsely ascribed to the ancient Germans, 151;
    protected by Councils, 182.

  Worms, Council of, excommunicates those who refuse to be reconciled, 177.


  Zeballos, P., on Christian politics and Naboth's vineyard, 467.

  Ziegler, a Lutheran, an ardent defender of the immediate communication
   of temporal power, 463.

  Zonarus, on charitable establishments, 187.

  Zuinglius, his phantom, 426.

THE END.


       *       *       *       *       *


Transcriber's Notes

Obvious typographical errors have been silently corrected.

Hyphenation and accents have been standardised.

Apart from the items mentioned below all other spellings and
punctuation are as in the original.

Develop and develope, idealog(y/ist) and ideolog(y/ist) are used
interchangeably in the book. They have been standardised to the
standard modern spelling of develop and ideology.

Variations in the use/spelling of derivatives of the Latin propius
(pages 473a, 474a and 490a), while possibly incorrect, have been left
as published as they seem unlikely to be typographical errors.

Zuinglius/Zwinglius. The former spelling is used in the body of the
book and the latter in the notes. This has not been changed.

A note on notes: upper case references [A] refer to conventional
footnotes, lower case references [a] refer to the endnotes in the
appendix, numeric references [1] refer to the main endnotes.

The reference to note 1 in the original reads "(See note at the end of
the vol.)" the [1] has been added to improve clarity and uniformity.

The quotation on page 313: 'What absolute monarch in Europe would
approve of one of his high functionaries expressing the origin of power
after the manner of our immortal Saavedra? "It is from the centre
of justice," says he, "that the circumference of the crown has been
drawn. The latter would not be necessary, if we could dispense with the
former.' is missing a closing quote. as it may be absent from 'drawn.'
or 'former.' it has not been corrected.

Entries for NOTES, APPENDIX and INDEX have been added to the table of
contents.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Protestantism and Catholicity, by 
Jaime Luciano Balmes

