The Project Gutenberg eBook of Life and Matter: A Criticism of Professor Haeckel's "Riddle of the Universe"
    
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Life and Matter: A Criticism of Professor Haeckel's "Riddle of the Universe"

Author: Sir Oliver Lodge


        
Release date: August 15, 2008 [eBook #26321]
                Most recently updated: June 7, 2022

Language: English

Other information and formats: www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/26321






    =Life and Matter=




    =Recent Works by Sir Oliver Lodge=


SCHOOL TEACHING AND SCHOOL REFORM. A Course of Four Lectures on School
Curricula and Methods delivered to Secondary Teachers and Teachers in
Training at Birmingham during February 1905. Crown 8vo, cloth, 3s.

WILLIAMS & NORGATE, London.


EASY MATHEMATICS: Chiefly Arithmetic. Being a Collection of Hints to
Teachers, Parents, self-taught Students, and Adults, and containing a
Summary or Indication of most things in Elementary Mathematics useful to
be known. By Sir Oliver Lodge, F.R.S., D.Sc., Principal of the
University of Birmingham. Crown 8vo. 4s. 6d.

MACMILLAN & CO., Limited, London.




    Life and Matter

    A Criticism of Professor Haeckel's
    "Riddle of the Universe"

    By
    Sir Oliver Lodge

    The expansion of a Presidential Address
    to the Birmingham and Midland Institute

    _SECOND EDITION _

    London
    Williams & Norgate
    14 Henrietta Street, Covent Garden

    1905


        TO
    JOHN HENRY MUIRHEAD
        AND
    MARY TALBOT MUIRHEAD
    THE FRIENDS OF MANY NEEDING HELP
    NOT IN PHILOSOPHY ALONE
    THIS VOLUME IS INSCRIBED
    IN MEMORY OF CHANDOLIN AND ST LUC 1904


    "Materialistic monism is nowadays the working hypothesis of
    every scientific explorer in every department, whatever other
    beliefs or denials he may, more or less explicitly and more or
    less consistently, superadd. Materialistic monism only becomes
    false when put forward as a complete philosophy of the
    universe, because it leaves out of sight the conditions of
    human knowledge, which the special sciences may conveniently
    disregard, but which a candid philosophy cannot ignore."

    "The legitimate materialism of the sciences simply means
    temporary and convenient abstraction from the cognitive
    conditions under which there are 'facts' or 'objects' for us at
    all; it is 'dogmatic materialism' which is metaphysics of the
    bad sort."
        D. G. Ritchie.

    "Our metaphysics is really like many other sciences—only on the
    threshold of genuine knowledge: God knows if it will ever get
    further. It is not hard to see its weakness in much that it
    undertakes. Prejudice is often found to be the mainstay of its
    proofs. For this nothing is to blame but the ruling passion of
    those who would fain extend human knowledge. They are anxious
    to have a grand philosophy: but the desirable thing is, that it
    should also be a sound one."
        Kant.




    Preface


This small volume is in form controversial, but in substance it has a
more ambitious aim: it is intended to formulate, or perhaps rather to
reformulate, a certain doctrine concerning the nature of man and the
interaction between mind and matter. Incidentally it attempts to
confute two errors which are rather prevalent:—

1.  The notion that because material energy is constant in quantity,
    therefore its transformations and transferences—which admittedly
    constitute terrestrial activity—are not susceptible
    of guidance or directive control.

2.  The idea that the specific guiding power which we call "life" is
    one of the forms of material energy, so that directly it
    relinquishes its connection with matter other equivalent forms
    of energy must arise to replace it.

The book is specially intended to act as an antidote to the speculative
and destructive portions of Professor Haeckel's interesting and
widely-read work, but in other respects it may be regarded less as a
hostile attack than as a supplement—an extension of the more scientific
portions of that work into higher and more fruitful regions of inquiry.

        OLIVER LODGE.

University of Birmingham,
_October 1905_.




    Contents


CHAP.                                                            PAGE

   I   MONISM                                                       1

  II   "THE LAW OF SUBSTANCE"                                      14

 III   THE DEVELOPMENT OF LIFE                                     41

  IV   MEMORANDA FOR WOULD-BE MATERIALISTS                         60

   V   RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY                                     71

  VI   MIND AND MATTER                                            100

 VII   PROFESSOR HAECKEL'S CONJECTURAL PHILOSOPHY                 125

VIII   HYPOTHESIS AND ANALOGIES CONCERNING LIFE                   136

  IX   WILL AND GUIDANCE                                          152

   X   FURTHER SPECULATION AS TO THE ORIGIN AND NATURE OF LIFE    179




    LIFE AND MATTER




    CHAPTER I

    MONISM


In his recent Presidential Address before the British Association, at
Cambridge, Mr Balfour rather emphasised the existence and even the
desirability of a barrier between Science and Philosophy which recent
advances have tended to minimise though never to obliterate. He
appeared to hint that it is best for scientific men not to attempt to
philosophise, but to restrict themselves to their own domain; though,
on the other hand, he did not appear to wish similarly to limit
philosophers, by recommending that they should keep themselves
unacquainted with scientific facts, and ignorant of the theories which
weld those facts together. Indeed, in his own person he is an example
of the opposite procedure, for he himself frequently takes pleasure in
overlooking the boundary and making a wide survey of the position on
its physical side—a thing which it is surely very desirable for a
philosopher to do.

But if that process be regarded as satisfactory, it is surely equally
permissible for a man of science occasionally to look over into the
philosophic region, and survey the territory on that side also, so far
as his means permit. And if philosophers object to this procedure, it
must be because they have found by experience that men of science who
have once transcended or transgressed the boundary are apt to lose all
sense of reasonable constraint, and to disport themselves as if they had
at length escaped into a region free from scientific trammels—a region
where confident assertions might be freely made, where speculative
hypothesis might rank as theory, and where verification was both
unnecessary and impossible.

The most striking instance of a scientific man who on entering
philosophic territory has exhibited signs of exhilaration and
emancipation, is furnished by the case of Professor Haeckel of Jena. In
an eloquent and popular work, entitled _das Welt-Räthsel_, the
World Problem, or "The Riddle of the Universe," this eminent
biologist has surveyed the whole range of existence, from the
foundations of physics to the comparison of religions, from the
facts of anatomy to the freedom of the will, from the vitality of
cells to the attributes of God; treating these subjects with wide
though by no means superhuman knowledge, and with considerable
critical and literary ability. This work, through the medium of a
really excellent translation by Mr M'Cabe, and under the auspices of
the Rationalist Press Association, has obtained a wide circulation
in this country, being purchasable for six-pence at any bookstall;
where one often finds it accompanied by another still more popular
and similarly-priced treatise by the same author, a digest or
summary of the religious aspect of his scientific philosophy, under
the title _The Confession of Faith of a Man of Science_.

Professor Haeckel's credentials, as a learned biologist who introduced
Darwinism into Germany, doubtless stand high; and it is a great tribute
to his literary ability that a fairly abstruse work on so comprehensive
a subject should have obtained a wide notoriety, and have been welcomed
by masses of thinking readers, especially by many among the skilled
artisans, in this country.

From several points of view this diffusion of interest is most
satisfactory, since the spread of thought on serious topics is greatly
to be welcomed. Moreover, there is a vast mass of information in these
writings which must be new to the bulk of the inhabitants of these
islands. There is also a great deal of criticism which should arouse
professors of dogmatic theology, and exponents of practical religion, to
a keener sense of their opportunities and responsibility. A view of
their position from outside, by an able and unsparing critic, cannot but
be illuminating and helpful, however unpleasant.

Moreover, the comprehensive survey of existence which can be taken by a
modern man of science is almost sure to be interesting and instructive,
when properly interpreted with the necessary restrictions and
expansions; and if it be found that the helpful portions are unhappily
accompanied by over-confident negations and supercilious denials of
facts at present outside the range of orthodox science, these natural
blemishes must be discounted and estimated at their proper worth; for it
would be foolish to imagine that even a diligent student of Nature has
special access to the kind of truths which have been hidden from the
nominally "wise and prudent" of all time.

So far as Professor Haeckel's writings are read by the thoroughly
educated and well-informed, they can do nothing but good. They may not,
indeed, convey anything particularly new, but they furnish an
interesting study in scientific history and mental development. So far,
however, as they are read by unbalanced and uncultured persons, with no
sense of proportion and but little critical faculty, they may do harm,
unless accompanied by a suitable qualification or antidote, especially
an antidote against the bigotry of their somewhat hasty and scornful
destructive portions.

To the intelligent artisan or other hard-headed reader who considers
that Christian faith is undermined, and the whole religious edifice
upset, by the scientific philosophy advocated by Professor Haeckel under
the name "Monism," I would say, paraphrasing a sentence of Mr Ruskin's
in a preface to _Sesame and Lilies_:—Do not think it likely that
you hold in your hands a treatise in which the ultimate and final
verity of the universe is at length beautifully proclaimed, and in
which pure truth has been sifted from the errors of all preceding
ages. Do not think it, friend: it is not so.

For what is this same "Monism?"

Professor Haeckel writes almost as if it were a recent invention, but in
truth there have been many versions of it, and in one form or another
the idea is quite old, older than Plato, as old as Parmenides.

The name "Monism" should apply to any philosophic system which assumes
and attempts to formulate the essential simplicity and _oneness_ of
all the apparent diversity of sensual impression and consciousness,
any system which seeks to exhibit all the complexities of existence,
both material and mental—the whole of phenomena, both objective and
subjective—as modes of manifestation of one fundamental reality.

According to the assumed nature of that reality, different brands of
monistic theory exist:—

1. There is the hypothesis that everything is an aspect of some unknown
absolute Reality, which itself, in its real nature, is far beyond our
apprehension or conception. And within the broad area thus suggested may
be grouped such utterly different universe-conceptions as that of
Herbert Spencer and that of Spinoza.

2. According to another system the fundamental reality is psychical, is
consciousness, let us say, or mind; and the material world has only the
reality appropriate to a consistent set of ideas. Here we find again
several varieties, ranging from Bishop Berkeley and presumably Hegel, on
the one hand, to William James—who, in so far as he is a monist at all,
may I suppose be called an empirical idealist—and solipsists such as
Mach and Karl Pearson, on the other.

3. A third system, or group of systems, has been in vogue among some
physicists of an earlier day, and among some biologists now; viz., that
mind, thought, consciousness are all by-products, phantasmagoria,
epiphenomena, developments and decorations, as it were, of the one
fundamental all-embracing reality, which some may call "matter," some
"energy," and some "substance." In this category we find Tyndall—at any
rate the Tyndall of "the Belfast address"—and here consistently do we
find Haeckel, together with several other biologists.

This last system of Monism, though not now in favour with philosophers,
is the most militant variety of all; and accordingly it has in some
quarters managed to obtain, and it certainly seems anxious to obtain, a
monopoly of the name.

But the monopoly should not be granted. The name Materialism is quite
convenient for it, just as Idealism is for the opposing system; and if
either of these titles is objected to by the upholders of either system,
as apparently too thorough-going and exclusive, whereas only a tendency
in one or other direction is to be indicated, then the longer but more
descriptive titles of Idealistic-monism and Materialistic-monism
respectively should be employed. But neither of these compromises seems
necessary to connote the position of Professor Haeckel.

The truth is that all philosophy aims at being monistic; it is bound to
aim at unification, however difficult of attainment; and a philosopher
who abandoned the quest, and contented himself with a permanent
antinomy—a universe compounded of two or more irreconcilable and
entirely disparate and disconnected agencies—would be held to be
throwing up his brief as a philosopher and taking refuge in a kind of
permanent Manichæism, which experience has shown to be an untenable and
ultimately unthinkable position.

An attempt at Monism is therefore common to all philosophers, whether
professional or amateur; and the only question at issue is what sort of
Monism are you aiming at, what sort of solution of the universe have you
to offer, what can you hold out to us as a simple satisfactory
comprehensive scheme of existence?

In order to estimate the value of Professor Haeckel's scheme of the
universe, it is not necessary to appeal to philosophers: it is
sufficient to meet him on scientific ground, and to show that in his
effort to simplify and unify he has under-estimated some classes of fact
and has stretched scientific theory into regions of guess-work and
hypothesis, where it loses touch with real science altogether. The facts
which he chooses gratuitously to deny, and the facts which he chooses
vigorously to emphasise, are arbitrarily selected by him according as
they will or will not fit into his philosophic scheme. The scheme itself
is no new one, and almost certainly contains elements of truth. Some day
far hence, when it is possible properly to formulate it, a system of
Monism may be devised which shall contain the whole truth. At present
the scheme formulated by Professor Haeckel must to philosophers appear
rudimentary and antiquated, while to men of science it appears
gratuitous, hypothetical, in some places erroneous, and altogether
unconvincing.

Before everything a philosopher should aim at being all-inclusive,
before everything a man of science should aim at being definite, clear,
and accurate. An attempt at combination is an ambitious attempt, which
may legitimately be made, but which it appears is hardly as yet given to
man to make successfully. Attempts at an all-embracing scheme, which
shall be both truly philosophic and truly scientific, must for the
present be mistrusted, and the mistrust should extend especially to
their negative side. Positive contributions, either to fact or to
system, may be real and should be welcome; but negative or destructive
criticism, the eschewing and throwing away of any part of human
experience, because it is inconsistent with a premature and
ill-considered monistic or any other system, should be regarded with
deep suspicion; and the promulgation of any such negative and
destructive scheme, especially in association with free and easy
dogmatism, should automatically excite mistrust and repulsion.

There are things which cannot yet be fitted in as part of a coherent
scheme of scientific knowledge—at present they appear like fragments of
another order of things; and if they are to be forced into the
scientific framework, like portions of a "puzzle-map," before their true
place has been discovered, a quantity of substantial fact must be
disarranged, dislocated, and thrown away. A premature and cheap Monism
is therefore worse than none at all.




    CHAPTER II

    "THE LAW OF SUBSTANCE"


I shall now endeavour to exhibit the way in which Professor Haeckel
proceeds to expound his views, and for that purpose shall extract
certain sentences from his work, _The Riddle of the Universe_;
giving references to the sixpenny translation, now so widely
circulated in England, in order that they may be referred to in
their context with ease. To scientific men the exaggeration of
statement will in many cases be immediately obvious; but in the
present state of general education it will often be necessary to
append a few comments, indicating, as briefly as possible, wherein
the statement is in excess of ascertained fact, however interesting
as a guess or speculation; wherefore it must be considered
illegitimate as a weapon wherewith to attack other systems, so far
as they too are equally entitled to be considered reasonable guesses
at truth.

The central scientific doctrines upon which Professor Haeckel's
philosophy is founded appear to be two—one physical, the other
biological. The physical doctrine is what he calls "the Law of
Substance"—a kind of combination of the conservation of matter and the
conservation of energy: a law to which he attaches extraordinary
importance, and from which he draws momentous conclusions. Ultimately he
seems to regard this law as almost axiomatic, in the sense that a
philosopher who has properly grasped it is unable to conceive the
negative. A few extracts will suffice to show the remarkable importance
which he attaches to this law:—

    "All the particular advances of physics and chemistry yield in
    theoretical importance to the discovery of the great law which
    brings them to one common focus, the 'law of substance.' As
    this fundamental cosmic law establishes the eternal persistence
    of matter and force, their unvarying constancy throughout the
    entire universe, it has become the pole-star that guides our
    monistic philosophy through the mighty labyrinth to a solution
    of the world-problem" (p. 2).

    "The uneducated member of a civilised community is surrounded
    with countless enigmas at every step, just as truly as the
    savage. Their number, however, decreases with every stride of
    civilisation and of science; and the monistic philosophy is
    ultimately confronted with but one simple and comprehensive
    enigma—the 'problem of substance'" (p. 6).

    "The supreme and all-pervading law of nature, the true and only
    cosmological law, is, in my opinion, _the law of substance_;
    its discovery and establishment is the greatest intellectual
    triumph of the nineteenth century, in the sense that all other
    known laws of nature are subordinate to it. Under the name of
    'law of substance' we embrace two supreme laws of different
    origin and age—the older is the chemical law of the
    'conservation of matter,' and the younger is the physical law of
    the 'conservation of energy.' It will be self-evident to many
    readers, and it is acknowledged by most of the scientific men of
    the day, that these two great laws are essentially inseparable"
    (p. 75).

    "The conviction that these two great cosmic theorems, the
    chemical law of the persistence of matter and the physical law
    of the persistence of force, are fundamentally one, is of the
    utmost importance in our monistic system. The two theories are
    just as intimately united as their objects—matter and force or
    energy. Indeed, this fundamental unity of the two laws is
    self-evident to many monistic scientists and philosophers,
    since they merely relate to two different aspects of one and
    the same object, the _cosmos_" (p. 76).

    "I proposed some time ago to call it the 'law of substance,' or
    the 'fundamental cosmic law'; it might also be called the
    'universal law,' or the 'law of constancy,' or the 'axiom of
    the constancy of the universe.' In the ultimate analysis it is
    found to be a necessary consequence of the principle of
    causality" (p. 76).

I criticise these utterances below, and I also quote extracts bearing on
the subject from Professor Huxley in Chapter IV.; but meanwhile
Professor Haeckel is as positive as any Positivist, and runs no risk of
being accused of Solipsism:—

    "Our only real and valuable knowledge is a knowledge of nature
    itself, and consists of presentations which correspond to
    external things."... "These presentations we call _true_, and
    we are convinced that their content corresponds to the knowable
    aspect of things. We _know_ that these facts are not imaginary,
    but real" (p. 104).

He also tends to become sentimental about the ultimate reality as he
perceives it, and tries to construct from it a kind of religion:—

    "The astonishment with which we gaze upon the starry heavens and
    the microscopic life in a drop of water, the awe with which we
    trace the marvellous working of energy in the motion of matter,
    the reverence with which we grasp the universal dominance of the
    law of substance throughout the universe—all these are part of
    our emotional life, falling under the heading of 'natural
    religion'" (p. 122).

    "Pantheism teaches that God and the world are one. The idea of
    God is identical with that of nature or substance.... In
    pantheism, God, as an _intra-mundane_ being, is everywhere
    identical with nature itself, and is operative _within_ the
    world as 'force' or 'energy.' The latter view alone is
    compatible with our supreme law—the law of substance. It
    follows necessarily that pantheism is _the world-system of the
    modern scientist_" (p. 102).

    "This 'godless world-system' substantially agrees with the
    monism or pantheism of the modern scientist; it is only another
    expression for it, emphasising its negative aspect, the
    non-existence of any supernatural deity. In this sense
    Schopenhauer justly remarks:

    "'Pantheism is only a polite form of atheism. The truth of
    pantheism lies in its destruction of the dualist antithesis of
    God and the world, in its recognition that the world exists in
    virtue of its own inherent forces. The maxim of the pantheist,
    'God and the world are one,' is merely a polite way of giving
    the Lord God his _congé_'" (p. 103).

Thus we are led on, from what may be supposed to be a bare statement of
two recent generalisations of science,—first of all to regard them as
almost axiomatic or self-evident; next, to consider that they solve the
main problem of the universe; and, lastly, that they suffice to replace
the Deity Himself.

To curb these extravagant pretensions it is only necessary to consider
soberly what these physical laws really assert.


    _Conservation of Energy._

Take first the conservation of energy. This generalisation asserts that
in every complete material system, subject to any kind of internal
activity, the total energy of the system does not change, but is subject
merely to transference and transformation, and can only be increased or
diminished by passing fresh energy in or out through the walls of the
system. So far from this being self-evident, it required very careful
measurement and experimental proof to demonstrate the fact, for in
common experience the energy of a system left to itself continually to
all appearance diminishes; yet it has been skilfully proved that when
the heat and every other kind of product is collected and measured, the
result can be so expressed as to show a total constancy, appertaining to
a certain specially devised function called "energy," provided we know
and are able to account for every form into which the said energy can be
transformed by the activity going on. A very important generalisation
truly, and one which has so seized hold of the mind of the physicist
that if in any actual example a disappearance or a generation of energy
were found, he would at once conclude either that he had overlooked some
known form and thereby committed an error, or that some unknown form was
present which he had not allowed for: thereby getting a clue which, if
followed up, he would hope might result in a discovery.

But the term "energy" itself, as used in definite sense by the
physicist, rather involves a modern idea and is itself a generalisation.
Things as distinct from each other as light, heat, sound, rotation,
vibration, elastic strain, gravitative separation, electric currents,
and chemical affinity, have all to be generalised under the same
heading, in order to make the law true. Until "heat" was included in the
list of energies, the statement could not be made; and, a short time
ago, it was sometimes discussed whether "life" should or should not be
included in the category of energy. I should give the answer decidedly
No, but some might be inclined to say Yes; and this is sufficient as an
example to show that the categories of energy are not necessarily
exhausted; that new forms may be discovered; and that if new forms
exist, until they are discovered, the law of conservation of energy as
now stated may in some cases be strictly untrue; just as it would be
untrue, though partially and usefully true, in the theory of machines,
if heat were unknown or ignored. To jump, therefore, from a
generalisation such as this, and to say, as Professor Haeckel does on
page 5, that the following cosmological theorems have already been
"amply demonstrated," is to leap across a considerable chasm:—

    "1. The universe, or the cosmos, is eternal, infinite, and
    illimitable.

    "2. Its substance, with its two attributes (matter and energy),
    fills infinite space, and is in eternal motion.

    "3. This motion runs on through infinite time as an unbroken
    development, with a periodic change from life to death, from
    evolution to devolution.

    "4. The innumerable bodies which are scattered about the
    space-filling ether all obey the same 'law of substance'; while
    the rotating masses slowly move towards their destruction and
    dissolution in one part of space, others are springing into new
    life and development in other quarters of the universe."

Most of this, though in itself probable enough, must, when
scientifically regarded, be rated as guess-work, being an overpressing
of known fact into an exaggerated and over-comprehensive form of
statement. Let it be understood that I am not objecting to his
speculations, but only pointing out that they are speculations.

The conservation of energy is a legitimate enough generalisation: we do
not really doubt its conservation and constancy when we admit that we
are not yet sure of having fully and finally exhausted the whole
category of energy. What we do grant is, that it may hereafter be
possible to discover new forms; and when new forms are discovered, then
either the definition may have to be modified, or else the detailed
statement at present found sufficient will have to be overhauled. But
after all, this is not specially important: the _serious_ mistake
which people are apt to make concerning this law of energy is to
imagine that it denies the possibility of guidance, control, or
directing agency, whereas really it has nothing to say on these
topics; it relates to _amount_ alone. Philosophers have been far
too apt to jump to the conclusion that because energy is constant,
therefore no guidance is possible, so that all psychological or
other interference is precluded. Physicists, however, know better;
though unfortunately Tyndall, in some papers on Miracles and Prayer,
thoughtlessly adduced the conservation of energy as decisive. This
question of "guidance" is one of great interest, and I emphasise the
subject further on, especially in Chapter IX.


    _Conservation of Matter._

Take next the "conservation of matter"—which means that in any
operation, mechanical, physical, or chemical, to which matter can be
subjected, its amount, as measured by weight, remains unchanged; so that
the only way to increase or diminish the weight of substance inside a
given enclosure, or geometrically closed boundary, is to pass matter in
or out through the walls.

This law has been called the sheet-anchor of chemistry, but it is very
far from being self-evident; and its statement involves the finding of a
property of matter which experimentally shall remain unchanged, although
nearly every other property is modified. To superficial observation
nothing is easier than to destroy matter. When liquid—when dew, for
instance—evaporates, it seems to disappear, and when a manuscript is
burnt it is certainly destroyed: but it turns out that there is
something which may be called the vapour of water, or the "matter" of
the letter, which still persists, though it has taken rarer form and
become unrecognisable. Ultimately, in order to express the persistence
of the permanent abstraction called "matter" clearly, it is necessary to
speak of the "ultimate atoms" of which it is composed, and to say that
though these may enter into various combinations, and thereby display
many outward forms, yet that they themselves are immutable and
indestructible, constant in number and quality and form, not subject to
any law of evolution; in other words, totally unaffected by time.

If we ask for the evidence on which this generalisation is founded, we
have to appeal to various delicate weighings, conducted chiefly by
chemists for practical purposes, and very few of them really directed to
ascertain whether the law is true or not. A few such direct experiments
are now, indeed, being conducted with the hope of finding that the law
is not completely true; in other words, with the hope of finding that
the weight of a body does depend slightly on its state of aggregation or
on some other physical property. The question has even been raised
whether the weight of a crystal is altogether independent of its
_aspect_: the direction of its plane of cleavage with reference to
the earth's radius; also, whether the _temperature_ of bodies has
any influence on their weight; but on these points it may be truly
said that if any difference were discovered it would not be
expressed by saying that the amount of matter was different, but
simply that "weight" was not so fundamental and inalienable a
property of matter as has been sometimes assumed; in which case it
is clear that there must be a more fundamental property to which
appeal can be made in favour of constancy or persistency or
conservation. Now the most fundamental property of matter known is
undoubtedly 'inertia'; and the law of conservation would therefore
come to mean that the _inertia_ of matter was constant, no matter
what changes it underwent. But, then, inertia is not an easy
property to measure,—very difficult to measure with great accuracy:
it is in practice nearly always _inferred_ from weight; and in
terms of inertia the law of conservation of matter cannot be
considered really an experimental fact; it is, strictly speaking, a
reasonable hypothesis, an empirical law, which we have never seen
any reason to doubt, and in support of which all scientific
experience may be adduced in favour.

It is possible, however, to grant to Professor Haeckel—not positively,
but for the sake of argument, and giving him the benefit of our present
ignorance—that it is unlikely that matter in its lowest denomination can
by us be created or destroyed. For, although it is now pretty well known
that atoms of matter are not the indestructible and immutable things
they were once thought (seeing that, although we do not know how to
break them up, they are liable every now and then themselves to break up
or explode, and so resolve themselves into simpler forms), yet it can be
granted that these simpler forms are likewise themselves atoms, in the
same sense, and that if they break up they will break up likewise into
atoms: or ultimately, it may be, into those corpuscles or electrons or
electric charges, of which one plausible theory conjectures that the
atoms of matter are really composed.

Supposing an atom thus broken up into electrons, its weight may possibly
have disappeared. We simply do not know whether weight is a property of
the grouping called an atom, or whether it belongs also to the
individual ingredients or corpuscles of that atom. There is at present
no evidence. But whether weight has disappeared or not, it is quite
certain, for definite though rather recondite theoretical reasons, that
the inertia would _not_ have disappeared; and accordingly it may be
held, and must be held in our present state of knowledge, that the
constancy of fundamental material still holds good, even though the
atoms are resolved into electric charges—an amount of destruction never
contemplated by those chemists and physicists who promulgated the
doctrine of the conservation of matter.


    _Electrical Theory of Matter._

But then, on the electrical theory of matter, even _inertia_ is not
the thoroughly constant property we once thought it. It is a
function of velocity for one thing, and when speeds become excessive
the inertia of matter rises perceptibly in value. The fact that it
would rise in value by a calculable amount, and that the rise would
be perceptible when the speed of motion approached in value to
within, say, a tenth of the velocity of light, was predicted
mathematically;[1] and now, strange to say, it has recently become
possible to observe and actually measure the increase of inertia
experimentally, and thus to confirm the electrical theory not only
as qualitatively or approximately true, but as completely and
quantitatively accurate. A remarkable achievement all this! of quite
modern times, which has not excited the attention it deserves—save
among physicists.

    [Footnote 1: By Mr Oliver Heaviside and Professor J. J. Thomson.]

But even this is not all that can be said as to the fluctuating
character of that fundamental material quality "inertia." It appears
possible, if electrons approach too near each other, so as to encroach
on each other's magnetic field as they move, that then their inertia may
fall in value during the time they are contiguous. No experimental fact
has yet suggested this at present: it is improbable that even in the
tightest combinations they ever really approach close enough to each
other to make the effect appreciable in the slightest degree; still,
strictly speaking, the inertia of matter is a known mathematical
function of the distance of electrons apart, compared with their size,
as well as of their absolute speed through the ether; and hence it may
be found to vary from either of two distinct reasons. Nevertheless, even
this variation would not be expressed as a failure in the conservation
of matter, though there is now no single material property that can be
specified as really and genuinely constant. So long as the electric
centres of strain, or whatever they are—so long as the electric charges
themselves—continue unaltered, we should prefer to say that at least the
_basis_ of matter was fundamentally conserved.

Further than this, however, we cannot go; and to say, as Professor
Haeckel says, that the modern physicist has grown so accustomed to the
conservation of matter that he is unable to conceive the contrary, is
simply untrue. Whatever may be the case in real fact, there is no
question with respect to the possibility of conception. The electrons
themselves must be explained somehow; and the only surmise which at
present holds the field is that they are knots or twists or vortices, or
some sort of either static or kinetic modification, of the ether of
space—a small bit partitioned off from the rest and individualised by
reason of this identifying peculiarity. It may be that these knots
cannot be untied, these twists undone, these vortices broken up; it may
be that neither artificially nor spontaneously are they ever in the
slightest degree changed. It may be so, but we do not know; and it is
quite easy to conceive them broken up, the identity of the electron
lost, its substance resolved into the original ether, without parts or
individual properties. If this happened, within our ken, we should have
to confess that the properties of matter were gone, and that hence
everything that could by any stretch of language be called "matter" was
destroyed, since no identifying property remained. The discovery of such
an event may lie in the science of the future; it would be an
epoch-making event in the history of science, but no physicist would be
upset by it—perhaps not even surprised; nor would any one have good
reason to be astonished if the correlative phenomenon occurred, and
under certain conditions some knots or strains were some day caused in
the ether, which had not been previously there; and so "matter," or the
foundation of matter, artificially produced. In other words, the
destruction and the creation of matter are well within the range of
scientific conception, and may be within the realm of experimental
possibility.


    _Persistence of the Existent._

Is there, then, no meaning in the conception which Professor Haeckel and
others have so enthusiastically formulated, and which certainly commends
itself to every one as representing in some sense a genuine truth,
whether it be called a "law of substance" or whatever it be called?
There does seem a certain plausibility in the idea, pure guess or
assumption though it be, that anything which really and fundamentally
exists, in a serious and untrivial and non-accidental sense, can be
trusted not suddenly to go out of existence and leave no trace behind.
In other words, there seems some reason to suppose that anything which
actually _exists_ must be in some way or other perpetual; that real
existence is not a capricious and changing attribute: arbitrary
collocations and accidental relations may and must be temporary, but
there may be in each a fundamental substratum which, if it can be
reached, will be found to be eternal. I develop this idea further in the
sequel. This is, at any rate, what Professor Haeckel was evidently
groping after, as many others have groped before him, and the nature of
this fundamental persistent entity or entities (for we must not assume
without proof that there is only one: there may be several, and at any
rate their ultimate unification may be a still further advanced and more
transcendental problem) may with some appropriateness be called 'the
problem of the universe,' since it is clearly the problem of existence.
Professor Haeckel thinks he has solved the problem, grasped the
fundamental reality, and found it to be _matter and energy_ and
nothing else; though why he chooses to regard matter and energy as
one thing instead of two is not perfectly plain to me, nor, I
venture to say, is it really plain to him.

Making the assumption, then, that there is something, or that there are
several things, to be discovered, which may thus have the most
fundamental property, viz., persistent immutable existence, the
'problem' has resolved itself into the discovery of what these things
actually are. It will not do to jump at some object and assume that that
is it.

A multitude of things obviously perish, thereby showing themselves to be
trivial or accidental arrangements, according to our hypothesis. A flame
is extinguished and dies, a mountain is ultimately ground into sand by
the slow influence of denudation, a planet or a sun may lose its
identity by encounter with other bodies. All these are temporary
collocations of atoms; and it appears now that an atom may break up into
electric charges, and these again may some day be found capable of
resolving themselves into pristine ether. If so, then these also are
temporary, and in the material universe it is the ether only which
persists—the Ether with such states of motion or strain as it eternally
possesses—in which case the Ether will have proved itself the material
substratum and most fundamental known entity on that side.

But are we to conclude, therefore, that nothing else exists? that the
existence of one thing disproves the existence of others? The contention
would be absurd. The category of _life_ has not been touched in anything
we have said so far; no relation has been established between life and
energy, or between life and ether. The nature of life is unknown. Is
life also a thing of which constancy can be asserted? When it disappears
from a material environment is it knocked out of existence, or is it
merely transferred to some other surroundings, becoming as difficult to
identify and recognise as are the gases of a burnt manuscript or the
vapour of a vanished cloud? Is it a temporary trivial collocation
associated with certain complex groupings of the atoms of matter, and
resolved into nothingness when that grouping is interfered with? or is
it something immaterial and itself fundamental, something which uses
these collocations of matter in order to display itself amid material
surroundings, but is otherwise essentially independent of them? (This
idea is expanded in Chapters VI. to X., and see note at end of present
chapter.)

Professor Haeckel would answer this question with a contemptuous
negative; and the treatment which he would thus give to life he would
also extend to mind and consciousness, to affection, to art, to poetry,
to religion, and all the other facts of experience to which in the
process of evolution humanity has risen: I say he would answer the
question, whether these had any real existence other than as a necessary
concomitant of a sufficiently complex material aggregate, with a
contemptuous negative; but I challenge him to say by what right he gives
that answer. His speculation is that all these properties are nascent
and latent in the material atoms themselves, that these have the
potentiality of life and choice and consciousness, which we perceive in
their developed combinations. As a speculation this is legitimate; but
the only answer that can by science legitimately be given at the present
time is the answer given by du Bois-Reymond, _ignoramus_, we do not
know.

Scientifically we do not; and for a man of science to pretend, or to
assert in a popular treatise, that we do, is essentially and seriously
to mislead. (See Chapter VII. below.) It may even be a question whether
the assertion of entire ignorance at the present time is completely
appropriate, whether we have not some positive evidence _against_
Professor Haeckel's contention. I believe that we have; and though I may
acquiesce in an assertion of present ignorance, I am not at all willing
to accept the next sentence of Professor du Bois-Reymond's answer, and
to say _ignorabimus_, we never shall know.

The matter seems to me within the legitimate lines of scientific
inquiry, and it is unwise to attempt prediction, especially negative
prediction, or to attempt to close the door to the future developments
of knowledge.

But I am content to say for the present that from the point of view of
strict science it is not yet possible to give any positive answer to
these questions; that they must await the progress of discovery. It
becomes a question of some interest, therefore, how it is possible for
Professor Haeckel and for others of his school to have arrived at the
idea not only that a scientific answer can be given, but that already it
has been given, and that they know distinctly what it is.


    Note on the Word "Life."

Until a term is accurately defined, and even afterwards for some
purposes, it is permissible to use a word of large significance in more
than one sense. Thus the word "light" may be considered a psychological
term, denoting a certain sensation, or a physiological term, signifying
the stimulus of certain specialised nerve-endings, or a physical term,
expressing briefly an electromagnetic wave-disturbance in the ether. I
am using the word "life" in a quite general sense, as is obvious, for if
it be limited to certain metabolic processes in protoplasm—which is the
narrowest of its legitimate meanings—what I have said about its possible
existence apart from matter would be absurd. It may be convenient to
employ the word "vitality" for this limited sense; but so far as I know,
there is no general consensus of usage, and the context must suffice to
show a friendly reader the connotation intended.




    CHAPTER III

    THE DEVELOPMENT OF LIFE


This leads me to the second main thesis or central scientific doctrine
of Professor Haeckel's treatise, the biological one; and it is this
which I shall now proceed to illustrate by further quotations, viz., the
connection as he conceives it between life and matter.

His view is that life has arisen from inorganic matter without
antecedent life. The experimental facts of biogenesis he discards in
favour of a hypothetical and at present undiscovered kind of spontaneous
generation. He assumes that the chemico-physical properties of carbon
confer so peculiar a power on its albuminoid compounds that they develop
into living protoplasm. He says that he formulated this view
thirty-three years ago, and that no better monistic theory has arisen to
replace it, while to reject some form of spontaneous generation is to
admit a miracle:—

    "The hypothesis of spontaneous generation, and the allied
    carbon-theory (viz., that 'carbon ... may be considered the
    chemical basis of life,' p. 2) are of great importance in
    deciding the long-standing conflict between the _teleological_
    (dualistic) and the _mechanical_ (monistic) interpretation of
    phenomena" (p. 91).

But it can hardly be maintained that a "hypothesis" is able to "decide"
any dispute. (See, however, Chapter VI.)

An unscientific reader could hardly imagine that the apparently detailed
account given in the next sentence of the automatic origin of life, as
it may have arisen on other planes, and as it must have arisen on this,
is of the nature of hypothesis:—

    "First simple monera are formed by spontaneous generation, and
    from these arise unicellular protists.... From these
    unicellular protists arise, in the further course of evolution,
    first social cell-communities, and subsequently tissue-forming
    plants and animals" (p. 131).

In this hypothesis of automatic origin by the agency of matter and
energy alone, he could probably find many biologists to agree with him
speculatively; but he goes further than some of them, for he does not
limit the automatic or material development to animal and vegetable life
alone: he throws automatic consciousness in, too:—

    "The 'cellular theory' ... has given us the first true
    interpretation of the physical, chemical, and even the
    psychological, processes of life" (p. 1).

    "Consciousness, thought, and speculation are functions of the
    ganglionic cells of the cortex of the brain" (p. 6).

    "The peculiar phenomenon of consciousness is not, as du
    Bois-Reymond and the dualistic school would have us believe, a
    completely 'transcendental' problem: it is, as I showed
    thirty-three years ago, a _physiological_ problem, and as such,
    must be reduced to the phenomena of physics and chemistry" (p.
    65).

Holding such a view concerning consciousness, in the teeth of the
general philosophic opinion of to-day, it is natural to find that of
orthodox psychology and psychologists he is contemptuous:—

    "Most of our so-called 'psychologists' have little or no
    knowledge of these indispensable foundations of
    anthropology—anatomy, histology, ontogeny, and physiology....
    Hence it is that most of the psychological literature of the day
    is so much waste-paper" (p. 34).

    "What we call the soul is, in my opinion, a natural phenomenon;
    I therefore consider psychology to be a branch of natural
    science—a section of physiology. Consequently, I must
    emphatically assert from the commencement that we have no
    different methods of research for that science than for any of
    the others" (p. 32).

In this difficult Science of Psychology he evidently feels himself quite
at home. He assumes easily and gratuitously that there is a material
substance at the root of all mental processes whatever—called by
Clifford 'mind-stuff,' (see, however, Chapter IV. below,)—and he then
proceeds to lay down the law concerning ancient difficulties as
follows:—

    "We shall give to this material basis of all psychic activity,
    without which it is inconceivable, the provisional name of
    'psychoplasm.'

    "The psychic processes are subject to the supreme, all-ruling
    law of substance; not even in this province is there a single
    exception to this highest cosmological law.

    "The dogma of 'free-will,' another essential element of the
    dualistic psychology, is similarly irreconcilable with the
    universal law of substance" (p. 32).

    "The freedom of the will is not an object for critical
    scientific inquiry at all, for it is a pure dogma, based on an
    illusion, and has no real existence" (p. 6).

Nevertheless, he realises that its apparent existence has to be
accounted for somehow, and accordingly he adopts the view that has
several times occurred to thinkers, viz., that the nucleus of all the
faculties enjoyed by a complete organism must be attributed in germ or
nucleus to the cells and even to the atoms out of which the organism is
built up.

His speculation as to the formation of a conscious organism, and to the
real meaning of its apparent sense of right and wrong and its apparent
control over its own acts, runs as follows, the will being reduced to
attraction and repulsion between the atoms:—

    "Vogt's pyknotic theory of substance is that minute parts of
    the universal substance, the centres of condensation, which
    might be called _pyknatoms_, correspond in general to the
    ultimate separate atoms of the kinetic theory; they differ,
    however, very considerably in that they are credited with
    sensation and inclination (or will-movement of the simplest
    form), _with souls_, in a certain sense,—in harmony with the
    old theory of Empedocles of the 'loves and hatreds of the
    elements.'

    "Moreover, these 'atoms with souls' do not float in empty space,
    but in the continuous, extremely attenuated, intermediate
    substance, which represents the uncondensed portion of the
    primitive matter" (p. 77).

    "'Attraction' and 'repulsion' seem to be the sources of
    _will_—that momentous element of the soul which determines the
    character of the individual" (p. 45).

    "The positive ponderable matter, the element with the feeling of
    like or desire, is continually striving to complete the process of
    condensation, and thus collecting an enormous amount of _potential_
    energy; the negative imponderable matter, on the other hand, offers
    a perpetual and equal resistance to the further increase of its
    strain and of the feeling of dislike connected therewith, and thus
    gathers the utmost amount of _actual_ energy.

    "I think that this pyknotic theory of substance will prove more
    acceptable to every biologist who is convinced of the unity of
    nature than the kinetic theory which prevails in physics to-day"
    (p. 78).

In other words, he appeals to a presumed sentiment of biologists
against the knowledge of the physicist in his own sphere—a strange
attitude for a man of science. After this it is less surprising to find
him ignoring the elementary axiom that "action and reaction are equal
and opposite," _i.e._ that internal forces can have no motive power on
a body as a whole, and making the grotesque assertion that matter is
moved, not by external forces, but by internal likes and desires:—

    "I must lay down the following theses, which are involved in Vogt's
    pyknotic theory, as indispensable for a truly monistic view of
    substance, and one that covers the whole field of organic and
    inorganic nature:—

    "1. The two fundamental forms of substance, ponderable matter and
    ether, are not dead and only moved by extrinsic force, but they are
    endowed with sensation and will (though, naturally, of the lowest
    grade); they experience an inclination for condensation, a dislike
    of strain; they strive after the one and struggle against the
    other" (p. 78).

My desire is to criticise politely, and hence I refrain from
characterising this sentence as a physicist should.

    "Every shade of inclination, from complete indifference to the
    fiercest passion, is exemplified in the chemical relation of the
    various elements towards each other" (p. 79).

    "On those phenomena we base our conviction that even the _atom_ is
    not without a rudimentary form of sensation and will, or, as it is
    better expressed, of feeling (_æsthesis_) and inclination
    (_tropesis_)—that is, a universal 'soul' of the simplest
    character" (p. 80).

    "I gave the outlines of _cellular_ psychology in 1866 in my paper
    on 'Cell-souls and Soul-cells'" (p. 63).

Thus, then, in order to explain life and mind and consciousness by
means of matter, all that is done is to assume that matter possesses
these unexplained attributes.

What the full meaning of that may be, and whether there be any
philosophic justification for any such idea, is a matter on which I
will not now express an opinion; but, at any rate, as it stands, it is
not science, and its formulation gives no sort of conception of what
life and will and consciousness really are.

Even if it were true, it contains nothing whatever in the nature of
explanation: it recognises the inexplicable, and relegates it to the
atoms, where it seems to hope that further quest may cease. Instead of
tackling the difficulty where it actually occurs; instead of
associating life, will, and consciousness with the organisms in which
they are actually in experience found, these ideas are foisted into the
atoms of matter; and then the properties which have been conferred on
the atoms are denied in all essential reality to the fully developed
organisms which those atoms help to compose!

I show later on (Chapters V. and X.) that there is no necessary
justification for assuming that a phenomenon exhibited by an aggregate
of particles must be possessed by the ingredients of which it is
composed; on the contrary, wholly new properties may make their
appearance simply by aggregation; though I admit that such a
proposition is by no means obvious, and that it may be a legitimate
subject for controversy. But into that question our author does not
enter; and even when he has conferred on the atoms these astounding
properties, he abstains from what would seem a natural development: for
his doctrine is that our power is actually less than that of the
atoms,—that instead of utilising the attractions and repulsions, or
"likes and dislikes," of our constituent particles, and directing them
by the aggregate of conscious will-power to some preconceived end, we
ourselves, on the contrary, are dominated and controlled by _them_; so
that freedom of the will is an illusion.

Freedom being thus disposed of, Immortality presents no difficulty; a
soul is the operation of a group of cells, and so the existence of man
clearly begins and ends with that of his terrestrial body:—

    "The most important moment in the life of every man, as in that of
    all other complex animals, is the moment in which he begins his
    individual existence [coalescence of sperm cell and ovum] ... the
    existence of the personality, the independent individual,
    commences. This ontogenetic fact is supremely important, for the
    most far-reaching conclusions may be drawn from it. In the first
    place, we have a clear perception that man, like all the other
    complex animals, inherits all his personal characteristics, bodily
    and mental, from his parents; and further, we come to the momentous
    conclusion that the new personality which arises thus can lay no
    claim to 'immortality'" (p. 22).

Others beside Haeckel have held this kind of view at one time or
another; but, unlike him, most of them have recanted and seen the error
of their ways. He is, indeed, aware that several of his great German
contemporaries have been through this phase of thought and come out on
the other side, notably the physiologist-philosopher Wundt, and he
refers to them fairly and instructively thus:—

    "What seems to me of special importance and value in Wundt's work
    is that he 'extends the law of the persistence of force for the
    first time to the psychic world.'

    "Thirty years afterwards, in a second edition, Wundt emancipated
    himself from the fundamental errors of the first, and says that he
    'learned many years ago to consider the work a sin of his youth';
    it 'weighed on him as a kind of crime, from which he longed to free
    himself as soon as possible.' In the first, psychology is treated
    as a _physical_ science, on the same laws as the whole of
    physiology, of which it is only a part; thirty years afterwards he
    finds psychology to be a _spiritual_ science, with principles and
    objects entirely different from those of physical science.

    "I myself," says Haeckel, "naturally consider the 'youthful sin' of
    the young physiologist Wundt to be a correct knowledge of nature,
    and energetically defend it against the antagonistic view of the
    old philosopher Wundt. This entire change of philosophical
    principles, which we find in Wundt, as we found it in Kant,
    Virchow, du Bois-Reymond, Carl Ernst Baer, and others, is very
    interesting" (p. 36).

So it is: very interesting!

Professor Haeckel is so imbued with biological science that he loses
his sense of proportion; and his enthusiasm for the work of Darwin
leads him to attribute to it an exaggerated scope, and enables him to
eliminate the third of the Kantian trilogy:—

    "Darwin's theory of the natural origin of species at once gave us
    the solution of the mystic 'problem of creation,' the great
    'question of all questions'—the problem of the true character and
    origin of man himself" (p. 28) [_cf._ p. 19 above].

It is a great deal more than that patient observer and deep thinker
Charles Darwin ever claimed, nor have his wiser disciples claimed it
for him. It is familiar that he explained how variations once arisen
would be clinched, if favourable in the struggle, by the action of
heredity and survival; but the source or origin of the variations
themselves he did not explain.

Do they arise by guidance or by chance? Is natural selection akin to
the verified and practical processes of artificial selection? or is it
wholly alien to them and influenced by chance alone? The latter view
can hardly be considered a complete explanation, though it is verbally
the one adopted by Professor Haeckel, and it is of interest to see what
he means by chance:—

    "Since impartial study of the evolution of the world teaches us
    that there is no definite aim and no special purpose to be traced
    in it, there seems to be no alternative but to leave everything to
    'blind chance.'

    "One group of philosophers affirms, in accordance with its
    teleological conception, that the whole cosmos is an orderly
    system, in which every phenomenon has its aim and purpose; there is
    no such thing as chance. The other group, holding a mechanical
    theory, expresses itself thus: The development of the universe is a
    monistic mechanical process, in which we discover no aim or purpose
    whatever; what we call design in the organic world is a special
    result of biological agencies; neither in the evolution of the
    heavenly bodies nor in that of the crust of our earth do we find
    any trace of a controlling purpose—all is the result of chance.
    Each party is right—according to its definition of chance. The
    general law of causality, taken in conjunction with the law of
    substance, teaches us that every phenomenon has a mechanical cause;
    in this sense there is no such thing as chance. Yet it is not only
    lawful, but necessary, to retain the term for the purpose of
    expressing the simultaneous occurrence of two phenomena, which are
    not causally related to each other, but of which each has its own
    mechanical cause, independent of that of the other.

    "Everybody knows that chance, in this monistic sense, plays an
    important part in the life of man and in the universe at large.
    That, however, does not prevent us from recognising in each
    'chance' event, as we do in the evolution of the entire cosmos, the
    universal sovereignty of nature's supreme law, _the law of
    substance_" (p. 97).


_Illegitimate Negations._

With regard to the possibility of Revelation, or information derived
from super-human sources, naturally he ridicules the idea; but in
connection with the mode of origin and development of life on this
planet he makes the following sensible and noteworthy admission:—

    "It is very probable that these processes have gone on likewise on
    other planets, and that other planets have produced other types of
    the higher plants and animals, which are unknown on our earth;
    perhaps from some higher animal stem, which is superior to the
    vertebrate in formation, higher beings have arisen who far
    transcend us earthly men in intelligence."

Exactly; it is quite probable. It is, in fact, improbable that man is
the highest type of existence. But if Professor Haeckel is ready to
grant that probability or even possibility, why does he so strenuously
exclude the idea of revelation, _i.e._, the acquiring of imparted
information from higher sources? Savages can certainly have
"revelation" from civilised men. Why, then, should it be inconceivable
that human beings should receive information from beings in the
universe higher than themselves? It may or may not be the case that
they do; but there is no scientific ground for dogmatism on the
subject, nor any reason for asserting the inconceivability of such a
thing.

Professor Haeckel would no doubt reply to some of the above criticism
that he is not only a man of science, but also a philosopher, that he
is looking ahead, beyond ascertained fact, and that it is his
philosophic views which are in question rather than his scientific
statements. To some extent it is both, as has been seen; but if even
the above be widely known—if it be generally understood that the most
controversial portions of his work are mainly speculative and
hypothetical, it can be left to its proper purpose of doing good rather
than harm. It can only do harm by misleading, it can do considerable
good by criticising and stimulating and informing; and it is an
interesting fact that a man so well acquainted with biology as
Professor Haeckel is should have been so strongly impressed with the
truth of some aspect of the philosophic system known as Monism. Many
men of science have likewise been impressed with the probability, or
possibility, of some such ultimate unification.

The problem to be solved—and an old-world problem indeed it is—is the
range, and especially the nature, of the connection between mind and
matter; or, let us say, between the material universe on the one hand,
and the vital, the mental, the conscious and spiritual universe or
universes, on the other.

It would be extremely surprising if any attempt yet made had already
been thoroughly successful, though the attack on the idealistic side
appears to many of us physicists to be by far the most hopeful line of
advance. An excessively wide knowledge of existence would seem to be
demanded for the success of any such most ambitious attempt; but,
though none of us may hope to achieve it, many may strive to make some
contribution towards the great end; and those who think they have such
a contribution to make, or such a revelation entrusted to them, are
bound to express it to the best of their ability, and leave it to their
contemporaries and successors to assimilate such portions of it as are
true, and to develop it further. From this point of view Professor
Haeckel is no doubt amply justified in his writings; but,
unfortunately, it appears to me that although he has been borne forward
on the advancing wave of monistic philosophy, he has, in its
specification, attempted such precision of materialistic detail, and
subjected it to so narrow and limited a view of the totality of
experience, that the progress of thought has left him, as well as his
great English exemplar, Herbert Spencer, somewhat high and dry, belated
and stranded by the tide of opinion which has now begun to flow in
another direction. He is, as it were, a surviving voice from the middle
of the nineteenth century; he represents, in clear and eloquent
fashion, opinions which then were prevalent among many leaders of
thought—opinions which they themselves in many cases, and their
successors still more, lived to outgrow; so that by this time Professor
Haeckel's voice is as the voice of one crying in the wilderness, not as
the pioneer or vanguard of an advancing army, but as the despairing
shout of a standard-bearer, still bold and unflinching, but abandoned
by the retreating ranks of his comrades as they march to new orders in
a fresh and more idealistic direction.




CHAPTER IV

MEMORANDA FOR WOULD-BE MATERIALISTS


The objection which it has been found necessary to express concerning
Materialism as a complete system is based not on its assertions, but on
its negations. In so far as it makes positive assertions, embodying the
results of scientific discovery and even of scientific speculation
based thereupon, there is no fault to find with it; but when, on the
strength of that, it sets up to be a philosophy of the universe—all
inclusive, therefore, and shutting out a number of truths otherwise
perceived, or which appeal to other faculties, or which are equally
true and are not really contradictory of legitimately materialistic
statements—then it is that its insufficiency and narrowness have to be
displayed.

It will be probably instructive, and it may be sufficient, if I show
that two great leaders in scientific thought (one the greatest of all
men of science who have yet lived), though well aware of much that
could be said positively on the materialistic side, and very willing to
admit or even to extend the province of science or exact knowledge to
the uttermost, yet were very far from being philosophic Materialists or
from imagining that other modes of regarding the universe were thereby
excluded.

Great leaders of thought, in fact, are not accustomed to take a narrow
view of existence, or to suppose that one mode of regarding it, or one
set of formulæ expressing it, can possibly be sufficient and complete.
Even a sheet of paper has two sides: a terrestrial globe presents
different aspects from different points of view; a crystal has a
variety of facets; and the totality of existence is not likely to be
more simple than any of these—is not likely to be readily expressible
in any form of words, or to be thoroughly conceivable by any human
mind.

It may be well to remember that Sir Isaac Newton was a Theist of the
most pronounced and thorough conviction, although he had a great deal
to do with the reduction of the major Cosmos to mechanics, _i.e._ with
its explanation by the elaborated machinery of simple forces; and he
conceived it possible that, in the progress of science, this process of
reduction to mechanics would continue till it embraced nearly all
phenomena. (See extract below.) That, indeed, has been the effort of
science ever since, and therein lies the legitimate basis for
materialistic statements, though not for a materialistic philosophy.

The following sound remarks concerning Newton are taken from Huxley's
_Hume_, p. 246:—

    "Newton demonstrated all the host of heaven to be but the elements
    of a vast mechanism, regulated by the same laws as those which
    express the falling of a stone to the ground. There is a passage in
    the preface to the first edition of the _Principia_, which shows
    that Newton was penetrated, as completely as Descartes, with the
    belief that all the phenomena of nature are expressible in terms of
    matter and motion:—

    "'WOULD THAT THE REST OF THE PHENOMENA OF NATURE COULD BE DEDUCED
    BY A LIKE KIND OF REASONING FROM MECHANICAL PRINCIPLES. FOR MANY
    CIRCUMSTANCES LEAD ME TO SUSPECT THAT ALL THESE PHENOMENA MAY
    DEPEND UPON CERTAIN FORCES, IN VIRTUE OF WHICH THE PARTICLES OF
    BODIES, BY CAUSES NOT YET KNOWN, ARE EITHER MUTUALLY IMPELLED
    AGAINST ONE ANOTHER, AND COHERE INTO REGULAR FIGURES, OR REPEL AND
    RECEDE FROM ONE ANOTHER; WHICH FORCES BEING UNKNOWN, PHILOSOPHERS
    HAVE AS YET EXPLORED NATURE IN VAIN. BUT I HOPE THAT, EITHER BY
    THIS METHOD OF PHILOSOPHISING, OR BY SOME OTHER AND BETTER, THE
    PRINCIPLES HERE LAID DOWN MAY THROW SOME LIGHT UPON THE MATTER.'"

Here is a full-blown anticipation of an intelligible exposition of the
Universe in terms of matter and force: the substantial basis of what
smaller men call materialism and develop into what they consider to be
a materialistic philosophy. But there is no necessity for anything of
the kind; a systematic expression of facts in terms of one of their
aspects does not exclude expression in terms of other and totally
different aspects also. Denial of all sides but one, is a poor kind of
unification. Denial of this sort is the weakness and delusion of the
people who call themselves 'Christian Scientists': they have hold of
one side of truth—and that should be granted them,—but they hold it
in so narrow and insecure a fashion that, in self-defence, they think
it safest strenuously to deny the existence of all other sides. In this
futile enterprise they are imitating the attitude of the philosophic
Materialists, on the other side of the controversy.

And then, again, Professor Huxley himself, who is commonly spoken of by
half-informed people as if he were a philosophic materialist, was
really nothing of the kind; for although, like Newton, fully imbued
with the mechanical doctrine, and, of course, far better informed
concerning the biological departments of Nature and the discoveries
which have in the last century been made, and though he rightly
regarded it as his mission to make the scientific point of view clear
to his benighted contemporaries, and was full of enthusiasm for the
facts on which materialists take their stand, he saw clearly that these
alone were insufficient for a philosophy. The following extracts from
the 'Hume' volume will show, first, that he entirely repudiated
materialism as a satisfactory or complete scheme of things; and,
secondly, that he profoundly disagreed with the position which now
appears to be occupied by Professor Haeckel. Especially is he severe on
gratuitous denials applied to provinces beyond our scope, saying:—

    "that while it is the summit of human wisdom to learn the limit of
    our faculties, it may be wise to recollect that we have no more
    right to make denials, than to put forth affirmatives, about what
    lies beyond that limit. Whether either mind or matter has a
    'substance' or not is a problem which we are incompetent to
    discuss; and it is just as likely that the common notions upon the
    subject should be correct as any others.... 'The same principles
    which, at first view, lead to scepticism, pursued to a certain
    point, bring men back to common sense'" (p. 282).

And on p. 286 he speaks concerning "substance"—that substance which
constitutes the foundation of Haeckel's philosophy—almost as if he
were purposely confuting that rather fly-blown production:—

    "Thus, if any man think he has reason to believe that the
    '_substance_' of matter, to the existence of which no limit can be
    set either in time or space, is the infinite and eternal substratum
    of all actual and possible existences, which is the doctrine of
    philosophical materialism, as I understand it, I have no objection
    to his holding that doctrine; and I fail to comprehend how it can
    have the slightest influence upon any ethical or religious views he
    may please to hold....

    "Moreover, the ultimate forms of existence which we distinguish in
    our little speck of the universe are, possibly, only two out of
    infinite varieties of existence, not only analogous to matter and
    analogous to mind, but of kinds which we are not competent so much
    as to conceive—in the midst of which, indeed, we might be set
    down, with no more notion of what was about us, than the worm in a
    flower-pot, on a London balcony, has of the life of the great city.

    "That which I do very strongly object to is the habit, which a
    great many non-philosophical materialists unfortunately fall into,
    of forgetting all these very obvious considerations. They talk as
    if the proof that the 'substance of matter' was the 'substance' of
    all things cleared up all the mysteries of existence. In point of
    fact, it leaves them exactly where they were.... Your religious and
    ethical difficulties are just as great as mine. The speculative
    game is drawn—let us get to practical work" (p. 286).

And again on pp. 251 and 279:—

    "It is worth any amount of trouble to ... know by one's own
    knowledge the great truth ... that the honest and rigorous
    following up of the argument which leads us to 'materialism'
    inevitably carries us beyond it" (p. 251).

    "To sum up. If the materialist affirms that the universe and all
    its phenomena are resolvable into matter and motion, Berkeley
    replies, True; but what you call matter and motion are known to us
    only as forms of consciousness; their being is to be conceived or
    known; and the existence of a state of consciousness, apart from a
    thinking mind, is a contradiction in terms.

    "I conceive that this reasoning is irrefragable. And, therefore, if
    I were obliged to choose between absolute materialism and absolute
    idealism, I should feel compelled to accept the latter alternative"
    (p. 279).

Let the jubilant but uninstructed and comparatively ignorant amateur
materialist therefore beware, and bethink himself twice or even thrice
before he conceives that he understands the universe and is competent
to pour scorn upon the intuitions and perceptions of great men in what
may be to him alien regions of thought and experience.

Let him explain, if he can, what he means by his own identity, or the
identity of any thinking or living being, which at different times
consists of a totally different set of material particles. Something
there clearly is which confers personal identity and constitutes an
individual: it is a property characteristic of every form of life,
even the humblest; but it is not yet explained or understood, and it
is no answer to assert gratuitously that there is some fundamental
"substance" or material basis on which that identity depends, any more
than it is an explanation to say that it depends upon a "soul." These
are all forms of words. As Hume says, quoted by Huxley with approval in
the work already cited, p. 194:—

    "It is impossible to attach any definite meaning to the word
    'substance,' when employed for the hypothetical substratum of soul
    and matter.... If it be said that our personal identity requires
    the assumption of a substance which remains the same while the
    accidents of perception shift and change, the question arises what
    is meant by personal identity?... A plant or an animal, in the
    course of its existence, from the condition of an egg or seed to
    the end of life, remains the same neither in form, nor in
    structure, nor in the matter of which it is composed: every
    attribute it possesses is constantly changing, and yet we say that
    it is always one and the same individual" (p. 194).

And in his own preface to the 'Hume' volume Huxley expresses himself
forcibly thus,—equally antagonistic as was his wont to both ostensible
friend and ostensible foe, as soon as they got off what he considered
the straight path:—

    "That which it may be well for us not to forget is, that the
    first-recorded judicial murder of a scientific thinker [Socrates]
    was compassed and effected, not by a despot, nor by priests, but
    was brought about by eloquent demagogues.... Clear knowledge of
    what one does not know just as important as knowing what one does
    know....

    "The development of exact natural knowledge in all its vast range,
    from physics to history and criticism, is the consequence of the
    working out, in this province, of the resolution to 'take nothing
    for truth without clear knowledge that it is such'; to consider all
    beliefs open to criticism; to regard the value of authority as
    neither greater nor less, than as much as it can prove itself to be
    worth. The modern spirit is not the spirit 'which always denies,'
    delighting only in destruction; still less is it that which builds
    castles in the air rather than not construct; it is that spirit
    which works and will work 'without haste and without rest,'
    gathering harvest after harvest of truth into its barns, and
    devouring error with unquenchable fire" (p. viii.).

The harvesting of truth is a safe enough enterprise, but the devouring
of error is a more dangerous pastime, since flames are liable to spread
beyond our control; and though, in a world overgrown with weeds and
refuse, the cleansing influence of fire is a necessity, it would be
cruel to apply the same agency again at a later stage, when a fresh
young crop is springing up in the cleared ground.




