CHAPTER XIII

THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE EMOTIONS


_The Association of the Emotions_

If the human body has at any time been simultaneously affected by two
bodies, whenever the mind afterwards imagines one of them, it will
immediately remember the other. But the imaginations of the mind
indicate rather the modifications of our body than the nature of
external bodies, and therefore if the body, and consequently the mind,
has been at any time, simultaneously affected by two emotions, whenever
it is afterwards affected by one of them, it will also be affected by
the other.

Let the mind be supposed to be affected at the same time by two
emotions, its power of action not being increased or diminished by one,
while it is increased or diminished by the other. From the preceding
proposition it is plain that when the mind is afterwards affected by the
first emotion through its true cause, which (by hypothesis) of itself
neither increases nor diminishes the mind's power of thinking, it will
at the same time be affected by the other emotion, which does increase
or diminish that power, that is to say, it will be affected with joy or
sorrow; and thus the thing itself will be the cause of joy or of sorrow,
not of itself, but accidentally. In the same way it can easily be shown
that the same thing may accidentally be the cause of desire.

The fact that we have contemplated a thing with an emotion of joy or
sorrow, of which it is not the efficient cause, is a sufficient reason
for being able to love or hate it.

We now understand why we love or hate certain things from no cause which
is known to us, but merely from sympathy or antipathy, as they say. To
this class, too, are to be referred those objects which affect us with
joy or sorrow solely because they are somewhat like objects which
usually affect us with those emotions. I know indeed that the writers
who first introduced the words "Sympathy" and "Antipathy" desired
thereby to signify certain hidden qualities of things, but nevertheless
I believe that we shall be permitted to understand by those names
qualities which are plain and well known.

Anything may be accidentally the cause either of hope or fear. Things
which are accidentally the causes either of hope or fear are called good
or evil omens. In so far as the omens are the cause of hope and fear are
they the cause of joy or of sorrow, and consequently so far do we love
them or hate them, and endeavor to use them as means to obtain those
things for which we hope, or to remove them as obstacles or causes of
fear. Our natural constitution, too, is such that we easily believe the
things we hope for, and believe with difficulty those we fear, and we
think too much of the former and too little of the latter. Thus have
superstitions arisen, by which men are everywhere disquieted. I do not
consider it worth while to go any further, and to explain here all
those vacillations of mind which arise from hope and fear, since it
follows from the definition alone of these emotions that hope cannot
exist without fear, nor fear without hope.

If we imagine a certain thing to possess something which resembles an
object which usually affects the mind with joy or sorrow, although the
quality in which the thing resembles the object is not the efficient
cause of these emotions, we shall nevertheless, by virtue of the
resemblance alone, love or hate the thing.

If we have been affected with joy or sorrow by any one who belongs to a
class or nation different from our own, and if our joy or sorrow is
accompanied with the idea of this person as its cause, under the common
name of his class or nation, we shall not love or hate him merely, but
the whole of the class or nation to which he belongs.


_The Imitation and Reciprocation of the Emotions_

I

The images of things are modifications of the human body, and the ideas
of these modifications represent to us external bodies as if they were
present, that is to say, these ideas involve both the nature of our own
body and at the same time the present nature of the external body. If,
therefore, the nature of the external body be like that of our body,
then the idea of the external body which we imagine will involve a
modification of our body like that of the external body. Therefore, if
we imagine any one who is like ourselves to be affected by a
modification, this imagination will express a modification of our body
like that modification, and therefore we shall be modified with a
similar modification ourselves, because we imagine something like us to
be modified with the same. If, on the other hand, we hate a thing which
is like ourselves, we shall so far be modified by a modification
contrary and not similar to that with which it is modified.

If we imagine that a person enjoys a thing, that will be a sufficient
reason for making us love the thing and desiring to enjoy it. If we
imagine that a person enjoys a thing which only one can possess, we do
all we can to prevent his possessing it. His enjoyment of the thing is
an obstacle to our joy, and we endeavor to bring into existence
everything which we imagine conduces to joy, and to remove or destroy
everything opposed to it, or which we imagine conduces to sorrow.

We see, therefore, that the nature of man is generally constituted so as
to pity those who are in adversity and envy those who are in prosperity,
and he envies with a hatred which is the greater in proportion as he
loves what he imagines another possesses. We see also that from the same
property of human nature from which it follows that men pity one another
it also follows that they are envious and ambitious. If we will consult
experience, we shall find that she teaches the same doctrine, especially
if we consider the first years of our life. For we find that children,
because their body is, as it were, continually in equilibrium, laugh and
cry merely because they see others do the same; whatever else they see
others do they immediately wish to imitate; everything which they think
is pleasing to other people they want. And the reason is, as we have
said, that the images of things are the modifications themselves of the
human body, or the ways in which it is modified by external causes and
disposed to this or that action.


II

If we imagine that we are hated by another without having given him any
cause for it, we shall hate him in return. If we imagine that we have
given just cause for the hatred, we shall then be affected with shame.
This, however, rarely happens; we endeavor to affirm everything, both
concerning ourselves and concerning the beloved object which we imagine
will affect us or the object with joy, and, on the contrary, we endeavor
to deny everything that will affect either it or ourselves with sorrow.

This reciprocity of hatred may also arise from the fact that hatred is
followed by an attempt to bring evil upon him who is hated. If,
therefore, we imagine that we are hated by any one else, we shall
imagine him as the cause of some evil or sorrow, and thus we shall be
affected with sorrow or apprehension accompanied with the idea of the
person who hates us as a cause; that is to say, we shall hate him in
return, as we have said above.

If we imagine that the person we love is affected with hatred towards
us, we shall be agitated at the same time both with love and hatred. For
in so far as we imagine that we are hated are we determined to hate him
in return. But (by hypothesis) we love him notwithstanding, and
therefore we shall be agitated both by love and hatred.

If we imagine that an evil has been brought upon us through the hatred
of some person towards whom we have hitherto been moved by no emotion,
we shall immediately endeavor to return that evil upon him.

If we imagine that any one like ourselves is affected with hatred
towards an object like ourselves which we love, we shall hate him. If we
imagine that we are beloved by a person without having given any cause
for the love we shall love him in return.

If we imagine that we have given just cause for love, we shall pride
ourselves upon it. This frequently occurs, and we have said that the
contrary takes place when we believe that we are hated by another
person. This reciprocal love, and consequently this attempt to do good
to the person who loves us, and who endeavors to do good to us, is
called _thankfulness_ or _gratitude_, and from this we can see how much
readier men are to revenge themselves than to return a benefit.

If we imagine that we are loved by a person we hate, we shall at the
same time be agitated both by love and hatred. If the hatred prevail, we
shall endeavor to bring evil upon the person by whom we are loved. This
emotion is called Cruelty, especially if it is believed that the person
who loves has not given any ordinary reason for hatred.


_The "Herd Instinct"_

If we imagine men to love or hate a thing, we shall therefore love or
hate it; that is to say, we shall therefore rejoice or be sad at the
presence of the thing, and therefore we shall endeavor to do everything
which we imagine men[28] will look upon with joy, and, on the contrary,
we shall be averse to doing anything to which we imagine men are averse.

He who imagines that he affects others with joy or sorrow will
necessarily be affected with joy or sorrow. But since man is conscious
of himself by means of the emotions by which he is determined to act;
therefore if a person has done anything which he imagines will affect
others with joy, he also will be affected with joy, accompanied with an
idea of himself as its cause; that is to say, he will look upon himself
with joy. If, on the other hand, he has done anything which he imagines
will affect others with sorrow, he will look upon himself with sorrow.

If we imagine that a person loves, desires, or hates a thing which we
ourselves love, desire, or hate, we shall on that account love, desire,
or hate the thing more steadily. If, on the other hand, we imagine that
he is averse to the thing we love or loves the thing to which we are
averse, we shall then suffer vacillation of mind.

It follows from this proposition that every one endeavors as much as
possible to make others love what he loves, and to hate what he hates.
Hence the poet says:

    Speremus pariter, pariter metuamus amantes;
    Ferreus est, si quis, quod sinit alter, amat.

This effort to make every one approve what we love or hate is in truth
ambition, and so we see that each person by nature desires that other
persons should live according to his way of thinking; but if every one
does this, then all are a hindrance to one another, and if every one
wishes to be praised or beloved by the rest, then they all hate one
another.


_The Varieties of Emotion_

Joy and sorrow, and consequently the emotions which are compounded of
these or derived from them, are passions. But we necessarily suffer in
so far as we have inadequate ideas, and only in so far as we have them;
that is to say, we necessarily suffer only in so far as we imagine, or
in so far as we are affected by a modification which involves the nature
of our body and that of an external body. The nature, therefore, of each
passion must necessarily be explained in such a manner, that the nature
of the object by which we are affected is expressed. The joy, for
example, which springs from an object _A_ involves the nature of that
object _A_, and the joy which springs from _B_ involves the nature of
that object _B_, and therefore these two emotions of joy are of a
different nature, because they arise from causes of a different nature.
In like manner the emotion of sorrow which arises from one object is of
a different kind from that which arises from another cause, and the same
thing is to be understood of love, hatred, hope, fear, vacillation of
mind, etc.; so that there are necessarily just as many kinds of joy,
sorrow, love, hatred, etc., as there are kinds of objects by which we
are affected. But desire is the essence itself or nature of a person in
so far as this nature is conceived from its given constitution as
determined towards any action, and therefore as a person is affected by
external causes with this or that kind of joy, sorrow, love, hatred,
etc., that is to say, as his nature is constituted in this or that way,
so must his desire vary and the nature of one desire differ from that of
another, just as the emotions from which each desire arises differ.
There are as many kinds of desires, therefore, as there are kinds of
joy, sorrow, love, etc., and, consequently (as we have just shown), as
there are kinds of objects by which we are affected.

All emotions are related to desire, joy, or sorrow, as the definitions
show which we have given of those emotions. But desire is the very
nature or essence of a person and therefore the desire of one person
differs from the desire of another as much as the nature or essence of
the one differs from that of the other. Again, joy and sorrow are
passions by which the power of a person or his effort to persevere in
his own being is increased or diminished, helped, or limited. But by the
effort to persevere in his own being, in so far as it is related at the
same time to the mind and the body, we understand appetite and desire,
and therefore joy and sorrow are desire or appetite in so far as the
latter is increased, diminished, helped, or limited by external causes;
that is to say they are the nature itself of each person.

The joy or sorrow of one person therefore differs from the joy or sorrow
of another as much as the nature or essence of one person differs from
that of the other, and consequently the emotion of one person differs
from the corresponding emotion of another.

Hence it follows that the emotions of animals which are called
irrational (for after we have learned the origin of the mind we can in
no way doubt that brutes feel) differ from human emotions as much as
the nature of a brute differs from that of a man. Both the man and the
horse, for example, are swayed by the lust to propagate, but the horse
is swayed by equine lust and the man by that which is human. The lusts
and appetites of insects, fishes, and birds must vary in the same way;
and so, although each individual lives contented with its own nature and
delights in it, nevertheless the life with which it is contented and its
joy are nothing but the idea or soul of that individual, and so the joy
of one differs in character from the joy of the other as much as the
essence of the one differs from the essence of the other. Finally, it
follows from the preceding proposition that the joy by which the
drunkard is enslaved is altogether different from the joy which is the
portion of the philosopher,--a thing I wished just to hint in passing.


_The Inconstancy of the Emotions_

The human body is affected by external bodies in a number of ways. Two
men, therefore, may be affected in different ways at the same time, and
therefore they can be affected by one and the same object in different
ways. Again the human body may be affected now in this and now in that
way, and consequently it may be affected by one and the same object in
different ways at different times.

We thus see that it is possible for one man to love a thing and for
another man to hate it; for this man to fear what this man does not
fear, and for the same man to love what before he hated, and to dare to
do what before he feared. Again, since each judges according to his own
emotion what is good and what is evil, what is better and what is
worse, it follows that men may change in their judgment as they do in
their emotions, and hence it comes to pass that when we compare men, we
distinguish them solely by the difference in their emotions, calling
some brave, others timid, and others by other names.

For example, I shall call a man _brave_ who despises an evil which I
usually fear, and if, besides this, I consider the fact that his desire
of doing evil to a person whom he hates or doing good to one whom he
loves is not restrained by that fear of evil by which I am usually
restrained, I call him _audacious_. On the other hand, the man who fears
an evil which I usually despise will appear _timid_, and if, besides
this, I consider that his desire is restrained by the fear of an evil
which has no power to restrain me, I call him _pusillanimous_; and in
this way everybody will pass judgment.

Finally, from this nature of man and the inconstancy of his judgment, in
consequence of which he often judges things from mere emotion, and the
things which he believes contribute to his joy or his sorrow, and which,
therefore, he endeavors to bring to pass or remove, are often only
imaginary--to say nothing about the uncertainty of things--it is easy to
see that a man may often be himself the cause of his sorrow or his joy,
or of being affected with sorrow or joy accompanied with the idea of
himself as its cause, so that we can easily understand what repentance
and what self-approval are.

Love and hatred towards any object, for example, towards Peter, are
destroyed if the joy and the sorrow which they respectively involve be
joined to the idea of another cause; and they are respectively
diminished in proportion as we imagine that Peter has not been their
sole cause.

For the same reason, love or hatred towards an object we imagine to be
free must be greater than towards an object which is under necessity.

An object which we imagine to be free must be perceived through itself
and without others. If, therefore, we imagine it to be the cause of joy
or sorrow, we shall for that reason alone love or hate it, and that too
with the greatest love or the greatest hatred which can spring from the
given emotion. But if we imagine that the object which is the cause of
that emotion is necessary, then we shall imagine it as the cause of that
emotion, not alone, but together with other causes, and so our love or
hatred towards it will be less.

Hence it follows that our hatred or love towards one another is greater
than towards other things, because we think we are free.


_The Power of Love Over Hate_

If we imagine that the person we hate is affected with hatred towards
us, a new hatred is thereby produced, the old hatred still remaining (by
hypothesis). If, on the other hand, we imagine him to be affected with
love towards us, in so far as we imagine it shall we look upon ourselves
with joy, and endeavor to please him; that is to say, in so far shall we
endeavor not to hate him nor to affect him with sorrow. This effort will
be greater or less as the emotion from which it arises is greater or
less, and, therefore, should it be greater than that which springs from
hatred, and by which we endeavor to affect with sorrow the object we
hate, then it will prevail and banish hatred from the mind. Hatred is
increased through return of hatred, but may be destroyed by love.

Hatred which is altogether overcome by love passes into love, and the
love is therefore greater than if hatred had not preceded it. For if we
begin to love a thing which we hated, or upon which we were in the habit
of looking with sorrow, we shall rejoice for the very reason that we
love, and to this joy which love involves a new joy is added, which
springs from the fact that the effort to remove the sorrow which hatred
involves, is so much assisted, there being also present before us as the
cause of our joy the idea of the person whom we hated.

Notwithstanding the truth of this proposition, no one will try to hate a
thing or will wish to be affected with sorrow in order that he may
rejoice the more; that is to say, no one will desire to inflict loss on
himself in the hope of recovering the loss, or to become ill in the hope
of getting well, inasmuch as every one will always try to preserve his
being and to remove sorrow from himself as much as possible. Moreover,
if it can be imagined that it is possible for us to desire to hate a
person in order that we may love him afterwards the more, we must always
desire to continue the hatred. For the love will be the greater as the
hatred has been greater, and therefore we shall always desire the hatred
to be more and more increased. Upon the same principle we shall desire
that our sickness may continue and increase in order that we may
afterwards enjoy the greater pleasure when we get well, and therefore we
shall always desire sickness, which is absurd.

FOOTNOTES:

[28] Both here and in what follows to whom we are moved by no emotion I
understand by the word _men_, men (Sp.).




THIRD PART

ON MAN'S WELL-BEING


_All happiness or unhappiness solely depends upon the quality of the
object to which we are attached by love. Love for an object eternal and
infinite feeds the mind with joy alone, a joy that is free from all
sorrow_.

SPINOZA.




