CHAPTER XI

DETERMINISM AND MORALS


_The Mind Is Necessarily Determined_

The mind is a certain and determinate mode of thought, and therefore it
cannot be the free cause of its own actions, or have an absolute faculty
of willing or not willing, but must be determined to this or that
volition by a cause which is also determined by another cause, and this
again by another, and so on _ad infinitum_.

In the same manner it is demonstrated that in the mind there exists no
absolute faculty of understanding, desiring, loving, etc. These and the
like faculties, therefore, are either altogether fictitious, or else are
nothing but metaphysical or universal entities, which we are in the
habit of forming from individual cases. The intellect and will,
therefore, are related to this or that idea or volition as rockiness is
related to this or that rock, or as man is related to Peter or Paul. The
reason why men imagine themselves to be free we have already explained.


_Faculty Psychology Fallacious_

Before, however, I advance any further, I must observe that by the will
I understand a faculty of affirming or denying, but not a desire; a
faculty, I say, by which the mind affirms or denies that which is true
or false, and not a desire by which the mind seeks a thing or turns away
from it. But now that we have demonstrated that these faculties are
universal notions which are not distinguishable from the individual
notions from which they are formed, we must now inquire whether the
volitions themselves are anything more than the ideas of things. We must
inquire, I say, whether in the mind there exists any other affirmation
or negation than that which the idea involves in so far as it is an
idea. For this purpose see the following, so that thought may not fall
into pictures. For by ideas I do not understand the images which are
formed at the back of the eye, or, if you please, in the middle of the
brain, but rather the conceptions of thought.

In the mind there exists no absolute faculty of willing or not willing.
Only individual volitions exist, that is to say, this and that
affirmation and this and that negation. Let us conceive, therefore, any
individual volition, that is, any mode of thought, by which the mind
affirms that the three angles of a triangle are equal to two right
angles. This affirmation involves the conception or idea of the
triangle, that is to say, without it the affirmation cannot be
conceived. For to say that _A_ must involve the conception _B_, is the
same as saying that _A_ cannot be conceived without _B_. Moreover,
without the idea of the triangle this affirmation cannot be, and it can
therefore neither be nor be conceived without that idea. But this idea
of the triangle must involve this same affirmation that its three angles
are equal to two right angles. Therefore also, _vice versa_, this idea
of the triangle without this affirmation can neither be nor be
conceived. Therefore this affirmation pertains to the essence of the
idea of the triangle, nor is it anything else besides this. Whatever too
we have said of this volition (since it has been taken arbitrarily)
applies to all other volitions, that is to say, they are nothing but
ideas.

The will and the intellect are nothing but the individual volitions and
ideas themselves. But the individual volition and idea are one and the
same. Therefore the will and the intellect are one and the same.


_False Doctrines about Error Exposed_

I have thus removed what is commonly thought to be the cause of error.
It has been proved above that falsity consists solely in the privation
which mutilated and confused ideas involve. A false idea, therefore, in
so far as it is false, does not involve certitude. Consequently, when we
say that a man assents to what is false and does not doubt it, we do not
say that he is certain, but merely that he does not doubt, that is to
say, that he assents to what is false, because there are no causes
sufficient to make his imagination waver. Although, therefore, a man may
be supposed to adhere to what is false, we shall never on that account
say that he is certain. For by certitude we understand something
positive, and not the privation of doubt; but by the privation of
certitude we understand falsity.

If the preceding proposition, however, is to be more clearly
comprehended, a word or two must be added; it yet remains also that I
should answer the objections which may be brought against our doctrine,
and finally, in order to remove all scruples, I have thought it worth
while to indicate some of its advantages. I say some, as the principal
advantages will be better understood later.

I begin, therefore, with the first, and I warn my readers carefully to
distinguish between an idea or conception of the mind and the images of
things formed by our imagination. Secondly, it is necessary that we
should distinguish between ideas and the words by which things are
signified. For it is because these three things, images, words, and
ideas, are by many people either altogether confounded or not
distinguished with sufficient accuracy and care that such ignorance
exists about this doctrine of the will, so necessary to be known both
for the purposes of speculation and for the wise government of life.
Those who think that ideas consist of images, which are formed in us by
meeting with external bodies, persuade themselves that those ideas of
things of which we can form no similar image are not ideas, but mere
fancies constructed by the free power of the will. They look upon ideas,
therefore, as dumb pictures on a tablet, and being prepossessed with
this prejudice, they do not see that an idea, in so far as it is an
idea, involves affirmation or negation. Again, those who confound words
with the idea, or with the affirmation itself which the idea involves,
think that they can will contrary to their perception, because they
affirm or deny something in words alone contrary to their perception. It
will be easy for us, however, to divest ourselves of these prejudices if
we attend to the nature of thought, which in no way involves the
conception of extension, and by doing this we clearly see that an idea,
since it is a mode of thought, is not an image of anything, nor does it
consist of words. For the essence of words and images is formed of
bodily motions alone, which involve in no way whatever the conception of
thought.

Let thus much suffice under this head. I pass on now to the objections
to which I have already alluded.


_Freedom of the Will_

The first is, that it is supposed to be certain that the will extends
itself more widely than the intellect, and is therefore different from
it. The reason why men suppose that the will extends itself more widely
than the intellect is because they say they have discovered that they do
not need a larger faculty of assent--that is to say, of affirmation--and
denial than that which they now have for the purpose of assenting to an
infinite number of other things which we do not perceive, but that they
do need a greater faculty for understanding them. The will, therefore,
is distinguished from the intellect, the latter being finite, the former
infinite. The second objection which can be made is that there is
nothing which experience seems to teach more clearly than the
possibility of suspending our judgment, so as not to assent to the
things we perceive; and we are strengthened in this opinion because no
one is said to be deceived in so far as he perceives a thing, but only
in so far as he assents to it or dissents from it. For example, a man
who imagines a winged horse does not therefore admit the existence of a
winged horse; that is to say, he is not necessarily deceived, unless he
grants at the same time that a winged horse exists. Experience,
therefore, seems to show nothing more plainly than that the will or
faculty of assent is free, and different from the faculty of the
intellect.

Thirdly, it may be objected that one affirmation does not seem to
contain more reality than another; that is to say, it does not appear
that we need a greater power for affirming a thing to be true which is
true than for affirming a thing to be true which is false. Nevertheless,
we observe that one idea contains more reality or perfection than
another, for as some objects are nobler than others, in the same
proportion are their ideas more perfect. It appears indisputable,
therefore, that there is a difference between the will and the
intellect.

Fourthly, it may be objected that if a man does not act from freedom of
the will, what would he do if he were in a state of equilibrium, like
the ass of Buridanus? Would he not perish from hunger and thirst? and if
this be granted, do we not seem to conceive him as a statue of a man or
as an ass? If I deny that he would thus perish, he will consequently
determine himself and possess the power of going where he likes and
doing what he likes.

There may be other objections besides these, but as I am not bound to
discuss what every one may dream, I shall therefore make it my business
to answer as briefly as possible those only which I have mentioned.

In reply to the first objection, I grant that the will extends itself
more widely than the intellect, if by the intellect we understand only
clear and distinct ideas; but I deny that the will extends itself more
widely than the perceptions or the faculty of conception; nor, indeed,
do I see why the faculty of will should be said to be infinite any more
than the faculty of feeling; for as by the same faculty of will we can
affirm an infinite number of things (one after the other, for we cannot
affirm an infinite number of things at once), so also by the same
faculty of feeling we can feel or perceive (one after another) an
infinite number of bodies. If it be said that there are an infinite
number of things which we cannot perceive, I reply that such things as
these we can reach by no thought, and consequently by no faculty of
will. But it is said that if God wished us to perceive those things, it
would be necessary for Him to give us a larger faculty of perception,
but not a larger faculty of will than He has already given us, which is
the same thing as saying that if God wished us to understand an infinite
number of other beings, it would be necessary for Him to give us a
greater intellect, but not a more universal idea of being (in order to
embrace that infinite number of beings), than He has given us. For we
have shown that the will is a Universal, or the idea by which we explain
all individual volitions, that is to say, that which is common to them
all. It is not to be wondered at, therefore, that those who believe this
common or universal idea of all the volitions to be a faculty should say
that it extends itself infinitely beyond the limits of the intellect.
For the universal is predicated of one or of many, or of an infinite
number of individuals.

The second objection I answer by denying that we have free power of
suspending judgment. For when we say that a person suspends judgment, we
only say in other words that he sees that he does not perceive the thing
adequately. The suspension of the judgment, therefore, is in truth a
perception and not free will.

In order that this may be clearly understood, let us take the case of a
boy who imagines a horse and perceives nothing else. Since this
imagination involves the existence of the horse, and the boy does not
perceive anything which negates its existence, he will necessarily
contemplate it as present, nor will he be able to doubt its existence
although he may not be certain of it. This is a thing which we daily
experience in dreams, nor do I believe that there is any one who thinks
that he has the free power during dreams of suspending his judgment upon
those things which he dreams, and of causing himself not to dream those
things which he dreams that he sees; and yet in dreams it nevertheless
happens that we suspend our judgment, for we dream that we dream.

I grant, it is true, that no man is deceived in so far as he perceives;
that is to say, I grant that mental images considered in themselves
involve no error; but I deny that a man in so far as he perceives
affirms nothing. For what else is it to perceive a winged horse than to
affirm of the horse that it has wings? For if the mind perceived nothing
else but this winged horse, it would regard it as present, nor would it
have any reason for doubting its existence, nor any power of refusing
assent to it, unless the image of the winged horse be joined to an idea
which negates its existence, or the mind perceives that the idea of the
winged horse which it has is inadequate. In either of the two latter
cases it will necessarily deny or doubt the existence of the horse.

With regard to the third objection, what has been said will perhaps be
a sufficient answer--namely, that the will is something universal, which
is predicated of all ideas, and that it signifies that only which is
common to them all, that is to say, affirmation. Its adequate essence,
therefore, in so far as it is thus considered in the abstract, must be
in every idea, and in this sense only must it be the same in all; but
not in so far as it is considered as constituting the essence of an
idea, for so far, the individual affirmations differ just as the ideas
differ. For example, the affirmation which the idea of a circle involves
differs from that which the idea of a triangle involves, just as the
idea of a circle differs from the idea of a triangle. Again, I
absolutely deny that we need a power of thinking in order to affirm that
to be true which is true, equal to that which we need in order to affirm
that to be true which is false. For these two affirmations, if we look
to the mind, are related to one another as being and non-being, for
there is nothing positive in ideas which constitutes a form of falsity.

Here therefore particularly is it to be observed how easily we are
deceived when we confuse universals with individuals, and the entities
of reason and abstractions with realities.

With regard to the fourth objection, I say that I entirely grant that if
a man were placed in such a state of equilibrium he would perish of
hunger and thirst, supposing he perceived nothing but hunger and thirst,
and the food and drink which were equidistant from him. If you ask me
whether such a man would not be thought an ass rather than a man, I
reply that I do not know; nor do I know what ought to be thought of a
man who hangs himself, or of children, fools, and madmen.


_The Independence of Mind and Body_

All modes of thought have God for a cause in so far as He is a thinking
thing, and not in so far as He is manifested by any other attribute.
That which determines the mind to thought, therefore, is a mode of
thought and not of extension, that is to say, it is not the body. Again,
the motion and rest of the body must be derived from some other body,
which has also been determined to motion or rest by another, and,
absolutely, whatever arises in the body must arise from God, in so far
as He is considered as affected by some mode of extension, and not in so
far as He is considered as affected by any mode of thought, that is to
say, whatever arises in the body cannot arise from the mind, which is a
mode of thought. Therefore, the body cannot determine the mind to
thought, neither can the mind determine the body to motion nor rest, nor
to anything else, if there be anything else.

This proposition will be better understood from what has been said, that
is to say, that the mind and the body are one and the same thing,
conceived at one time under the attribute of thought, and at another
under that of extension. For this reason, the order or concatenation of
things is one, whether nature be conceived under this or under that
attribute, and consequently the order of the actions and passions of our
body is coincident in Nature with the order of the actions and passions
of the mind.

Although these things are so, and no ground for doubting remains, I
scarcely believe, nevertheless, that, without a proof derived from
experience, men will be induced calmly to weigh what has been said, so
firmly are they persuaded that, solely at the bidding of the mind, the
body moves or rests, and does a number of things which depend upon the
will of the mind alone, and upon the power of thought. For what the body
can do no one has hitherto determined, that is to say, experience has
taught no one hitherto what the body, without being determined by the
mind, can do and what it cannot do from the laws of Nature alone, in so
far as Nature is considered merely as corporeal. For no one as yet has
understood the structure of the body so accurately as to be able to
explain all its functions, not to mention the fact that many things are
observed in brutes which far surpass human sagacity, and that
sleep-walkers in their sleep do very many things which they dare not do
when awake; all this showing that the body itself can do many things
from the laws of its own nature alone at which the mind belonging to
that body is amazed.

Again, nobody knows by what means or by what method the mind moves the
body, nor how many degrees of motion it can communicate to the body, nor
with what speed it can move the body. So that it follows that when men
say that this or that action of the body springs from the mind which has
commanded over the body, they do not know what they say, and they do
nothing but confess with pretentious words that they know nothing about
the cause of the action, and see nothing in it to wonder at.

But they will say, that whether they know or do not know by what means
the mind moves the body, it is nevertheless in their experience that if
the mind were not fit for thinking the body would be inert. They say,
again, it is in their experience that the mind alone has power both to
speak and be silent, and to do many other things which they therefore
think to be dependent on a decree of the mind.

But with regard to the first assertion, I ask them if experience does
not also teach that if the body be sluggish the mind at the same time is
not fit for thinking? When the body is asleep, the mind slumbers with
it, and has not the power to think, as it has when the body is awake.
Again, I believe that all have discovered that the mind is not always
equally fitted for thinking about the same subject, but in proportion to
the fitness of the body for this or that image to be excited in it will
the mind be better fitted to contemplate this or that object. But my
opponents will say, that from the laws of Nature alone, in so far as it
is considered to be corporeal merely, it cannot be that the causes of
architecture, painting, and things of this sort, which are the results
of human art alone, could be deduced, and that the human body, unless it
were determined and guided by the mind, would not be able to build a
temple. I have already shown, however, that they do not know what the
body can do, nor what can be deduced from the consideration of its
nature alone, and that they find that many things are done merely by the
laws of Nature which they would never have believed to be possible
without the direction of the mind, as, for example, those things which
sleep-walkers do in their sleep, and at which they themselves are
astonished when they wake. I adduce also here the structure itself of
the human body, which so greatly surpasses in workmanship all those
things which are constructed by human art, not to mention what I have
already proved, that an infinitude of things follows from Nature under
whatever attribute it may be considered.

With regard to the second point, I should say that human affairs would
be much more happily conducted if it were equally in the power of men to
be silent and to speak. But experience shows over and over again that
there is nothing which men have less power over than the tongue, and
that there is nothing which they are less able to do than to govern
their appetites, so that many persons believe that we do those things
only with freedom which we seek indifferently; as the desire for such
things can easily be lessened by the recollection of another thing which
we frequently call to mind; it being impossible, on the other hand, to
do those things with freedom which we seek with such ardor that the
recollection of another thing is unable to mitigate it.

But if, however, we had not found out that we do many things which we
afterwards repent, and that when agitated by conflicting emotions we see
that which is better and follow that which is worse, nothing would
hinder us from believing that we do everything with freedom. Thus the
infant believes that it is by free will that it seeks the breast; the
angry boy believes that by free will he wishes vengeance; the timid man
thinks it is with free will he seeks flight; the drunkard believes that
by a free command of his mind he speaks the things which when sober he
wishes he had left unsaid. Thus the madman, the chatterer, the boy, and
others of the same kind, all believe that they speak by a free command
of the mind, whilst, in truth, they have no power to restrain the
impulse which they have to speak, so that experience itself, no less
than reason, clearly teaches that men believe themselves to be free
simply because they are conscious of their own actions, knowing nothing
of the causes by which they are determined. It[19] teaches, too, that
the decrees of the mind are nothing but the appetites themselves, which
differ, therefore, according to the different temper of the body. For
every man determines all things from his emotion; those who are agitated
by contrary emotions do not know what they want, whilst those who are
agitated by no emotion are easily driven hither and thither.

All this plainly shows that the decree of the mind, the appetite, and
determination of the body are coincident in Nature, or rather that they
are one and the same thing, which, when it is considered under the
attribute of thought and manifested by that, is called a decree, and
when it is considered under the attribute of extension and is deduced
from the laws of motion and rest, is called a determination.

This, however, will be better understood as we go on, for there is
another thing which I wish to be observed here--that we cannot by a
mental decree do a thing unless we recollect it. We cannot speak a word,
for instance, unless we recollect it. But it is not in the free power of
the mind either to recollect a thing or to forget it. It is believed,
therefore, that the power of the mind extends only thus far--that from a
mental decree we can speak or be silent about a thing only when we
recollect it. But when we dream that we speak, we believe that we do so
from a free decree of the mind; and yet we do not speak, or, if we do,
it is the result of a spontaneous motion of the body. We dream, again,
that we are concealing things, and that we do this by virtue of a decree
of the mind like that by which, when awake, we are silent about things
we know. We dream, again, that from a decree of the mind, we do some
things which we should not dare to do when awake. And I should like to
know, therefore, whether there are two kinds of decrees in the
mind--one belonging to dreams and the other free. If this be too great
nonsense, we must necessarily grant that this decree of the mind, which
is believed to be free, is not distinguishable from the imagination or
memory, and is nothing but the affirmation which the idea necessarily
involves in so far as it is an idea. These decrees of the mind,
therefore, arise in the mind by the same necessity as the ideas of
things actually existing. Consequently, those who believe that they
speak, or are silent, or do anything else from a free decree of the
mind, dream with their eyes open.


_The Moral Values of Determinism_

I

It remains for me now to show what service to our own lives a knowledge
of this doctrine is. This we shall easily understand from the remarks
which follow. Notice--

1. It is of service in so far as it teaches us that we do everything by
the will of God alone, and that we are partakers of the divine nature in
proportion as our actions become more and more perfect and we more and
more understand God. This doctrine, therefore, besides giving repose in
every way to the soul, has also this advantage, that it teaches us in
what our highest happiness or blessedness consists, namely, in the
knowledge of God alone, by which we are drawn to do those things only
which love and piety persuade. Hence we clearly see how greatly those
stray from the true estimation of virtue who expect to be distinguished
by God with the highest rewards for virtue and the noblest actions as if
for the completest servitude, just as if virtue itself and the service
of God were not happiness itself and the highest liberty.

2. It is of service to us in so far as it teaches us how we ought to
behave with regard to the things of fortune, or those which are not in
our power, that is to say, which do not follow from our own nature; for
it teaches us with equal mind to wait for and bear each form of fortune,
because we know that all things follow from the eternal decree of God,
according to that same necessity by which it follows from the essence of
a triangle that its three angles are equal to two right angles.

3. This doctrine contributes to the welfare of our social existence,
since it teaches us to hate no one, to despise no one, to mock no one,
to be angry with no one, and to envy no one. It teaches every one,
moreover, to be content with his own, and to be helpful to his neighbor,
not from any womanish pity, from partiality, or superstition, but by the
guidance of reason alone, according to the demand of time and
circumstance, as I shall show.

4. This doctrine contributes not a little to the advantage of common
society, in so far as it teaches us by what means citizens are to be
governed and led; not in order that they may be slaves, but that they
may freely do those things which are best.


II

At[21] last I see, what it was that you begged me not to publish.
However, as it forms the chief foundation of everything in the
treatise[22] which I intend to bring out, I should like briefly to
explain here, in what sense I assert that a fatal necessity presides
over all things and actions.

God I in no wise subject to fate: I conceive that all things follow with
inevitable necessity from the nature of God, in the same way as every
one conceives that it follows from God's nature that God understands
Himself. This latter consequence all admit to follow necessarily from
the divine nature, yet no one conceives that God is under the compulsion
of any fate, but that He understands Himself quite freely, though
necessarily.

Further, this inevitable necessity in things does away neither with
divine nor human laws. The principles of morality, whether they receive
from God Himself the form of laws or institutions, or whether they do
not, are still divine and salutary; whether we receive the good, which
flows from virtue and the divine love, as from God in the capacity of a
judge, or as from the necessity of the divine nature, it will in either
case be equally desirable; on the other hand, the evils following from
wicked actions and passions are not less to be feared because they are
necessary consequences.[23] Lastly, in our actions, whether they be
necessary or contingent, we are led by hope and fear.

Men are only without excuse before God, because they are in God's power,
as clay is in the hands of the potter, who from the same lump makes
vessels, some to honor, some to dishonor.... [24] When I said in my
former letter that we are inexcusable, because we are in the power of
God, like clay in the hands of the potter, I meant to be understood in
the sense that no one can bring a complaint against God for having given
him a weak nature, or infirm spirit. A circle might as well complain to
God for not being endowed with the properties of a sphere, or a child
who is tortured, say, with stone, for not being given a healthy body, as
a man of feeble spirit, because God has denied to him fortitude, and the
true knowledge and love of the Deity, or because he is endowed with so
weak a nature that he cannot check or moderate his desires. For the
nature of each thing is only competent to do that which follows
necessarily from its given cause.

That every man cannot be brave, and that we can no more command for
ourselves a healthy body than a healthy mind, nobody can deny, without
giving the lie to experience, as well as to reason. "But," you urge, "if
men sin by nature, they are excusable"; but you do not state the
conclusion you draw, whether that God cannot be angry with them, or that
they are worthy of blessedness--that is, of the knowledge and love of
God. If you say the former, I fully admit that God cannot be angry, and
that all things are done in accordance with His will; but I deny that
all men ought, therefore, to be blessed--men may be excusable, and
nevertheless, be without blessedness and afflicted in many ways.[25] A
horse is excusable for being a horse and not a man; but, nevertheless,
he must needs be a horse and not a man. He who goes mad from the bite of
a dog is excusable, yet he is rightly suffocated. Lastly, he who cannot
govern his desires, and keep them in check with the fear of the laws,
though his weakness may be excusable, yet he cannot enjoy with
contentment, the knowledge and love of God, but necessarily perishes.

FOOTNOTES:

[19] ... I say that a thing is free, which exists and acts solely by the
necessity of its own nature. Thus also God understands Himself and all
things freely, because it follows solely from the necessity of His
nature that He should understand all things. You see I do not place
freedom in free decision, but in free necessity. However, let us descend
to created things, which are all determined by external causes to exist
and operate in a given determinate manner. In order that this may be
clearly understood, let us conceive a very simple thing. For instance, a
stone receives from the impulsion of an external cause a certain
quantity of motion, by virtue of which it continues to move after the
impulsion given by the external cause has ceased. The permanence of the
stone's motion is constrained, not necessary because it must be defined
by the impulsion of an external cause. What is true of the stone is true
of an individual, however complicated its nature, or varied its
functions, inasmuch as every individual thing is necessarily determined
by some external cause to exist and operate in a fixed and determinate
manner.

Further conceive, I beg, that a stone, while continuing in motion,
should be capable of thinking and knowing, that it is endeavoring, as
far as it can, to continue to move. Such a stone, being conscious merely
of its own endeavor and not at all indifferent, would believe itself to
be completely free, and would think that it continued in motion solely
because of its own wish. This is that human freedom, which all boast
that they possess, and which consists solely in the fact, that men are
conscious of their own desire, but are ignorant of the causes whereby
that desire has been determined.[20] ...

[20] _From a letter to G. H. Schaller_ (1674).

[21] _From a letter to Henry Oldenburg_ (Dec., 1675).

[22] The _Ethics_.--ED.

[23] I received on Saturday last your very short letter dated 15th Nov.
In it you merely indicated the points in the theological treatise which
have given pain to readers, whereas I had hoped to learn from it what
were the opinions which militated against the practice of religious
virtue.... I make this chief distinction between religion and
superstition; the latter is founded on ignorance, the former on
knowledge. This, I take it, is the reason why Christians are
distinguished from the rest of the world, not by faith, nor by charity,
nor by the other fruits of the Holy Spirit, but solely by their
opinions, inasmuch as they defend their cause, like every one else, by
miracles, that is, by ignorance, which is the source of all malice. Thus
they turn a faith, which may be true, into superstition. _From a letter
to Henry Oldenburg_ (Dec., 1675).

[24] _From a letter to Henry Oldenburg_ (Feb. 7, 1676).

[25] A mouse no less than an angel, and sorrow no less than joy depend
on God; yet a mouse is not a kind of angel, neither is sorrow a kind of
joy. _From a letter to Wm. Blyenbergh_ (March 13, 1665).




