The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Mad King, by Edgar Rice Burroughs

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: The Mad King

Author: Edgar Rice Burroughs

Release Date: November, 1995 [eBook #364]
[Most recently updated: December 21, 2021]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

Produced by: Judith Boss





The Mad King

by Edgar Rice Burroughs


Contents

 PART I
 I. A RUNAWAY HORSE
 II. OVER THE PRECIPICE
 III. AN ANGRY KING
 IV. BARNEY FINDS A FRIEND
 V. THE ESCAPE
 VI. A KING’S RANSOM
 VII. THE REAL LEOPOLD
 VIII. THE CORONATION DAY
 IX. THE KING’S GUESTS
 X. ON THE BATTLEFIELD
 XI. A TIMELY INTERVENTION
 XII. THE GRATITUDE OF A KING

 PART II
 I. BARNEY RETURNS TO LUTHA
 II. CONDEMNED TO DEATH
 III. BEFORE THE FIRING SQUAD
 IV. A RACE TO LUTHA
 V. THE TRAITOR KING
 VI. A TRAP IS SPRUNG
 VII. BARNEY TO THE RESCUE
 VIII. AN ADVENTUROUS DAY
 IX. THE CAPTURE
 X. A NEW KING IN LUTHA
 XI. THE BATTLE
 XII. LEOPOLD WAITS FOR DAWN
 XIII. THE TWO KINGS
 XIV. “THE KING’S WILL IS LAW”
 XV. MAENCK BLUNDERS
 XVI. KING OF LUTHA




PART I




I.
A RUNAWAY HORSE


All Lustadt was in an uproar. The mad king had escaped. Little knots of
excited men stood upon the street corners listening to each latest
rumor concerning this most absorbing occurrence. Before the palace a
great crowd surged to and fro, awaiting they knew not what.

For ten years no man of them had set eyes upon the face of the boy-king
who had been hastened to the grim castle of Blentz upon the death of
the old king, his father.

There had been murmurings then when the lad’s uncle, Peter of Blentz,
had announced to the people of Lutha the sudden mental affliction which
had fallen upon his nephew, and more murmurings for a time after the
announcement that Peter of Blentz had been appointed Regent during the
lifetime of the young King Leopold, “or until God, in His infinite
mercy, shall see fit to restore to us in full mental vigor our beloved
monarch.”

But ten years is a long time. The boy-king had become but a vague
memory to the subjects who could recall him at all.

There were many, of course, in the capital city, Lustadt, who still
retained a mental picture of the handsome boy who had ridden out nearly
every morning from the palace gates beside the tall, martial figure of
the old king, his father, for a canter across the broad plain which
lies at the foot of the mountain town of Lustadt; but even these had
long since given up hope that their young king would ever ascend his
throne, or even that they should see him alive again.

Peter of Blentz had not proved a good or kind ruler. Taxes had doubled
during his regency. Executives and judiciary, following the example of
their chief, had become tyrannical and corrupt. For ten years there had
been small joy in Lutha.

There had been whispered rumors off and on that the young king was dead
these many years, but not even in whispers did the men of Lutha dare
voice the name of him whom they believed had caused his death. For
lesser things they had seen their friends and neighbors thrown into the
hitherto long-unused dungeons of the royal castle.

And now came the rumor that Leopold of Lutha had escaped the Castle of
Blentz and was roaming somewhere in the wild mountains or ravines upon
the opposite side of the plain of Lustadt.

Peter of Blentz was filled with rage and, possibly, fear as well.

“I tell you, Coblich,” he cried, addressing his dark-visaged minister
of war, “there’s more than coincidence in this matter. Someone has
betrayed us. That he should have escaped upon the very eve of the
arrival at Blentz of the new physician is most suspicious. None but
you, Coblich, had knowledge of the part that Dr. Stein was destined to
play in this matter,” concluded Prince Peter pointedly.

Coblich looked the Regent full in the eye.

“Your highness wrongs not only my loyalty, but my intelligence,” he
said quietly, “by even so much as intimating that I have any guilty
knowledge of Leopold’s escape. With Leopold upon the throne of Lutha,
where, think you, my prince, would old Coblich be?”

Peter smiled.

“You are right, Coblich,” he said. “I know that you would not be such a
fool; but whom, then, have we to thank?”

“The walls have ears, prince,” replied Coblich, “and we have not always
been as careful as we should in discussing the matter. Something may
have come to the ears of old Von der Tann. I don’t for a moment doubt
but that he has his spies among the palace servants, or even the guard.
You know the old fox has always made it a point to curry favor with the
common soldiers. When he was minister of war he treated them better
than he did his officers.”

“It seems strange, Coblich, that so shrewd a man as you should have
been unable to discover some irregularity in the political life of
Prince Ludwig von der Tann before now,” said the prince querulously.
“He is the greatest menace to our peace and sovereignty. With Von der
Tann out of the way there would be none powerful enough to question our
right to the throne of Lutha—after poor Leopold passes away.”

“You forget that Leopold has escaped,” suggested Coblich, “and that
there is no immediate prospect of his passing away.”

“He must be retaken at once, Coblich!” cried Prince Peter of Blentz.
“He is a dangerous maniac, and we must make this fact plain to the
people—this and a thorough description of him. A handsome reward for
his safe return to Blentz might not be out of the way, Coblich.”

“It shall be done, your highness,” replied Coblich. “And about Von der
Tann? You have never spoken to me quite so—ah—er—pointedly before. He
hunts a great deal in the Old Forest. It might be possible—in fact, it
has happened, before—there are many accidents in hunting, are there
not, your highness?”

“There are, Coblich,” replied the prince, “and if Leopold is able he
will make straight for the Tann, so that there may be two hunting
together in a day or so, Coblich.”

“I understand, your highness,” replied the minister. “With your
permission, I shall go at once and dispatch troops to search the forest
for Leopold. Captain Maenck will command them.”

“Good, Coblich! Maenck is a most intelligent and loyal officer. We must
reward him well. A baronetcy, at least, if he handles this matter
well,” said Peter. “It might not be a bad plan to hint at as much to
him, Coblich.”

And so it happened that shortly thereafter Captain Ernst Maenck, in
command of a troop of the Royal Horse Guards of Lutha, set out toward
the Old Forest, which lies beyond the mountains that are visible upon
the other side of the plain stretching out before Lustadt. At the same
time other troopers rode in many directions along the highways and
byways of Lutha, tacking placards upon trees and fence posts and beside
the doors of every little rural post office.

The placard told of the escape of the mad king, offering a large reward
for his safe return to Blentz.

It was the last paragraph especially which caused a young man, the
following day in the little hamlet of Tafelberg, to whistle as he
carefully read it over.

“I am glad that I am not the mad king of Lutha,” he said as he paid the
storekeeper for the gasoline he had just purchased and stepped into the
gray roadster for whose greedy maw it was destined.

“Why, mein Herr?” asked the man.

“This notice practically gives immunity to whoever shoots down the
king,” replied the traveler. “Worse still, it gives such an account of
the maniacal ferocity of the fugitive as to warrant anyone in shooting
him on sight.”

As the young man spoke the storekeeper had examined his face closely
for the first time. A shrewd look came into the man’s ordinarily stolid
countenance. He leaned forward quite close to the other’s ear.

“We of Lutha,” he whispered, “love our ‘mad king’—no reward could be
offered that would tempt us to betray him. Even in self-protection we
would not kill him, we of the mountains who remember him as a boy and
loved his father and his grandfather, before him.

“But there are the scum of the low country in the army these days, who
would do anything for money, and it is these that the king must guard
against. I could not help but note that mein Herr spoke too perfect
German for a foreigner. Were I in mein Herr’s place, I should speak
mostly the English, and, too, I should shave off the ‘full,
reddish-brown beard.’”

Whereupon the storekeeper turned hastily back into his shop, leaving
Barney Custer of Beatrice, Nebraska, U.S.A., to wonder if all the
inhabitants of Lutha were afflicted with a mental disorder similar to
that of the unfortunate ruler.

“I don’t wonder,” soliloquized the young man, “that he advised me to
shave off this ridiculous crop of alfalfa. Hang election bets, anyway;
if things had gone half right I shouldn’t have had to wear this badge
of idiocy. And to think that it’s got to be for a whole month longer! A
year’s a mighty long while at best, but a year in company with a full
set of red whiskers is an eternity.”

The road out of Tafelberg wound upward among tall trees toward the pass
that would lead him across the next valley on his way to the Old
Forest, where he hoped to find some excellent shooting. All his life
Barney had promised himself that some day he should visit his mother’s
native land, and now that he was here he found it as wild and beautiful
as she had said it would be.

Neither his mother nor his father had ever returned to the little
country since the day, thirty years before, that the big American had
literally stolen his bride away, escaping across the border but a scant
half-hour ahead of the pursuing troop of Luthanian cavalry. Barney had
often wondered why it was that neither of them would ever speak of
those days, or of the early life of his mother, Victoria Rubinroth,
though of the beauties of her native land Mrs. Custer never tired of
talking.

Barney Custer was thinking of these things as his machine wound up the
picturesque road. Just before him was a long, heavy grade, and as he
took it with open muffler the chugging of his motor drowned the sound
of pounding hoof beats rapidly approaching behind him.

It was not until he topped the grade that he heard anything unusual,
and at the same instant a girl on horseback tore past him. The speed of
the animal would have been enough to have told him that it was beyond
the control of its frail rider, even without the added testimony of the
broken bit that dangled beneath the tensely outstretched chin.

Foam flecked the beast’s neck and shoulders. It was evident that the
horse had been running for some distance, yet its speed was still that
of the thoroughly frightened runaway.

The road at the point where the animal had passed Custer was cut from
the hillside. At the left an embankment rose steeply to a height of ten
or fifteen feet. On the right there was a drop of a hundred feet or
more into a wooded ravine. Ahead, the road apparently ran quite
straight and smooth for a considerable distance.

Barney Custer knew that so long as the road ran straight the girl might
be safe enough, for she was evidently an excellent horsewoman; but he
also knew that if there should be a sharp turn to the left ahead, the
horse in his blind fright would in all probability dash headlong into
the ravine below him.

There was but a single thing that the man might attempt if he were to
save the girl from the almost certain death which seemed in store for
her, since he knew that sooner or later the road would turn, as all
mountain roads do. The chances that he must take, if he failed, could
only hasten the girl’s end. There was no alternative except to sit
supinely by and see the fear-crazed horse carry its rider into
eternity, and Barney Custer was not the sort for that role.

Scarcely had the beast come abreast of him than his foot leaped to the
accelerator. Like a frightened deer the gray roadster sprang forward in
pursuit. The road was narrow. Two machines could not have passed upon
it. Barney took the outside that he might hold the horse away from the
dangerous ravine.

At the sound of the whirring thing behind him the animal cast an
affrighted glance in its direction, and with a little squeal of terror
redoubled its frantic efforts to escape. The girl, too, looked back
over her shoulder. Her face was very white, but her eyes were steady
and brave.

Barney Custer smiled up at her in encouragement, and the girl smiled
back at him.

“She’s sure a game one,” thought Barney.

Now she was calling to him. At first he could not catch her words above
the pounding of the horse’s hoofs and the noise of his motor. Presently
he understood.

“Stop!” she cried. “Stop or you will be killed. The road turns to the
left just ahead. You’ll go into the ravine at that speed.”

The front wheel of the roadster was at the horse’s right flank. Barney
stepped upon the accelerator a little harder. There was barely room
between the horse and the edge of the road for the four wheels of the
roadster, and Barney must be very careful not to touch the horse. The
thought of that and what it would mean to the girl sent a cold shudder
through Barney Custer’s athletic frame.

The man cast a glance to his right. His machine drove from the left
side, and he could not see the road at all over the right hand door.
The sight of tree tops waving beneath him was all that was visible.
Just ahead the road’s edge rushed swiftly beneath the right-hand
fender; the wheels on that side must have been on the very verge of the
embankment.

Now he was abreast the girl. Just ahead he could see where the road
disappeared around a corner of the bluff at the dangerous curve the
girl had warned him against.

Custer leaned far out over the side of his car. The lunging of the
horse in his stride, and the swaying of the leaping car carried him
first close to the girl and then away again. With his right hand he
held the car between the frantic horse and the edge of the embankment.
His left hand, outstretched, was almost at the girl’s waist. The turn
was just before them.

“Jump!” cried Barney.

The girl fell backward from her mount, turning to grasp Custer’s arm as
it closed about her. At the same instant Barney closed the throttle,
and threw all the weight of his body upon the foot brake.

The gray roadster swerved toward the embankment as the hind wheels
skidded on the loose surface gravel. They were at the turn. The horse
was just abreast the bumper. There was one chance in a thousand of
making the turn were the running beast out of the way. There was still
a chance if he turned ahead of them. If he did not turn—Barney hated to
think of what must follow.

But it was all over in a second. The horse bolted straight ahead.
Barney swerved the roadster to the turn. It caught the animal full in
the side. There was a sickening lurch as the hind wheels slid over the
embankment, and then the man shoved the girl from the running board to
the road, and horse, man and roadster went over into the ravine.

A moment before a tall young man with a reddish-brown beard had stood
at the turn of the road listening intently to the sound of the hurrying
hoof beats and the purring of the racing motor car approaching from the
distance. In his eyes lurked the look of the hunted. For a moment he
stood in evident indecision, but just before the runaway horse and the
pursuing machine came into view he slipped over the edge of the road to
slink into the underbrush far down toward the bottom of the ravine.

When Barney pushed the girl from the running board she fell heavily to
the road, rolling over several times, but in an instant she scrambled
to her feet, hardly the worse for the tumble other than a few
scratches.

Quickly she ran to the edge of the embankment, a look of immense relief
coming to her soft, brown eyes as she saw her rescuer scrambling up the
precipitous side of the ravine toward her.

“You are not killed?” she cried in German. “It is a miracle!”

“Not even bruised,” reassured Barney. “But you? You must have had a
nasty fall.”

“I am not hurt at all,” she replied. “But for you I should be lying
dead, or terribly maimed down there at the bottom of that awful ravine
at this very moment. It’s awful.” She drew her shoulders upward in a
little shudder of horror. “But how did you escape? Even now I can
scarce believe it possible.”

“I’m quite sure I don’t know how I did escape,” said Barney, clambering
over the rim of the road to her side. “That I had nothing to do with it
I am positive. It was just luck. I simply dropped out onto that bush
down there.”

They were standing side by side, now peering down into the ravine where
the car was visible, bottom side up against a tree, near the base of
the declivity. The horse’s head could be seen protruding from beneath
the wreckage.

“I’d better go down and put him out of his misery,” said Barney, “if he
is not already dead.”

“I think he is quite dead,” said the girl. “I have not seen him move.”

Just then a little puff of smoke arose from the machine, followed by a
tongue of yellow flame. Barney had already started toward the horse.

“Please don’t go,” begged the girl. “I am sure that he is quite dead,
and it wouldn’t be safe for you down there now. The gasoline tank may
explode any minute.”

Barney stopped.

“Yes, he is dead all right,” he said, “but all my belongings are down
there. My guns, six-shooters and all my ammunition. And,” he added
ruefully, “I’ve heard so much about the brigands that infest these
mountains.”

The girl laughed.

“Those stories are really exaggerated,” she said. “I was born in Lutha,
and except for a few months each year have always lived here, and
though I ride much I have never seen a brigand. You need not be
afraid.”

Barney Custer looked up at her quickly, and then he grinned. His only
fear had been that he would not meet brigands, for Mr. Bernard Custer,
Jr., was young and the spirit of Romance and Adventure breathed strong
within him.

“Why do you smile?” asked the girl.

“At our dilemma,” evaded Barney. “Have you paused to consider our
situation?”

The girl smiled, too.

“It is most unconventional,” she said. “On foot and alone in the
mountains, far from home, and we do not even know each other’s name.”

“Pardon me,” cried Barney, bowing low. “Permit me to introduce myself.
I am,” and then to the spirits of Romance and Adventure was added a
third, the spirit of Deviltry, “I am the mad king of Lutha.”




II.
OVER THE PRECIPICE


The effect of his words upon the girl were quite different from what he
had expected. An American girl would have laughed, knowing that he but
joked. This girl did not laugh. Instead her face went white, and she
clutched her bosom with her two hands. Her brown eyes peered
searchingly into the face of the man.

“Leopold!” she cried in a suppressed voice. “Oh, your majesty, thank
God that you are free—and sane!”

Before he could prevent it the girl had seized his hand and pressed it
to her lips.

Here was a pretty muddle! Barney Custer swore at himself inwardly for a
boorish fool. What in the world had ever prompted him to speak those
ridiculous words! And now how was he to unsay them without mortifying
this beautiful girl who had just kissed his hand?

She would never forgive that—he was sure of it.

There was but one thing to do, however, and that was to make a clean
breast of it. Somehow, he managed to stumble through his explanation of
what had prompted him, and when he had finished he saw that the girl
was smiling indulgently at him.

“It shall be Mr. Bernard Custer if you wish it so,” she said; “but your
majesty need fear nothing from Emma von der Tann. Your secret is as
safe with me as with yourself, as the name of Von der Tann must assure
you.”

She looked to see the expression of relief and pleasure that her
father’s name should have brought to the face of Leopold of Lutha, but
when he gave no indication that he had ever before heard the name she
sighed and looked puzzled.

“Perhaps,” she thought, “he doubts me. Or can it be possible that,
after all, his poor mind is gone?”

“I wish,” said Barney in a tone of entreaty, “that you would forgive
and forget my foolish words, and then let me accompany you to the end
of your journey.”

“Whither were you bound when I became the means of wrecking your motor
car?” asked the girl.

“To the Old Forest,” replied Barney.

Now she was positive that she was indeed with the mad king of Lutha,
but she had no fear of him, for since childhood she had heard her
father scout the idea that Leopold was mad. For what other purpose
would he hasten toward the Old Forest than to take refuge in her
father’s castle upon the banks of the Tann at the forest’s verge?

“Thither was I bound also,” she said, “and if you would come there
quickly and in safety I can show you a short path across the mountains
that my father taught me years ago. It touches the main road but once
or twice, and much of the way passes through dense woods and
undergrowth where an army might hide.”

“Hadn’t we better find the nearest town,” suggested Barney, “where I
can obtain some sort of conveyance to take you home?”

“It would not be safe,” said the girl. “Peter of Blentz will have
troops out scouring all Lutha about Blentz and the Old Forest until the
king is captured.”

Barney Custer shook his head despairingly.

“Won’t you please believe that I am but a plain American?” he begged.

Upon the bole of a large wayside tree a fresh, new placard stared them
in the face. Emma von der Tann pointed at one of the paragraphs.

“Gray eyes, brown hair, and a full reddish-brown beard,” she read. “No
matter who you may be,” she said, “you are safer off the highways of
Lutha than on them until you can find and use a razor.”

“But I cannot shave until the fifth of November,” said Barney.

Again the girl looked quickly into his eyes and again in her mind rose
the question that had hovered there once before. Was he indeed, after
all, quite sane?

“Then please come with me the safest way to my father’s,” she urged.
“He will know what is best to do.”

“He cannot make me shave,” insisted Barney.

“Why do you wish not to shave?” asked the girl.

“It is a matter of my honor,” he replied. “I had my choice of wearing a
green wastebasket bonnet trimmed with red roses for six months, or a
beard for twelve. If I shave off the beard before the fifth of November
I shall be without honor in the sight of all men or else I shall have
to wear the green bonnet. The beard is bad enough, but the bonnet—ugh!”

Emma von der Tann was now quite assured that the poor fellow was indeed
quite demented, but she had seen no indications of violence as yet,
though when that too might develop there was no telling. However, he
was to her Leopold of Lutha, and her father’s house had been loyal to
him or his ancestors for three hundred years.

If she must sacrifice her life in the attempt, nevertheless still must
she do all within her power to save her king from recapture and to lead
him in safety to the castle upon the Tann.

“Come,” she said; “we waste time here. Let us make haste, for the way
is long. At best we cannot reach Tann by dark.”

“I will do anything you wish,” replied Barney, “but I shall never
forgive myself for having caused you the long and tedious journey that
lies before us. It would be perfectly safe to go to the nearest town
and secure a rig.”

Emma von der Tann had heard that it was always well to humor maniacs
and she thought of it now. She would put the scheme to the test.

“The reason that I fear to have you go to the village,” she said, “is
that I am quite sure they would catch you and shave off your beard.”

Barney started to laugh, but when he saw the deep seriousness of the
girl’s eyes he changed his mind. Then he recalled her rather peculiar
insistence that he was a king, and it suddenly occurred to him that he
had been foolish not to have guessed the truth before.

“That is so,” he agreed; “I guess we had better do as you say,” for he
had determined that the best way to handle her would be to humor her—he
had always heard that that was the proper method for handling the
mentally defective. “Where is the—er—ah—sanatorium?” he blurted out at
last.

“The what?” she asked. “There is no sanatorium near here, your majesty,
unless you refer to the Castle of Blentz.”

“Is there no asylum for the insane near by?”

“None that I know of, your majesty.”

For a while they moved on in silence, each wondering what the other
might do next.

Barney had evolved a plan. He would try and ascertain the location of
the institution from which the girl had escaped and then as gently as
possible lead her back to it. It was not safe for as beautiful a woman
as she to be roaming through the forest in any such manner as this. He
wondered what in the world the authorities at the asylum had been
thinking of to permit her to ride out alone in the first place.

“From where did you ride today?” he blurted out suddenly.

“From Tann.”

“That is where we are going now?”

“Yes, your majesty.”

Barney drew a breath of relief. The way had become suddenly difficult
and he took the girl’s arm to help her down a rather steep place. At
the bottom of the ravine there was a little brook.

“There used to be a fallen log across it here,” said the girl. “How in
the world am I ever to get across, your majesty?”

“If you call me that again, I shall begin to believe that I am a king,”
he humored her, “and then, being a king, I presume that it wouldn’t be
proper for me to carry you across, or would it? Never really having
been a king, I do not know.”

“I think,” replied the girl, “that it would be eminently proper.”

She had difficulty in keeping in mind the fact that this handsome,
smiling young man was a dangerous maniac, though it was easy to believe
that he was the king. In fact, he looked much as she had always
pictured Leopold as looking. She had known him as a boy, and there were
many paintings and photographs of his ancestors in her father’s castle.
She saw much resemblance between these and the young man.

The brook was very narrow, and the girl thought that it took the young
man an unreasonably long time to carry her across, though she was
forced to admit that she was far from uncomfortable in the strong arms
that bore her so easily.

“Why, what are you doing?” she cried presently. “You are not crossing
the stream at all. You are walking right up the middle of it!”

She saw his face flush, and then he turned laughing eyes upon her.

“I am looking for a safe landing,” he said.

Emma von der Tann did not know whether to be frightened or amused. As
her eyes met the clear, gray ones of the man she could not believe that
insanity lurked behind that laughing, level gaze of her carrier. She
found herself continually forgetting that the man was mad. He had
turned toward the bank now, and a couple of steps carried them to the
low sward that fringed the little brooklet. Here he lowered her to the
ground.

“Your majesty is very strong,” she said. “I should not have expected it
after the years of confinement you have suffered.”

“Yes,” he said, realizing that he must humor her—it was difficult to
remember that this lovely girl was insane. “Let me see, now just what
was I in prison for? I do not seem to be able to recall it. In
Nebraska, they used to hang men for horse stealing; so I am sure it
must have been something else not quite so bad. Do you happen to know?”

“When the king, your father, died you were thirteen years old,” the
girl explained, hoping to reawaken the sleeping mind, “and then your
uncle, Prince Peter of Blentz, announced that the shock of your
father’s death had unbalanced your mind. He shut you up in Blentz then,
where you have been for ten years, and he has ruled as regent. Now, my
father says, he has recently discovered a plot to take your life so
that Peter may become king. But I suppose you learned of that, and
because of it you escaped!”

“This Peter person is all-powerful in Lutha?” he asked.

“He controls the army,” the girl replied.

“And you really believe that I am the mad king Leopold?”

“You are the king,” she said in a convincing manner.

“You are a very brave young lady,” he said earnestly. “If all the mad
king’s subjects were as loyal as you, and as brave, he would not have
languished for ten years behind the walls of Blentz.”

“I am a Von der Tann,” she said proudly, as though that was explanation
sufficient to account for any bravery or loyalty.

“Even a Von der Tann might, without dishonor, hesitate to accompany a
mad man through the woods,” he replied, “especially if she happened to
be a very—a very—” He halted, flushing.

“A very what, your majesty?” asked the girl.

“A very young woman,” he ended lamely.

Emma von der Tann knew that he had not intended saying that at all.
Being a woman, she knew precisely what he had meant to say, and she
discovered that she would very much have liked to hear him say it.

“Suppose,” said Barney, “that Peter’s soldiers run across us—what
then?”

“They will take you back to Blentz, your majesty.”

“And you?”

“I do not think that they will dare lay hands on me, though it is
possible that Peter might do so. He hates my father even more now than
he did when the old king lived.”

“I wish,” said Mr. Custer, “that I had gone down after my guns. Why
didn’t you tell me, in the first place, that I was a king, and that I
might get you in trouble if you were found with me? Why, they may even
take me for an emperor or a mikado—who knows? And then look at all the
trouble we’d be in.”

Which was Barney’s way of humoring a maniac.

“And they might even shave off your beautiful beard.”

Which was the girl’s way.

“Do you think that you would like me better in the green wastebasket
hat with the red roses?” asked Barney.

A very sad look came into the girl’s eyes. It was pitiful to think that
this big, handsome young man, for whose return to the throne all Lutha
had prayed for ten long years, was only a silly half-wit. What might he
not have accomplished for his people had this terrible misfortune not
overtaken him! In every other way he seemed fitted to be the savior of
his country. If she could but make him remember!

“Your majesty,” she said, “do you not recall the time that your father
came upon a state visit to my father’s castle? You were a little boy
then. He brought you with him. I was a little girl, and we played
together. You would not let me call you ‘highness,’ but insisted that I
should always call you Leopold. When I forgot you would accuse me of
lese-majeste, and sentence me to—to punishment.”

“What was the punishment?” asked Barney, noticing her hesitation and
wishing to encourage her in the pretty turn her dementia had taken.

Again the girl hesitated; she hated to say it, but if it would help to
recall the past to that poor, dimmed mind, it was her duty.

“Every time I called you ‘highness’ you made me give you a—a kiss,” she
almost whispered.

“I hope,” said Barney, “that you will be guilty of lese-majeste often.”

“We were little children then, your majesty,” the girl reminded him.

Had he thought her of sound mind Mr. Custer might have taken advantage
of his royal prerogatives on the spot, for the girl’s lips were most
tempting; but when he remembered the poor, weak mind, tears almost came
to his eyes, and there sprang to his heart a great desire to protect
and guard this unfortunate child.

“And when I was Crown Prince what were you, way back there in the
beautiful days of our childhood?” asked Barney.

“Why, I was what I still am, your majesty,” replied the girl. “Princess
Emma von der Tann.”

So the poor child, besides thinking him a king, thought herself a
princess! She certainly was mad. Well, he would humor her.

“Then I should call you ‘your highness,’ shouldn’t I?” he asked.

“You always called me Emma when we were children.”

“Very well, then, you shall be Emma and I Leopold. Is it a bargain?”

“The king’s will is law,” she said.

They had come to a very steep hillside, up which the half-obliterated
trail zigzagged toward the crest of a flat-topped hill. Barney went
ahead, taking the girl’s hand in his to help her, and thus they came to
the top, to stand hand in hand, breathing heavily after the stiff
climb.

The girl’s hair had come loose about her temples and a lock was blowing
over her face. Her cheeks were very red and her eyes bright. Barney
thought he had never looked upon a lovelier picture. He smiled down
into her eyes and she smiled back at him.

“I wished, back there a way,” he said, “that that little brook had been
as wide as the ocean—now I wish that this little hill had been as high
as Mont Blanc.”

“You like to climb?” she asked.

“I should like to climb forever—with you,” he said seriously.

She looked up at him quickly. A reply was on her lips, but she never
uttered it, for at that moment a ruffian in picturesque rags leaped out
from behind a near-by bush, confronting them with leveled revolver. He
was so close that the muzzle of the weapon almost touched Barney’s
face. In that the fellow made his mistake.

“You see,” said Barney unexcitedly, “that I was right about the
brigands after all. What do you want, my man?”

The man’s eyes had suddenly gone wide. He stared with open mouth at the
young fellow before him. Then a cunning look came into his eyes.

“I want you, your majesty,” he said.

“Godfrey!” exclaimed Barney. “Did the whole bunch escape?”

“Quick!” growled the man. “Hold up your hands. The notice made it plain
that you would be worth as much dead as alive, and I have no mind to
lose you, so do not tempt me to kill you.”

Barney’s hands went up, but not in the way that the brigand had
expected. Instead, one of them seized his weapon and shoved it aside,
while with the other Custer planted a blow between his eyes and sent
him reeling backward. The two men closed, fighting for possession of
the gun. In the scrimmage it was exploded, but a moment later the
American succeeded in wresting it from his adversary and hurled it into
the ravine.

Striking at one another, the two surged backward and forward at the
very edge of the hill, each searching for the other’s throat. The girl
stood by, watching the battle with wide, frightened eyes. If she could
only do something to aid the king!

She saw a loose stone lying at a little distance from the fighters and
hastened to procure it. If she could strike the brigand a single good
blow on the side of the head, Leopold might easily overpower him. When
she had gathered up the rock and turned back toward the two she saw
that the man she thought to be the king was not much in the way of
needing outside assistance. She could not but marvel at the strength
and dexterity of this poor fellow who had spent almost half his life
penned within the four walls of a prison. It must be, she thought, the
superhuman strength with which maniacs are always credited.

Nevertheless, she hurried toward them with her weapon; but just before
she reached them the brigand made a last mad effort to free himself
from the fingers that had found his throat. He lunged backward,
dragging the other with him. His foot struck upon the root of a tree,
and together the two toppled over into the ravine.

As the girl hastened toward the spot where the two had disappeared, she
was startled to see three troopers of the palace cavalry headed by an
officer break through the trees at a short distance from where the
battle had waged. The four men ran rapidly toward her.

“What has happened here?” shouted the officer to Emma von der Tann; and
then, as he came closer: “Gott! Can it be possible that it is your
highness?”

The girl paid no attention to the officer. Instead, she hurried down
the steep embankment toward the underbrush into which the two men had
fallen. There was no sound from below, and no movement in the bushes to
indicate that a moment before two desperately battling human beings had
dropped among them.

The soldiers were close upon the girl’s heels, but it was she who first
reached the two quiet figures that lay side by side upon the stony
ground halfway down the hillside.

When the officer stopped beside her she was sitting on the ground
holding the head of one of the combatants in her lap.

A little stream of blood trickled from a wound in the forehead. The
officer stooped closer.

“He is dead?” he asked.

“The king is dead,” replied the Princess Emma von der Tann, a little
sob in her voice.

“The king!” exclaimed the officer; and then, as he bent lower over the
white face: “Leopold!”

The girl nodded.

“We were searching for him,” said the officer, “when we heard the
shot.” Then, arising, he removed his cap, saying in a very low voice:
“The king is dead. Long live the king!”




III.
AN ANGRY KING


The soldiers stood behind their officer. None of them had ever seen
Leopold of Lutha—he had been but a name to them—they cared nothing for
him; but in the presence of death they were awed by the majesty of the
king they had never known.

The hands of Emma von der Tann were chafing the wrists of the man whose
head rested in her lap.

“Leopold!” she whispered. “Leopold, come back! Mad king you may have
been, but still you were king of Lutha—my father’s king—my king.”

The girl nearly cried out in shocked astonishment as she saw the eyes
of the dead king open. But Emma von der Tann was quick-witted. She knew
for what purpose the soldiers from the palace were scouring the
country.

Had she not thought the king dead she would have cut out her tongue
rather than reveal his identity to these soldiers of his great enemy.
Now she saw that Leopold lived, and she must undo the harm she had
innocently wrought. She bent lower over Barney’s face, trying to hide
it from the soldiers.

“Go away, please!” she called to them. “Leave me with my dead king. You
are Peter’s men. You do not care for Leopold, living or dead. Go back
to your new king and tell him that this poor young man can never more
stand between him and the throne.”

The officer hesitated.

“We shall have to take the king’s body with us, your highness,” he
said.

The officer evidently becoming suspicious, came closer, and as he did
so Barney Custer sat up.

“Go away!” cried the girl, for she saw that the king was attempting to
speak. “My father’s people will carry Leopold of Lutha in state to the
capital of his kingdom.”

“What’s all this row about?” he asked. “Can’t you let a dead king alone
if the young lady asks you to? What kind of a short sport are you,
anyway? Run along, now, and tie yourself outside.”

The officer smiled, a trifle maliciously perhaps.

“Ah,” he said, “I am very glad indeed that you are not dead, your
majesty.”

Barney Custer turned his incredulous eyes upon the lieutenant.

“Et tu, Brute?” he cried in anguished accents, letting his head fall
back into the girl’s lap. He found it very comfortable there indeed.

The officer smiled and shook his head. Then he tapped his forehead
meaningly.

“I did not know,” he said to the girl, “that he was so bad. But come—it
is some distance to Blentz, and the afternoon is already well spent.
Your highness will accompany us.”

“I?” cried the girl. “You certainly cannot be serious.”

“And why not, your highness?” asked the officer. “We had strict orders
to arrest not only the king, but any companions who may have been
involved in his escape.”

“I had nothing whatever to do with his escape,” said the girl, “though
I should have been only too glad to have aided him had the opportunity
presented.”

“King Peter may think differently,” replied the man.

“The Regent, you mean?” the girl corrected him haughtily.

The officer shrugged his shoulders.

“Regent or King, he is ruler of Lutha nevertheless, and he would take
away my commission were I to tell him that I had found a Von der Tann
in company with the king and had permitted her to escape. Your blood
convicts your highness.”

“You are going to take me to Blentz and confine me there?” asked the
girl in a very small voice and with wide incredulous eyes. “You would
not dare thus to humiliate a Von der Tann?”

“I am very sorry,” said the officer, “but I am a soldier, and soldiers
must obey their superiors. My orders are strict. You may be thankful,”
he added, “that it was not Maenck who discovered you.”

At the mention of the name the girl shuddered.

“In so far as it is in my power your highness and his majesty will be
accorded every consideration of dignity and courtesy while under my
escort. You need not entertain any fear of me,” he concluded.

Barney Custer, during this, to him, remarkable dialogue, had risen to
his feet, and assisted the girl in rising. Now he turned and spoke to
the officer.

“This farce,” he said, “has gone quite far enough. If it is a joke it
is becoming a very sorry one. I am not a king. I am an American—Bernard
Custer, of Beatrice, Nebraska, U.S.A. Look at me. Look at me closely.
Do I look like a king?”

“Every inch, your majesty,” replied the officer.

Barney looked at the man aghast.

“Well, I am not a king,” he said at last, “and if you go to arresting
me and throwing me into one of your musty old dungeons you will find
that I am a whole lot more important than most kings. I’m an American
citizen.”

“Yes, your majesty,” replied the officer, a trifle impatiently. “But we
waste time in idle discussion. Will your majesty be so good as to
accompany me without resistance?”

“If you will first escort this young lady to a place of safety,”
replied Barney.

“She will be quite safe at Blentz,” said the lieutenant.

Barney turned to look at the girl, a question in his eyes. Before them
stood the soldiers with drawn revolvers, and now at the summit of the
hill a dozen more appeared in command of a sergeant. They were two
against nearly a score, and Barney Custer was unarmed.

The girl shook her head.

“There, is no alternative, I am afraid, your majesty,” she said.

Barney wheeled toward the officer.

“Very well, lieutenant,” he said, “we will accompany you.”

The party turned back up the hillside, leaving the dead bandit where he
lay—the fellow’s neck had been broken by the fall. A short distance
from where the man had confronted them the two prisoners were brought
to the main road where they saw still other troopers, and with them the
horses of those who had gone into the forest on foot.

Barney and the girl were mounted on two of the animals, the soldiers
who had ridden them clambering up behind two of their comrades. A
moment later the troop set out along the road which leads to Blentz.

The prisoners rode near the center of the column, surrounded by
troopers. For a time they were both silent. Barney was wondering if he
had accidentally tumbled into the private grounds of Lutha’s largest
madhouse, or if, in reality, these people mistook him for the young
king—it seemed incredible.

It had commenced slowly to dawn upon him that perhaps the girl was not
crazy after all. Had not the officer addressed her as “your highness”?
Now that he thought upon it he recalled that she did have quite a
haughty and regal way with her at times, especially so when she had
addressed the officer.

Of course she might be mad, after all, and possibly the bandit, too,
but it seemed unbelievable that the officer was mad and his entire
troop of cavalry should be composed of maniacs, yet they all persisted
in speaking and acting as though he were indeed the mad king of Lutha
and the young girl at his side a princess.

From pitying the girl he had come to feel a little bit in awe of her.
To the best of his knowledge he had never before associated with a real
princess. When he recalled that he had treated her as he would an
ordinary mortal, and that he had thought her demented, and had tried to
humor her mad whims, he felt very foolish indeed.

Presently he turned a sheepish glance in her direction, to find her
looking at him. He saw her flush slightly as his eyes met hers.

“Can your highness ever forgive me?” he asked.

“Forgive you!” she cried in astonishment. “For what, your majesty?”

“For thinking you insane, and for getting you into this horrible
predicament,” he replied. “But especially for thinking you insane.”

“Did you think me mad?” she asked in wide-eyed astonishment.

“When you insisted that I was a king, yes,” he replied. “But now I
begin to believe that it must be I who am mad, after all, or else I
bear a remarkable resemblance to Leopold of Lutha.”

“You do, your majesty,” replied the girl.

Barney saw it was useless to attempt to convince them and so he decided
to give up for the time.

“Have me king, if you will,” he said, “but please do not call me ‘your
majesty’ any more. It gets on my nerves.”

“Your will is law—Leopold,” replied the girl, hesitating prettily
before the familiar name, “but do not forget your part of the compact.”

He smiled at her. A princess wasn’t half so terrible after all.

“And your will shall be my law, Emma,” he said.

It was almost dark when they came to Blentz. The castle lay far up on
the side of a steep hill above the town. It was an ancient pile, but
had been maintained in an excellent state of repair. As Barney Custer
looked up at the grim towers and mighty, buttressed walls his heart
sank. It had taken the mad king ten years to make his escape from that
gloomy and forbidding pile!

“Poor child,” he murmured, thinking of the girl.

Before the barbican the party was halted by the guard. An officer with
a lantern stepped out upon the lowered portcullis. The lieutenant who
had captured them rode forward to meet him.

“A detachment of the Royal Horse Guards escorting His Majesty the King,
who is returning to Blentz,” he said in reply to the officer’s sharp
challenge.

“The king!” exclaimed the officer. “You have found him?” and he
advanced with raised lantern searching for the monarch.

“At last,” whispered Barney to the girl at his side, “I shall be
vindicated. This man, at least, who is stationed at Blentz must know
his king by sight.”

The officer came quite close, holding his lantern until the rays fell
full in Barney’s face. He scrutinized the young man for a moment. There
was neither humility nor respect in his manner, so that the American
was sure that the fellow had discovered the imposture.

From the bottom of his heart he hoped so. Then the officer swung the
lantern until its light shone upon the girl.

“And who’s the wench with him?” he asked the officer who had found
them.

The man was standing close beside Barney’s horse, and the words were
scarce out of his month when the American slipped from his saddle to
the portcullis and struck the officer full in the face.

“She is the Princess von der Tann, you boor,” said Barney, “and let
that help you remember it in future.”

The officer scrambled to his feet, white with rage. Whipping out his
sword he rushed at Barney.

“You shall die for that, you half-wit,” he cried.

Lieutenant Butzow, he of the Royal Horse, rushed forward to prevent the
assault and Emma von der Tann sprang from her saddle and threw herself
in front of Barney.

Butzow grasped the other officer’s arm.

“Are you mad, Schonau?” he cried. “Would you kill the king?”

The fellow tugged to escape the grasp of Butzow. He was crazed with
anger.

“Why not?” he bellowed. “You were a fool not to have done it yourself.
Maenck will do it and get a baronetcy. It will mean a captaincy for me
at least. Let me at him—no man can strike Karl Schonau and live.”

“The king is unarmed,” cried Emma von der Tann. “Would you murder him
in cold blood?”

“He shall not murder him at all, your highness,” said Lieutenant Butzow
quietly. “Give me your sword, Lieutenant Schonau. I place you under
arrest. What you have just said will not please the Regent when it is
reported to him. You should keep your head better when you are angry.”

“It is the truth,” growled Schonau, regretting that his anger had led
him into a disclosure of the plot against the king’s life, but like
most weak characters fearing to admit himself in error even more than
he feared the consequences of his rash words.

“Do you intend taking my sword?” asked Schonau suddenly, turning toward
Lieutenant Butzow standing beside him.

“We will forget the whole occurrence, lieutenant,” replied Butzow, “if
you will promise not to harm his majesty, or offer him or the Princess
von der Tann further humiliation. Their position is sufficiently
unpleasant without our adding to the degradation of it.”

“Very well,” grumbled Schonau. “Pass on into the courtyard.”

Barney and the girl remounted and the little cavalcade moved forward
through the ballium and the great gate into the court beyond.

“Did you notice,” said Barney to the princess, “that even he believes
me to be the king? I cannot fathom it.”

Within the castle they were met by a number of servants and soldiers.
An officer escorted them to the great hall, and presently a dark
visaged captain of cavalry entered and approached them. Butzow saluted.

“His Majesty, the King,” he announced, “has returned to Blentz. In
accordance with the commands of the Regent I deliver his august person
into your safe keeping, Captain Maenck.”

Maenck nodded. He was looking at Barney with evident curiosity.

“Where did you find him?” he asked Butzow.

He made no pretense of according to Barney the faintest indication of
the respect that is supposed to be due to those of royal blood. Barney
commenced to hope that he had finally come upon one who would know that
he was not king.

Butzow recounted the details of the finding of the king. As he spoke,
Maenck’s eyes, restless and furtive, seemed to be appraising the
personal charms of the girl who stood just back of Barney.

The American did not like the appearance of the officer, but he saw
that he was evidently supreme at Blentz, and he determined to appeal to
him in the hope that the man might believe his story and untangle the
ridiculous muddle that a chance resemblance to a fugitive monarch had
thrown him and the girl into.

“Captain,” said Barney, stepping closer to the officer, “there has been
a mistake in identity here. I am not the king. I am an American
traveling for pleasure in Lutha. The fact that I have gray eyes and
wear a full reddish-brown beard is my only offense. You are doubtless
familiar with the king’s appearance and so you at least have already
seen that I am not his majesty.

“Not being the king, there is no cause to detain me longer, and as I am
not a fugitive and never have been, this young lady has been guilty of
no misdemeanor or crime in being in my company. Therefore she too
should be released. In the name of justice and common decency I am sure
that you will liberate us both at once and furnish the Princess von der
Tann, at least, with a proper escort to her home.”

Maenck listened in silence until Barney had finished, a half smile upon
his thick lips.

“I am commencing to believe that you are not so crazy as we have all
thought,” he said. “Certainly,” and he let his eyes rest upon Emma von
der Tann, “you are not mentally deficient in so far as your judgment of
a good-looking woman is concerned. I could not have made a better
selection myself.

“As for my familiarity with your appearance, you know as well as I that
I have never seen you before. But that is not necessary—you conform
perfectly to the printed description of you with which the kingdom is
flooded. Were that not enough, the fact that you were discovered with
old Von der Tann’s daughter is sufficient to remove the least doubt as
to your identity.”

“You are governor of Blentz,” cried Barney, “and yet you say that you
have never seen the king?”

“Certainly,” replied Maenck. “After you escaped the entire personnel of
the garrison here was changed, even the old servants to a man were
withdrawn and others substituted. You will have difficulty in again
escaping, for those who aided you before are no longer here.”

“There is no man in the castle of Blentz who has ever seen the king?”
asked Barney.

“None who has seen him before tonight,” replied Maenck. “But were we in
doubt we have the word of the Princess Emma that you are Leopold. Did
she not admit it to you, Butzow?”

“When she thought his majesty dead she admitted it,” replied Butzow.

“We gain nothing by discussing the matter,” said Maenck shortly. “You
are Leopold of Lutha. Prince Peter says that you are mad. All that
concerns me is that you do not escape again, and you may rest assured
that while Ernst Maenck is governor of Blentz you shall not escape and
go at large again.

“Are the royal apartments in readiness for his majesty, Dr. Stein?” he
concluded, turning toward a rat-faced little man with bushy whiskers,
who stood just behind him.

The query was propounded in an ironical tone, and with a manner that
made no pretense of concealing the contempt of the speaker for the man
he thought the king.

The eyes of the Princess Emma were blazing as she caught the scant
respect in Maenck’s manner. She looked quickly toward Barney to see if
he intended rebuking the man for his impertinence. She saw that the
king evidently intended overlooking Maenck’s attitude. But Emma von der
Tann was of a different mind.

She had seen Maenck several times at social functions in the capital.
He had even tried to win a place in her favor, but she had always
disliked him, even before the nasty stories of his past life had become
common gossip, and within the year she had won his hatred by definitely
indicating to him that he was persona non grata, in so far as she was
concerned. Now she turned upon him, her eyes flashing with indignation.

“Do you forget, sir, that you address the king?” she cried. “That you
are without honor I have heard men say, and I may truly believe it now
that I have seen what manner of man you are. The most lowly-bred boor
in all Lutha would not be so ungenerous as to take advantage of his
king’s helplessness to heap indignities upon him.

“Leopold of Lutha shall come into his own some day, and my dearest hope
is that his first act may be to mete out to such as you the punishment
you deserve.”

Maenck paled in anger. His fingers twitched nervously, but he
controlled his temper remarkably well, biding his time for revenge.

“Take the king to his apartments, Stein,” he commanded curtly, “and
you, Lieutenant Butzow, accompany them with a guard, nor leave until
you see that he is safely confined. You may return here afterward for
my further instructions. In the meantime I wish to examine the king’s
mistress.”

For a moment tense silence reigned in the apartment after Maenck had
delivered his wanton insult.

Emma von der Tann, her little chin high in the air, stood straight and
haughty, nor was there any sign in her expression to indicate that she
had heard the man’s words.

Barney was the first to take cognizance of them.

“You cur!” he cried, and took a step toward Maenck. “You’re going to
eat that, word for word.”

Maenck stepped back, his hand upon his sword. Butzow laid a hand upon
Barney’s arm.

“Don’t, your majesty,” he implored, “it will but make your position
more unpleasant, nor will it add to the safety of the Princess von der
Tann for you to strike him now.”

Barney shook himself free from Butzow, and before either Stein or the
lieutenant could prevent had sprung upon Maenck.

The latter had not been quick enough with his sword, so that Barney had
struck him twice, heavily in the face before the officer was able to
draw. Butzow had sprung to the king’s side, and was attempting to
interpose himself between Maenck and the American. In a moment more the
sword of the infuriated captain would be in the king’s heart. Barney
turned the first thrust with his forearm.

“Stop!” cried Butzow to Maenck. “Are you mad, that you would kill the
king?”

Maenck lunged again, viciously, at the unprotected body of his
antagonist.

“Die, you pig of an idiot!” he screamed.

Butzow saw that the man really meant to murder Leopold. He seized
Barney by the shoulder and whirled him backward. At the same instant
his own sword leaped from his scabbard, and now Maenck found himself
facing grim steel in the hand of a master swordsman.

The governor of Blentz drew back from the touch of that sharp point.

“What do you mean?” he cried. “This is mutiny.”

“When I received my commission,” replied Butzow, quietly, “I swore to
protect the person of the king with my life, and while I live no man
shall affront Leopold of Lutha in my presence, or threaten his safety
else he accounts to me for his act. Return your sword, Captain Maenck,
nor ever again draw it against the king while I be near.”

Slowly Maenck sheathed his weapon. Black hatred for Butzow and the man
he was protecting smoldered in his eyes.

“If he wishes peace,” said Barney, “let him apologize to the princess.”

“You had better apologize, captain,” counseled Butzow, “for if the king
should command me to do so I should have to compel you to,” and the
lieutenant half drew his sword once more.

There was something in Butzow’s voice that warned Maenck that his
subordinate would like nothing better than the king’s command to run
him through.

He well knew the fame of Butzow’s sword arm, and having no stomach for
an encounter with it he grumbled an apology.

“And don’t let it occur again,” warned Barney.

“Come,” said Dr. Stein, “your majesty should be in your apartments,
away from all excitement, if we are to effect a cure, so that you may
return to your throne quickly.”

Butzow formed the soldiers about the American, and the party moved
silently out of the great hall, leaving Captain Maenck and Princess
Emma von der Tann its only occupants.

Barney cast a troubled glance toward Maenck, and half hesitated.

“I am sorry, your majesty,” said Butzow in a low voice, “but you must
accompany us. In this the governor of Blentz is well within his
authority, and I must obey him.”

“Heaven help her!” murmured Barney.

“The governor will not dare harm her,” said Butzow. “Your majesty need
entertain no apprehension.”

“I wouldn’t trust him,” replied the American. “I know his kind.”




IV.
BARNEY FINDS A FRIEND


After the party had left the room Maenck stood looking at the princess
for several seconds. A cunning expression supplanted the anger that had
shown so plainly upon his face but a moment before. The girl had moved
to one side of the apartment and was pretending an interest in a large
tapestry that covered the wall at that point. Maenck watched her with
greedy eyes. Presently he spoke.

“Let us be friends,” he said. “You shall be my guest at Blentz for a
long time. I doubt if Peter will care to release you soon, for he has
no love for your father—and it will be easier for both if we establish
pleasant relations from the beginning. What do you say?”

“I shall not be at Blentz long,” she replied, not even looking in
Maenck’s direction, “though while I am it shall be as a prisoner and
not as a guest. It is incredible that one could believe me willing to
pose as the guest of a traitor, even were he less impossible than the
notorious and infamous Captain Maenck.”

Maenck smiled. He was one of those who rather pride themselves upon the
possession of racy reputations. He walked across the room to a bell
cord which he pulled. Then he turned toward the girl again.

“I have given you an opportunity,” he said, “to lighten the burdens of
your captivity. I hoped that you would be sensible and accept my
advances of friendship voluntarily,” and he emphasized the word
“voluntarily,” “but—”

He shrugged his shoulders.

A servant had entered the apartment in response to Maenck’s summons.

“Show the Princess von der Tann to her apartments,” he commanded with a
sinister tone.

The man, who was in the livery of Peter of Blentz, bowed, and with a
deferential sign to the girl led the way from the room. Emma von der
Tann followed her guide up a winding stairway which spiraled within a
tower at the end of a long passage. On the second floor of the castle
the servant led her to a large and beautifully furnished suite of three
rooms—a bedroom, dressing-room and boudoir. After showing her the rooms
that were to be hers the servant left her alone.

As soon as he had gone the Princess von der Tann took another turn
through the suite, looking to the doors and windows to ascertain how
securely she might barricade herself against unwelcome visitors.

She found that the three rooms lay in an angle of the old, moss-covered
castle wall.

The bedroom and dressing-room were connected by a doorway, and each in
turn had another door opening into the boudoir. The only connection
with the corridor without was through a single doorway from the
boudoir. This door was equipped with a massive bolt, which, when she
had shot it, gave her a feeling of immense relief and security. The
windows were all too high above the court on one side and the moat upon
the other to cause her the slightest apprehension of danger from the
outside.

The girl found the boudoir not only beautiful, but extremely
comfortable and cozy. A huge log-fire blazed upon the hearth, and,
though it was summer, its warmth was most welcome, for the night was
chill. Across the room from the fireplace a full length oil of a former
Blentz princess looked down in arrogance upon the unwilling occupant of
the room. It seemed to the girl that there was an expression of
annoyance upon the painted countenance that another, and an enemy of
her house, should be making free with her belongings. She wondered a
little, too, that this huge oil should have been hung in a lady’s
boudoir. It seemed singularly out of place.

“If she would but smile,” thought Emma von der Tann, “she would detract
less from the otherwise pleasant surroundings, but I suppose she serves
her purpose in some way, whatever it may be.”

There were papers, magazines and books upon the center table and more
books upon a low tier of shelves on either side of the fireplace. The
girl tried to amuse herself by reading, but she found her thoughts
continually reverting to the unhappy situation of the king, and her
eyes momentarily wandered to the cold and repellent face of the Blentz
princess.

Finally she wheeled a great armchair near the fireplace, and with her
back toward the portrait made a final attempt to submerge her unhappy
thoughts in a current periodical.

When Barney and his escort reached the apartments that had been
occupied by the king of Lutha before his escape, Butzow and the
soldiers left him in company with Dr. Stein and an old servant, whom
the doctor introduced as his new personal attendant.

“Your majesty will find him a very attentive and faithful servant,”
said Stein. “He will remain with you and administer your medicine at
proper intervals.”

“Medicine?” ejaculated Barney. “What in the world do I need of
medicine? There is nothing the matter with me.”

Stein smiled indulgently.

“Ah, your majesty,” he said, “if you could but realize the sad
affliction that clouds your life! You may never sit upon your throne
until the last trace of this sinister mental disorder is eradicated, so
take your medicine voluntarily, or otherwise Joseph will be compelled
to administer it by force. Remember, sire, that only through this
treatment will you be able to leave Blentz.”

After Stein had left the room Joseph bolted the door behind him. Then
he came to where Barney stood in the center of the apartment, and
dropping to his knees took the young man’s hand in his and kissed it.

“God has been good indeed, your majesty,” he whispered. “It was He who
made it possible for old Joseph to deceive them and find his way to
your side.”

“Who are you, my man?” asked Barney.

“I am from Tann,” whispered the old man, in a very low voice. “His
highness, the prince, found the means to obtain service for me with the
new retinue that has replaced the old which permitted your majesty’s
escape. There was another from Tann among the former servants here.

“It was through his efforts that you escaped before, you will recall. I
have seen Fritz and learned from him the way, so that if your majesty
does not recall it it will make no difference, for I know it well,
having been over it three times already since I came here, to be sure
that when the time came that they should recapture you I might lead you
out quickly before they could slay you.”

“You really think that they intend murdering me?”

“There is no doubt about it, your majesty,” replied the old man. “This
very bottle”—Joseph touched the phial which Stein had left upon the
table—“contains the means whereby, through my hands, you were to be
slowly poisoned.”

“Do you know what it is?”

“Bichloride of mercury, your majesty. One dose would have been
sufficient, and after a few days—perhaps a week—you would have died in
great agony.”

Barney shuddered.

“But I am not the king, Joseph,” said the young man, “so even had they
succeeded in killing me it would have profited them nothing.”

Joseph shook his head sadly.

“Your majesty will pardon the presumption of one who loves him,” he
said, “if he makes so bold as to suggest that your majesty must not
again deny that he is king. That only tends to corroborate the
contention of Prince Peter that your majesty is not—er, just sane, and
so, incompetent to rule Lutha. But we of Tann know differently, and
with the help of the good God we will place your majesty upon the
throne which Peter has kept from you all these years.”

Barney sighed. They were determined that he should be king whether he
would or no. He had often thought he would like to be a king; but now
the realization of his boyish dreaming which seemed so imminent bade
fair to be almost anything than pleasant.

Barney suddenly realized that the old fellow was talking. He was
explaining how they might escape. It seemed that a secret passage led
from this very chamber to the vaults beneath the castle and from there
through a narrow tunnel below the moat to a cave in the hillside far
beyond the structure.

“They will not return again tonight to see your majesty,” said Joseph,
“and so we had best make haste to leave at once. I have a rope and
swords in readiness. We shall need the rope to make our way down the
hillside, but let us hope that we shall not need the swords.”

“I cannot leave Blentz,” said Barney, “unless the Princess Emma goes
with us.”

“The Princess Emma!” cried the old man. “What Princess Emma?”

“Princess von der Tann,” replied Barney. “Did you not know that she was
captured with me!”

The old man was visibly affected by the knowledge that his young
mistress was a prisoner within the walls of Blentz. He seemed torn by
conflicting emotions—his duty toward his king and his love for the
daughter of his old master. So it was that he seemed much relieved when
he found that Barney insisted upon saving the girl before any thought
of their own escape should be taken into consideration.

“My first duty, your majesty,” said Joseph, “is to bring you safely out
of the hands of your enemies, but if you command me to try to bring
your betrothed with us I am sure that his highness, Prince Ludwig,
would be the last to censure me for deviating thus from his
instructions, for if he loves another more than he loves his king it is
his daughter, the beautiful Princess Emma.”

“What do you mean, Joseph,” asked Barney, “by referring to the princess
as my betrothed? I never saw her before today.”

“It has slipped your majesty’s mind,” said the old man sadly; “but you
and my young mistress were betrothed many years ago while you were yet
but children. It was the old king’s wish that you wed the daughter of
his best friend and most loyal subject.”

Here was a pretty pass, indeed, thought Barney. It was sufficiently
embarrassing to be mistaken for the king, but to be thrown into this
false position in company with a beautiful young woman to whom the king
was engaged to be married, and who, with the others, thought him to be
the king, was quite the last word in impossible positions.

Following this knowledge there came to Barney the first pangs of regret
that he was not really the king, and then the realization, so sudden
that it almost took his breath away, that the girl was very beautiful
and very much to be desired. He had not thought about the matter until
her utter impossibility was forced upon him.

It was decided that Joseph should leave the king’s apartment at once
and discover in what part of the castle Emma von der Tann was
imprisoned. Their further plans were to depend upon the information
gained by the old man during his tour of investigation of the castle.

In the interval of his absence Barney paced the length of his prison
time and time again. He thought the fellow would never return. Perhaps
he had been detected in the act of spying, and was himself a prisoner
in some other part of the castle! The thought came to Barney like a
blow in the face, for he realized that then he would be entirely at the
mercy of his captors, and that there would be none to champion the
cause of the Princess von der Tann.

When his nervous tension had about reached the breaking point there
came a sound of stealthy movement just outside the door of his room.
Barney halted close to the massive panels. He heard a key fitted
quietly and then the lock grated as it turned.

Barney thought that they had surely detected Joseph’s duplicity and had
come to make short work of the king before other traitors arose in
their midst entirely to frustrate their plans. The young American
stepped to the wall behind the door that he might be out of sight of
whoever entered. Should it prove other than Joseph, might the Lord help
them! The clenched fists, square-set chin, and gleaming gray eyes of
the prisoner presaged no good for any incoming enemy.

Slowly the door swung open and a man entered the room. Barney breathed
a deep sigh of relief—it was Joseph.

“Well?” cried the young man from behind him, and Joseph started as
though Peter of Blentz himself had laid an accusing finger upon his
shoulder. “What news?”

“Your majesty,” gasped Joseph, “how you did startle me! I found the
apartments of the princess, sire. There is a bare chance that we may
succeed in rescuing her, but a very bare one, indeed.

“We must traverse a main corridor of the castle to reach her suite, and
then return by the same way. It will be a miracle if we are not
discovered; but the worst of it is that next to her apartments, and
between them and your majesty’s, are the apartments of Captain Maenck.

“He is sure to be there and officers and servants may be coming and
going throughout the entire night, for the man is a convivial fellow,
sitting at cards and drink until sunrise nearly every day.”

“And when we have brought the princess in safety to my quarters,” asked
Barney, “what then? How shall we conduct her from the castle? You have
not told me that as yet.”

The old man explained then the plan of escape. It seemed that one of
the two huge tile panels that flanked the fireplace on either side was
in reality a door hiding the entrance to a shaft that rose from the
vaults beneath the castle to the roof. At each floor there was a
similar secret door concealing the mouth of the passage. From the
vaults a corridor led through another secret panel to the tunnel that
wound downward to the cave in the hillside.

“Beyond that we shall find horses, your majesty,” concluded the old
man. “They have been hidden in the woods since I came to Blentz. Each
day I go there to water and feed them.”

During the servant’s explanation Barney had been casting about in his
mind for some means of rescuing the princess without so great risk of
detection, and as the plan of the secret passageway became clear to him
he thought that he saw a way to accomplish the thing with comparative
safety in so far as detection was concerned.

“Who occupies the floor above us, Joseph?” he asked.

“It is vacant,” replied the old man.

“Good! Come, show me the entrance to the shaft,” directed Barney.

“You will go without attempting to succor the Princess Emma?” exclaimed
the old fellow in ill-concealed chagrin.

“Far from it,” replied Barney. “Bring your rope and the swords. I think
we are going to find the rescuing of the Princess Emma the easiest part
of our adventure.”

The old man shook his head, but went to another room of the suite, from
which he presently emerged with a stout rope about fifty feet in length
and two swords. As he buckled one of the weapons to Barney his eyes
fell upon the American’s seal ring that encircled the third finger of
his left hand.

“The Royal Ring of Lutha!” exclaimed Joseph. “Where is it, your
majesty? What has become of the Royal Ring of the Kings of Lutha?”

“I’m sure I don’t know, Joseph,” replied the young man. “Should I be
wearing a royal ring?”

“The profaning miscreants!” cried Joseph. “They have dared to filch
from you the great ring that has been handed down from king to king for
three hundred years. When did they take it from you?”

“I have never seen it, Joseph,” replied the young man, “and possibly
this fact may assure you where all else has failed that I am no true
king of Lutha, after all.”

“Ah, no, your majesty,” replied the old servitor; “it but makes
assurance doubly sure as to your true identity, for the fact that you
have not the ring is positive proof that you are king and that they
have sought to hide the fact by removing the insignia of your divine
right to rule in Lutha.”

Barney could not but smile at the old fellow’s remarkable logic. He saw
that nothing short of a miracle would ever convince Joseph that he was
not the real monarch, and so, as matters of greater importance were to
the fore, he would have allowed the subject to drop had not the man
attempted to recall to the impoverished memory of his king a
recollection of the historic and venerated relic of the dead monarchs
of Lutha.

“Do you not remember, sir,” he asked, “the great ruby that glared,
blood-red from its center, and the four sets of golden wings that
formed the setting? From the blood of Charlemagne was the ruby made, so
history tells us, and the setting represented the protecting wings of
the power of the kings of Lutha spread to the four points of the
compass. Now your majesty must recall the royal ring, I am sure.”

Barney only shook his head, much to Joseph’s evident sorrow.

“Never mind the ring, Joseph,” said the young man. “Bring your rope and
lead me to the floor above.”

“The floor above? But, your majesty, we cannot reach the vaults and
tunnel by going upward!”

“You forget, Joseph, that we are going to fetch the Princess Emma
first.”

“But she is not on the floor above us, sire; she is upon the same floor
as we are,” insisted the old man, hesitating.

“Joseph, who do you think I am?” asked Barney.

“You are the king, my lord,” replied the old man.

“Then do as your king commands,” said the American sharply.

Joseph turned with dubious mutterings and approached the tiled panel at
the left of the fireplace. Here he fumbled about for a moment until his
fingers found the hidden catch that held the cunningly devised door in
place. An instant later the panel swung inward before his touch, and
standing to one side, the old fellow bowed low as he ushered Barney
into the Stygian darkness of the space beyond their vision.

Joseph halted the young man just within the doorway, cautioning him
against the danger of falling into the shaft, then he closed the panel,
and a moment later had found the lantern he had hidden there and
lighted it. The rays disclosed to the American the rough masonry of the
interior of a narrow, well-built shaft. A rude ladder standing upon a
narrow ledge beside him extended upward to lose itself in the shadows
above. At its foot the top of another ladder was visible protruding
through the opening from the floor beneath.

No sooner had Joseph’s lantern shown him the way than Barney was
ascending the ladder toward the floor above. At the next landing he
waited for the old man.

Joseph put out the light and placed the lantern where they could easily
find it upon their return. Then he cautiously slipped the catch that
held the panel in place and slowly opened the door until a narrow line
of lesser darkness showed from without.

For a moment they stood in silence listening for any sound from the
chamber beyond, but as nothing occurred to indicate that the apartment
was occupied the old man opened the portal a trifle further, and
finally far enough to permit his body to pass through. Barney followed
him. They found themselves in a large, empty chamber, identical in size
and shape with that which they had just quitted upon the floor below.

From this the two passed into the corridor beyond, and thence to the
apartments at the far end of the wing, directly over those occupied by
Emma von der Tann.

Barney hastened to a window overlooking the moat. By leaning far out he
could see the light from the princess’s chamber shining upon the sill.
He wished that the light was not there, for the window was in plain
view of the guard on the lookout upon the barbican.

Suddenly he caught the sound of voices from the chamber beneath. For an
instant he listened, and then, catching a few words of the dialogue, he
turned hurriedly toward his companion.

“The rope, Joseph! And for God’s sake be quick about it.”




V.
THE ESCAPE


For half an hour the Princess von der Tann succeeded admirably in
immersing herself in the periodical, to the exclusion of her unhappy
thoughts and the depressing influence of the austere countenance of the
Blentz Princess hanging upon the wall behind her.

But presently she became unaccountably nervous. At the slightest sound
from the palace-life on the floor below she would start up with a
tremor of excitement. Once she heard footsteps in the corridor before
her door, but they passed on, and she thought she discerned the click
of a latch a short distance further on along the passageway.

Again she attempted to gather up the thread of the article she had been
reading, but she was unsuccessful. A stealthy scratching brought her
round quickly, staring in the direction of the great portrait. The girl
would have sworn that she had heard a noise within her chamber. She
shuddered at the thought that it might have come from that painted
thing upon the wall.

What was the matter with her? Was she losing all control of herself to
be frightened like a little child by ghostly noises?

She tried to return to her reading, but for the life of her she could
not keep her eyes off the silent, painted woman who stared and stared
and stared in cold, threatening silence upon this ancient enemy of her
house.

Presently the girl’s eyes went wide in horror. She could feel the scalp
upon her head contract with fright. Her terror-filled gaze was frozen
upon that awful figure that loomed so large and sinister above her, for
the thing had moved! She had seen it with her own eyes. There could be
no mistake—no hallucination of overwrought nerves about it. The Blentz
Princess was moving slowly toward her!

Like one in a trance the girl rose from her chair, her eyes glued upon
the awful apparition that seemed creeping upon her. Slowly she withdrew
toward the opposite side of the chamber. As the painting moved more
quickly the truth flashed upon her—it was mounted on a door.

The crack of the door widened and beyond it the girl saw dimly, eyes
fastened upon her. With difficulty she restrained a shriek. The portal
swung wide and a man in uniform stepped into the room.

It was Maenck.

Emma von der Tann gazed in unveiled abhorrence upon the leering face of
the governor of Blentz.

“What means this intrusion?” cried the girl.

“What would you have here?”

“You,” replied Maenck.

The girl crimsoned.

Maenck regarded her sneeringly.

“You coward!” she cried. “Leave my apartments at once. Not even Peter
of Blentz would countenance such abhorrent treatment of a prisoner.”

“You do not know Peter, my dear,” responded Maenck. “But you need not
fear. You shall be my wife. Peter has promised me a baronetcy for the
capture of Leopold, and before I am done I shall be made a prince, of
that you may rest assured, so you see I am not so bad a match after
all.”

He crossed over toward her and would have laid a rough hand upon her
arm.

The girl sprang away from him, running to the opposite side of the
library table at which she had been reading. Maenck started to pursue
her, when she seized a heavy, copper bowl that stood upon the table and
hurled it full in his face. The missile struck him a glancing blow, but
the edge laid open the flesh of one cheek almost to the jaw bone.

With a cry of pain and rage Captain Ernst Maenck leaped across the
table full upon the young girl. With vicious, murderous fingers he
seized upon her fair throat, shaking her as a terrier might shake a
rat. Futilely the girl struck at the hate-contorted features so close
to hers.

“Stop!” she cried. “You are killing me.”

The fingers released their hold.

“No,” muttered the man, and dragged the princess roughly across the
room.

Half a dozen steps he had taken when there came a sudden crash of
breaking glass from the window across the chamber. Both turned in
astonishment to see the figure of a man leap into the room, carrying
the shattered crystal and the casement with him. In one hand was a
naked sword.

“The king!” cried Emma von der Tann.

“The devil!” muttered Maenck, as, dropping the girl, he scurried toward
the great painting from behind which he had found ingress to the
chambers of the princess.

Maenck was a coward, and he had seen murder in the eyes of the man
rushing upon him. With a bound he reached the picture which still stood
swung wide into the room.

Barney was close behind him, but fear lent wings to the governor of
Blentz, so that he was able to dart into the passage behind the picture
and slam the door behind him a moment before the infuriated man was
upon him.

The American clawed at the edge of the massive frame, but all to no
avail. Then he raised his sword and slashed the canvas, hoping to find
a way into the place beyond, but mighty oaken panels barred his further
progress. With a whispered oath he turned back toward the girl.

“Thank Heaven that I was in time, Emma,” he cried.

“Oh, Leopold, my king, but at what a price,” replied the girl. “He will
return now with others and kill you. He is furious—so furious that he
scarce knows what he does.”

“He seemed to know what he was doing when he ran for that hole in the
wall,” replied Barney with a grin. “But come, it won’t pay to let them
find us should they return.”

Together they hastened to the window beyond which the girl could see a
rope dangling from above. The sight of it partially solved the riddle
of the king’s almost uncanny presence upon her window sill in the very
nick of time.

Below, the lights in the watch tower at the outer gate were plainly
visible, and the twinkling of them reminded Barney of the danger of
detection from that quarter. Quickly he recrossed the apartment to the
wall-switch that operated the recently installed electric lights, and
an instant later the chamber was in total darkness.

Once more at the girl’s side Barney drew in one end of the rope and
made it fast about her body below her arms, leaving a sufficient length
terminating in a small loop to permit her to support herself more
comfortably with one foot within the noose. Then he stepped to the
outer sill, and reaching down assisted her to his side.

Far below them the moonlight played upon the sluggish waters of the
moat. In the distance twinkled the lights of the village of Blentz.
From the courtyard and the palace came faintly the sound of voices, and
the movement of men. A horse whinnied from the stables.

Barney turned his eyes upward. He could see the head and shoulders of
Joseph leaning from the window of the chamber directly above them.

“Hoist away, Joseph!” whispered the American, and to the girl: “Be
brave. Shut your eyes and trust to Joseph and—and—”

“And my king,” finished the girl for him.

His arm was about her shoulders, supporting her upon the narrow sill.
His cheek so close to hers that once he felt the soft velvet of it
brush his own. Involuntarily his arm tightened about the supple body.

“My princess!” he murmured, and as he turned his face toward hers their
lips almost touched.

Joseph was pulling upon the rope from above. They could feel it tighten
beneath the girl’s arms. Impulsively Barney Custer drew the sweet lips
closer to his own. There was no resistance.

“I love you,” he whispered. The words were smothered as their lips met.

Joseph, above, wondered at the great weight of the Princess Emma von
der Tann.

“I love you, Leopold, forever,” whispered the girl, and then as
Joseph’s Herculean tugging seemed likely to drag them both from the
narrow sill, Barney lifted the girl upward with one hand while he clung
to the window frame with the other. The distance to the sill above was
short, and a moment later Joseph had grasped the princess’s hand and
was helping her over the ledge into the room beyond.

At the same instant there came a sudden commotion from the interior of
the room in the window of which Barney still stood waiting for Joseph
to remove the rope from about the princess and lower it for him. Barney
heard the heavy feet of men, the clank of arms, and muttered oaths as
the searchers stumbled against the furniture.

Presently one of them found the switch and instantly the room was
flooded with light, which revealed to the American a dozen Luthanian
troopers headed by the murderous Maenck.

Barney looked anxiously aloft. Would Joseph never lower that rope!
Within the room the men were searching. He could hear Maenck directing
them. Only a thin portiere screened him from their view. It was but a
matter of seconds before they would investigate the window through
which Maenck knew the king had found ingress.

Yes! It had come.

“Look to the window,” commanded Maenck. “He may have gone as he came.”

Two of the soldiers crossed the room toward the casement. From above
Joseph was lowering the rope; but it was too late. The men would be at
the window before he could clamber out of their reach.

“Hoist away!” he whispered to Joseph. “Quick now, my man, and make your
escape with the Princess von der Tann. It is the king’s command.”

Already the soldiers were at the window. At the sound of his voice they
tore aside the draperies; at the same instant the pseudo-king turned
and leaped out into the blackness of the night.

There were exclamations of surprise and rage from the soldiers—a
woman’s scream. Then from far below came a dull splash as the body of
Bernard Custer struck the surface of the moat.

Maenck, leaning from the window, heard the scream and the splash, and
jumped to the conclusion that both the king and the princess had
attempted to make their escape in this harebrained way. Immediately all
the resources at his command were put to the task of searching the moat
and the adjacent woods.

He was sure that one or both of the prisoners would be stunned by
impact with the surface of the water, and then drowned before they
regained consciousness, but he did not know Bernard Custer, nor the
facility and almost uncanny ease with which that young man could
negotiate a high dive into shallow water.

Nor did he know that upon the floor above him one Joseph was hastening
along a dark corridor toward a secret panel in another apartment, and
that with him was the Princess Emma bound for liberty and safety far
from the frowning walls of Blentz.

As Barney’s head emerged above the surface of the moat he shook it
vigorously to free his eyes from water, and then struck out for the
further bank.

Long before his pursuers had reached the courtyard and alarmed the
watch at the barbican, the American had crawled out upon dry land and
hastened across the broad clearing to the patch of stunted trees that
grew lower down upon the steep hillside before the castle.

He shrank from the thought of leaving Blentz without knowing positively
that Joseph had made good the escape of himself and the princess, but
he finally argued that even if they had been retaken, he could serve
her best by hastening to her father and fetching the only succor that
might prevail against the strength of Blentz—armed men in sufficient
force to storm the ancient fortress.

He had scarcely entered the wood when he heard the sound of the
searchers at the moat, and saw the rays of their lanterns flitting
hither and thither as they moved back and forth along the bank.

Then the young man turned his face from the castle and set forth across
the unfamiliar country in the direction of the Old Forest and the
castle Von der Tann.

The memory of the warm lips that had so recently been pressed to his
urged him on in the service of the wondrous girl who had come so
suddenly into his life, bringing to him the realization of a love that
he knew must alter, for happiness or for sorrow, all the balance of his
existence, even unto death.

He dreaded the day of reckoning when, at last, she must learn that he
was no king. He did not have the temerity to hope that her courage
would be equal to the great sacrifice which the acknowledgment of her
love for one not of noble blood must entail; but he could not believe
that she would cease to love him when she learned the truth.

So the future looked black and cheerless to Barney Custer as he trudged
along the rocky, moonlit way. The only bright spot was the realization
that for a while at least he might be serving the one woman in all the
world.

All the balance of the long night the young man traversed valley and
mountain, holding due south in the direction he supposed the Old Forest
to lie. He passed many a little farm tucked away in the hollow of a
hillside, and quaint hamlets, and now and then the ruins of an ancient
feudal stronghold, but no great forest of black oaks loomed before him
to apprise him of the nearness of his goal, nor did he dare to ask the
correct route at any of the homes he passed.

His fatal likeness to the description of the mad king of Lutha warned
him from intercourse with the men of Lutha until he might know which
were friends and which enemies of the hapless monarch.

Dawn found him still upon his way, but with the determination fully
crystallized to hail the first man he met and ask the way to Tann. He
still avoided the main traveled roads, but from time to time he
paralleled them close enough that he might have ample opportunity to
hail the first passerby.

The road was becoming more and more mountainous and difficult. There
were fewer homes and no hamlets, and now he began to despair entirely
of meeting any who could give him direction unless he turned and
retraced his steps to the nearest farm.

Directly before him the narrow trail he had been following for the past
few miles wound sharply about the shoulder of a protruding cliff. He
would see what lay beyond the turn—perhaps he would find the Old Forest
there, after all.

But instead he found something very different, though in its way quite
as interesting, for as he rounded the rugged bluff he came face to face
with two evil-looking fellows astride stocky, rough-coated ponies.

At sight of him they drew in their mounts and eyed him suspiciously.
Nor was there great cause for wonderment in that, for the American
presented aught but a respectable appearance. His khaki motoring suit,
soaked from immersion in the moat, had but partially dried upon him.
Mud from the banks of the stagnant pool caked his legs to the knees,
almost hiding his once tan puttees. More mud streaked his jacket front
and stained its sleeves to the elbows. He was bare-headed, for his cap
had remained in the moat at Blentz, and his disheveled hair was tousled
upon his head, while his full beard had dried into a weird and tangled
fringe about his face. At his side still hung the sword that Joseph had
buckled there, and it was this that caused the two men the greatest
suspicion of this strange looking character.

They continued to eye Barney in silence, every now and then casting
apprehensive glances beyond him, as though expecting others of his kind
to appear in the trail at his back. And that is precisely what they did
fear, for the sword at Barney’s side had convinced them that he must be
an officer of the army, and they looked to see his command following in
his wake.

The young man saluted them pleasantly, asking the direction to the Old
Forest. They thought it strange that a soldier of Lutha should not know
his own way about his native land, and so judged that his question was
but a blind to deceive them.

“Why do you not ask your own men the way?” parried one of the fellows.

“I have no men, I am alone,” replied Barney. “I am a stranger in Lutha
and have lost my way.”

He who had spoken before pointed to the sword at Barney’s side.

“Strangers traveling in Lutha do not wear swords,” he said. “You are an
officer. Why should you desire to conceal the fact from two honest
farmers? We have done nothing. Let us go our way.”

Barney looked his astonishment at this reply.

“Most certainly, go your way, my friends,” he said laughing. “I would
not delay you if I could; but before you go please be good enough to
tell me how to reach the Old Forest and the ancient castle of the
Prince von der Tann.”

For a moment the two men whispered together, then the spokesman turned
to Barney.

“We will lead you upon the right road. Come,” and the two turned their
horses, one of them starting slowly back up the trail while the other
remained waiting for Barney to pass him.

The American, suspecting nothing, voiced his thanks, and set out after
him who had gone before. As he passed the fellow who waited the latter
moved in behind him, so that Barney walked between the two.
Occasionally the rider at his back turned in his saddle to scan the
trail behind, as though still fearful that Barney had been lying to
them and that he would discover a company of soldiers charging down
upon them.

The trail became more and more difficult as they advanced, until Barney
wondered how the little horses clung to the steep mountainside, where
he himself had difficulty in walking without using his hand to keep
from falling.

Twice the American attempted to break through the taciturnity of his
guides, but his advances were met with nothing more than sultry grunts
or silence, and presently a suspicion began to obtrude itself among his
thoughts that possibly these “honest farmers” were something more
sinister than they represented themselves to be.

A malign and threatening atmosphere seemed to surround them. Even the
cat-like movement of their silent mounts breathed a sinister secrecy,
and now, for the first time, Barney noticed the short, ugly looking
carbines that were slung in boots at their saddle-horns. Then, prompted
to further investigation, he dropped back beside the man who had been
riding behind him, and as he did so he saw beneath the fellow’s cloak
the butts of two villainous-looking pistols.

As Barney dropped back beside him the man turned his mount across the
narrow trail, and reining him in motioned Barney ahead.

“I have changed my mind,” said the American, “about going to the Old
Forest.”

He had determined that he might as well have the thing out now as
later, and discover at once how he stood with these two, and whether or
not his suspicions of them were well grounded.

The man ahead had halted at the sound of Barney’s voice, and swung
about in the saddle.

“What’s the trouble?” he asked.

“He don’t want to go to the Old Forest,” explained his companion, and
for the first time Barney saw one of them grin. It was not at all a
pleasant grin, nor reassuring.

“He don’t, eh?” growled the other. “Well, he ain’t goin’, is he? Who
ever said he was?”

And then he, too, laughed.

“I’m going back the way I came,” said Barney, starting around the horse
that blocked his way.

“No, you ain’t,” said the horseman. “You’re goin’ with us.”

And Barney found himself gazing down the muzzle of one of the wicked
looking pistols.

For a moment he stood in silence, debating mentally the wisdom of
attempting to rush the fellow, and then, with a shake of his head, he
turned back up the trail between his captors.

“Yes,” he said, “on second thought I have decided to go with you. Your
logic is most convincing.”




VI.
A KING’S RANSOM


For another mile the two brigands conducted their captor along the
mountainside, then they turned into a narrow ravine near the summit of
the hills—a deep, rocky, wooded ravine into whose black shadows it
seemed the sun might never penetrate.

A winding path led crookedly among the pines that grew thickly in this
sheltered hollow, until presently, after half an hour of rough going,
they came upon a small natural clearing, rock-bound and impregnable.

As they filed from the wood Barney saw a score of villainous fellows
clustered about a camp fire where they seemed engaged in cooking their
noonday meal. Bits of meat were roasting upon iron skewers, and a great
iron pot boiled vigorously at one side of the blaze.

At the sound of their approach the men sprang to their feet in alarm,
and as many weapons as there were men leaped to view; but when they saw
Barney’s companions they returned their pistols to their holsters, and
at sight of Barney they pressed forward to inspect the prisoner.

“Who have we here?” shouted a big blond giant, who affected extremely
gaudy colors in his selection of wearing apparel, and whose pistols and
knife had their grips heavily ornamented with pearl and silver.

“A stranger in Lutha he calls himself,” replied one of Barney’s
captors. “But from the sword I take it he is one of old Peter’s
wolfhounds.”

“Well, he’s found the wolves at any rate,” replied the giant, with a
wide grin at his witticism. “And if Yellow Franz is the particular wolf
you’re after, my friend, why here I am,” he concluded, addressing the
American with a leer.

“I’m after no one,” replied Barney. “I tell you I’m a stranger, and I
lost my way in your infernal mountains. All I wish is to be set upon
the right road to Tann, and if you will do that for me you shall be
well paid for your trouble.”

The giant, Yellow Franz, had come quite close to Barney and was
inspecting him with an expression of considerable interest. Presently
he drew a soiled and much-folded paper from his breast. Upon one side
was a printed notice, and at the corners bits were torn away as though
the paper had once been tacked upon wood, and then torn down without
removing the tacks.

At sight of it Barney’s heart sank. The look of the thing was all too
familiar. Before the yellow one had commenced to read aloud from it
Barney had repeated to himself the words he knew were coming.

“‘Gray eyes,’” read the brigand, “‘brown hair, and a full,
reddish-brown beard.’ Herman and Friedrich, my dear children, you have
stumbled upon the richest haul in all Lutha. Down upon your
marrow-bones, you swine, and rub your low-born noses in the dirt before
your king.”

The others looked their surprise.

“The king?” one cried.

“Behold!” cried Yellow Franz. “Leopold of Lutha!”

He waved a ham-like hand toward Barney.

Among the rough men was a young smooth-faced boy, and now with wide
eyes he pressed forward to get a nearer view of the wonderful person of
a king.

“Take a good look at him, Rudolph,” cried Yellow Franz. “It is the
first and will probably be the last time you will ever see a king.
Kings seldom visit the court of their fellow monarch, Yellow Franz of
the Black Mountains.

“Come, my children, remove his majesty’s sword, lest he fall and stick
himself upon it, and then prepare the royal chamber, seeing to it that
it be made so comfortable that Leopold will remain with us a long time.
Rudolph, fetch food and water for his majesty, and see to it that the
silver plates and the golden goblets are well scoured and polished up.”

They conducted Barney to a miserable lean-to shack at one side of the
clearing, and for a while the motley crew loitered about bandying
coarse jests at the expense of the “king.” The boy, Rudolph, brought
food and water, he alone of them all evincing the slightest respect or
awe for the royalty of their unwilling guest.

After a time the men tired of the sport of king-baiting, for Barney
showed neither rancor nor outraged majesty at their keenest thrusts,
instead, often joining in the laugh with them at his own expense. They
thought it odd that the king should hold his dignity in so low esteem,
but that he was king they never doubted, attributing his denials to a
disposition to deceive them, and rob them of the “king’s ransom” they
had already commenced to consider as their own.

Shortly after Barney arrived at the rendezvous he saw a messenger
dispatched by Yellow Franz, and from the repeated gestures toward
himself that had accompanied the giant’s instructions to his emissary,
Barney was positive that the man’s errand had to do with him.

After the men had left his prison, leaving the boy standing awkwardly
in wide-eyed contemplation of his august charge, the American ventured
to open a conversation with his youthful keeper.

“Aren’t you rather young to be starting in the bandit business,
Rudolph?” asked Barney, who had taken a fancy to the youth.

“I do not want to be a bandit, your majesty,” whispered the lad; “but
my father owes Yellow Franz a great sum of money, and as he could not
pay the debt Yellow Franz stole me from my home and says that he will
keep me until my father pays him, and that if he does not pay he will
make a bandit of me, and that then some day I shall be caught and
hanged until I am dead.”

“Can’t you escape?” asked the young man. “It would seem to me that
there would be many opportunities for you to get away undetected.”

“There are, but I dare not. Yellow Franz says that if I run away he
will be sure to come across me some day again and that then he will
kill me.”

Barney laughed.

“He is just talking, my boy,” he said. “He thinks that by frightening
you he will be able to keep you from running away.”

“Your majesty does not know him,” whispered the youth, shuddering. “He
is the wickedest man in all the world. Nothing would please him more
than killing me, and he would have done it long since but for two
things. One is that I have made myself useful about his camp, doing
chores and the like, and the other is that were he to kill me he knows
that my father would never pay him.”

“How much does your father owe him?”

“Five hundred marks, your majesty,” replied Rudolph. “Two hundred of
this amount is the original debt, and the balance Yellow Franz has
added since he captured me, so that it is really ransom money. But my
father is a poor man, so that it will take a long time before he can
accumulate so large a sum.

“You would really like to go home again, Rudolph?”

“Oh, very much, your majesty, if I only dared.” Barney was silent for
some time, thinking. Possibly he could effect his own escape with the
connivance of Rudolph, and at the same time free the boy. The paltry
ransom he could pay out of his own pocket and send to Yellow Franz
later, so that the youth need not fear the brigand’s revenge. It was
worth thinking about, at any rate.

“How long do you imagine they will keep me, Rudolph?” he asked after a
time.

“Yellow Franz has already sent Herman to Lustadt with a message for
Prince Peter, telling him that you are being held for ransom, and
demanding the payment of a huge sum for your release. Day after
tomorrow or the next day he should return with Prince Peter’s reply.

“If it is favorable, arrangements will be made to turn you over to
Prince Peter’s agents, who will have to come to some distant meeting
place with the money. A week, perhaps, it will take, maybe longer.”

It was the second day before Herman returned from Lustadt. He rode in
just at dark, his pony lathered from hard going.

Barney and the boy saw him coming, and the youth ran forward with the
others to learn the news that he had brought; but Yellow Franz and his
messenger withdrew to a hut which the brigand chief reserved for his
own use, nor would he permit any beside the messenger to accompany him
to hear the report.

For half an hour Barney sat alone waiting for word from Yellow Franz
that arrangements had been consummated for his release, and then out of
the darkness came Rudolph, wide-eyed and trembling.

“Oh, my king?” he whispered. “What shall we do? Peter has refused to
ransom you alive, but he has offered a great sum for unquestioned proof
of your death. Already he has caused a proclamation to be issued
stating that you have been killed by bandits after escaping from
Blentz, and ordering a period of national mourning. In three weeks he
is to be crowned king of Lutha.”

“When do they intend terminating my existence?” queried Barney.

There was a smile upon his lips, for even now he could scarce believe
that in the twentieth century there could be any such medieval plotting
against a king’s life, and yet, on second thought, had he not ample
proof of the lengths to which Peter of Blentz was willing to go to
obtain the crown of Lutha!

“I do not know, your majesty,” replied Rudolph, “when they will do it;
but soon, doubtless, since the sooner it is done the sooner they can
collect their pay.”

Further conversation was interrupted by the sound of footsteps without,
and an instant later Yellow Franz entered the squalid apartment and the
dim circle of light which flickered feebly from the smoky lantern that
hung suspended from the rafters.

He stopped just within the doorway and stood eyeing the American with
an ugly grin upon his vicious face. Then his eyes fell upon the
trembling Rudolph.

“Get out of here, you!” he growled. “I’ve got private business with
this king. And see that you don’t come nosing round either, or I’ll
slit that soft throat for you.”

Rudolph slipped past the burly ruffian, barely dodging a brutal blow
aimed at him by the giant, and escaped into the darkness without.

“And now for you, my fine fellow,” said the brigand, turning toward
Barney. “Peter says you ain’t worth nothing to him—alive, but that your
dead body will fetch us a hundred thousand marks.”

“Rather cheap for a king, isn’t it?” was Barney’s only comment.

“That’s what Herman tells him,” replied Yellow Franz. “But he’s a close
one, Peter is, and so it was that or nothing.”

“When are you going to pull off this little—er—ah—royal demise?” asked
Barney.

“If you mean when am I going to kill you,” replied the bandit, “why,
there ain’t no particular rush about it. I’m a tender-hearted chap, I
am. I never should have been in this business at all, but here I be,
and as there ain’t nobody that can do a better job of the kind than me,
or do it so painlessly, why I just got to do it myself, and that’s all
there is to it. But, as I says, there ain’t no great rush. If you want
to pray, why, go ahead and pray. I’ll wait for you.”

“I don’t remember,” said Barney, “when I have met so generous a party
as you, my friend. Your self-sacrificing magnanimity quite overpowers
me. It reminds me of another unloved Robin Hood whom I once met. It was
in front of Burket’s coal-yard on Ella Street, back in dear old
Beatrice, at some unchristian hour of the night.

“After he had relieved me of a dollar and forty cents he remarked: ‘I
gotta good mind to kick yer slats in fer not havin’ more of de cush on
yeh; but I’m feelin’ so good about de last guy I stuck up I’ll let
youse off dis time.’”

“I do not know what you are talking about,” replied Yellow Franz; “but
if you want to pray you’d better hurry up about it.”

He drew his pistol from its holster on the belt at his hips.

Now Barney Custer had no mind to give up the ghost without a struggle;
but just how he was to overcome the great beast who confronted him with
menacing pistol was, to say the least, not precisely plain. He wished
the man would come a little nearer where he might have some chance to
close with him before the fellow could fire. To gain time the American
assumed a prayerful attitude, but kept one eye on the bandit.

Presently Yellow Franz showed indications of impatience. He fingered
the trigger of his weapon, and then slowly raised it on a line with
Barney’s chest.

“Hadn’t you better come closer?” asked the young man. “You might miss
at that distance, or just wound me.”

Yellow Franz grinned.

“I don’t miss,” he said, and then: “You’re certainly a game one. If it
wasn’t for the hundred thousand marks, I’d be hanged if I’d kill you.”

“The chances are that you will be if you do,” said Barney, “so wouldn’t
you rather take one hundred and fifty thousand marks and let me make my
escape?”

Yellow Franz looked at the speaker a moment through narrowed lids.

“Where would you find any one willing to pay that amount for a crazy
king?” he asked.

“I have told you that I am not the king,” said Barney. “I am an
American with a father who would gladly pay that amount on my safe
delivery to any American consul.”

Yellow Franz shook his head and tapped his brow significantly.

“Even if you was what you are dreaming, it wouldn’t pay me,” he said.

“I’ll make it two hundred thousand,” said Barney.

“No—it’s a waste of time talking about it. It’s worth more than money
to me to know that I’ll always have this thing on Peter, and that when
he’s king he won’t dare bother me for fear I’ll publish the details of
this little deal. Come, you must be through praying by this time. I
can’t wait around here all night.” Again Yellow Franz raised his pistol
toward Barney’s heart.

Before the brigand could pull the trigger, or Barney hurl himself upon
his would-be assassin, there was a flash and a loud report from the
open window of the shack.

With a groan Yellow Franz crumpled to the dirt floor, and
simultaneously Barney was upon him and had wrested the pistol from his
hand; but the precaution was unnecessary for Yellow Franz would never
again press finger to trigger. He was dead even before Barney reached
his side.

In possession of the weapon, the American turned toward the window from
which had come the rescuing shot, and as he did so he saw the boy,
Rudolph, clambering over the sill, white-faced and trembling. In his
hand was a smoking carbine, and on his brow great beads of cold sweat.

“God forgive me!” murmured the youth. “I have killed a man.”

“You have killed a dangerous wild beast, Rudolph,” said Barney, “and
both God and your fellow man will thank and reward you.”

“I am glad that I killed him, though,” went on the boy, “for he would
have killed you, my king, had I not done so. Gladly would I go to the
gallows to save my king.”

“You are a brave lad, Rudolph,” said Barney, “and if ever I get out of
the pretty pickle I’m in you’ll be well rewarded for your loyalty to
Leopold of Lutha. After all,” thought the young man, “being a kind has
its redeeming features, for if the boy had not thought me his monarch
he would never have risked the vengeance of the bloodthirsty brigands
in this attempt to save me.”

“Hasten, your majesty,” whispered the boy, tugging at the sleeve of
Barney’s jacket. “There is no time to be lost. We must be far away from
here when the others discover that Yellow Franz has been killed.”

Barney stooped above the dead man, and removing his belt and cartridges
transferred them to his own person. Then blowing out the lantern the
two slipped out into the darkness of the night.

About the camp fire of the brigands the entire pack was congregated.
They were talking together in low voices, ever and anon glancing
expectantly toward the shack to which their chief had gone to dispatch
the king. It is not every day that a king is murdered, and even these
hardened cut-throats felt the spell of awe at the thought of what they
believed the sharp report they had heard from the shack portended.

Keeping well to the far side of the clearing, Rudolph led Barney around
the group of men and safely into the wood below them. From this point
the boy followed the trail which Barney and his captors had traversed
two days previously, until he came to a diverging ravine that led
steeply up through the mountains upon their right hand.

In the distance behind them they suddenly heard, faintly, the shouting
of men.

“They have discovered Yellow Franz,” whispered the boy, shuddering.

“Then they’ll be after us directly,” said Barney.

“Yes, your majesty,” replied Rudolph, “but in the darkness they will
not see that we have turned up this ravine, and so they will ride on
down the other. I have chosen this way because their horses cannot
follow us here, and thus we shall be under no great disadvantage. It
may be, however, that we shall have to hide in the mountains for a
while, since there will be no place of safety for us between here and
Lustadt until after the edge of their anger is dulled.”

And such proved to be the case, for try as they would they found it
impossible to reach Lustadt without detection by the brigands who
patrolled every highway and byway from their rugged mountains to the
capital of Lutha.

For nearly three weeks Barney and the boy hid in caves or dense
underbrush by day, and by night sought some avenue which would lead
them past the vigilant sentries that patrolled the ways to freedom.

Often they were wet by rains, nor were they ever in the warm sunlight
for a sufficient length of time to become thoroughly dry and
comfortable. Of food they had little, and of the poorest quality.

They dared not light a fire for warmth or cooking, and their light was
so miserable that, but for the boy’s pitiful terror at the thought of
being recaptured by the bandits, Barney would long since have made a
break for Lustadt, depending upon their arms and ammunition to carry
them safely through were they discovered by their enemies.

Rudolph had contracted a severe cold the first night, and now, it
having settled upon his lungs, he had developed a persistent and
aggravating cough that caused Barney not a little apprehension. When,
after nearly three weeks of suffering and privation, it became clear
that the boy’s lungs were affected, the American decided to take
matters into his own hands and attempt to reach Lustadt and a good
doctor; but before he had an opportunity to put his plan into execution
the entire matter was removed from his jurisdiction.

It happened like this: After a particularly fatiguing and uncomfortable
night spent in attempting to elude the sentinels who blocked their way
from the mountains, daylight found them near a little spring, and here
they decided to rest for an hour before resuming their way.

The little pool lay not far from a clump of heavy bushes which would
offer them excellent shelter, as it was Barney’s intention to go into
hiding as soon as they had quenched their thirst at the spring.

Rudolph was coughing pitifully, his slender frame wracked by the
convulsion of each new attack. Barney had placed an arm about the boy
to support him, for the paroxysms always left him very weak.

The young man’s heart went out to the poor boy, and pangs of regret
filled his mind as he realized that the child’s pathetic condition was
the direct result of his self-sacrificing attempt to save his king.
Barney felt much like a murderer and a thief, and dreaded the time when
the boy should be brought to a realization of his mistake.

He had come to feel a warm affection for the loyal little lad, who had
suffered so uncomplainingly and whose every thought had been for the
safety and comfort of his king.

Today, thought Barney, I’ll take this child through to Lustadt even if
every ragged brigand in Lutha lies between us and the capital; but even
as he spoke a sudden crashing of underbrush behind caused him to wheel
about, and there, not twenty paces from them, stood two of Yellow
Franz’s cutthroats.

At sight of Barney and the lad they gave voice to a shout of triumph,
and raising their carbines fired point-blank at the two fugitives.

But Barney had been equally as quick with his own weapon, and at the
moment that they fired he grasped Rudolph and dragged him backward to a
great boulder behind which their bodies might be protected from the
fire of their enemies.

Both the bullets of the bandits’ first volley had been directed at
Barney, for it was upon his head that the great price rested. They had
missed him by a narrow margin, due, perhaps, to the fact that the
mounts of the brigands had been prancing in alarm at the unexpected
sight of the two strangers at the very moment that their riders
attempted to take aim and fire.

But now they had ridden back into the brush and dismounted, and after
hiding their ponies they came creeping out upon their bellies upon
opposite sides of Barney’s shelter.

The American saw that it would be an easy thing for them to pick him
off if he remained where he was, and so with a word to Rudolph he
sprang up and the boy with him. Each delivered a quick shot at the
bandit nearest him, and then together they broke for the bushes in
which the brigand’s mounts were hidden.

Two shots answered theirs. Rudolph, who was ahead of Barney, stumbled
and threw up his hands. He would have fallen had not the American
thrown a strong arm about him.

“I’m shot, your majesty,” murmured the boy, his head dropping against
Barney’s breast.

With the lad grasped close to him, the young man turned at the edge of
the brush to meet the charge of the two ruffians. The wounding of the
youth had delayed them just enough to preclude their making this
temporary refuge in safety.

As Barney turned both the men fired simultaneously, and both missed.
The American raised his revolver, and with the flash of it the foremost
brigand came to a sudden stop. An expression of bewilderment crossed
his features. He extended his arms straight before him, the revolver
slipped from his grasp, and then like a dying top he pivoted once
drunkenly and collapsed upon the turf.

At the instant of his fall his companion and the American fired
point-blank at one another.

Barney felt a burning sensation in his shoulder, but it was forgotten
for the moment in the relief that came to him as he saw the second
rascal sprawl headlong upon his face. Then he turned his attention to
the limp little figure that hung across his left arm.

Gently Barney laid the boy upon the sward, and fetching water from the
pool bathed his face and forced a few drops between the white lips. The
cooling draft revived the wounded child, but brought on a paroxysm of
coughing. When this had subsided Rudolph raised his eyes to those of
the man bending above him.

“Thank God, your majesty is unharmed,” he whispered. “Now I can die in
peace.”

The white lids drooped lower, and with a tired sigh the boy lay quiet.
Tears came to the young man’s eyes as he let the limp body gently to
the ground.

“Brave little heart,” he murmured, “you gave up your life in the
service of your king as truly as though you had not been all mistaken
in the object of your veneration, and if it lies within the power of
Barney Custer you shall not have died in vain.”




VII.
THE REAL LEOPOLD


Two hours later a horseman pushed his way between tumbled and tangled
briers along the bottom of a deep ravine.

He was hatless, and his stained and ragged khaki betokened much
exposure to the elements and hard and continued usage. At his
saddle-bow a carbine swung in its boot, and upon either hip was
strapped a long revolver. Ammunition in plenty filled the cross belts
that he had looped about his shoulders.

Grim and warlike as were his trappings, no less grim was the set of his
strong jaw or the glint of his gray eyes, nor did the patch of brown
stain that had soaked through the left shoulder of his jacket tend to
lessen the martial atmosphere which surrounded him. Fortunate it was
for the brigands of the late Yellow Franz that none of them chanced in
the path of Barney Custer that day.

For nearly two hours the man had ridden downward out of the high hills
in search of a dwelling at which he might ask the way to Tann; but as
yet he had passed but a single house, and that a long untenanted ruin.
He was wondering what had become of all the inhabitants of Lutha when
his horse came to a sudden halt before an obstacle which entirely
blocked the narrow trail at the bottom of the ravine.

As the horseman’s eyes fell upon the thing they went wide in
astonishment, for it was no less than the charred remnants of the once
beautiful gray roadster that had brought him into this twentieth
century land of medieval adventure and intrigue. Barney saw that the
machine had been lifted from where it had fallen across the horse of
the Princess von der Tann, for the animal’s decaying carcass now lay
entirely clear of it; but why this should have been done, or by whom,
the young man could not imagine.

A glance aloft showed him the road far above him, from which he, the
horse and the roadster had catapulted; and with the sight of it there
flashed to his mind the fair face of the young girl in whose service
the thing had happened. Barney wondered if Joseph had been successful
in returning her to Tann, and he wondered, too, if she mourned for the
man she had thought king—if she would be very angry should she ever
learn the truth.

Then there came to the American’s mind the figure of the shopkeeper of
Tafelberg, and the fellow’s evident loyalty to the mad king he had
never seen. Here was one who might aid him, thought Barney. He would
have the will, at least, and with the thought the young man turned his
pony’s head diagonally up the steep ravine side.

It was a tough and dangerous struggle to the road above, but at last by
dint of strenuous efforts on the part of the sturdy little beast the
two finally scrambled over the edge of the road and stood once more
upon level footing.

After breathing his mount for a few minutes Barney swung himself into
the saddle again and set off toward Tafelberg. He met no one upon the
road, nor within the outskirts of the village, and so he came to the
door of the shop he sought without attracting attention.

Swinging to the ground he tied the pony to one of the supporting
columns of the porch-roof and a moment later had stepped within the
shop.

From a back room the shopkeeper presently emerged, and when he saw who
it was that stood before him his eyes went wide in consternation.

“In the name of all the saints, your majesty,” cried the old fellow,
“what has happened? How comes it that you are out of the hospital, and
travel-stained as though from a long, hard ride? I cannot understand
it, sire.”

“Hospital?” queried the young man. “What do you mean, my good fellow? I
have been in no hospital.”

“You were there only last evening when I inquired after you of the
doctor,” insisted the shopkeeper, “nor did any there yet suspect your
true identity.”

“Last evening I was hiding far up in the mountains from Yellow Franz’s
band of cutthroats,” replied Barney. “Tell me what manner of riddle you
are propounding.”

Then a sudden light of understanding flashed through Barney’s mind.

“Man!” he exclaimed. “Tell me—you have found the true king? He is at a
hospital in Tafelberg?”

“Yes, your majesty, I have found the true king, and it is so that he
was at the Tafelberg sanatorium last evening. It was beside the
remnants of your wrecked automobile that two of the men of Tafelberg
found you.

“One leg was pinioned beneath the machine which was on fire when they
discovered you. They brought you to my shop, which is the first on the
road into town, and not guessing your true identity they took my word
for it that you were an old acquaintance of mine and without more ado
turned you over to my care.”

Barney scratched his head in puzzled bewilderment. He began to doubt if
he were in truth himself, or, after all, Leopold of Lutha. As no one
but himself could, by the wildest stretch of imagination, have been in
such a position, he was almost forced to the conclusion that all that
had passed since the instant that his car shot over the edge of the
road into the ravine had been but the hallucinations of a fever-excited
brain, and that for the past three weeks he had been lying in a
hospital cot instead of experiencing the strange and inexplicable
adventures that he had believed to have befallen him.

But yet the more he thought of it the more ridiculous such a conclusion
appeared, for it did not in the least explain the pony tethered
without, which he plainly could see from where he stood within the
shop, nor did it satisfactorily account for the blotch of blood upon
his shoulder from a wound so fresh that the stain still was damp; nor
for the sword which Joseph had buckled about his waist within Blentz’s
forbidding walls; nor for the arms and ammunition he had taken from the
dead brigands—all of which he had before him as tangible evidence of
the rationality of the past few weeks.

“My friend,” said Barney at last, “I cannot wonder that you have
mistaken me for the king, since all those I have met within Lutha have
leaped to the same error, though not one among them made the slightest
pretense of ever having seen his majesty. A ridiculous beard started
the trouble, and later a series of happenings, no one of which was
particularly remarkable in itself, aggravated it, until but a moment
since I myself was almost upon the point of believing that I am the
king.

“But, my dear Herr Kramer, I am not the king; and when you have
accompanied me to the hospital and seen that your patient still is
there, you may be willing to admit that there is some justification for
doubt as to my royalty.”

The old man shook his head.

“I am not so sure of that,” he said, “for he who lies at the hospital,
providing you are not he, or he you, maintains as sturdily as do you
that he is not Leopold. If one of you, whichever be king—providing that
you are not one and the same, and that I be not the only maniac in the
sad muddle—if one of you would but trust my loyalty and love for the
true king and admit your identity, then I might be of some real service
to that one of you who is really Leopold. Herr Gott! My words are as
mixed as my poor brain.”

“If you will listen to me, Herr Kramer,” said Barney, “and believe what
I tell you, I shall be able to unscramble your ideas in so far as they
pertain to me and my identity. As to the man you say was found beneath
my car, and who now lies in the sanatorium of Tafelberg, I cannot say
until I have seen and talked with him. He may be the king and he may
not; but if he insists that he is not, I shall be the last to wish a
kingship upon him. I know from sad experience the hardships and burdens
that the thing entails.”

Then Barney narrated carefully and in detail the principal events of
his life, from his birth in Beatrice to his coming to Lutha upon
pleasure. He showed Herr Kramer his watch with his monogram upon it,
his seal ring, and inside the pocket of his coat the label of his
tailor, with his own name written beneath it and the date that the
garment had been ordered.

When he had completed his narrative the old man shook his head.

“I cannot understand it,” he said; “and yet I am almost forced to
believe that you are not the king.”

“Direct me to the sanatorium,” suggested Barney, “and if it be within
the range of possibility I shall learn whether the man who lies there
is Leopold or another, and if he be the king I shall serve him as
loyally as you would have served me. Together we may assist him to gain
the safety of Tann and the protection of old Prince Ludwig.”

“If you are not the king,” said Kramer suspiciously, “why should you be
so interested in aiding Leopold? You may even be an enemy. How can I
know?”

“You cannot know, my good friend,” replied Barney. “But had I been an
enemy, how much more easily might I have encompassed my designs,
whatever they might have been, had I encouraged you to believe that I
was king. The fact that I did not, must assure you that I have no
ulterior designs against Leopold.”

This line of reasoning proved quite convincing to the old shopkeeper,
and at last he consented to lead Barney to the sanatorium. Together
they traversed the quiet village streets to the outskirts of the town,
where in large, park-like grounds the well-known sanatorium of
Tafelberg is situated in quiet surroundings. It is an institution for
the treatment of nervous diseases to which patients are brought from
all parts of Europe, and is doubtless Lutha’s principal claim upon the
attention of the outer world.

As the two crossed the gardens which lay between the gate and the main
entrance and mounted the broad steps leading to the veranda an old
servant opened the door, and recognizing Herr Kramer, nodded pleasantly
to him.

“Your patient seems much brighter this morning, Herr Kramer,” he said,
“and has been asking to be allowed to sit up.”

“He is still here, then?” questioned the shopkeeper with a sigh that
might have indicated either relief or resignation.

“Why, certainly. You did not expect that he had entirely recovered
overnight, did you?”

“No,” replied Herr Kramer, “not exactly. In fact, I did not know what I
should expect.”

As the two passed him on their way to the room in which the patient
lay, the servant eyed Herr Kramer in surprise, as though wondering what
had occurred to his mentality since he had seen him the previous day.
He paid no attention to Barney other than to bow to him as he passed,
but there was another who did—an attendant standing in the hallway
through which the two men walked toward the private room where one of
them expected to find the real mad king of Lutha.

He was a dark-visaged fellow, sallow and small-eyed; and as his glance
rested upon the features of the American a puzzled expression crossed
his face. He let his gaze follow the two as they moved on up the
corridor until they turned in at the door of the room they sought, then
he followed them, entering an apartment next to that in which Herr
Kramer’s patient lay.

As Barney and the shopkeeper entered the small, whitewashed room, the
former saw upon the narrow iron cot the figure of a man of about his
own height. The face that turned toward them as they entered was
covered by a full, reddish-brown beard, and the eyes that looked up at
them in troubled surprise were gray. Beyond these Barney could see no
likenesses to himself; yet they were sufficient, he realized, to have
deceived any who might have compared one solely to the printed
description of the other.

At the doorway Kramer halted, motioning Barney within.

“It will be better if you talk with him alone,” he said. “I am sure
that before both of us he will admit nothing.”

Barney nodded, and the shopkeeper of Tafelberg withdrew and closed the
door behind him. The American approached the bedside with a cheery
“Good morning.”

The man returned the salutation with a slight inclination of his head.
There was a questioning look in his eyes; but dominating that was a
pitiful, hunted expression that touched the American’s heart.

The man’s left hand lay upon the coverlet. Barney glanced at the third
finger. About it was a plain gold band. There was no royal ring of the
kings of Lutha in evidence, yet that was no indication that the man was
not Leopold; for were he the king and desirous of concealing his
identity, his first act would be to remove every symbol of his
kingship.

Barney took the hand in his.

“They tell me that you are well on the road to recovery,” he said. “I
am very glad that it is so.”

“Who are you?” asked the man.

“I am Bernard Custer, an American. You were found beneath my car at the
bottom of a ravine. I feel that I owe you full reparation for the
injuries you received, though it is beyond me how you happened to be
found under the machine. Unless I am truly mad, I was the only occupant
of the roadster when it plunged over the embankment.”

“It is very simple,” replied the man upon the cot. “I chanced to be at
the bottom of the ravine at the time and the car fell upon me.”

“What were you doing at the bottom of the ravine?” asked Barney quite
suddenly, after the manner of one who administers a third degree.

The man started and flushed with suspicion.

“That is my own affair,” he said.

He tried to disengage his hand from Barney’s, and as he did so the
American felt something within the fingers of the other. For an instant
his own fingers tightened upon those that lay within them, so that as
the others were withdrawn his index finger pressed close upon the thing
that had aroused his curiosity.

It was a large setting turned inward upon the third finger of the left
hand. The gold band that Barney had seen was but the opposite side of
the same ring.

A quick look of comprehension came to Barney’s eyes. The man upon the
cot evidently noted it and rightly interpreted its cause, for, having
freed his hand, he now slipped it quickly beneath the coverlet.

“I have passed through a series of rather remarkable adventures since I
came to Lutha,” said Barney apparently quite irrelevantly, after the
two had remained silent for a moment. “Shortly after my car fell upon
you I was mistaken for the fugitive King Leopold by the young lady
whose horse fell into the ravine with my car. She is a most loyal
supporter of the king, being none other than the Princess Emma von der
Tann. From her I learned to espouse the cause of Leopold.”

Step by step Barney took the man through the adventures that had
befallen him during the past three weeks, closing with the story of the
death of the boy, Rudolph.

“Above his dead body I swore to serve Leopold of Lutha as loyally as
the poor, mistaken child had served me, your majesty,” and Barney
looked straight into the eyes of him who lay upon the little iron cot.

For a moment the man held his eyes upon those of the American, but
finally, under the latter’s steady gaze, they dropped and wandered.

“Why do you address me as ‘your majesty’?” he asked irritably.

“With my forefinger I felt the ruby and the four wings of the setting
of the royal ring of the kings of Lutha upon the third finger of your
left hand,” replied Barney.

The king started up upon his elbow, his eyes wild with apprehension.

“It is not so,” he cried. “It is a lie! I am not the king.”

“Hush!” admonished Barney. “You have nothing to fear from me. There are
good friends and loyal subjects in plenty to serve and protect your
majesty, and place you upon the throne that has been stolen from you. I
have sworn to serve you. The old shopkeeper, Herr Kramer, who brought
me here, is an honest, loyal old soul. He would die for you, your
majesty. Trust us. Let us help you. Tomorrow, Kramer tells me, Peter of
Blentz is to have himself crowned as king in the cathedral at Lustadt.

“Will you sit supinely by and see another rob you of your kingdom, and
then continue to rob and throttle your subjects as he has been doing
for the past ten years? No, you will not. Even if you do not want the
crown, you were born to the duties and obligations it entails, and for
the sake of your people you must assume them now.”

“How am I to know that you are not another of the creatures of that
fiend of Blentz?” cried the king. “How am I to know that you will not
drag me back to the terrors of that awful castle, and to the poisonous
potions of the new physician Peter has employed to assassinate me? I
can trust none.

“Go away and leave me. I do not want to be king. I wish only to go away
as far from Lutha as I can get and pass the balance of my life in peace
and security. Peter may have the crown. He is welcome to it, for all of
me. All I ask is my life and my liberty.”

Barney saw that while the king was evidently of sound mind, his was not
one of those iron characters and courageous hearts that would willingly
fight to the death for his own rights and the rights and happiness of
his people. Perhaps the long years of bitter disappointment and misery,
the tedious hours of imprisonment, and the constant haunting fears for
his life had reduced him to this pitiable condition.

Whatever the cause, Barney Custer was determined to overcome the man’s
aversion to assuming the duties which were rightly his, for in his
memory were the words of Emma von der Tann, in which she had made plain
to him the fate that would doubtless befall her father and his house
were Peter of Blentz to become king of Lutha. Then, too, there was the
life of the little peasant boy. Was that to be given up uselessly for a
king with so mean a spirit that he would not take a scepter when it was
forced upon him?

And the people of Lutha? Were they to be further and continually robbed
and downtrodden beneath the heel of Peter’s scoundrelly officials
because their true king chose to evade the responsibilities that were
his by birth?

For half an hour Barney pleaded and argued with the king, until he
infused in the weak character of the young man a part of his own
tireless enthusiasm and courage. Leopold commenced to take heart and
see things in a brighter and more engaging light. Finally he became
quite excited about the prospects, and at last Barney obtained a
willing promise from him that he would consent to being placed upon his
throne and would go to Lustadt at any time that Barney should come for
him with a force from the retainers of Prince Ludwig von der Tann.

“Let us hope,” cried the king, “that the luck of the reigning house of
Lutha has been at last restored. Not since my aunt, the Princess
Victoria, ran away with a foreigner has good fortune shone upon my
house. It was when my father was still a young man—before he had yet
come to the throne—and though his reign was marked with great peace and
prosperity for the people of Lutha, his own private fortunes were most
unhappy.

“My mother died at my birth, and the last days of my father’s life were
filled with suffering from the cancer that was slowly killing him. Let
us pray, Herr Custer, that you have brought new life to the fortunes of
my house.”

“Amen, your majesty,” said Barney. “And now I’ll be off for Tann—there
must not be a moment lost if we are to bring you to Lustadt in time for
the coronation. Herr Kramer will watch over you, but as none here
guesses your true identity you are safer here than anywhere else in
Lutha. Good-bye, your majesty. Be of good heart. We’ll have you on the
road to Lustadt and the throne tomorrow morning.”

After Barney Custer had closed the door of the king’s chamber behind
him and hurried down the corridor, the door of the room next the king’s
opened quietly and a dark-visaged fellow, sallow and small-eyed,
emerged. Upon his lips was a smile of cunning satisfaction, as he
hastened to the office of the medical director and obtained a leave of
absence for twenty-four hours.




VIII.
THE CORONATION DAY


Toward dusk of the day upon which the mad king of Lutha had been found,
a dust-covered horseman reined in before the great gate of the castle
of Prince Ludwig von der Tann. The unsettled political conditions which
overhung the little kingdom of Lutha were evident in the return to
medievalism which the raised portcullis and the armed guard upon the
barbican of the ancient feudal fortress revealed. Not for a hundred
years before had these things been done other than as a part of the
ceremonials of a fete day, or in honor of visiting royalty.

At the challenge from the gate Barney replied that he bore a message
for the prince. Slowly the portcullis sank into position across the
moat and an officer advanced to meet the rider.

“The prince has ridden to Lustadt with a large retinue,” he said, “to
attend the coronation of Peter of Blentz tomorrow.”

“Prince Ludwig von der Tann has gone to attend the coronation of
Peter!” cried Barney in amazement. “Has the Princess Emma returned from
her captivity in the castle of Blentz?”

“She is with her father now, having returned nearly three weeks ago,”
replied the officer, “and Peter has disclaimed responsibility for the
outrage, promising that those responsible shall be punished. He has
convinced Prince Ludwig that Leopold is dead, and for the sake of
Lutha—to save her from civil strife—my prince has patched a truce with
Peter; though unless I mistake the character of the latter and the
temper of the former it will be short-lived.

“To demonstrate to the people,” continued the officer, “that Prince
Ludwig and Peter are good friends, the great Von der Tann will attend
the coronation, but that he takes little stock in the sincerity of the
Prince of Blentz would be apparent could the latter have a peep beneath
the cloaks and look into the loyal hearts of the men of Tann who rode
down to Lustadt today.”

Barney did not wait to hear more. He was glad that in the gathering
dusk the officer had not seen his face plainly enough to mistake him
for the king. With a parting, “Then I must ride to Lustadt with my
message for the prince,” he wheeled his tired mount and trotted down
the steep trail from Tann toward the highway which leads to the
capital.

All night Barney rode. Three times he wandered from the way and was
forced to stop at farmhouses to inquire the proper direction; but
darkness hid his features from the sleepy eyes of those who answered
his summons, and daylight found him still forging ahead in the
direction of the capital of Lutha.

The American was sunk in unhappy meditation as his weary little mount
plodded slowly along the dusty road. For hours the man had not been
able to urge the beast out of a walk. The loss of time consequent upon
his having followed wrong roads during the night and the exhaustion of
the pony which retarded his speed to what seemed little better than a
snail’s pace seemed to assure the failure of his mission, for at best
he could not reach Lustadt before noon.

There was no possibility of bringing Leopold to his capital in time for
the coronation, and but a bare possibility that Prince Ludwig would
accept the word of an entire stranger that Leopold lived, for the
acknowledgment of such a condition by the old prince could result in
nothing less than an immediate resort to arms by the two factions. It
was certain that Peter would be infinitely more anxious to proceed with
his coronation should it be rumored that Leopold lived, and equally
certain that Prince Ludwig would interpose every obstacle, even to
armed resistance, to prevent the consummation of the ceremony.

Yet there seemed to Barney no other alternative than to place before
the king’s one powerful friend the information that he had. It would
then rest with Ludwig to do what he thought advisable.

An hour from Lustadt the road wound through a dense forest, whose
pleasant shade was a grateful relief to both horse and rider from the
hot sun beneath which they had been journeying the greater part of the
morning. Barney was still lost in thought, his eyes bent forward, when
at a sudden turning of the road he came face to face with a troop of
horse that were entering the main highway at this point from an
unfrequented byroad.

At sight of them the American instinctively wheeled his mount in an
effort to escape, but at a command from an officer a half dozen
troopers spurred after him, their fresh horses soon overtaking his
jaded pony.

For a moment Barney contemplated resistance, for these were troopers of
the Royal Horse, the body which was now Peter’s most effective personal
tool; but even as his hand slipped to the butt of one of the revolvers
at his hip, the young man saw the foolish futility of such a course,
and with a shrug and a smile he drew rein and turned to face the
advancing soldiers.

As he did so the officer rode up, and at sight of Barney’s face gave an
exclamation of astonishment. The officer was Butzow.

“Well met, your majesty,” he cried saluting. “We are riding to the
coronation. We shall be just in time.”

“To see Peter of Blentz rob Leopold of a crown,” said the American in a
disgusted tone.

“To see Leopold of Lutha come into his own, your majesty. Long live the
king!” cried the officer.

Barney thought the man either poking fun at him because he was not the
king, or, thinking he was Leopold, taking a mean advantage of his
helplessness to bait him. Yet this last suspicion seemed unfair to
Butzow, who at Blentz had given ample evidence that he was a gentleman,
and of far different caliber from Maenck and the others who served
Peter.

If he could but convince the man that he was no king and thus gain his
liberty long enough to reach Prince Ludwig’s ear, his mission would
have been served in so far as it lay in his power to serve it. For some
minutes Barney expended his best eloquence and logic upon the cavalry
officer in an effort to convince him that he was not Leopold.

The king had given the American his great ring to safeguard for him
until it should be less dangerous for Leopold to wear it, and for fear
that at the last moment someone within the sanatorium might recognize
it and bear word to Peter of the king’s whereabouts. Barney had worn it
turned in upon the third finger of his left hand, and now he slipped it
surreptitiously into his breeches pocket lest Butzow should see it and
by it be convinced that Barney was indeed Leopold.

“Never mind who you are,” cried Butzow, thinking to humor the king’s
strange obsession. “You look enough like Leopold to be his twin, and
you must help us save Lutha from Peter of Blentz.”

The American showed in his expression the surprise he felt at these
words from an officer of the prince regent.

“You wonder at my change of heart?” asked Butzow.

“How can I do otherwise?”

“I cannot blame you,” said the officer. “Yet I think that when you know
the truth you will see that I have done only that which I believed to
be the duty of a patriotic officer and a true gentleman.”

They had rejoined the troop by this time, and the entire company was
once more headed toward Lustadt. Butzow had commanded one of the
troopers to exchange horses with Barney, bringing the jaded animal into
the city slowly, and now freshly mounted the American was making better
time toward his destination. His spirits rose, and as they galloped
along the highway, he listened with renewed interest to the story which
Lieutenant Butzow narrated in detail.

It seemed that Butzow had been absent from Lutha for a number of years
as military attache to the Luthanian legation at a foreign court. He
had known nothing of the true condition at home until his return, when
he saw such scoundrels as Coblich, Maenck, and Stein high in the favor
of the prince regent. For some time before the events that had
transpired after he had brought Barney and the Princess Emma to Blentz
he had commenced to have his doubts as to the true patriotism of Peter
of Blentz; and when he had learned through the unguarded words of
Schonau that there was a real foundation for the rumor that the regent
had plotted the assassination of the king his suspicions had
crystallized into knowledge, and he had sworn to serve his king before
all others—were he sane or mad. From this loyalty he could not be
shaken.

“And what do you intend doing now?” asked Barney.

“I intend placing you upon the throne of your ancestors, sire,” replied
Butzow; “nor will Peter of Blentz dare the wrath of the people by
attempting to interpose any obstacle. When he sees Leopold of Lutha
ride into the capital of his kingdom at the head of even so small a
force as ours he will know that the end of his own power is at hand,
for he is not such a fool that he does not perfectly realize that he is
the most cordially hated man in all Lutha, and that only those attend
upon him who hope to profit through his success or who fear his evil
nature.”

“If Peter is crowned today,” asked Barney, “will it prevent Leopold
regaining his throne?”

“It is difficult to say,” replied Butzow; “but the chances are that the
throne would be lost to him forever. To regain it he would have to
plunge Lutha into a bitter civil war, for once Peter is proclaimed king
he will have the law upon his side, and with the resources of the State
behind him—the treasury and the army—he will feel in no mood to
relinquish the scepter without a struggle. I doubt much that you will
ever sit upon your throne, sire, unless you do so within the very next
hour.”

For some time Barney rode in silence. He saw that only by a master
stroke could the crown be saved for the true king. Was it worth it? The
man was happier without a crown. Barney had come to believe that no man
lived who could be happy in possession of one. Then there came before
his mind’s eye the delicate, patrician face of Emma von der Tann.

Would Peter of Blentz be true to his new promises to the house of Von
der Tann? Barney doubted it. He recalled all that it might mean of
danger and suffering to the girl whose kisses he still felt upon his
lips as though it had been but now that hers had placed them there. He
recalled the limp little body of the boy, Rudolph, and the Spartan
loyalty with which the little fellow had given his life in the service
of the man he had thought king. The pitiful figure of the fear-haunted
man upon the iron cot at Tafelberg rose before him and cried for
vengeance.

To this man was the woman he loved betrothed! He knew that he might
never wed the Princess Emma. Even were she not promised to another, the
iron shackles of convention and age-old customs must forever separate
her from an untitled American. But if he couldn’t have her he still
could serve her!

“For her sake,” he muttered.

“Did your majesty speak?” asked Butzow.

“Yes, lieutenant. We urge greater haste, for if we are to be crowned
today we have no time to lose.”

Butzow smiled a relieved smile. The king had at last regained his
senses!

Within the ancient cathedral at Lustadt a great and gorgeously attired
assemblage had congregated. All the nobles of Lutha were gathered there
with their wives, their children, and their retainers. There were the
newer nobility of the lowlands—many whose patents dated but since the
regency of Peter—and there were the proud nobility of the highlands—the
old nobility of which Prince Ludwig von der Tann was the chief.

It was noticeable that though a truce had been made between Ludwig and
Peter, yet the former chancellor of the kingdom did not stand upon the
chancel with the other dignitaries of the State and court.

Few there were who knew that he had been invited to occupy a place of
honor there, and had replied that he would take no active part in the
making of any king in Lutha whose veins did not pulse to the flow of
the blood of the house in whose service he had grown gray.

Close packed were the retainers of the old prince so that their great
number was scarcely noticeable, though quite so was the fact that they
kept their cloaks on, presenting a somber appearance in the midst of
all the glitter of gold and gleam of jewels that surrounded them—a
grim, business-like appearance that cast a chill upon Peter of Blentz
as his eyes scanned the multitude of faces below him.

He would have shown his indignation at this seeming affront had he
dared; but until the crown was safely upon his head and the royal
scepter in his hand Peter had no mind to do aught that might jeopardize
the attainment of the power he had sought for the past ten years.

The solemn ceremony was all but completed; the Bishop of Lustadt had
received the great golden crown from the purple cushion upon which it
had been borne at the head of the procession which accompanied Peter up
the broad center aisle of the cathedral. He had raised it above the
head of the prince regent, and was repeating the solemn words which
precede the placing of the golden circlet upon the man’s brow. In
another moment Peter of Blentz would be proclaimed the king of Lutha.

By her father’s side stood Emma von der Tann. Upon her haughty,
high-bred face there was no sign of the emotions which ran riot within
her fair bosom. In the act that she was witnessing she saw the eventual
ruin of her father’s house. That Peter would long want for an excuse to
break and humble his ancient enemy she did not believe; but this was
not the only cause for the sorrow that overwhelmed her.

Her most poignant grief, like that of her father, was for the dead
king, Leopold; but to the sorrow of the loyal subject was added the
grief of the loving woman, bereft. Close to her heart she hugged the
memory of the brief hours spent with the man whom she had been taught
since childhood to look upon as her future husband, but for whom the
all-consuming fires of love had only been fanned to life within her
since that moment, now three weeks gone, that he had crushed her to his
breast to cover her lips with kisses for the short moment ere he
sacrificed his life to save her from a fate worse than death.

Before her stood the Nemesis of her dead king. The last act of the
hideous crime against the man she had loved was nearing its close. As
the crown, poised over the head of Peter of Blentz, sank slowly
downward the girl felt that she could scarce restrain her desire to
shriek aloud a protest against the wicked act—the crowning of a
murderer king of her beloved Lutha.

A glance at the old man at her side showed her the stern, commanding
features of her sire molded in an expression of haughty dignity; only
the slight movement of the muscles of the strong jaw revealed the
tensity of the hidden emotions of the stern old warrior. He was meeting
disappointment and defeat as a Von der Tann should—brave to the end.

The crown had all but touched the head of Peter of Blentz when a sudden
commotion at the back of the cathedral caused the bishop to look up in
ill-concealed annoyance. At the sight that met his eyes his hands
halted in mid-air.

The great audience turned as one toward the doors at the end of the
long central aisle. There, through the wide-swung portals, they saw
mounted men forcing their way into the cathedral. The great horses
shouldered aside the foot-soldiers that attempted to bar their way, and
twenty troopers of the Royal Horse thundered to the very foot of the
chancel steps.

At their head rode Lieutenant Butzow and a tall young man in soiled and
tattered khaki, whose gray eyes and full reddish-brown beard brought an
exclamation from Captain Maenck who commanded the guard about Peter of
Blentz.

“Mein Gott—the king!” cried Maenck, and at the words Peter went white.

In open-mouthed astonishment the spectators saw the hurrying troopers
and heard Butzow’s “The king! The king! Make way for Leopold, King of
Lutha!”

And a girl saw, and as she saw her heart leaped to her mouth. Her small
hand gripped the sleeve of her father’s coat. “The king, father,” she
cried. “It is the king.”

Old Von der Tann, the light of a new hope firing his eyes, threw aside
his cloak and leaped to the chancel steps beside Butzow and the others
who were mounting them. Behind him a hundred cloaks dropped from the
shoulders of his fighting men, exposing not silks and satins and fine
velvet, but the coarse tan of khaki, and grim cartridge belts well
filled, and stern revolvers slung to well-worn service belts.

As Butzow and Barney stepped upon the chancel Peter of Blentz leaped
forward. “What mad treason is this?” he fairly screamed.

“The days of treason are now past, prince,” replied Butzow meaningly.
“Here is not treason, but Leopold of Lutha come to claim his crown
which he inherited from his father.”

“It is a plot,” cried Peter, “to place an impostor upon the throne!
This man is not the king.”

For a moment there was silence. The people had not taken sides as yet.
They awaited a leader. Old Von der Tann scrutinized the American
closely.

“How may we know that you are Leopold?” he asked. “For ten years we
have not seen our king.”

“The governor of Blentz has already acknowledged his identity,” cried
Butzow. “Maenck was the first to proclaim the presence of the putative
king.”

At that someone near the chancel cried: “Long live Leopold, king of
Lutha!” and at the words the whole assemblage raised their voices in a
tumultuous: “Long live the king!”

Peter of Blentz turned toward Maenck. “The guard!” he cried. “Arrest
those traitors, and restore order in the cathedral. Let the coronation
proceed.”

Maenck took a step toward Barney and Butzow, when old Prince von der
Tann interposed his giant frame with grim resolve.

“Hold!” He spoke in a low, stern voice that brought the cowardly Maenck
to a sudden halt.

The men of Tann had pressed eagerly forward until they stood, with
bared swords, a solid rank of fighting men in grim semicircle behind
their chief. There were cries from different parts of the cathedral of:
“Crown Leopold, our true king! Down with Peter! Down with the
assassin!”

“Enough of this,” cried Peter. “Clear the cathedral!”

He drew his own sword, and with half a hundred loyal retainers at his
back pressed forward to clear the chancel. There was a brief fight,
from which Barney, much to his disgust, was barred by the mighty figure
of the old prince and the stalwart sword-arm of Butzow. He did get one
crack at Maenck, and had the satisfaction of seeing blood spurt from a
flesh wound across the fellow’s cheek.

“That for the Princess Emma,” he called to the governor of Blentz, and
then men crowded between them and he did not see the captain again
during the battle.

When Peter saw that more than half of the palace guard were shouting
for Leopold, and fighting side by side with the men of Tann, he
realized the futility of further armed resistance at this time. Slowly
he withdrew, and at last the fighting ceased and some semblance of
order was restored within the cathedral.

Fearfully, the bishop emerged from hiding, his robes disheveled and his
miter askew. Butzow grasped him none too reverently by the arm and
dragged him before Barney. The crown of Lutha dangled in the priest’s
palsied hands.

“Crown the king!” cried the lieutenant. “Crown Leopold, king of Lutha!”

A mad roar of acclaim greeted this demand, and again from all parts of
the cathedral rose the same wild cry. But in the lull that followed
there were some who demanded proof of the tattered young man who stood
before them and claimed that he was king.

“Let Prince Ludwig speak!” cried a dozen voices.

“Yes, Prince Ludwig! Prince Ludwig!” took up the throng.

Prince Ludwig von der Tann turned toward the bearded young man. Silence
fell upon the crowded cathedral. Peter of Blentz stood awaiting the
outcome, ready to demand the crown upon the first indication of
wavering belief in the man he knew was not Leopold.

“How may we know that you are really Leopold?” again asked Ludwig of
Barney.

The American raised his left hand, upon the third finger of which
gleamed the great ruby of the royal ring of the kings of Lutha. Even
Peter of Blentz started back in surprise as his eyes fell upon the
ring.

Where had the man come upon it?

Prince von der Tann dropped to one knee before Mr. Bernard Custer of
Beatrice, Nebraska, U.S.A., and lifted that gentleman’s hand to his
lips, and as the people of Lutha saw the act they went mad with joy.

Slowly Prince Ludwig rose and addressed the bishop. “Leopold, the
rightful heir to the throne of Lutha, is here. Let the coronation
proceed.”

The quiet of the sepulcher fell upon the assemblage as the holy man
raised the crown above the head of the king. Barney saw from the corner
of his eye the sea of faces upturned toward him. He saw the relief and
happiness upon the stern countenance of the old prince.

He hated to dash all their new found joy by the announcement that he
was not the king. He could not do that, for the moment he did Peter
would step forward and demand that his own coronation continue. How was
he to save the throne for Leopold?

Among the faces beneath him he suddenly descried that of a beautiful
young girl whose eyes, filled with the tears of a great happiness and a
greater love, were upturned to his. To reveal his true identity would
lose him this girl forever. None save Peter knew that he was not the
king. All save Peter would hail him gladly as Leopold of Lutha. How
easily he might win a throne and the woman he loved by a moment of
seeming passive compliance.

The temptation was great, and then he recalled the boy, lying dead for
his king in the desolate mountains, and the pathetic light in the eyes
of the sorrowful man at Tafelberg, and the great trust and confidence
in the heart of the woman who had shown that she loved him.

Slowly Barney Custer raised his palm toward the bishop in a gesture of
restraint.

“There are those who doubt that I am king,” he said. “In these
circumstances there should be no coronation in Lutha until all doubts
are allayed and all may unite in accepting without question the royal
right of the true Leopold to the crown of his father. Let the
coronation wait, then, until another day, and all will be well.”

“It must take place before noon of the fifth day of November, or not
until a year later,” said Prince Ludwig. “In the meantime the Prince
Regent must continue to rule. For the sake of Lutha the coronation must
take place today, your majesty.”

“What is the date?” asked Barney.

“The third, sire.”

“Let the coronation wait until the fifth.”

“But your majesty,” interposed Von der Tann, “all may be lost in two
days.”

“It is the king’s command,” said Barney quietly.

“But Peter of Blentz will rule for these two days, and in that time
with the army at his command there is no telling what he may
accomplish,” insisted the old man.

“Peter of Blentz shall not rule Lutha for two days, or two minutes,”
replied Barney. “We shall rule. Lieutenant Butzow, you may place Prince
Peter, Coblich, Maenck, and Stein under arrest. We charge them with
treason against their king, and conspiring to assassinate their
rightful monarch.”

Butzow smiled as he turned with his troopers at his back to execute
this most welcome of commissions; but in a moment he was again at
Barney’s side.

“They have fled, your majesty,” he said. “Shall I ride to Blentz after
them?”

“Let them go,” replied the American, and then, with his retinue about
him the new king of Lutha passed down the broad aisle of the cathedral
of Lustadt and took his way to the royal palace between ranks of
saluting soldiery backed by cheering thousands.




IX.
THE KING’S GUESTS


Once within the palace Barney sought the seclusion of a small room off
the audience chamber. Here he summoned Butzow.

“Lieutenant,” said the American, “for the sake of a woman, a dead child
and an unhappy king I have become dictator of Lutha for forty-eight
hours; but at noon upon the fifth this farce must cease. Then we must
place the true Leopold upon the throne, or a new dictator must replace
me.

“In vain I have tried to convince you that I am not the king, and today
in the cathedral so great was the temptation to take advantage of the
odd train of circumstances that had placed a crown within my reach that
I all but surrendered to it—not for the crown of gold, Butzow, but for
an infinitely more sacred diadem which belongs to him to whom by right
of birth and lineage, belongs the crown of Lutha. I do not ask you to
understand—it is not necessary—but this you must know and believe: that
I am not Leopold, and that the true Leopold lies in hiding in the
sanatorium at Tafelberg, from which you and I, Butzow, must fetch him
to Lustadt before noon on the fifth.”

“But, sire—” commenced Butzow, when Barney raised his hand.

“Enough of that, Butzow!” he cried almost irritably. “I am sick of
being ‘sired’ and ‘majestied’—my name is Custer. Call me that when
others are not present. Believe what you will, but ride with me in
secrecy to Tafelberg tonight, and together we shall bring back Leopold
of Lutha. Then we may call Prince Ludwig into our confidence, and none
need ever know of the substitution.

“I doubt if many had a sufficiently close view of me today to realize
the trick that I have played upon them, and if they note a difference
they will attribute it to the change in apparel, for we shall see to it
that the king is fittingly garbed before we exhibit him to his
subjects, while hereafter I shall continue in khaki, which becomes me
better than ermine.”

Butzow shook his head.

“King or dictator,” he said, “it is all the same, and I must obey
whatever commands you see fit to give, and so I will ride to Tafelberg
tonight, though what we shall find there I cannot imagine, unless there
are two Leopolds of Lutha. But shall we also find another royal ring
upon the finger of this other king?”

Barney smiled. “You’re a typical hard-headed Dutchman, Butzow,” he
said.

The lieutenant drew himself up haughtily. “I am not a Dutchman, your
majesty. I am a Luthanian.”

Barney laughed. “Whatever else you may be, Butzow, you’re a brick,” he
said, laying his hand upon the other’s arm.

Butzow looked at him narrowly.

“From your speech,” he said, “and the occasional Americanisms into
which you fall I might believe that you were other than the king but
for the ring.”

“It is my commission from the king,” replied Barney. “Leopold placed it
upon my finger in token of his royal authority to act in his behalf.
Tonight, then Butzow, you and I shall ride to Tafelberg. Have three
good horses. We must lead one for the king.”

Butzow saluted and left the apartment. For an hour or two the American
was busy with tailors whom he had ordered sent to the palace to measure
him for the numerous garments of a royal wardrobe, for he knew the king
to be near enough his own size that he might easily wear clothes that
had been fitted to Barney; and it was part of his plan to have
everything in readiness for the substitution which was to take place
the morning of the coronation.

Then there were foreign dignitaries, and the heads of numerous domestic
and civic delegations to be given audience. Old Von der Tann stood
close behind Barney prompting him upon the royal duties that had fallen
so suddenly upon his shoulders, and none thought it strange that he was
unfamiliar with the craft of kingship, for was it not common knowledge
that he had been kept a close prisoner in Blentz since boyhood, nor
been given any coaching for the duties Peter of Blentz never intended
he should perform?

After it was all over Prince Ludwig’s grim and leathery face relaxed
into a smile of satisfaction.

“None who witnessed the conduct of your first audience, sire,” he said,
“could for a moment doubt your royal lineage—if ever a man was born to
kingship, your majesty, it be you.”

Barney smiled, a bit ruefully, however, for in his mind’s eye he saw a
future moment when the proud old Prince von der Tann would know the
truth of the imposture that had been played upon him, and the young man
foresaw that he would have a rather unpleasant half-hour.

At a little distance from them Barney saw Emma von der Tann surrounded
by a group of officials and palace officers. Since he had come to
Lustadt that day he had had no word with her, and now he crossed toward
her, amused as the throng parted to form an aisle for him, the men
saluting and the women curtsying low.

He took both of the girl’s hands in his, and, drawing one through his
arm, took advantage of the prerogatives of kingship to lead her away
from the throng of courtiers.

“I thought that I should never be done with all the tiresome business
which seems to devolve upon kings,” he said, laughing. “All the while
that I should have been bending my royal intellect to matters of state,
I was wondering just how a king might find a way to see the woman he
loves without interruptions from the horde that dogs his footsteps.”

“You seem to have found a way, Leopold,” she whispered, pressing his
arm close to her. “Kings usually do.”

“It is not because I am a king that I found a way, Emma,” he replied.
“It is because I am an American.”

She looked up at him with an expression of pleading in her eyes.

“Why do you persist?” she cried. “You have come into your own, and
there is no longer aught to fear from Peter or any other. To me at
least, it is most unkind still to deny your identity.”

“I wonder,” said Barney, “if your love could withstand the knowledge
that I am not the king.”

“It is the MAN I love, Leopold,” the girl replied.

“You think so now,” he said, “but wait until the test comes, and when
it does, remember that I have always done my best to undeceive you. I
know that you are not for such as I, my princess, and when I have
returned your true king to you all that I shall ask is that you be
happy with him.”

“I shall always be happy with my king,” she whispered, and the look
that she gave him made Barney Custer curse the fate that had failed to
make him a king by birth.

An hour later darkness had fallen upon the little city of Lustadt, and
from a small gateway in the rear of the palace grounds two horsemen
rode out into the ill-paved street and turned their mounts’ heads
toward the north. At the side of one trotted a led horse.

As they passed beneath the glare of an arc-light before a cafe at the
side of the public square, a diner sitting at a table upon the walk
spied the tall figure and the bearded face of him who rode a few feet
in advance of his companion. Leaping to his feet the man waved his
napkin above his head.

“Long live the king!” he cried. “God save Leopold of Lutha!”

And amid the din of cheering that followed, Barney Custer of Beatrice
and Lieutenant Butzow of the Royal Horse rode out into the night upon
the road to Tafelberg.

When Peter of Blentz had escaped from the cathedral he had hastily
mounted with a handful of his followers and hurried out of Lustadt
along the road toward his formidable fortress at Blentz. Half way upon
the journey he had met a dusty and travel-stained horseman hastening
toward the capital city that Peter and his lieutenants had just left.

At sight of the prince regent the fellow reined in and saluted.

“May I have a word in private with your highness?” he asked. “I have
news of the greatest importance for your ears alone.”

Peter drew to one side with the man.

“Well,” he asked, “and what news have you for Peter of Blentz?”

The man leaned from his horse close to Peter’s ear.

“The king is in Tafelberg, your highness,” he said.

“The king is dead,” snapped Peter. “There is an impostor in the palace
at Lustadt. But the real Leopold of Lutha was slain by Yellow Franz’s
band of brigands weeks ago.”

“I heard the man at Tafelberg tell another that he was the king,”
insisted the fellow. “Through the keyhole of his room I saw him take a
great ring from his finger—a ring with a mighty ruby set in its
center—and give it to the other. Both were bearded men with gray
eyes—either might have passed for the king by the description upon the
placards that have covered Lutha for the past month. At first he denied
his identity, but when the other had convinced him that he sought only
the king’s welfare he at last admitted that he was Leopold.”

“Where is he now?” cried Peter.

“He is still in the sanatorium at Tafelberg. In room twenty-seven. The
other promised to return for him and take him to Lustadt, but when I
left Tafelberg he had not yet done so, and if you hasten you may reach
there before they take him away, and if there be any reward for my
loyalty to you, prince, my name is Ferrath.”

“Ride with us and if you have told the truth, fellow, there shall be a
reward and if not—then there shall be deserts,” and Peter of Blentz
wheeled his horse and with his company galloped on toward Tafelberg.

As he rode he talked with his lieutenants Coblich, Maenck, and Stein,
and among them it was decided that it would be best that Peter stop at
Blentz for the night while the others rode on to Tafelberg.

“Do not bring Leopold to Blentz,” directed Peter, “for if it be he who
lies at Tafelberg and they find him gone it will be toward Blentz that
they will first look. Take him—”

The Regent leaned from his saddle so that his mouth was close to the
ear of Coblich, that none of the troopers might hear.

Coblich nodded his head.

“And, Coblich, the fewer that ride to Tafelberg tonight the surer the
success of the mission. Take Maenck, Stein and one other with you. I
shall keep this man with me, for it may prove but a plot to lure me to
Tafelberg.”

Peter scowled at the now frightened hospital attendant.

“Tomorrow I shall be riding through the lowlands, Coblich, and so you
may not find means to communicate with me, but before noon of the fifth
have word at your town house in Lustadt for me of the success of your
venture.”

They had reached the point now where the road to Tafelberg branches
from that to Blentz, and the four who were to fetch the king wheeled
their horses into the left-hand fork and cantered off upon their
mission.

The direct road between Lustadt and Tafelberg is but little more than
half the distance of that which Coblich and his companions had to
traverse because of the wide detour they had made by riding almost to
Blentz first, and so it was that when they cantered into the little
mountain town near midnight Barney Custer and Lieutenant Butzow were
but a mile or two behind them.

Had the latter had even the faintest of suspicions that the identity of
the hiding place of the king might come to the knowledge of Peter of
Blentz they could have reached Tafelberg ahead of Coblich and his
party, but all unsuspecting they rode slowly to conserve the energy of
their mounts for the return trip.

In silence the two men approached the grounds surrounding the
sanatorium. In the soft dirt of the road the hoofs of their mounts made
no sound, and the shadows of the trees that border the front of the
enclosure hid them from the view of the trooper who held four riderless
horses in a little patch of moonlight that broke through the opening in
the trees at the main gate of the institution.

Barney was the first to see the animals and the man.

“S-s-st,” he hissed, reining in his horse.

Butzow drew alongside the American.

“What can it mean?” asked Barney. “That fellow is a trooper, but I
cannot make out his uniform.”

“Wait here,” said Butzow, and slipping from his horse he crept closer
to the man, hugging the dense shadows close to the trees.

Barney reined in nearer the low wall. From his saddle he could see the
grounds beyond through the branches of a tree. As he looked his
attention was suddenly riveted upon a sight that sent his heart into
his throat.

Three men were dragging a struggling, half-naked figure down the gravel
walk from the sanatorium toward the gate. One kept a hand clapped
across the mouth of the prisoner, who struck and fought his assailants
with all the frenzy of despair.

Barney leaped from his saddle and ran headlong after Butzow. The
lieutenant had reached the gate but an instant ahead of him when the
trooper, turning suddenly at some slight sound of the officer’s foot
upon the ground, detected the man creeping upon him. In an instant the
fellow had whipped out a revolver, and raising it fired point-blank at
Butzow’s chest; but in the same instant a figure shot out of the
shadows beside him, and with the report of the revolver a heavy fist
caught the trooper on the side of the chin, crumpling him to the ground
as if he were dead.

The blow had been in time to deflect the muzzle of the firearm, and the
bullet whistled harmlessly past the lieutenant.

“Your majesty!” exclaimed Butzow excitedly. “Go back. He might have
killed you.”

Barney leaped to the other’s side and grasping him by the shoulders
wheeled him about so that he faced the gate.

“There, Butzow,” he cried, “there is your king, and from the looks of
it he never needed a loyal subject more than he does this moment.
Come!” Without waiting to see if the other followed him, Barney Custer
leaped through the gate full in the faces of the astonished trio that
was dragging Leopold of Lutha from his sanctuary.

At sight of the American the king gave a muffled cry of relief, and
then Barney was upon those who held him. A stinging uppercut lifted
Coblich clear of the ground to drop him, dazed and bewildered, at the
foot of the monarch he had outraged. Maenck drew a revolver only to
have it struck from his hand by the sword of Butzow, who had followed
closely upon the American’s heels.

Barney, seizing the king by the arm, started on a run for the gateway.
In his wake came Butzow with a drawn sword beating back Stein, who was
armed with a cavalry saber, and Maenck who had now drawn his own sword.

The American saw that the two were pressing Butzow much too closely for
safety and that Coblich had now recovered from the effects of the blow
and was in pursuit, drawing his saber as he ran. Barney thrust the king
behind him and turned to face the enemy, at Butzow’s side.

The three men rushed upon the two who stood between them and their
prey. The moonlight was now full in the faces of Butzow and the
American. For the first time Maenck and the others saw who it was that
had interrupted them.

“The impostor!” cried the governor of Blentz. “The false king!”

Imbued with temporary courage by the knowledge that his side had the
advantage of superior numbers he launched himself full upon the
American. To his surprise he met a sword-arm that none might have
expected in an American, for Barney Custer had been a pupil of the
redoubtable Colonel Monstery, who was, as Barney was wont to say, “one
of the thanwhomest of fencing masters.”

Quickly Maenck fell back to give place to Stein, but not before the
American’s point had found him twice to leave him streaming blood from
two deep flesh wounds.

Neither of those who fought in the service of the king saw the
trembling, weak-kneed figure, which had stood behind them, turn and
scurry through the gateway, leaving the men who battled for him to
their fate.

The trooper whom Barney had felled had regained consciousness and as he
came to his feet rubbing his swollen jaw he saw a disheveled,
half-dressed figure running toward him from the sanatorium grounds. The
fellow was no fool, and knowing the purpose of the expedition as he did
he was quick to jump to the conclusion that this fleeing
personification of abject terror was Leopold of Lutha; and so it was
that as the king emerged from the gateway in search of freedom he ran
straight into the widespread arms of the trooper.

Maenck and Coblich had seen the king’s break for liberty, and the
latter maneuvered to get himself between Butzow and the open gate that
he might follow after the fleeing monarch.

At the same instant Maenck, seeing that Stein was being worsted by the
American, rushed in upon the latter, and thus relieved, the rat-faced
doctor was enabled to swing a heavy cut at Barney which struck him a
glancing blow upon the head, sending him stunned and bleeding to the
sward.

Coblich and the governor of Blentz hastened toward the gate, pausing
for an instant to overwhelm Butzow. In the fierce scrimmage that
followed the lieutenant was overthrown, though not before his sword had
passed through the heart of the rat-faced one. Deserting their fallen
comrade the two dashed through the gate, where to their immense relief
they found Leopold safe in the hands of the trooper.

An instant later the precious trio, with Leopold upon the horse of the
late Dr. Stein, were galloping swiftly into the darkness of the wood
that lies at the outskirts of Tafelberg.

When Barney regained consciousness he found himself upon a cot within
the sanatorium. Close beside him lay Butzow, and above them stood an
interne and several nurses. No sooner had the American regained his
scattered wits than he leaped to the floor. The interne and the nurses
tried to force him back upon the cot, thinking that he was in the
throes of a delirium, and it required his best efforts to convince them
that he was quite rational.

During the melee Butzow regained consciousness; his wound being as
superficial as that of the American, the two men were soon donning
their clothing, and, half-dressed, rushing toward the outer gate.

The interne had told them that when he had reached the scene of the
conflict in company with the gardener he had found them and another
lying upon the sward.

Their companion, he said, was quite dead.

“That must have been Stein,” said Butzow. “And the others had escaped
with the king!”

“The king?” cried the interne.

“Yes, the king, man—Leopold of Lutha. Did you not know that he who has
lain here for three weeks was the king?” replied Butzow.

The interne accompanied them to the gate and beyond, but everywhere was
silence. The king was gone.




X.
ON THE BATTLEFIELD


All that night and the following day Barney Custer and his aide rode in
search of the missing king.

They came to Blentz, and there Butzow rode boldly into the great court,
admitted by virtue of the fact that the guard upon the gate knew him
only as an officer of the royal guard whom they believed still loyal to
Peter of Blentz.

The lieutenant learned that the king was not there, nor had he been
since his escape. He also learned that Peter was abroad in the lowland
recruiting followers to aid him forcibly to regain the crown of Lutha.

The lieutenant did not wait to hear more, but, hurrying from the
castle, rode to Barney where the latter had remained in hiding in the
wood below the moat—the same wood through which he had stumbled a few
weeks previously after his escape from the stagnant waters of the moat.

“The king is not here,” said Butzow to him, as soon as the former
reached his side. “Peter is recruiting an army to aid him in seizing
the palace at Lustadt, and king or no king, we must ride for the
capital in time to check that move. Thank God,” he added, “that we
shall have a king to place upon the throne of Lutha at noon tomorrow in
spite of all that Peter can do.”

“What do you mean?” asked Barney. “Have you any clue to the whereabouts
of Leopold?”

“I saw the man at Tafelberg whom you say is king,” replied Butzow. “I
saw him tremble and whimper in the face of danger. I saw him run when
he might have seized something, even a stone, and fought at the sides
of the men who were come to rescue him. And I saw you there also.

“The truth and the falsity of this whole strange business is beyond me,
but this I know: if you are not the king today I pray God that the
other may not find his way to Lustadt before noon tomorrow, for by then
a brave man will sit upon the throne of Lutha, your majesty.”

Barney laid his hand upon the shoulder of the other.

“It cannot be, my friend,” he said. “There is more than a throne at
stake for me, but to win them both I could not do the thing you
suggest. If Leopold of Lutha lives he must be crowned tomorrow.”

“And if he does not live?” asked Butzow.

Barney Custer shrugged his shoulders.

It was dusk when the two entered the palace grounds in Lustadt. The
sight of Barney threw the servants and functionaries of the royal
household into wild excitement and confusion. Men ran hither and
thither bearing the glad tidings that the king had returned.

Old von der Tann was announced within ten minutes after Barney reached
his apartments. He urged upon the American the necessity for greater
caution in the future.

“Your majesty’s life is never safe while Peter of Blentz is abroad in
Lutha,” cried he.

“It was to save your king from Peter that we rode from Lustadt last
night,” replied Barney, but the old prince did not catch the double
meaning of the words.

While they talked a young officer of cavalry begged an audience. He had
important news for the king, he said. From him Barney learned that
Peter of Blentz had succeeded in recruiting a fair-sized army in the
lowlands. Two regiments of government infantry and a squadron of
cavalry had united forces with him, for there were those who still
accepted him as regent, believing his contention that the true king was
dead, and that he whose coronation was to be attempted was but the
puppet of old Von der Tann.

The morning of November 5 broke clear and cold. The old town of Lustadt
was awakened with a start at daybreak by the booming of cannon. Mounted
messengers galloped hither and thither through the steep, winding
streets. Troops, foot and horse, moved at the double from the barracks
along the King’s Road to the fortifications which guard the entrance to
the city at the foot of Margaretha Street.

Upon the heights above the town Barney Custer and the old Prince von
der Tann stood surrounded by officers and aides watching the advance of
a skirmish line up the slopes toward Lustadt. Behind, the thin line
columns of troops were marching under cover of two batteries of field
artillery that Peter of Blentz had placed upon a wooden knoll to the
southeast of the city.

The guns upon the single fort that, overlooking the broad valley,
guarded the entire southern exposure of the city were answering the
fire of Prince Peter’s artillery, while several machine guns had been
placed to sweep the slope up which the skirmish line was advancing.

The trees that masked the enemy’s pieces extended upward along the
ridge and the eastern edge of the city. Barney saw that a force of men
might easily reach a commanding position from that direction and enter
Lustadt almost in rear of the fortifications. Below him a squadron of
the Royal Horse were just emerging from their stables, taking their way
toward the plain to join in a concerted movement against the troops
that were advancing toward the fort.

He turned to an aide de camp standing just behind him.

“Intercept that squadron and direct the major to move due east along
the King’s Road to the grove,” he commanded. “We will join him there.”

And as the officer spurred down the steep and narrow street the
American, followed by Von der Tann and his staff, wheeled and galloped
eastward.

Ten minutes later the party entered the wood at the edge of town, where
the squadron soon joined them. Von der Tann was mystified at the
purpose of this change in the position of the general staff, since from
the wood they could see nothing of the battle waging upon the slope.
During his brief intercourse with the man he thought king he had quite
forgotten that there had been any question as to the young man’s
sanity, for he had given no indication of possessing aught but a
well-balanced mind. Now, however, he commenced to have misgivings, if
not of his sanity, then as to his judgment at least.

“I fear, your majesty,” he ventured, “that we are putting ourselves too
much out of touch with the main body of the army. We can neither see
nor accomplish anything from this position.”

“We were too far away to accomplish much upon the top of that
mountain,” replied Barney, “but we’re going to commence doing things
now. You will please to ride back along the King’s Road and take direct
command of the troops mobilized near the fort.

“Direct the artillery to redouble their fire upon the enemy’s battery
for five minutes, and then to cease firing into the wood entirely. At
the same instant you may order a cautious advance against the troops
advancing up the slope.

“When you see us emerge upon the west side of the grove where the
enemy’s guns are now, you may order a charge, and we will take them
simultaneously upon their right flank with a cavalry charge.”

“But, your majesty,” exclaimed Von der Tann dubiously, “where will you
be in the mean time?”

“We shall be with the major’s squadron, and when you see us emerging
from the grove, you will know that we have taken Peter’s guns and that
everything is over except the shouting.”

“You are not going to accompany the charge!” cried the old prince.

“We are going to lead it,” and the pseudo-king of Lutha wheeled his
mount as though to indicate that the time for talking was past.

With a signal to the major commanding the squadron of Royal Horse, he
moved eastward into the wood. Prince Ludwig hesitated a moment as
though to question further the wisdom of the move, but finally with a
shake of his head he trotted off in the direction of the fort.

Five minutes later the enemy were delighted to note that the fire upon
their concealed battery had suddenly ceased.

Then Peter saw a force of foot-soldiers deploy from the city and
advance slowly in line of skirmishers down the slope to meet his own
firing line.

Immediately he did what Barney had expected that he would—turned the
fire of his artillery toward the southwest, directly away from the
point from which the American and the crack squadron were advancing.

So it came that the cavalrymen crept through the woods upon the rear of
the guns, unseen; the noise of their advance was drowned by the
detonation of the cannon.

The first that the artillerymen knew of the enemy in their rear was a
shout of warning from one of the powder-men at a caisson, who had
caught a glimpse of the grim line advancing through the trees at his
rear.

Instantly an effort was made to wheel several of the pieces about and
train them upon the advancing horsemen; but even had there been time, a
shout that rose from several of Peter’s artillerymen as the Royal Horse
broke into full view would doubtless have prevented the maneuver, for
at sight of the tall, bearded, young man who galloped in front of the
now charging cavalrymen there rose a shout of “The king! The king!”

With the force of an avalanche the Royal Horse rode through those two
batteries of field artillery; and in the thick of the fight that
followed rode the American, a smile upon his face, for in his ears rang
the wild shouts of his troopers: “For the king! For the king!”

In the moment that the enemy made their first determined stand a bullet
brought down the great bay upon which Barney rode. A dozen of Peter’s
men rushed forward to seize the man stumbling to his feet. As many more
of the Royal Horse closed around him, and there, for five minutes, was
waged as fierce a battle for possession of a king as was ever fought.

But already many of the artillerymen had deserted the guns that had not
yet been attacked, for the magic name of king had turned their blood to
water. Fifty or more raised a white flag and surrendered without
striking a blow, and when, at last, Barney and his little bodyguard
fought their way through those who surrounded them they found the
balance of the field already won.

Upon the slope below the city the loyal troops were advancing upon the
enemy. Old Prince Ludwig paced back and forth behind them, apparently
oblivious to the rain of bullets about him. Every moment he turned his
eyes toward the wooded ridge from which there now belched an almost
continuous fusillade of shells upon the advancing royalists.

Quite suddenly the cannonading ceased and the old man halted in his
tracks, his gaze riveted upon the wood. For several minutes he saw no
sign of what was transpiring behind that screen of sere and yellow
autumn leaves, and then a man came running out, and after him another
and another.

The prince raised his field glasses to his eyes. He almost cried aloud
in his relief—the uniforms of the fugitives were those of artillerymen,
and only cavalry had accompanied the king. A moment later there
appeared in the center of his lenses a tall figure with a full beard.
He rode, swinging his saber above his head, and behind him at full
gallop came a squadron of the Royal Horse.

Old von der Tann could restrain himself no longer.

“The king! The king!” he cried to those about him, pointing in the
direction of the wood.

The officers gathered there and the soldiery before him heard and took
up the cry, and then from the old man’s lips came the command,
“Charge!” and a thousand men tore down the slopes of Lustadt upon the
forces of Peter of Blentz, while from the east the king charged their
right flank at the head of the Royal Horse.

Peter of Blentz saw that the day was lost, for the troops upon the
right were crumpling before the false king while he and his cavalrymen
were yet a half mile distant. Before the retreat could become a rout
the prince regent ordered his forces to fall back slowly upon a suburb
that lies in the valley below the city.

Once safely there he raised a white flag, asking a conference with
Prince Ludwig.

“Your majesty,” said the old man, “what answer shall we send the
traitor who even now ignores the presence of his king?”

“Treat with him,” replied the American. “He may be honest enough in his
belief that I am an impostor.”

Von der Tann shrugged his shoulders, but did as Barney bid, and for
half an hour the young man waited with Butzow while Von der Tann and
Peter met halfway between the forces for their conference.

A dozen members of the most powerful of the older nobility accompanied
Ludwig. When they returned their faces were a picture of puzzled
bewilderment. With them were several officers, soldiers and civilians
from Peter’s contingency.

“What said he?” asked Barney.

“He said, your majesty,” replied Von der Tann, “that he is confident
you are not the king, and that these men he has sent with me knew the
king well at Blentz. As proof that you are not the king he has offered
the evidence of your own denials—made not only to his officers and
soldiers, but to the man who is now your loyal lieutenant, Butzow, and
to the Princess Emma von der Tann, my daughter.

“He insists that he is fighting for the welfare of Lutha, while we are
traitors, attempting to seat an impostor upon the throne of the dead
Leopold. I will admit that we are at a loss, your majesty, to know
where lies the truth and where the falsity in this matter.

“We seek only to serve our country and our king but there are those
among us who, to be entirely frank, are not yet convinced that you are
Leopold. The result of the conference may not, then, meet with the
hearty approval of your majesty.”

“What was the result?” asked Barney.

“It was decided that all hostilities cease, and that Prince Peter be
given an opportunity to establish the validity of his claim that your
majesty is an impostor. If he is able to do so to the entire
satisfaction of a majority of the old nobility, we have agreed to
support him in a return to his regency.”

For a moment there was deep silence. Many of the nobles stood with
averted faces and eyes upon the ground.

The American, a half-smile upon his face, turned toward the men of
Peter who had come to denounce him. He knew what their verdict would
be. He knew that if he were to save the throne for Leopold he must hold
it at any cost until Leopold should be found.

Troopers were scouring the country about Lustadt as far as Blentz in
search of Maenck and Coblich. Could they locate these two and arrest
them “with all found in their company,” as his order read, he felt sure
that he would be able to deliver the missing king to his subjects in
time for the coronation at noon.

Barney looked straight into the eyes of old Von der Tann.

“You have given us the opinion of others, Prince Ludwig,” he said. “Now
you may tell us your own views of the matter.”

“I shall have to abide by the decision of the majority,” replied the
old man. “But I have seen your majesty under fire, and if you are not
the king, for Lutha’s sake you ought to be.”

“He is not Leopold,” said one of the officers who had accompanied the
prince from Peter’s camp. “I was governor of Blentz for three years and
as familiar with the king’s face as with that of my own brother.”

“No,” cried several of the others, “this man is not the king.”

Several of the nobles drew away from Barney. Others looked at him
questioningly.

Butzow stepped close to his side, and it was noticeable that the
troopers, and even the officers, of the Royal Horse which Barney had
led in the charge upon the two batteries in the wood, pressed a little
closer to the American. This fact did not escape Butzow’s notice.

“If you are content to take the word of the servants of a traitor and a
would-be regicide,” he cried, “I am not. There has been no proof
advanced that this man is not the king. In so far as I am concerned he
is the king, nor ever do I expect to serve another more worthy of the
title.

“If Peter of Blentz has real proof—not the testimony of his own
faction—that Leopold of Lutha is dead, let him bring it forward before
noon today, for at noon we shall crown a king in the cathedral at
Lustadt, and I for one pray to God that it may be he who has led us in
battle today.”

A shout of applause rose from the Royal Horse, and from the
foot-soldiers who had seen the king charge across the plain, scattering
the enemy before him.

Barney, appreciating the advantage in the sudden turn affairs had taken
following Butzow’s words, swung to his saddle.

“Until Peter of Blentz brings to Lustadt one with a better claim to the
throne,” he said, “we shall continue to rule Lutha, nor shall other
than Leopold be crowned her king. We approve of the amnesty you have
granted, Prince Ludwig, and Peter of Blentz is free to enter Lustadt,
as he will, so long as he does not plot against the true king.

“Major,” he added, turning to the commander of the squadron at his
back, “we are returning to the palace. Your squadron will escort us,
remaining on guard there about the grounds. Prince Ludwig, you will see
that machine guns are placed about the palace and commanding the
approaches to the cathedral.”

With a nod to the cavalry major he wheeled his horse and trotted up the
slope toward Lustadt.

With a grim smile Prince Ludwig von der Tann mounted his horse and rode
toward the fort. At his side were several of the nobles of Lutha. They
looked at him in astonishment.

“You are doing his bidding, although you do not know that he is the
true king?” asked one of them.

“Were he an impostor,” replied the old man, “he would have insisted by
word of mouth that he is king. But not once has he said that he is
Leopold. Instead, he has proved his kingship by his acts.”




XI.
A TIMELY INTERVENTION


Nine o’clock found Barney Custer pacing up and down his apartments in
the palace. No clue as to the whereabouts of Coblich, Maenck or the
king had been discovered. One by one his troopers had returned to
Butzow empty-handed, and as much at a loss as to the hiding-place of
their quarry as when they had set out upon their search.

Peter of Blentz and his retainers had entered the city and already had
commenced to gather at the cathedral.

Peter, at the residence of Coblich, had succeeded in gathering about
him many of the older nobility whom he pledged to support him in case
he could prove to them that the man who occupied the royal palace was
not Leopold of Lutha.

They agreed to support him in his regency if he produced proof that the
true Leopold was dead, and Peter of Blentz waited with growing anxiety
the coming of Coblich with word that he had the king in custody. Peter
was staking all on a single daring move which he had decided to make in
his game of intrigue.

As Barney paced within the palace, waiting for word that Leopold had
been found, Peter of Blentz was filled with equal apprehension as he,
too, waited for the same tidings. At last he heard the pound of hoofs
upon the pavement without and a moment later Coblich, his clothing
streaked with dirt, blood caked upon his face from a wound across the
forehead, rushed into the presence of the prince regent.

Peter drew him hurriedly into a small study on the first floor.

“Well?” he whispered, as the two faced each other.

“We have him,” replied Coblich. “But we had the devil’s own time
getting him. Stein was killed and Maenck and I both wounded, and all
morning we have spent the time hiding from troopers who seemed to be
searching for us. Only fifteen minutes since did we reach the
hiding-place that you instructed us to use. But we have him, your
highness, and he is in such a state of cowardly terror that he is ready
to agree to anything, if you will but spare his life and set him free
across the border.”

“It is too late for that now, Coblich,” replied Peter. “There is but
one way that Leopold of Lutha can serve me now, and that is—dead. Were
his corpse to be carried into the cathedral of Lustadt before noon
today, and were those who fetched it to swear that the king was killed
by the impostor after being dragged from the hospital at Tafelberg
where you and Maenck had located him, and from which you were
attempting to rescue him, I believe that the people would tear our
enemies to pieces. What say you, Coblich?”

The other stared at Peter of Blentz for several seconds while the
atrocity of his chief’s plan filtered through his brain.

“My God!” he exclaimed at last. “You mean that you wish me to murder
Leopold with my own hands?”

“You put it too crudely, my dear Coblich,” replied the other.

“I cannot do it,” muttered Coblich. “I have never killed a man in my
life. I am getting old. No, I could never do it. I should not sleep
nights.”

“If it is not done, Coblich, and Leopold comes into his own,” said
Peter slowly, “you will be caught and hanged higher than Haman. And if
you do not do it, and the impostor is crowned today, then you will be
either hanged officially or knifed unofficially, and without any choice
in the matter whatsoever. Nothing, Coblich, but the dead body of the
true Leopold can save your neck. You have your choice, therefore, of
letting him live to prove your treason, or letting him die and becoming
chancellor of Lutha.”

Slowly Coblich turned toward the door. “You are right,” he said, “but
may God have mercy on my soul. I never thought that I should have to do
it with my own hands.”

So saying he left the room and a moment later Peter of Blentz smiled as
he heard the pounding of a horse’s hoofs upon the pavement without.

Then the Regent entered the room he had recently quitted and spoke to
the nobles of Lutha who were gathered there.

“Coblich has found the body of the murdered king,” he said. “I have
directed him to bring it to the cathedral. He came upon the impostor
and his confederate, Lieutenant Butzow, as they were bearing the corpse
from the hospital at Tafelberg where the king has lain unknown since
the rumor was spread by Von der Tann that he had been killed by
bandits.

“He was not killed until last evening, my lords, and you shall see
today the fresh wounds upon him. When the time comes that we can
present this grisly evidence of the guilt of the impostor and those who
uphold him, I shall expect you all to stand at my side, as you have
promised.”

With one accord the noblemen pledged anew their allegiance to Peter of
Blentz if he could produce one-quarter of the evidence he claimed to
possess.

“All that we wish to know positively is,” said one, “that the man who
bears the title of king today is really Leopold of Lutha, or that he is
not. If not then he stands convicted of treason, and we shall know how
to conduct ourselves.”

Together the party rode to the cathedral, the majority of the older
nobility now openly espousing the cause of the Regent.

At the palace Barney was about distracted. Butzow was urging him to
take the crown whether he was Leopold or not, for the young lieutenant
saw no hope for Lutha, if either the scoundrelly Regent or the cowardly
man whom Barney had assured him was the true king should come into
power.

It was eleven o’clock. In another hour Barney knew that he must have
found some new solution of his dilemma, for there seemed little
probability that the king would be located in the brief interval that
remained before the coronation. He wondered what they did to people who
stole thrones. For a time he figured his chances of reaching the border
ahead of the enraged populace. All had depended upon the finding of the
king, and he had been so sure that it could be accomplished in time,
for Coblich and Maenck had had but a few hours in which to conceal the
monarch before the search was well under way.

Armed with the king’s warrants, his troopers had ridden through the
country, searching houses, and questioning all whom they met. Patrols
had guarded every road that the fugitives might take either to Lustadt,
Blentz, or the border; but no king had been found and no trace of his
abductors.

Prince von der Tann, Barney was convinced, was on the point of
deserting him, and going over to the other side. It was true that the
old man had carried out his instructions relative to the placing of the
machine guns; but they might be used as well against him, where they
stood, as for him.

From his window he could see the broad avenue which passes before the
royal palace of Lutha. It was crowded with throngs moving toward the
cathedral. Presently there came a knock upon the closed door of his
chamber.

At his “Enter” a functionary announced: “His Royal Highness Ludwig,
Prince von der Tann!”

The old man was much perturbed at the rumors he had heard relative to
the assassination of the true Leopold. Soldier-like, he blurted out his
suspicions and his ultimatum.

“None but the royal blood of Rubinroth may reign in Lutha while there
be a Rubinroth left to reign and old Von der Tann lives,” he cried in
conclusion.

At the name “Rubinroth” Barney started. It was his mother’s name.
Suddenly the truth flashed upon him. He understood now the reticence of
both his father and mother relative to her early life.

“Prince Ludwig,” said the young man earnestly, “I have only the good of
Lutha in my heart. For three weeks I have labored and risked death a
hundred times to place the legitimate heir to the crown of Lutha upon
his throne. I—”

He hesitated, not knowing just how to commence the confession he was
determined to make, though he was positive that it would place Peter of
Blentz upon the throne, since the old prince had promised to support
the Regent could it be proved that Barney was an impostor.

“I,” he started again, and then there came an interruption at the door.

“A messenger, your majesty,” announced the doorman, “who says that he
must have audience at once upon a matter of life and death to the
king.”

“We will see him in the ante-chamber,” replied Barney, moving toward
the door. “Await us here, Prince Ludwig.”

A moment later he re-entered the apartment. There was an expression of
renewed hope upon his face.

“As we were about to remark, my dear prince,” he said, “I swear that
the royal blood of the Rubinroths flows in my veins, and as God is my
judge, none other than the true Leopold of Lutha shall be crowned
today. And now we must prepare for the coronation. If there be trouble
in the cathedral, Prince Ludwig, we look to your sword in protection of
the king.”

“When I am with you, sire,” said Von der Tann, “I know that you are
king. When I saw how you led the troops in battle, I prayed that there
could be no mistake. God give that I am right. But God help you if you
are playing with old Ludwig von der Tann.”

When the old man had left the apartment Barney summoned an aide and
sent for Butzow. Then he hurried to the bath that adjoined the
apartment, and when the lieutenant of horse was announced Barney called
through a soapy lather for his confederate to enter.

“What are you doing, sire?” cried Butzow in amazement.

“Cut out the ‘sire,’ old man,” shouted Barney Custer of Beatrice. “this
is the fifth of November and I am shaving off this alfalfa. The king is
found!”

“What?” cried Butzow, and upon his face there was little to indicate
the rejoicing that a loyal subject of Leopold of Lutha should have felt
at that announcement.

“There is a man in the next room,” went on Barney, “who can lead us to
the spot where Coblich and Maenck guard the king. Get him in here.”

Butzow hastened to comply with the American’s instructions, and a
moment later returned to the apartment with the old shopkeeper of
Tafelberg.

As Barney shaved he issued directions to the two. Within the room to
the east, he said, there were the king’s coronation robes, and in a
smaller dressingroom beyond they would find a long gray cloak.

They were to wrap all these in a bundle which the old shopkeeper was to
carry.

“And, Butzow,” added Barney, “look to my revolvers and your own, and
lay my sword out as well. The chances are that we shall have to use
them before we are ten minutes older.”

In an incredibly short space of time the young man emerged from the
bath, his luxuriant beard gone forever, he hoped. Butzow looked at him
with a smile.

“I must say that the beard did not add greatly to your majesty’s good
looks,” he said.

“Never mind the bouquets, old man,” cried Barney, cramming his arms
into the sleeves of his khaki jacket and buckling sword and revolver
about him, as he hurried toward a small door that opened upon the
opposite side of the apartment to that through which his visitors had
been conducted.

Together the three hastened through a narrow, little-used corridor and
down a flight of well-worn stone steps to a door that let upon the rear
court of the palace.

There were grooms and servants there, and soldiers too, who saluted
Butzow, according the old shopkeeper and the smooth-faced young
stranger only cursory glances. It was evident that without his beard it
was not likely that Barney would be again mistaken for the king.

At the stables Butzow requisitioned three horses, and soon the trio was
galloping through a little-frequented street toward the northern, hilly
environs of Lustadt. They rode in silence until they came to an old
stone building, whose boarded windows and general appearance of
dilapidation proclaimed its long tenantless condition. Rank weeds, now
rustling dry and yellow in the November wind, choked what once might
have been a luxuriant garden. A stone wall, which had at one time
entirely surrounded the grounds, had been almost completely removed
from the front to serve as foundation stone for a smaller edifice
farther down the mountainside.

The horsemen avoided this break in the wall, coming up instead upon the
rear side where their approach was wholly screened from the building by
the wall upon that exposure.

Close in they dismounted, and leaving the animals in charge of the
shopkeeper of Tafelberg, Barney and Butzow hastened toward a small
postern-gate which swung, groaning, upon a single rusted hinge. Each
felt that there was no time for caution or stratagem. Instead all
depended upon the very boldness and rashness of their attack, and so as
they came through into the courtyard the two dashed headlong for the
building.

Chance accomplished for them what no amount of careful execution might
have done, and they came within the ruin unnoticed by the four who
occupied the old, darkened library.

Possibly the fact that one of the men had himself just entered and was
excitedly talking to the others may have drowned the noisy approach of
the two. However that may be, it is a fact that Barney and the cavalry
officer came to the very door of the library unheard.

There they halted, listening. Coblich was speaking.

“The Regent commands it, Maenck,” he was saying. “It is the only thing
that can save our necks. He said that you had better be the one to do
it, since it was your carelessness that permitted the fellow to escape
from Blentz.”

Huddled in a far corner of the room was an abject figure trembling in
terror. At the words of Coblich it staggered to its feet. It was the
king.

“Have pity—have pity!” he cried. “Do not kill me, and I will go away
where none will ever know that I live. You can tell Peter that I am
dead. Tell him anything, only spare my life. Oh, why did I ever listen
to the cursed fool who tempted me to think of regaining the crown that
has brought me only misery and suffering—the crown that has now placed
the sentence of death upon me.”

“Why not let him go?” suggested the trooper, who up to this time had
not spoken. “If we don’t kill him, we can’t be hanged for his murder.”

“Don’t be too sure of that,” exclaimed Maenck. “If he goes away and
never returns, what proof can we offer that we did not kill him, should
we be charged with the crime? And if we let him go, and later he
returns and gains his throne, he will see that we are hanged anyway for
treason.

“The safest thing to do is to put him where he at least cannot come
back to threaten us, and having done so upon the orders of Peter, let
the king’s blood be upon Peter’s head. I, at least, shall obey my
master, and let you two bear witness that I did the thing with my own
hand.” So saying he drew his sword and crossed toward the king.

But Captain Ernst Maenck never reached his sovereign.

As the terrified shriek of the sorry monarch rang through the interior
of the desolate ruin another sound mingled with it, half-drowning the
piercing wail of terror.

It was the sharp crack of a revolver, and even as it spoke Maenck
lunged awkwardly forward, stumbled, and collapsed at Leopold’s feet.
With a moan the king shrank back from the grisly thing that touched his
boot, and then two men were in the center of the room, and things were
happening with a rapidity that was bewildering.

About all that he could afterward recall with any distinctness was the
terrified face of Coblich, as he rushed past him toward a door in the
opposite side of the room, and the horrid leer upon the face of the
dead trooper, who foolishly, had made a move to draw his revolver.

Within the cathedral at Lustadt excitement was at fever heat. It lacked
but two minutes of noon, and as yet no king had come to claim the
crown. Rumors were running riot through the close-packed audience.

One man had heard the king’s chamberlain report to Prince von der Tann
that the master of ceremonies had found the king’s apartments vacant
when he had gone to urge the monarch to hasten his preparations for the
coronation.

Another had seen Butzow and two strangers galloping north through the
city. A third told of a little old man who had come to the king with an
urgent message.

Peter of Blentz and Prince Ludwig were talking in whispers at the foot
of the chancel steps. Peter ascended the steps and facing the
assemblage raised a silencing hand.

“He who claimed to be Leopold of Lutha,” he said, “was but a mad
adventurer. He would have seized the throne of the Rubinroths had his
nerve not failed him at the last moment. He has fled. The true king is
dead. Now I, Prince Regent of Lutha, declare the throne vacant, and
announce myself king!”

There were a few scattered cheers and some hissing. A score of the
nobles rose as though to protest, but before any could take a step the
attention of all was directed toward the sorry figure of a white-faced
man who scurried up the broad center aisle.

It was Coblich.

He ran to Peter’s side, and though he attempted to speak in a whisper,
so out of breath, and so filled with hysterical terror was he that his
words came out in gasps that were audible to many of those who stood
near by.

“Maenck is dead,” he cried. “The impostor has stolen the king.”

Peter of Blentz went white as his lieutenant. Von der Tann heard and
demanded an explanation.

“You said that Leopold was dead,” he said accusingly.

Peter regained his self-control quickly.

“Coblich is excited,” he explained. “He means that the impostor has
stolen the body of the king that Coblich and Maenck had discovered and
were bringing to Lustadt.”

Von der Tann looked troubled.

He knew not what to make of the series of wild tales that had come to
his ears within the past hour. He had hoped that the young man whom he
had last seen in the king’s apartments was the true Leopold. He would
have been glad to have served such a one, but there had been many
inexplicable occurrences which tended to cast a doubt upon the man’s
claims—and yet, had he ever claimed to be the king? It suddenly
occurred to the old prince that he had not. On the contrary he had
repeatedly stated to Prince Ludwig’s daughter and to Lieutenant Butzow
that he was not Leopold.

It seemed that they had all been so anxious to believe him king that
they had forced the false position upon him, and now if he had indeed
committed the atrocity that Coblich charged against him, who could
wonder? With less provocation men had before attempted to seize thrones
by more dastardly means.

Peter of Blentz was speaking.

“Let the coronation proceed,” he cried, “that Lutha may have a true
king to frustrate the plans of the impostor and the traitors who had
supported him.”

He cast a meaning glance at Prince von der Tann.

There were many cries for Peter of Blentz. “Let’s have done with
treason, and place upon the throne of Lutha one whom we know to be both
a Luthanian and sane. Down with the mad king! Down with the impostor!”

Peter turned to ascend the chancel steps.

Von der Tann still hesitated. Below him upon one side of the aisle were
massed his own retainers. Opposite them were the men of the Regent, and
dividing the two the parallel ranks of Horse Guards stretched from the
chancel down the broad aisle to the great doors. These were strongly
for the impostor, if impostor he was, who had led them to victory over
the men of the Blentz faction.

Von der Tann knew that they would fight to the last ditch for their
hero should he come to claim the crown. Yet how would they fight—to
which side would they cleave, were he to attempt to frustrate the
design of the Regent to seize the throne of Lutha?

Already Peter of Blentz had approached the bishop, who, eager to
propitiate whoever seemed most likely to become king, gave the signal
for the procession that was to mark the solemn bearing of the crown of
Lutha up the aisle to the chancel.

Outside the cathedral there was the sudden blare of trumpets. The great
doors swung violently open, and the entire throng were upon their feet
in an instant as a trooper of the Royal Horse shouted: “The king! The
king! Make way for Leopold of Lutha!”




XII.
THE GRATITUDE OF A KING


At the cry silence fell upon the throng. Every head was turned toward
the great doors through which the head of a procession was just
visible. It was a grim looking procession—the head of it, at least.

There were four khaki-clad trumpeters from the Royal Horse Guards, the
gay and resplendent uniforms which they should have donned today
conspicuous for their absence. From their brazen bugles sounded another
loud fanfare, and then they separated, two upon each side of the aisle,
and between them marched three men.

One was tall, with gray eyes and had a reddish-brown beard. He was
fully clothed in the coronation robes of Leopold. Upon his either hand
walked the others—Lieutenant Butzow and a gray-eyed, smooth-faced,
square-jawed stranger.

Behind them marched the balance of the Royal Horse Guards that were not
already on duty within the cathedral. As the eyes of the multitude fell
upon the man in the coronation robes there were cries of: “The king!
Impostor!” and “Von der Tann’s puppet!”

“Denounce him!” whispered one of Peter’s henchmen in his master’s ear.

The Regent moved closer to the aisle, that he might meet the impostor
at the foot of the chancel steps. The procession was moving steadily up
the aisle.

Among the clan of Von der Tann a young girl with wide eyes was bending
forward that she might have a better look at the face of the king. As
he came opposite her her eyes filled with horror, and then she saw the
eyes of the smooth-faced stranger at the king’s side. They were brave,
laughing eyes, and as they looked straight into her own the truth
flashed upon her, and the girl gave a gasp of dismay as she realized
that the king of Lutha and the king of her heart were not one and the
same.

At last the head of the procession was almost at the foot of the
chancel steps. There were murmurs of: “It is not the king,” and “Who is
this new impostor?”

Leopold’s eyes were searching the faces of the close-packed nobility
about the chancel. At last they fell upon the face of Peter. The young
man halted not two paces from the Regent. The man went white as the
king’s eyes bored straight into his miserable soul.

“Peter of Blentz,” cried the young man, “as God is your judge, tell the
truth today. Who am I?”

The legs of the Prince Regent trembled. He sank upon his knees, raising
his hands in supplication toward the other. “Have pity on me, your
majesty, have pity!” he cried.

“Who am I, man?” insisted the king.

“You are Leopold Rubinroth, sire, by the grace of God, king of Lutha,”
cried the frightened man. “Have mercy on an old man, your majesty.”

“Wait! Am I mad? Was I ever mad?”

“As God is my judge, sire, no!” replied Peter of Blentz.

Leopold turned to Butzow.

“Remove the traitor from our presence,” he commanded, and at a word
from the lieutenant a dozen guardsmen seized the trembling man and
hustled him from the cathedral amid hisses and execrations.

Following the coronation the king was closeted in his private audience
chamber in the palace with Prince Ludwig.

“I cannot understand what has happened, even now, your majesty,” the
old man was saying. “That you are the true Leopold is all that I am
positive of, for the discomfiture of Prince Peter evidenced that fact
all too plainly. But who the impostor was who ruled Lutha in your name
for two days, disappearing as miraculously as he came, I cannot guess.

“But for another miracle which preserved you for us in the nick of time
he might now be wearing the crown of Lutha in your stead. Having Peter
of Blentz safely in custody our next immediate task should be to hunt
down the impostor and bring him to justice also; though”—and the old
prince sighed—“he was indeed a brave man, and a noble figure of a king
as he led your troops to battle.”

The king had been smiling as Von der Tann first spoke of the
“impostor,” but at the old man’s praise of the other’s bravery a slight
flush tinged his cheek, and the shadow of a scowl crossed his brow.

“Wait,” he said, “we shall not have to look far for your ‘impostor,’”
and summoning an aide he dispatched him for “Lieutenant Butzow and Mr.
Custer.”

A moment later the two entered the audience chamber. Barney found that
Leopold the king, surrounded by comforts and safety, was a very
different person from Leopold the fugitive. The weak face now wore an
expression of arrogance, though the king spoke most graciously to the
American.

“Here, Von der Tann,” said Leopold, “is your ‘impostor.’ But for him I
should doubtless be dead by now, or once again a prisoner at Blentz.”

Barney and Butzow found it necessary to repeat their stories several
times before the old man could fully grasp all that had transpired
beneath his very nose without his being aware of scarce a single detail
of it.

When he was finally convinced that they were telling the truth, he
extended his hand to the American.

“I knelt to you once, young man,” he said, “and kissed your hand. I
should be filled with bitterness and rage toward you. On the contrary,
I find that I am proud to have served in the retinue of such an
impostor as you, for you upheld the prestige of the house of Rubinroth
upon the battlefield, and though you might have had a crown, you
refused it and brought the true king into his own.”

Leopold sat tapping his foot upon the carpet. It was all very well if
he, the king, chose to praise the American, but there was no need for
old von der Tann to slop over so. The king did not like it. As a matter
of fact, he found himself becoming very jealous of the man who had
placed him upon his throne.

“There is only one thing that I can harbor against you,” continued
Prince Ludwig, “and that is that in a single instance you deceived me,
for an hour before the coronation you told me that you were a
Rubinroth.”

“I told you, prince,” corrected Barney, “that the royal blood of
Rubinroth flowed in my veins, and so it does. I am the son of the
runaway Princess Victoria of Lutha.”

Both Leopold and Ludwig looked their surprise, and to the king’s eyes
came a sudden look of fear. With the royal blood in his veins, what was
there to prevent this popular hero from some day striving for the
throne he had once refused? Leopold knew that the minds of men were
wont to change most unaccountably.

“Butzow,” he said suddenly to the lieutenant of horse, “how many do you
imagine know positively that he who has ruled Lutha for the past two
days and he who was crowned in the cathedral this noon are not one and
the same?”

“Only a few besides those who are in this room, your majesty,” replied
Butzow. “Peter and Coblich have known it from the first, and then there
is Kramer, the loyal old shopkeeper of Tafelberg, who followed Coblich
and Maenck all night and half a day as they dragged the king to the
hiding-place where we found him. Other than these there may be those
who guess the truth, but there are none who know.”

For a moment the king sat in thought. Then he rose and commenced pacing
back and forth the length of the apartment.

“Why should they ever know?” he said at last, halting before the three
men who had been standing watching him. “For the sake of Lutha they
should never know that another than the true king sat upon the throne
even for an hour.”

He was thinking of the comparison that might be drawn between the
heroic figure of the American and his own colorless part in the events
which had led up to his coronation. In his heart of hearts he felt that
old Von der Tann rather regretted that the American had not been the
king, and he hated the old man accordingly, and was commencing to hate
the American as well.

Prince Ludwig stood looking at the carpet after the king had spoken.
His judgment told him that the king’s suggestion was a wise one; but he
was sorry and ashamed that it had come from Leopold. Butzow’s lips
almost showed the contempt that he felt for the ingratitude of his
king.

Barney Custer was the first to speak.

“I think his majesty is quite right,” he said, “and tonight I can leave
the palace after dark and cross the border some time tomorrow evening.
The people need never know the truth.”

Leopold looked relieved.

“We must reward you, Mr. Custer,” he said. “Name that which it lies
within our power to grant you and it shall be yours.”

Barney thought of the girl he loved; but he did not mention her name,
for he knew that she was not for him now.

“There is nothing, your majesty,” he said.

“A money reward,” Leopold started to suggest, and then Barney Custer
lost his temper.

A flush mounted to his face, his chin went up, and there came to his
lips bitter words of sarcasm. With an effort, however, he held his
tongue, and, turning his back upon the king, his broad shoulders
proclaiming the contempt he felt, he walked slowly out of the room.

Von der Tann and Butzow and Leopold of Lutha stood in silence as the
American passed out of sight beyond the portal.

The manner of his going had been an affront to the king, and the young
ruler had gone red with anger.

“Butzow,” he cried, “bring the fellow back; he shall be taught a lesson
in the deference that is due kings.”

Butzow hesitated. “He has risked his life a dozen times for your
majesty,” said the lieutenant.

Leopold flushed.

“Do not humiliate him, sire,” advised Von der Tann. “He has earned a
greater reward at your hands than that.”

The king resumed his pacing for a moment, coming to a halt once more
before the two.

“We shall take no notice of his insolence,” he said, “and that shall be
our royal reward for his services. More than he deserves, we dare say,
at that.”

As Barney hastened through the palace on his way to his new quarters to
obtain his arms and order his horse saddled, he came suddenly upon a
girlish figure gazing sadly from a window upon the drear November
world—her heart as sad as the day.

At the sound of his footstep she turned, and as her eyes met the gray
ones of the man she stood poised as though of half a mind to fly. For a
moment neither spoke.

“Can your highness forgive?” he asked.

For answer the girl buried her face in her hands and dropped upon the
cushioned window seat before her. The American came close and knelt at
her side.

“Don’t,” he begged as he saw her shoulders rise to the sudden sobbing
that racked her slender frame. “Don’t!”

He thought that she wept from mortification that she had given her
kisses to another than the king.

“None knows,” he continued, “what has passed between us. None but you
and I need ever know. I tried to make you understand that I was not
Leopold; but you would not believe. It is not my fault that I loved
you. It is not my fault that I shall always love you. Tell me that you
forgive me my part in the chain of strange circumstances that deceived
you into an acknowledgment of a love that you intended for another.
Forgive me, Emma!”

Down the corridor behind them a tall figure approached on silent,
noiseless feet. At sight of the two at the window seat it halted. It
was the king.

The girl looked up suddenly into the eyes of the American bending so
close above her.

“I can never forgive you,” she cried, “for not being the king, for I am
betrothed to him—and I love you!”

Before she could prevent him, Barney Custer had taken her in his arms,
and though at first she made a pretense of attempting to escape, at
last she lay quite still. Her arms found their way about the man’s
neck, and her lips returned the kisses that his were showering upon her
upturned mouth.

Presently her glance wandered above the shoulder of the American, and
of a sudden her eyes filled with terror, and, with a little gasp of
consternation, she struggled to free herself.

“Let me go!” she whispered. “Let me go—the king!”

Barney sprang to his feet and, turning, faced Leopold. The king had
gone quite white.

“Failing to rob me of my crown,” he cried in a trembling voice, “you
now seek to rob me of my betrothed! Go to your father at once, and as
for you—you shall learn what it means for you thus to meddle in the
affairs of kings.”

Barney saw the terrible position in which his love had placed the
Princess Emma. His only thought now was for her. Bowing low before her
he spoke so that the king might hear, yet as though his words were for
her ears alone.

“Your highness knows the truth, now,” he said, “and that after all I am
not the king. I can only ask that you will forgive me the deception.
Now go to your father as the king commands.”

Slowly the girl turned away. Her heart was torn between love for this
man, and her duty toward the other to whom she had been betrothed in
childhood. The hereditary instinct of obedience to her sovereign was
strong within her, and the bonds of custom and society held her in
their relentless shackles. With a sob she passed up the corridor,
curtsying to the king as she passed him.

When she had gone Leopold turned to the American. There was an evil
look in the little gray eyes of the monarch.

“You may go your way,” he said coldly. “We shall give you forty-eight
hours to leave Lutha. Should you ever return your life shall be the
forfeit.”

The American kept back the hot words that were ready upon the end of
his tongue. For her sake he must bow to fate. With a slight inclination
of his head toward Leopold he wheeled and resumed his way toward his
quarters.

Half an hour later as he was about to descend to the courtyard where a
trooper of the Royal Horse held his waiting mount, Butzow burst
suddenly into his room.

“For God’s sake,” cried the lieutenant, “get out of this. The king has
changed his mind, and there is an officer of the guard on his way here
now with a file of soldiers to place you under arrest. Leopold swears
that he will hang you for treason. Princess Emma has spurned him, and
he is wild with rage.”

The dismal November twilight had given place to bleak night as two men
cantered from the palace courtyard and turned their horses’ heads
northward toward Lutha’s nearest boundary. All night they rode,
stopping at daylight before a distant farm to feed and water their
mounts and snatch a mouthful for themselves. Then onward once again
they pressed in their mad flight.

Now that day had come they caught occasional glimpses of a body of
horsemen far behind them, but the border was near, and their start such
that there was no danger of their being overtaken.

“For the thousandth time, Butzow,” said one of the men, “will you turn
back before it is too late?”

But the other only shook his head obstinately, and so they came to the
great granite monument which marks the boundary between Lutha and her
powerful neighbor upon the north.

Barney held out his hand. “Good-bye, old man,” he said. “If I’ve
learned the ingratitude of kings here in Lutha, I have found something
that more than compensates me—the friendship of a brave man. Now hurry
back and tell them that I escaped across the border just as I was about
to fall into your hands and they will think that you have been pursuing
me instead of aiding in my escape across the border.”

But again Butzow shook his head.

“I have fought shoulder to shoulder with you, my friend,” he said. “I
have called you king, and after that I could never serve the coward who
sits now upon the throne of Lutha. I have made up my mind during this
long ride from Lustadt, and I have come to the decision that I should
prefer to raise corn in Nebraska with you rather than serve in the
court of an ingrate.”

“Well, you are an obstinate Dutchman, after all,” replied the American
with a smile, placing his hand affectionately upon the shoulder of his
comrade.

There was a clatter of horses’ hoofs upon the gravel of the road behind
them.

The two men put spurs to their mounts, and Barney Custer galloped
across the northern boundary of Lutha just ahead of a troop of
Luthanian cavalry, as had his father thirty years before; but a royal
princess had accompanied the father—only a soldier accompanied the son.




