PART II




I.
BARNEY RETURNS TO LUTHA


“What’s the matter, Vic?” asked Barney Custer of his sister. “You look
peeved.”

“I am peeved,” replied the girl, smiling. “I am terribly peeved. I
don’t want to play bridge this afternoon. I want to go motoring with
Lieutenant Butzow. This is his last day with us.”

“Yes. I know it is, and I hate to think of it,” replied Barney; “but
why in the world do you have to play bridge if you don’t want to?”

“I promised Margaret that I’d go. They’re short one, and she’s coming
after me in her car.”

“Where are you going to play—at the champion lady bridge player’s on
Fourth Street?” asked Barney, grinning.

His sister answered with a nod and a smile. “Where you brought down the
wrath of the lady champion upon your head the other night when you were
letting your mind wander across to Lutha and the Old Forest, instead of
paying attention to the game,” she added.

“Well, cheer up, Vic,” cried her brother. “Bert’ll probably set fire to
the car, the way he did to their first one, and then you won’t have to
go.”

“Oh, yes, I would; Margaret would send him after me in that
awful-looking, unwashed Ford runabout of his,” answered the girl.

“And then you WOULD go,” said Barney.

“You bet I would,” laughed Victoria. “I’d go in a wheelbarrow with
Bert.”

But she didn’t have to; and after she had driven off with her chum,
Barney and Butzow strolled down through the little city of Beatrice to
the corn mill in which the former was interested.

“I’m mighty sorry that you have to leave us, Butzow,” said Barney’s
partner. “It’s bad enough to lose you, but I’m afraid it will mean the
loss of Barney, too. He’s been hunting for some excuse to get back to
Lutha, and with you there and a war in sight I’m afraid nothing can
hold him.”

“I don’t know but that it may be just as well for my friends here that
I leave,” said Butzow seriously. “I did not tell you, Barney, all there
is in this letter”—he tapped his breastpocket, where the
foreign-looking envelope reposed with its contents.

Custer looked at him inquiringly.

“Besides saying that war between Austria and Serbia seems unavoidable
and that Lutha doubtless will be drawn into it, my informant warns me
that Leopold had sent emissaries to America to search for you, Barney,
and myself. What his purpose may be my friend does not know, but he
warns us to be upon our guard. Von der Tann wants me to return to
Lutha. He has promised to protect me, and with the country in danger
there is nothing else for me to do. I must go.”

“I wish I could go with you,” said Barney. “If it wasn’t for this
dinged old mill I would; but Bert wants to go away this summer, and as
I have been away most of the time for the past two years, it’s up to me
to stay.”

As the three men talked the afternoon wore on. Heavy clouds gathered in
the sky; a storm was brewing. Outside, a man, skulking behind a box car
on the siding, watched the entrance through which the three had gone.
He watched the workmen, and as quitting time came and he saw them
leaving for their homes he moved more restlessly, transferring the
package which he held from one hand to another many times, yet always
gingerly.

At last all had left. The man started from behind the box car, only to
jump back as the watchman appeared around the end of one of the
buildings. He watched the guardian of the property make his rounds; he
saw him enter his office, and then he crept forward toward the
building, holding his queer package in his right hand.

In the office the watchman came upon the three friends. At sight of him
they looked at one another in surprise.

“Why, what time is it?” exclaimed Custer, and as he looked at his watch
he rose with a laugh. “Late to dinner again,” he cried. “Come on, we’ll
go out this other way.” And with a cheery good night to the watchman
Barney and his friends hastened from the building.

Upon the opposite side the stranger approached the doorway to the mill.
The rain was falling in blinding sheets. Ominously the thunder roared.
Vivid flashes of lightning shot the heavens. The watchman, coming
suddenly from the doorway, his hat brim pulled low over his eyes,
passed within a couple of paces of the stranger without seeing him.

Five minutes later there was a blinding glare accompanied by a
deafening roar. It was as though nature had marshaled all her forces in
one mighty, devastating effort. At the same instant the walls of the
great mill burst asunder, a nebulous mass of burning gas shot
heavenward, and then the flames settled down to complete the
destruction of the ruin.

It was the following morning that Victoria and Barney Custer, with
Lieutenant Butzow and Custer’s partner, stood contemplating the
smoldering wreckage.

“And to think,” said Barney, “that yesterday this muss was the largest
corn mill west of anywhere. I guess we can both take vacations now,
Bert.”

“Who would have thought that a single bolt of lightning could have
resulted in such havoc?” mused Victoria.

“Who would?” agreed Lieutenant Butzow, and then, with a sudden
narrowing of his eyes and a quick glance at Barney, “if it WAS
lightning.”

The American looked at the Luthanian. “You think—” he started.

“I don’t dare think,” replied Butzow, “because of the fear of what this
may mean to you and Miss Victoria if it was not lightning that
destroyed the mill. I shouldn’t have spoken of it but that it may urge
you to greater caution, which I cannot but think is most necessary
since the warning I received from Lutha.”

“Why should Leopold seek to harm me now?” asked Barney. “It has been
almost two years since you and I placed him upon his throne, only to be
rewarded with threats and hatred. In that time neither of us has
returned to Lutha nor in any way conspired against the king. I cannot
fathom his motives.”

“There is the Princess Emma von der Tann,” Butzow reminded him. “She
still repulses him. He may think that, with you removed definitely and
permanently, all will then be plain sailing for him in that direction.
Evidently he does not know the princess.”

An hour later they were all bidding Butzow good-bye at the station.
Victoria Custer was genuinely grieved to see him go, for she liked this
soldierly young officer of the Royal Horse Guards immensely.

“You must come back to America soon,” she urged.

He looked down at her from the steps of the moving train. There was
something in his expression that she had never seen there before.

“I want to come back soon,” he answered, “to—to Beatrice,” and he
flushed and smiled at his own stumbling tongue.

For about a week Barney Custer moped disconsolately, principally about
the ruins of the corn mill. He was in everyone’s way and accomplished
nothing.

“I was never intended for a captain of industry,” he confided to his
partner for the hundredth time. “I wish some excuse would pop up to
which I might hang a reason for beating it to Europe. There’s something
doing there. Nearly everybody has declared war upon everybody else, and
here I am stagnating in peace. I’d even welcome a tornado.”

His excuse was to come sooner than he imagined. That night, after the
other members of his family had retired, Barney sat smoking within a
screened porch off the living-room. His thoughts were upon a trim
little figure in riding togs, as he had first seen it nearly two years
before, clinging desperately to a runaway horse upon the narrow
mountain road above Tafelberg.

He lived that thrilling experience through again as he had many times
before. He even smiled as he recalled the series of events that had
resulted from his resemblance to the mad king of Lutha.

They had come to a culmination at the time when the king, whom Barney
had placed upon a throne at the risk of his own life, discovered that
his savior loved the girl to whom the king had been betrothed since
childhood and that the girl returned the American’s love even after she
knew that he had but played the part of a king.

Barney’s cigar, forgotten, had long since died out. Not even its former
fitful glow proclaimed his presence upon the porch, whose black shadows
completely enveloped him. Before him stretched a wide acreage of lawn,
tree dotted at the side of the house. Bushes hid the stone wall that
marked the boundary of the Custer grounds and extended here and there
out upon the sward among the trees. The night was moonless but clear. A
faint light pervaded the scene.

Barney sat staring straight ahead, but his gaze did not stop upon the
familiar objects of the foreground. Instead it spanned two continents
and an ocean to rest upon the little spot of woodland and rugged
mountain and lowland that is Lutha. It was with an effort that the man
suddenly focused his attention upon that which lay directly before him.
A shadow among the trees had moved!

Barney Custer sat perfectly still, but now he was suddenly alert and
watchful. Again the shadow moved where no shadow should be moving. It
crossed from the shade of one tree to another. Barney came cautiously
to his feet. Silently he entered the house, running quickly to a side
door that opened upon the grounds. As he drew it back its hinges gave
forth no sound. Barney looked toward the spot where he had seen the
shadow. Again he saw it scuttle hurriedly beneath another tree nearer
the house. This time there was no doubt. It was a man!

Directly before the door where Barney stood was a pergola, ivy-covered.
Behind this he slid, and, running its length, came out among the trees
behind the night prowler. Now he saw him distinctly. The fellow was
bearded, and in his right hand he carried a package. Instantly Barney
recalled Butzow’s comment upon the destruction of the mill—“if it WAS
lightning!”

Cold sweat broke from every pore of his body. His mother and father
were there in the house, and Vic—all sleeping peacefully. He ran
quickly toward the menacing figure, and as he did so he saw the other
halt behind a great tree and strike a match. In the glow of the flame
he saw it touch close to the package that the fellow held, and then he
was upon him.

There was a brief and terrific struggle. The stranger hurled the
package toward the house. Barney caught him by the throat, beating him
heavily in the face; and then, realizing what the package was, he
hurled the fellow from him, and sprang toward the hissing and
sputtering missile where it lay close to the foundation wall of the
house, though in the instant of his close contact with the man he had
recognized through the disguising beard the features of Captain Ernst
Maenck, the principal tool of Peter of Blentz.

Quick though Barney was to reach the bomb and extinguish the fuse,
Maenck had disappeared before he returned to search for him; and,
though he roused the gardener and chauffeur and took turns with them in
standing guard the balance of the night, the would-be assassin did not
return.

There was no question in Barney Custer’s mind as to whom the bomb was
intended for. That Maenck had hurled it toward the house after Barney
had seized him was merely the result of accident and the man’s desire
to get the death-dealing missile as far from himself as possible before
it exploded. That it would have wrecked the house in the hope of
reaching him, had he not fortunately interfered, was too evident to the
American to be questioned.

And so he decided before the night was spent to put himself as far from
his family as possible, lest some future attempt upon his life might
endanger theirs. Then, too, righteous anger and a desire for revenge
prompted his decision. He would run Maenck to earth and have an
accounting with him. It was evident that his life would not be worth a
farthing so long as the fellow was at liberty.

Before dawn he swore the gardener and chauffeur to silence, and at
breakfast announced his intention of leaving that day for New York to
seek a commission as correspondent with an old classmate, who owned the
New York Evening National. At the hotel Barney inquired of the
proprietor relative to a bearded stranger, but the man had had no one
of that description registered. Chance, however, gave him a clue. His
roadster was in a repair shop, and as he stopped in to get it he
overheard a conversation that told him all he wanted to know. As he
stood talking with the foreman a dust-covered automobile pulled into
the garage.

“Hello, Bill,” called the foreman to the driver. “Where you been so
early?”

“Took a guy to Lincoln,” replied the other. “He was in an awful hurry.
I bet we broke all the records for that stretch of road this morning—I
never knew the old boat had it in her.”

“Who was it?” asked Barney.

“I dunno,” replied the driver. “Talked like a furriner, and looked the
part. Bushy black beard. Said he was a German army officer, an’ had to
beat it back on account of the war. Seemed to me like he was mighty
anxious to get back there an’ be killed.”

Barney waited to hear no more. He did not even go home to say good-bye
to his family. Instead he leaped into his gray roadster—a later model
of the one he had lost in Lutha—and the last that Beatrice, Nebraska,
saw of him was a whirling cloud of dust as he raced north out of town
toward Lincoln.

He was five minutes too late into the capital city to catch the
eastbound limited that Maenck must have taken; but he caught the next
through train for Chicago, and the second day thereafter found him in
New York. There he had little difficulty in obtaining the desired
credentials from his newspaper friend, especially since Barney offered
to pay all his own expenses and donate to the paper anything he found
time to write.

Passenger steamers were still sailing, though irregularly, and after
scanning the passenger-lists of three he found the name he sought.
“Captain Ernst Maenck, Lutha.” So he had not been mistaken, after all.
It was Maenck he had apprehended on his father’s grounds. Evidently the
man had little fear of being followed, for he had made no effort to
hide his identity in booking passage for Europe.

The steamer he had caught had sailed that very morning. Barney was not
so sorry, after all, for he had had time during his trip from Beatrice
to do considerable thinking, and had found it rather difficult to
determine just what to do should he have overtaken Maenck in the United
States. He couldn’t kill the man in cold blood, justly as he may have
deserved the fate, and the thought of causing his arrest and dragging
his own name into the publicity of court proceedings was little less
distasteful to him.

Furthermore, the pursuit of Maenck now gave Barney a legitimate excuse
for returning to Lutha, or at least to the close neighborhood of the
little kingdom, where he might await the outcome of events and be ready
to give his services in the cause of the house of Von der Tann should
they be required.

By going directly to Italy and entering Austria from that country
Barney managed to arrive within the boundaries of the dual monarchy
with comparatively few delays. Nor did he encounter any considerable
bodies of troops until he reached the little town of Burgova, which
lies not far from the Serbian frontier. Beyond this point his
credentials would not carry him. The emperor’s officers were polite,
but firm. No newspaper correspondents could be permitted nearer the
front than Burgova.

There was nothing to be done, therefore, but wait until some propitious
event gave him the opportunity to approach more closely the Serbian
boundary and Lutha. In the meantime he would communicate with Butzow,
who might be able to obtain passes for him to some village nearer the
Luthanian frontier, when it should be an easy matter to cross through
to Serbia. He was sure the Serbian authorities would object less
strenuously to his presence.

The inn at which he applied for accommodations was already overrun by
officers, but the proprietor, with scant apologies for a civilian,
offered him a little box of a room in the attic. The place was scarce
more than a closet, and for that Barney was in a way thankful since the
limited space could accommodate but a single cot, thus insuring him the
privacy that a larger chamber would have precluded.

He was very tired after his long and comfortless land journey, so after
an early dinner he went immediately to his room and to bed. How long he
slept he did not know, but some time during the night he was awakened
by the sound of voices apparently close to his ear.

For a moment he thought the speakers must be in his own room, so
distinctly did he overhear each word of their conversation; but
presently he discovered that they were upon the opposite side of a thin
partition in an adjoining room. But half awake, and with the sole idea
of getting back to sleep again as quickly as possible, Barney paid only
the slightest attention to the meaning of the words that fell upon his
ears, until, like a bomb, a sentence broke through his sleepy
faculties, banishing Morpheus upon the instant.

“It will take but little now to turn Leopold against Von der Tann.” The
speaker evidently was an Austrian. “Already I have half convinced him
that the old man aspires to the throne. Leopold fears the loyalty of
his army, which is for Von der Tann body and soul. He knows that Von
der Tann is strongly anti-Austrian, and I have made it plain to him
that if he allows his kingdom to take sides with Serbia he will have no
kingdom when the war is over—it will be a part of Austria.

“It was with greater difficulty, however, my dear Peter, that I
convinced him that you, Von Coblich, and Captain Maenck were his most
loyal friends. He fears you yet, but, nevertheless, he has pardoned you
all. Do not forget when you return to your dear Lutha that you owe your
repatriation to Count Zellerndorf of Austria.”

“You may be assured that we shall never forget,” replied another voice
that Barney recognized at once as belonging to Prince Peter of Blentz,
the one time regent of Lutha.

“It is not for myself,” continued Count Zellerndorf, “that I crave your
gratitude, but for my emperor. You may do much to win his undying
gratitude, while for yourselves you may win to almost any height with
the friendship of Austria behind you. I am sure that should any
accident, which God forfend, deprive Lutha of her king, none would make
a more welcome successor in the eyes of Austria than our good friend
Peter.”

Barney could almost see the smile of satisfaction upon the thin lips of
Peter of Blentz as this broad hint fell from the lips of the Austrian
diplomat—a hint that seemed to the American little short of the death
sentence of Leopold, King of Lutha.

“We owed you much before, count,” said Peter. “But for you we should
have been hanged a year ago—without your aid we should never have been
able to escape from the fortress of Lustadt or cross the border into
Austria-Hungary. I am sorry that Maenck failed in his mission, for had
he not we would have had concrete evidence to present to the king that
we are indeed his loyal supporters. It would have dispelled at once
such fears and doubts as he may still entertain of our fealty.”

“Yes, I, too, am sorry,” agreed Zellerndorf. “I can assure you that the
news we hoped Captain Maenck would bring from America would have gone a
long way toward restoring you to the confidence and good graces of the
king.”

“I did my best,” came another voice that caused Barney’s eyes to go
wide in astonishment, for it was none other than the voice of Maenck
himself. “Twice I risked hanging to get him and only came away after I
had been recognized.”

“It is too bad,” sighed Zellerndorf; “though it may not be without its
advantages after all, for now we still have this second bugbear to
frighten Leopold with. So long, of course, as the American lives there
is always the chance that he may return and seek to gain the throne.
The fact that his mother was a Rubinroth princess might make it easy
for Von der Tann to place him upon the throne without much opposition,
and if he married the old man’s daughter it is easy to conceive that
the prince might favor such a move. At any rate, it should not be
difficult to persuade Leopold of the possibility of such a thing.

“Under the circumstances Leopold is almost convinced that his only hope
of salvation lies in cementing friendly relations with the most
powerful of Von der Tann’s enemies, of which you three gentlemen stand
preeminently in the foreground, and of assuring to himself the support
of Austria. And now, gentlemen,” he went on after a pause, “good night.
I have handed Prince Peter the necessary military passes to carry you
safely through our lines, and tomorrow you may be in Blentz if you
wish.”




II.
CONDEMNED TO DEATH


For some time Barney Custer lay there in the dark revolving in his mind
all that he had overheard through the partition—the thin partition
which alone lay between himself and three men who would be only too
glad to embrace the first opportunity to destroy him. But his fears
were not for himself so much as for the daughter of old Von der Tann,
and for all that might befall that princely house were these three
unhung rascals to gain Lutha and have their way with the weak and
cowardly king who reigned there.

If he could but reach Von der Tann’s ear and through him the king
before the conspirators came to Lutha! But how might he accomplish it?
Count Zellerndorf’s parting words to the three had shown that military
passes were necessary to enable one to reach Lutha.

His papers were practically worthless even inside the lines. That they
would carry him through the lines he had not the slightest hope. There
were two things to be accomplished if possible. One was to cross the
frontier into Lutha; and the other, which of course was quite out of
the question, was to prevent Peter of Blentz, Von Coblich, and Maenck
from doing so. But was that altogether impossible?

The idea that followed that question came so suddenly that it brought
Barney Custer out onto the floor in a bound, to don his clothes and
sneak into the hall outside his room with the stealth of a professional
second-story man.

To the right of his own door was the door to the apartment in which the
three conspirators slept. At least, Barney hoped they slept. He bent
close to the keyhole and listened. From within came no sound other than
the regular breathing of the inmates. It had been at least half an hour
since the American had heard the conversation cease. A glance through
the keyhole showed no light within the room. Stealthily Barney turned
the knob. Had they bolted the door? He felt the tumbler move to the
pressure—soundlessly. Then he pushed gently inward. The door swung.

A moment later he stood in the room. Dimly he could see two beds—a
large one and a smaller. Peter of Blentz would be alone upon the
smaller bed, his henchmen sleeping together in the larger. Barney crept
toward the lone sleeper. At the bedside he fumbled in the dark groping
for the man’s clothing—for the coat, in the breastpocket of which he
hoped to find the military pass that might carry him safely out of
Austria-Hungary and into Lutha. On the foot of the bed he found some
garments. Gingerly he felt them over, seeking the coat.

At last he found it. His fingers, steady even under the nervous tension
of this unaccustomed labor, discovered the inner pocket and the folded
paper. There were several of them; Barney took them all.

So far he made no noise. None of the sleepers had stirred. Now he took
a step toward the doorway and—kicked a shoe that lay in his path. The
slight noise in that quiet room sounded to Barney’s ears like the fall
of a brick wall. Peter of Blentz stirred, turning in his sleep. Behind
him Barney heard one of the men in the other bed move. He turned his
head in that direction. Either Maenck or Coblich was sitting up peering
through the darkness.

“Is that you, Prince Peter?” The voice was Maenck’s.

“What’s the matter?” persisted Maenck.

“I’m going for a drink of water,” replied the American, and stepped
toward the door.

Behind him Peter of Blentz sat up in bed.

“That you, Maenck?” he called.

Instantly Maenck was out of bed, for the first voice had come from the
vicinity of the doorway; both could not be Peter’s.

“Quick!” he cried; “there’s someone in our room.”

Barney leaped for the doorway, and upon his heels came the three
conspirators. Maenck was closest to him—so close that Barney was forced
to turn at the top of the stairs. In the darkness he was just conscious
of the form of the man who was almost upon him. Then he swung a vicious
blow for the other’s face—a blow that landed, for there was a cry of
pain and anger as Maenck stumbled back into the arms of the two behind
him. From below came the sound of footsteps hurrying up the stairs to
the accompaniment of a clanking saber. Barney’s retreat was cut off.

Turning, he dodged into his own room before the enemy could locate him
or even extricate themselves from the confusion of Maenck’s sudden
collision with the other two. But what could Barney gain by the slight
delay that would be immediately followed by his apprehension?

He didn’t know. All that he was sure of was that there had been no
other place to go than this little room. As he entered the first thing
that his eyes fell upon was the small square window. Here at least was
some slight encouragement.

He ran toward it. The lower sash was raised. As the door behind him
opened to admit Peter of Blentz and his companions, Barney slipped
through into the night, hanging by his hands from the sill without.
What lay beneath or how far the drop he could not guess, but that
certain death menaced him from above he knew from the conversation he
had overheard earlier in the evening.

For an instant he hung suspended. He heard the men groping about the
room. Evidently they were in some fear of the unknown assailant they
sought, for they did not move about with undue rashness. Presently one
of them struck a light—Barney could see its flare lighten the window
casing for an instant.

“The room is empty,” came a voice from above him.

“Look to the window!” cried Peter of Blentz, and then Barney Custer let
go his hold upon the sill and dropped into the blackness below.

His fall was a short one, for the window had been directly over a low
shed at the side of the inn. Upon the roof of this the American landed,
and from there he dropped to the courtyard without mishap. Glancing up,
he saw the heads of three men peering from the window of the room he
had just quitted.

“There he is!” cried one, and instantly the three turned back into the
room. As Barney fled from the courtyard he heard the rattle of hasty
footsteps upon the rickety stairway of the inn.

Choosing an alley rather than a street in which he might run upon
soldiers at any moment, he moved quickly yet cautiously away from the
inn. Behind him he could hear the voices of many men. They were raised
to a high pitch by excitement. It was clear to Barney that there were
many more than the original three—Prince Peter had, in all probability,
enlisted the aid of the military.

Could he but reach the frontier with his stolen passes he would be
comparatively safe, for the rugged mountains of Lutha offered many
places of concealment, and, too, there were few Luthanians who did not
hate Peter of Blentz most cordially—among the men of the mountains at
least. Once there he could defy a dozen Blentz princes for the little
time that would be required to carry him into Serbia and comparative
safety.

As he approached a cross street a couple of squares from the inn he
found it necessary to pass beneath a street lamp. For a moment he
paused in the shadows of the alley listening. Hearing nothing moving in
the street, Barney was about to make a swift spring for the shadows
upon the opposite side when it occurred to him that it might be safer
to make assurance doubly sure by having a look up and down the street
before emerging into the light.

It was just as well that he did, for as he thrust his head around the
corner of the building the first thing that his eyes fell upon was the
figure of an Austrian sentry, scarcely three paces from him. The
soldier was standing in a listening attitude, his head half turned away
from the American. The sounds coming from the direction of the inn were
apparently what had attracted his attention.

Behind him, Barney was sure he heard evidences of pursuit. Before him
was certain detection should he attempt to cross the street. On either
hand rose the walls of buildings. That he was trapped there seemed
little doubt.

He continued to stand motionless, watching the Austrian soldier. Should
the fellow turn toward him, he had but to withdraw his head within the
shadow of the building that hid his body. Possibly the man might turn
and take his beat in the opposite direction. In which case Barney was
sure he could dodge across the street, undetected.

Already the vague threat of pursuit from the direction of the inn had
developed into a certainty—he could hear men moving toward him through
the alley from the rear. Would the sentry never move! Evidently not,
until he heard the others coming through the alley. Then he would turn,
and the devil would be to pay for the American.

Barney was about hopeless. He had been in the war zone long enough to
know that it might prove a very disagreeable matter to be caught
sneaking through back alleys at night. There was a single chance—a sort
of forlorn hope—and that was to risk fate and make a dash beneath the
sentry’s nose for the opposite alley mouth.

“Well, here goes,” thought Barney. He had heard that many of the
Austrians were excellent shots. Visions of Beatrice, Nebraska, swarmed
his memory. They were pleasant visions, made doubly alluring by the
thought that the realities of them might never again be for him.

He turned once more toward the sounds of pursuit—the men upon his track
could not be over a square away—there was not an instant to be lost.
And then from above him, upon the opposite side of the alley, came a
low: “S-s-t!”

Barney looked up. Very dimly he could see the dark outline of a window
some dozen feet from the pavement, and framed within it the lighter
blotch that might have been a human face. Again came the challenging:
“S-s-t!” Yes, there was someone above, signaling to him.

“S-s-t!” replied Barney. He knew that he had been discovered, and could
think of no better plan for throwing the discoverer off his guard than
to reply.

Then a soft voice floated down to him—a woman’s voice!

“Is that you?” The tongue was Serbian. Barney could understand it,
though he spoke it but indifferently.

“Yes,” he replied truthfully.

“Thank Heaven!” came the voice from above. “I have been watching you,
and thought you one of the Austrian pigs. Quick! They are coming—I can
hear them;” and at the same instant Barney saw something drop from the
window to the ground. He crossed the alley quickly, and could have
shouted in relief for what he found there—the end of a knotted rope
dangling from above.

His pursuers were almost upon him when he seized the rude ladder to
clamber upward. At the window’s ledge a firm, young hand reached out
and, seizing his own, almost dragged him through the window. He turned
to look back into the alley. He had been just in time; the Austrian
sentry, alarmed by the sound of approaching footsteps down the alley,
had stepped into view. He stood there now with leveled rifle, a
challenge upon his lips. From the advancing party came a satisfactory
reply.

At the same instant the girl beside him in the Stygian blackness of the
room threw her arms about Barney’s neck and drew his face down to hers.

“Oh, Stefan,” she whispered, “what a narrow escape! It makes me tremble
to think of it. They would have shot you, my Stefan!”

The American put an arm about the girl’s shoulders, and raised one hand
to her cheek—it might have been in caress, but it wasn’t. It was to
smother the cry of alarm he anticipated would follow the discovery that
he was not “Stefan.” He bent his lips close to her ear.

“Do not make an outcry,” he whispered in very poor Serbian. “I am not
Stefan; but I am a friend.”

The exclamation of surprise or fright that he had expected was not
forthcoming. The girl lowered her arms from about his neck.

“Who are you?” she asked in a low whisper.

“I am an American war correspondent,” replied Barney, “but if the
Austrians get hold of me now it will be mighty difficult to convince
them that I am not a spy.” And then a sudden determination came to him
to trust his fate to this unknown girl, whose face, even, he had never
seen. “I am entirely at your mercy,” he said. “There are Austrian
soldiers in the street below. You have but to call to them to send me
before the firing squad—or, you can let me remain here until I can find
an opportunity to get away in safety. I am trying to reach Serbia.”

“Why do you wish to reach Serbia?” asked the girl suspiciously.

“I have discovered too many enemies in Austria tonight to make it safe
for me to remain,” he replied, “and, further, my original intention was
to report the war from the Serbian side.”

The girl hesitated for a while, evidently in thought.

“They are moving on,” suggested Barney. “If you are going to give me up
you’d better do it at once.”

“I’m not going to give you up,” replied the girl. “I’m going to keep
you prisoner until Stefan returns—he will know best what to do with
you. Now you must come with me and be locked up. Do not try to escape—I
have a revolver in my hand,” and to give her prisoner physical proof of
the weapon he could not see she thrust the muzzle against his side.

“I’ll take your word for the gun,” said Barney, “if you’ll just turn it
in the other direction. Go ahead—I’ll follow you.”

“No, you won’t,” replied the girl. “You’ll go first; but before that
you’ll raise your hands above your head. I want to search you.”

Barney did as he was bid and a moment later felt deft fingers running
over his clothing in search of concealed weapons. Satisfied at last
that he was unarmed, the girl directed him to precede her, guiding his
steps from behind with a hand upon his arm. Occasionally he felt the
muzzle of her revolver touch his body. It was a most unpleasant
sensation.

They crossed the room to a door which his captor directed him to open,
and after they had passed through and she had closed it behind them the
girl struck a match and lit a candle which stood upon a little bracket
on the partition wall. The dim light of the tallow dip showed Barney
that he was in a narrow hall from which several doors opened into
different rooms. At one end of the hall a stairway led to the floor
below, while at the opposite end another flight disappeared into the
darkness above.

“This way,” said the girl, motioning toward the stairs that led upward.

Barney had turned toward her as she struck the match, obtaining an
excellent view of her features. They were clear-cut and regular. Her
eyes were large and very dark. Dark also was her hair, which was piled
in great heaps upon her finely shaped head. Altogether the face was one
not easily to be forgotten. Barney could scarce have told whether the
girl was beautiful or not, but that she was striking there could be no
doubt.

He preceded her up the stairway to a door at the top. At her direction
he turned the knob and entered a small room in which was a cot, an
ancient dresser and a single chair.

“You will remain here,” she said, “until Stefan returns. Stefan will
know what to do with you.” Then she left him, taking the light with
her, and Barney heard a key turn in the lock of the door after she had
closed it. Presently her footfalls died out as she descended to the
lower floors.

“Anyhow,” thought the American, “this is better than the Austrians. I
don’t know what Stefan will do with me, but I have a rather vivid idea
of what the Austrians would have done to me if they’d caught me
sneaking through the alleys of Burgova at midnight.”

Throwing himself on the cot Barney was soon asleep, for though his
predicament was one that, under ordinary circumstances might have made
sleep impossible, yet he had so long been without the boon of slumber
that tired nature would no longer be denied.

When he awoke it was broad daylight. The sun was pouring in through a
skylight in the ceiling of his tiny chamber. Aside from this there were
no windows in the room. The sound of voices came to him with an uncanny
distinctness that made it seem that the speakers must be in this very
chamber, but a glance about the blank walls convinced him that he was
alone.

Presently he espied a small opening in the wall at the head of his cot.
He rose and examined it. The voices appeared to be coming from it. In
fact, they were. The opening was at the top of a narrow shaft that
seemed to lead to the basement of the structure—apparently once the
shaft of a dumb-waiter or a chute for refuse or soiled clothes.

Barney put his ear close to it. The voices that came from below were
those of a man and a woman. He heard every word distinctly.

“We must search the house, fraulein,” came in the deep voice of a man.

“Whom do you seek?” inquired a woman’s voice. Barney recognized it as
the voice of his captor.

“A Serbian spy, Stefan Drontoff,” replied the man. “Do you know him?”

There was a considerable pause on the girl’s part before she answered,
and then her reply was in such a low voice that Barney could barely
hear it.

“I do not know him,” she said. “There are several men who lodge here.
What may this Stefan Drontoff look like?”

“I have never seen him,” replied the officer; “but by arresting all the
men in the house we must get this Stefan also, if he is here.”

“Oh!” cried the girl, a new note in her voice, “I guess I know now whom
you mean. There is one man here I have heard them call Stefan, though
for the moment I had forgotten it. He is in the small attic-room at the
head of the stairs. Here is a key that will fit the lock. Yes, I am
sure that he is Stefan. You will find him there, and it should be easy
to take him, for I know that he is unarmed. He told me so last night
when he came in.”

“The devil!” muttered Barney Custer; but whether he referred to his
predicament or to the girl it would be impossible to tell. Already the
sound of heavy boots on the stairs announced the coming of men—several
of them. Barney heard the rattle of accouterments—the clank of a
scabbard—the scraping of gun butts against the walls. The Austrians
were coming!

He looked about. There was no way of escape except the door and the
skylight, and the door was impossible.

Quickly he tilted the cot against the door, wedging its legs against a
crack in the floor—that would stop them for a minute or two. Then he
wheeled the dresser beneath the skylight and, placing the chair on top
of it, scrambled to the seat of the latter. His head was at the height
of the skylight. To force the skylight from its frame required but a
moment. A key entered the lock of the door from the opposite side and
turned. He knew that someone without was pushing. Then he heard an oath
and heavy battering upon the panels. A moment later he had drawn
himself through the skylight and stood upon the roof of the building.
Before him stretched a series of uneven roofs to the end of the street.
Barney did not hesitate. He started on a rapid trot toward the
adjoining roof. From that he clambered to a higher one beyond.

On he went, now leaping narrow courts, now dropping to low sheds and
again clambering to the heights of the higher buildings, until he had
come almost to the end of the row. Suddenly, behind him he heard a
hoarse shout, followed by the report of a rifle. With a whir, a bullet
flew a few inches above his head. He had gained the last roof—a large,
level roof—and at the shot he turned to see how near to him were his
pursuers.

Fatal turn!

Scarce had he taken his eyes from the path ahead than his foot fell
upon a glass skylight, and with a loud crash he plunged through amid a
shower of broken glass.

His fall was a short one. Directly beneath the skylight was a bed, and
on the bed a fat Austrian infantry captain. Barney lit upon the pit of
the captain’s stomach. With a howl of pain the officer catapulted
Barney to the floor. There were three other beds in the room, and in
each bed one or two other officers. Before the American could regain
his feet they were all sitting on him—all except the infantry captain.
He lay shrieking and cursing in a painful attempt to regain his breath,
every atom of which Barney had knocked out of him.

The officers sitting on Barney alternately beat him and questioned him,
interspersing their interrogations with lurid profanity.

“If you will get off of me,” at last shouted the American, “I shall be
glad to explain—and apologize.”

They let him up, scowling ferociously. He had promised to explain, but
now that he was confronted by the immediate necessity of an explanation
that would prove at all satisfactory as to how he happened to be
wandering around the rooftops of Burgova, he discovered that his powers
of invention were entirely inadequate. The need for explaining,
however, was suddenly removed. A shadow fell upon them from above, and
as they glanced up Barney saw the figure of an officer surrounded by
several soldiers looking down upon him.

“Ah, you have him!” cried the newcomer in evident satisfaction. “It is
well. Hold him until we descend.”

A moment later he and his escort had dropped through the broken
skylight to the floor beside them.

“Who is the mad man?” cried the captain who had broken Barney’s fall.
“The assassin! He tried to murder me.”

“I cannot doubt it,” replied the officer who had just descended, “for
the fellow is no other than Stefan Drontoff, the famous Serbian spy!”

“Himmel!” ejaculated the officers in chorus. “You have done a good
day’s work, lieutenant.”

“The firing squad will do a better work in a few minutes,” replied the
lieutenant, with a grim pointedness that took Barney’s breath away.




III.
BEFORE THE FIRING SQUAD


They marched Barney before the staff where he urged his American
nationality, pointing to his credentials and passes in support of his
contention.

The general before whom he had been brought shrugged his shoulders.
“They are all Americans as soon as they are caught,” he said; “but why
did you not claim to be Prince Peter of Blentz? You have his passes as
well. How can you expect us to believe your story when you have in your
possession passes for different men?

“We have every respect for our friends the Americans. I would even
stretch a point rather than chance harming an American; but you will
admit that the evidence is all against you. You were found in the very
building where Drontoff was known to stay while in Burgova. The young
woman whose mother keeps the place directed our officer to your room,
and you tried to escape, which I do not think that an innocent American
would have done.

“However, as I have said, I will go to almost any length rather than
chance a mistake in the case of one who from his appearance might pass
more readily for an American than a Serbian. I have sent for Prince
Peter of Blentz. If you can satisfactorily explain to him how you
chance to be in possession of military passes bearing his name I shall
be very glad to give you the benefit of every other doubt.”

Peter of Blentz. Send for Peter of Blentz! Barney wondered just what
kind of a sensation it was to stand facing a firing squad. He hoped
that his knees wouldn’t tremble—they felt a trifle weak even now. There
was a chance that the man might not recall his face, but a very slight
chance. It had been his remarkable likeness to Leopold of Lutha that
had resulted in the snatching of a crown from Prince Peter’s head.

Likely indeed that he would ever forget his, Barney’s, face, though he
had seen it but once without the red beard that had so added to
Barney’s likeness to the king. But Maenck would be along, of course,
and Maenck would have no doubts—he had seen Barney too recently in
Beatrice to fail to recognize him now.

Several men were entering the room where Barney stood before the
general and his staff. A glance revealed to the prisoner that Peter of
Blentz had come, and with him Von Coblich and Maenck. At the same
instant Peter’s eyes met Barney’s, and the former, white and wide-eyed
came almost to a dead halt, grasping hurriedly at the arm of Maenck who
walked beside him.

“My God!” was all that Barney heard him say, but he spoke a name that
the American did not hear. Maenck also looked his surprise, but his
expression was suddenly changed to one of malevolent cunning and
gratification. He turned toward Prince Peter with a few low-whispered
words. A look of relief crossed the face of the Blentz prince.

“You appear to know the gentleman,” said the general who had been
conducting Barney’s examination. “He has been arrested as a Serbian
spy, and military passes in your name were found upon his person
together with the papers of an American newspaper correspondent, which
he claims to be. He is charged with being Stefan Drontoff, whom we long
have been anxious to apprehend. Do you chance to know anything about
him, Prince Peter?”

“Yes,” replied Peter of Blentz, “I know him well by sight. He entered
my room last night and stole the military passes from my coat—we all
saw him and pursued him, but he got away in the dark. There can be no
doubt but that he is the Serbian spy.”

“He insists that he is Bernard Custer, an American,” urged the general,
who, it seemed to Barney, was anxious to make no mistake, and to give
the prisoner every reasonable chance—a state of mind that rather
surprised him in a European military chieftain, all of whom appeared to
share the popular obsession regarding the prevalence of spies.

“Pardon me, general,” interrupted Maenck. “I am well acquainted with
Mr. Custer, who spent some time in Lutha a couple of years ago. This
man is not he.”

“That is sufficient, gentlemen, I thank you,” said the general. He did
not again look at the prisoner, but turned to a lieutenant who stood
near-by. “You may remove the prisoner,” he directed. “He will be
destroyed with the others—here is the order,” and he handed the
subaltern a printed form upon which many names were filled in and at
the bottom of which the general had just signed his own. It had
evidently been waiting the outcome of the examination of Stefan
Drontoff.

Surrounded by soldiers, Barney Custer walked from the presence of the
military court. It was to him as though he moved in a strange world of
dreams. He saw the look of satisfaction upon the face of Peter of
Blentz as he passed him, and the open sneer of Maenck. As yet he did
not fully realize what it all meant—that he was marching to his death!
For the last time he was looking upon the faces of his fellow men; for
the last time he had seen the sun rise, never again to see it set.

He was to be “destroyed.” He had heard that expression used many times
in connection with useless horses, or vicious dogs. Mechanically he
drew a cigarette from his pocket and lighted it. There was no bravado
in the act. On the contrary it was done almost unconsciously. The
soldiers marched him through the streets of Burgova. The men were
entirely impassive—even so early in the war they had become accustomed
to this grim duty. The young officer who commanded them was more
nervous than the prisoner—it was his first detail with a firing squad.
He looked wonderingly at Barney, expecting momentarily to see the man
collapse, or at least show some sign of terror at his close impending
fate; but the American walked silently toward his death, puffing
leisurely at his cigarette.

At last, after what seemed a long time, his guard turned in at a large
gateway in a brick wall surrounding a factory. As they entered Barney
saw twenty or thirty men in civilian dress, guarded by a dozen
infantrymen. They were standing before the wall of a low brick
building. Barney noticed that there were no windows in the wall. It
suddenly occurred to him that there was something peculiarly grim and
sinister in the appearance of the dead, blank surface of
weather-stained brick. For the first time since he had faced the
military court he awakened to a full realization of what it all meant
to him—he was going to be lined up against that ominous brick wall with
these other men—they were going to shoot them.

A momentary madness seized him. He looked about upon the other
prisoners and guards. A sudden break for liberty might give him
temporary respite. He could seize a rifle from the nearest soldier, and
at least have the satisfaction of selling his life dearly. As he looked
he saw more soldiers entering the factory yard.

A sudden apathy overwhelmed him. What was the use? He could not escape.
Why should he wish to kill these soldiers? It was not they who were
responsible for his plight—they were but obeying orders. The close
presence of death made life seem very desirable. These men, too,
desired life. Why should he take it from them uselessly? At best he
might kill one or two, but in the end he would be killed as surely as
though he took his place before the brick wall with the others.

He noticed now that these others evinced no inclination to contest
their fates. Why should he, then? Doubtless many of them were as
innocent as he, and all loved life as well. He saw that several were
weeping silently. Others stood with bowed heads gazing at the
hard-packed earth of the factory yard. Ah, what visions were their eyes
beholding for the last time! What memories of happy firesides! What
dear, loved faces were limned upon that sordid clay!

His reveries were interrupted by the hoarse voice of a sergeant,
breaking rudely in upon the silence and the dumb terror. The fellow was
herding the prisoners into position. When he was done Barney found
himself in the front rank of the little, hopeless band. Opposite them,
at a few paces, stood the firing squad, their gun butts resting upon
the ground.

The young lieutenant stood at one side. He issued some instructions in
a low tone, then he raised his voice.

“Ready!” he commanded. Fascinated by the horror of it, Barney watched
the rifles raised smartly to the soldiers’ hips—the movement was as
precise as though the men were upon parade. Every bolt clicked in
unison with its fellows.

“Aim!” the pieces leaped to the hollows of the men’s shoulders. The
leveled barrels were upon a line with the breasts of the condemned. A
man at Barney’s right moaned. Another sobbed.

“Fire!” There was the hideous roar of the volley. Barney Custer
crumpled forward to the ground, and three bodies fell upon his. A
moment later there was a second volley—all had not fallen at the first.
Then the soldiers came among the bodies, searching for signs of life;
but evidently the two volleys had done their work. The sergeant formed
his men in line. The lieutenant marched them away. Only silence
remained on guard above the pitiful dead in the factory yard.

The day wore on and still the stiffening corpses lay where they had
fallen. Twilight came and then darkness. A head appeared above the top
of the wall that had enclosed the grounds. Eyes peered through the
night and keen ears listened for any sign of life within. At last,
evidently satisfied that the place was deserted, a man crawled over the
summit of the wall and dropped to the ground within. Here again he
paused, peering and listening.

What strange business had he here among the dead that demanded such
caution in its pursuit? Presently he advanced toward the pile of
corpses. Quickly he tore open coats and searched pockets. He ran his
fingers along the fingers of the dead. Two rings had rewarded his
search and he was busy with a third that encircled the finger of a body
that lay beneath three others. It would not come off. He pulled and
tugged, and then he drew a knife from his pocket.

But he did not sever the digit. Instead he shrank back with a muffled
scream of terror. The corpse that he would have mutilated had staggered
suddenly to its feet, flinging the dead bodies to one side as it rose.

“You fiend!” broke from the lips of the dead man, and the ghoul turned
and fled, gibbering in his fright.

The tramp of soldiers in the street beyond ceased suddenly at the sound
from within the factory yard. It was a detail of the guard marching to
the relief of sentries. A moment later the gates swung open and a score
of soldiers entered. They saw a figure dodging toward the wall a dozen
paces from them, but they did not see the other that ran swiftly around
the corner of the factory.

This other was Barney Custer of Beatrice. When the command to fire had
been given to the squad of riflemen, a single bullet had creased the
top of his head, stunning him. All day he had lain there unconscious.
It had been the tugging of the ghoul at his ring that had roused him to
life at last.

Behind him, as he scurried around the end of the factory building, he
heard the scattering fire of half a dozen rifles, followed by a
scream—the fleeing hyena had been hit. Barney crouched in the shadow of
a pile of junk. He heard the voices of soldiers as they gathered about
the wounded man, questioning him, and a moment later the imperious
tones of an officer issuing instructions to his men to search the yard.
That he must be discovered seemed a certainty to the American. He
crouched further back in the shadows close to the wall, stepping with
the utmost caution.

Presently to his chagrin his foot touched the metal cover of a manhole;
there was a resultant rattling that smote upon Barney’s ears and nerves
with all the hideous clatter of a boiler shop. He halted, petrified,
for an instant. He was no coward, but after being so near death, life
had never looked more inviting, and he knew that to be discovered meant
certain extinction this time.

The soldiers were circling the building. Already he could hear them
nearing his position. In another moment they would round the corner of
the building and be upon him. For an instant he contemplated a bold
rush for the fence. In fact, he had gathered himself for the leaping
start and the quick sprint across the open under the noses of the
soldiers who still remained beside the dying ghoul, when his mind
suddenly reverted to the manhole beneath his feet. Here lay a hiding
place, at least until the soldiers had departed.

Barney stooped and raised the heavy lid, sliding it to one side. How
deep was the black chasm beneath he could not even guess. Doubtless it
led into a coal bunker, or it might open over a pit of great depth.
There was no way to discover other than to plumb the abyss with his
body. Above was death—below, a chance of safety.

The soldiers were quite close when Barney lowered himself through the
manhole. Clinging with his fingers to the upper edge his feet still
swung in space. How far beneath was the bottom? He heard the scraping
of the heavy shoes of the searchers close above him, and then he closed
his eyes, released the grasp of his fingers, and dropped.




IV.
A RACE TO LUTHA


Barney’s fall was not more than four or five feet. He found himself
upon a slippery floor of masonry over which two or three inches of
water ran sluggishly. Above him he heard the soldiers pass the open
manhole. It was evident that in the darkness they had missed it.

For a few minutes the fugitive remained motionless, then, hearing no
sounds from above he started to grope about his retreat. Upon two sides
were blank, circular walls, upon the other two circular openings about
four feet in diameter. It was through these openings that the tiny
stream of water trickled.

Barney came to the conclusion that he had dropped into a sewer. To get
out the way he had entered appeared impossible. He could not leap
upward from the slimy, concave bottom the distance he had dropped. To
follow the sewer upward would lead him nowhere nearer escape. There
remained no hope but to follow the trickling stream downward toward the
river, into which his judgment told him the entire sewer system of the
city must lead.

Stooping, he entered the ill-smelling circular conduit, groping his way
slowly along. As he went the water deepened. It was half way to his
knees when he plunged unexpectedly into another tube running at right
angles to the first. The bottom of this tube was lower than that of the
one which emptied into it, so that Barney now found himself in a
swiftly running stream of filth that reached above his knees. Downward
he followed this flood—faster now for the fear of the deadly gases
which might overpower him before he could reach the river.

The water deepened gradually as he went on. At last he reached a point
where, with his head scraping against the roof of the sewer, his chin
was just above the surface of the stream. A few more steps would be all
that he could take in this direction without drowning. Could he retrace
his way against the swift current? He did not know. He was weakened
from the effects of his wound, from lack of food and from the exertions
of the past hour. Well, he would go on as far as he could. The river
lay ahead of him somewhere. Behind was only the hostile city.

He took another step. His foot found no support. He surged backward in
an attempt to regain his footing, but the power of the flood was too
much for him. He was swept forward to plunge into water that surged
above his head as he sank. An instant later he had regained the surface
and as his head emerged he opened his eyes.

He looked up into a starlit heaven! He had reached the mouth of the
sewer and was in the river. For a moment he lay still, floating upon
his back to rest. Above him he heard the tread of a sentry along the
river front, and the sound of men’s voices.

The sweet, fresh air, the star-shot void above, acted as a powerful
tonic to his shattered hopes and overwrought nerves. He lay inhaling
great lungsful of pure, invigorating air. He listened to the voices of
the Austrian soldiery above him. All the buoyancy of his inherent
Americanism returned to him.

“This is no place for a minister’s son,” he murmured, and turning over
struck out for the opposite shore. The river was not wide, and Barney
was soon nearing the bank along which he could see occasional camp
fires. Here, too, were Austrians. He dropped down-stream below these,
and at last approached the shore where a wood grew close to the water’s
edge. The bank here was steep, and the American had some difficulty in
finding a place where he could clamber up the precipitous wall of rock.
But finally he was successful, finding himself in a little clump of
bushes on the river’s brim. Here he lay resting and listening—always
listening. It seemed to Barney that his ears ached with the constant
strain of unflagging duty that his very existence demanded of them.

Hearing nothing, he crawled at last from his hiding place with the
purpose of making his way toward the south and to the frontier as
rapidly as possible. He could hope only to travel by night, and he
guessed that this night must be nearly spent. Stooping, he moved
cautiously away from the river. Through the shadows of the wood he made
his way for perhaps a hundred yards when he was suddenly confronted by
a figure that stepped from behind the bole of a tree.

“Halt! Who goes there?” came the challenge.

Barney’s heart stood still. With all his care he had run straight into
the arms of an Austrian sentry. To run would be to be shot. To advance
would mean capture, and that too would mean death.

For the barest fraction of an instant he hesitated, and then his quick
American wits came to his aid. Feigning intoxication he answered the
challenge in dubious Austrian that he hoped his maudlin tongue would
excuse.

“Friend,” he answered thickly. “Friend with a drink—have one?” And he
staggered drunkenly forward, banking all upon the credulity and thirst
of the soldier who confronted him with fixed bayonet.

That the sentry was both credulous and thirsty was evidenced by the
fact that he let Barney come within reach of his gun. Instantly the
drunken Austrian was transformed into a very sober and active engine of
destruction. Seizing the barrel of the piece Barney jerked it to one
side and toward him, and at the same instant he leaped for the throat
of the sentry.

So quickly was this accomplished that the Austrian had time only for a
single cry, and that was choked in his windpipe by the steel fingers of
the American. Together both men fell heavily to the ground, Barney
retaining his hold upon the other’s throat.

Striking and clutching at one another they fought in silence for a
couple of minutes, then the soldier’s struggles began to weaken. He
squirmed and gasped for breath. His mouth opened and his tongue
protruded. His eyes started from their sockets. Barney closed his
fingers more tightly upon the bearded throat. He rained heavy blows
upon the upturned face. The beating fists of his adversary waved wildly
now—the blows that reached Barney were pitifully weak. Presently they
ceased. The man struggled violently for an instant, twitched
spasmodically and lay still.

Barney clung to him for several minutes longer, until there was not the
slightest indication of remaining life. The perpetration of the deed
sickened him; but he knew that his act was warranted, for it had been
either his life or the other’s. He dragged the body back to the bushes
in which he had been hiding. There he stripped off the Austrian
uniform, put his own clothes upon the corpse and rolled it into the
river.

Dressed as an Austrian private, Barney Custer shouldered the dead
soldier’s gun and walked boldly through the wood to the south.
Momentarily he expected to run upon other soldiers, but though he kept
straight on his way for hours he encountered none. The thin line of
sentries along the river had been posted only to double the preventive
measures that had been taken to keep Serbian spies either from entering
or leaving the city.

Toward dawn, at the darkest period of the night, Barney saw lights
ahead of him. Apparently he was approaching a village. He went more
cautiously now, but all his care did not prevent him from running for
the second time that night almost into the arms of a sentry. This time,
however, Barney saw the soldier before he himself was discovered. It
was upon the edge of the town, in an orchard, that the sentinel was
posted. Barney, approaching through the trees, darting from one to
another, was within a few paces of the man before he saw him.

The American remained quietly in the shadow of a tree waiting for an
opportunity to escape, but before it came he heard the approach of a
small body of troops. They were coming from the village directly toward
the orchard. They passed the sentry and marched within a dozen feet of
the tree behind which Barney was hiding.

As they came opposite him he slipped around the tree to the opposite
side. The sentry had resumed his pacing, and was now out of sight
momentarily among the trees further on. He could not see the American,
but there were others who could. They came in the shape of a
non-commissioned officer and a detachment of the guard to relieve the
sentry. Barney almost bumped into them as he rounded the tree. There
was no escape—the non-commissioned officer was within two feet of him
when Barney discovered him. “What are you doing here?” shouted the
sergeant with an oath. “Your post is there,” and he pointed toward the
position where Barney had seen the sentry.

At first Barney could scarce believe his ears. In the darkness the
sergeant had mistaken him for the sentinel! Could he carry it out? And
if so might it not lead him into worse predicament? No, Barney decided,
nothing could be worse. To be caught masquerading in the uniform of an
Austrian soldier within the Austrian lines was to plumb the uttermost
depth of guilt—nothing that he might do now could make his position
worse.

He faced the sergeant, snapping his piece to present, hoping that this
was the proper thing to do. Then he stumbled through a brief excuse.
The officer in command of the troops that had just passed had demanded
the way of him, and he had but stepped a few paces from his post to
point out the road to his superior.

The sergeant grunted and ordered him to fall in. Another man took his
place on duty. They were far from the enemy and discipline was lax, so
the thing was accomplished which under other circumstances would have
been well nigh impossible. A moment later Barney found himself marching
back toward the village, to all intents and purposes an Austrian
private.

Before a low, windowless shed that had been converted into barracks for
the guard, the detail was dismissed. The men broke ranks and sought
their blankets within the shed, tired from their lonely vigil upon
sentry duty.

Barney loitered until the last. All the others had entered. He dared
not, for he knew that any moment the sentry upon the post from which he
had been taken would appear upon the scene, after discovering another
of his comrades. He was certain to inquire of the sergeant. They would
be puzzled, of course, and, being soldiers, they would be suspicious.
There would be an investigation, which would start in the barracks of
the guard. That neighborhood would at once become a most unhealthy spot
for Barney Custer, of Beatrice, Nebraska.

When the last of the soldiers had entered the shed Barney glanced
quickly about. No one appeared to notice him. He walked directly past
the doorway to the end of the building. Around this he found a yard,
deeply shadowed. He entered it, crossed it, and passed out into an
alley beyond. At the first cross-street his way was blocked by the
sight of another sentry—the world seemed composed entirely of Austrian
sentries. Barney wondered if the entire Austrian army was kept
perpetually upon sentry duty; he had scarce been able to turn without
bumping into one.

He turned back into the alley and at last found a crooked passageway
between buildings that he hoped might lead him to a spot where there
was no sentry, and from which he could find his way out of the village
toward the south. The passage, after devious windings, led into a
large, open court, but when Barney attempted to leave the court upon
the opposite side he found the ubiquitous sentries upon guard there.

Evidently there would be no escape while the Austrians remained in the
town. There was nothing to do, therefore, but hide until the happy
moment of their departure arrived. He returned to the courtyard, and
after a short search discovered a shed in one corner that had evidently
been used to stable a horse, for there was straw at one end of it and a
stall in the other. Barney sat down upon the straw to wait
developments. Tired nature would be denied no longer. His eyes closed,
his head drooped upon his breast. In three minutes from the time he
entered the shed he was stretched full length upon the straw, fast
asleep.

The chugging of a motor awakened him. It was broad daylight. Many
sounds came from the courtyard without. It did not take Barney long to
gather his scattered wits—in an instant he was wide awake. He glanced
about. He was the only occupant of the shed. Rising, he approached a
small window that looked out upon the court. All was life and movement.
A dozen military cars either stood about or moved in and out of the
wide gates at the opposite end of the enclosure. Officers and soldiers
moved briskly through a doorway that led into a large building that
flanked the court upon one side. While Barney slept the headquarters of
an Austrian army corps had moved in and taken possession of the
building, the back of which abutted upon the court where lay his modest
little shed.

Barney took it all in at a single glance, but his eyes hung long and
greedily upon the great, high-powered machines that chugged or purred
about him.

Gad! If he could but be behind the wheel of such a car for an hour! The
frontier could not be over fifty miles to the south, of that he was
quite positive; and what would fifty miles be to one of those machines?

Barney sighed as a great, gray-painted car whizzed into the courtyard
and pulled up before the doorway. Two officers jumped out and ran up
the steps. The driver, a young man in a uniform not unlike that which
Barney wore, drew the car around to the end of the courtyard close
beside Barney’s shed. Here he left it and entered the building into
which his passengers had gone. By reaching through the window Barney
could have touched the fender of the machine. A few seconds’ start in
that and it would take more than an Austrian army corps to stop him
this side of the border. Thus mused Barney, knowing already that the
mad scheme that had been born within his brain would be put to action
before he was many minutes older.

There were many soldiers on guard about the courtyard. The greatest
danger lay in arousing the suspicions of one of these should he chance
to see Barney emerge from the shed and enter the car.

“The proper thing,” thought Barney, “is to come from the building into
which everyone seems to pass, and the only way to be seen coming out of
it is to get into it; but how the devil am I to get into it?”

The longer he thought the more convinced he became that utter
recklessness and boldness would be his only salvation. Briskly he
walked from the shed out into the courtyard beneath the eyes of the
sentries, the officers, the soldiers, and the military drivers. He
moved straight among them toward the doorway of the headquarters as
though bent upon important business—which, indeed, he was. At least it
was quite the most important business to Barney Custer that that young
gentleman could recall having ventured upon for some time.

No one paid the slightest attention to him. He had left his gun in the
shed for he noticed that only the men on guard carried them. Without an
instant’s hesitation he ran briskly up the short flight of steps and
entered the headquarters building. Inside was another sentry who barred
his way questioningly. Evidently one must state one’s business to this
person before going farther. Barney, without any loss of time or
composure, stepped up to the guard.

“Has General Kampf passed in this morning?” he asked blithely. Barney
had never heard of any “General Kampf,” nor had the sentry, since there
was no such person in the Austrian army. But he did know, however, that
there were altogether too many generals for any one soldier to know the
names of them all.

“I do not know the general by sight,” replied the sentry.

Here was a pretty mess, indeed. Doubtless the sergeant would know a
great deal more than would be good for Barney Custer. The young man
looked toward the door through which he had just entered. His sole
object in coming into the spider’s parlor had been to make it possible
for him to come out again in full view of all the guards and officers
and military chauffeurs, that their suspicions might not be aroused
when he put his contemplated coup to the test.

He glanced toward the door. Machines were whizzing in and out of the
courtyard. Officers on foot were passing and repassing. The sentry in
the hallway was on the point of calling his sergeant.

“Ah!” cried Barney. “There is the general now,” and without waiting to
cast even a parting glance at the guard he stepped quickly through the
doorway and ran down the steps into the courtyard. Looking neither to
right nor to left, and with a convincing air of self-confidence and
important business, he walked directly to the big, gray machine that
stood beside the little shed at the end of the courtyard.

To crank it and leap to the driver’s seat required but a moment. The
big car moved smoothly forward. A turn of the steering wheel brought it
around headed toward the wide gates. Barney shifted to second speed,
stepped on the accelerator and the cut-out simultaneously, and with a
noise like the rattle of a machine gun, shot out of the courtyard.

None who saw his departure could have guessed from the manner of it
that the young man at the wheel of the gray car was stealing the
machine or that his life depended upon escape without detection. It was
the very boldness of his act that crowned it with success.

Once in the street Barney turned toward the south. Cars were passing up
and down in both directions, usually at high speed. Their numbers
protected the fugitive. Momentarily he expected to be halted; but he
passed out of the village without mishap and reached a country road
which, except for a lane down its center along which automobiles were
moving, was blocked with troops marching southward. Through this
soldier-walled lane Barney drove for half an hour.

From a great distance, toward the southeast, he could hear the boom of
cannon and the bursting of shells. Presently the road forked. The
troops were moving along the road on the left toward the distant battle
line. Not a man or machine was turning into the right fork, the road
toward the south that Barney wished to take.

Could he successfully pass through the marching soldiers at his right?
Among all those officers there surely would be one who would question
the purpose and destination of this private soldier who drove alone in
the direction of the nearby frontier.

The moment had come when he must stake everything on his ability to
gain the open road beyond the plodding mass of troops. Diminishing the
speed of the car Barney turned it in toward the marching men at the
same time sounding his horn loudly. An infantry captain, marching
beside his company, was directly in front of the car. He looked up at
the American. Barney saluted and pointed toward the right-hand fork.

The captain turned and shouted a command to his men. Those who had not
passed in front of the car halted. Barney shot through the little lane
they had opened, which immediately closed up behind him. He was
through! He was upon the open road! Ahead, as far as he could see,
there was no sign of any living creature to bar his way, and the
frontier could not be more than twenty-five miles away.




V.
THE TRAITOR KING


In his castle at Lustadt, Leopold of Lutha paced nervously back and
forth between his great desk and the window that overlooked the royal
gardens. Upon the opposite side of the desk stood an old man—a tall,
straight, old man with the bearing of a soldier and the head of a lion.
His keen, gray eyes were upon the king, and sorrow was written upon his
face. He was Ludwig von der Tann, chancellor of the kingdom of Lutha.

At last the king stopped his pacing and faced the old man, though he
could not meet those eagle eyes squarely, try as he would. It was his
inability to do so, possibly, that added to his anger. Weak himself, he
feared this strong man and envied him his strength, which, in a weak
nature, is but a step from hatred. There evidently had been a long
pause in their conversation, yet the king’s next words took up the
thread of their argument where it had broken.

“You speak as though I had no right to do it,” he snapped. “One might
think that you were the king from the manner with which you upbraid and
reproach me. I tell you, Prince von der Tann, that I shall stand it no
longer.”

The king approached the desk and pounded heavily upon its polished
surface with his fist. The physical act of violence imparted to him a
certain substitute for the moral courage which he lacked.

“I will tell you, sir, that I am king. It was not necessary that I
consult you or any other man before pardoning Prince Peter and his
associates. I have investigated the matter thoroughly and I am
convinced that they have been taught a sufficient lesson and that
hereafter they will be my most loyal subjects.”

He hesitated. “Their presence here,” he added, “may prove an antidote
to the ambitions of others who lately have taken it upon themselves to
rule Lutha for me.”

There was no mistaking the king’s meaning, but Prince Ludwig did not
show by any change of expression that the shot had struck him in a
vulnerable spot; nor, upon the other hand, did he ignore the
insinuation. There was only sorrow in his voice when he replied.

“Sire,” he said, “for some time I have been aware of the activity of
those who would like to see Peter of Blentz returned to favor with your
majesty. I have warned you, only to see that my motives were always
misconstrued. There is a greater power at work, your majesty, than any
of us—greater than Lutha itself. One that will stop at nothing in order
to gain its ends. It cares naught for Peter of Blentz, naught for me,
naught for you. It cares only for Lutha. For strategic purposes it must
have Lutha. It will trample you under foot to gain its end, and then it
will cast Peter of Blentz aside. You have insinuated, sire, that I am
ambitious. I am. I am ambitious to maintain the integrity and freedom
of Lutha.

“For three hundred years the Von der Tanns have labored and fought for
the welfare of Lutha. It was a Von der Tann that put the first
Rubinroth king upon the throne of Lutha. To the last they were loyal to
the former dynasty while that dynasty was loyal to Lutha. Only when the
king attempted to sell the freedom of his people to a powerful neighbor
did the Von der Tanns rise against him.

“Sire! the Von der Tanns have always been loyal to the house of
Rubinroth. And but a single thing rises superior within their breasts
to that loyalty, and that is their loyalty to Lutha.” He paused for an
instant before concluding. “And I, sire, am a Von der Tann.”

There could be no mistaking the old man’s meaning. So long as Leopold
was loyal to his people and their interests Ludwig von der Tann would
be loyal to Leopold. The king was cowed. He was very much afraid of
this grim old warrior. He chafed beneath his censure.

“You are always scolding me,” he cried irritably. “I am getting tired
of it. And now you threaten me. Do you call that loyalty? Do you call
it loyalty to refuse to compel your daughter to keep her plighted
troth? If you wish to prove your loyalty command the Princess Emma to
fulfil the promise you made my father—command her to wed me at once.”

Von der Tann looked the king straight in the eyes.

“I cannot do that,” he said. “She has told me that she will kill
herself rather than wed with your majesty. She is all I have left,
sire. What good would be accomplished by robbing me of her if you could
not gain her by the act? Win her confidence and love, sire. It may be
done. Thus only may happiness result to you and to her.”

“You see,” exclaimed the king, “what your loyalty amounts to! I believe
that you are saving her for the impostor—I have heard as much hinted at
before this. Nor do I doubt that she would gladly connive with the
fellow if she thought there was a chance of his seizing the throne.”

Von der Tann paled. For the first time righteous indignation and anger
got the better of him. He took a step toward the king.

“Stop!” he commanded. “No man, not even my king, may speak such words
to a Von der Tann.”

In an antechamber just outside the room a man sat near the door that
led into the apartment where the king and his chancellor quarreled. He
had been straining his ears to catch the conversation which he could
hear rising and falling in the adjoining chamber, but till now he had
been unsuccessful. Then came Prince Ludwig’s last words booming loudly
through the paneled door, and the man smiled. He was Count Zellerndorf,
the Austrian minister to Lutha.

The king’s outraged majesty goaded him to an angry retort.

“You forget yourself, Prince von der Tann,” he cried. “Leave our
presence. When we again desire to be insulted we shall send for you.”

As the chancellor passed into the antechamber Count Zellerndorf rose
and greeted him warmly, almost effusively. Von der Tann returned his
salutations with courtesy but with no answering warmth. Then he passed
on out of the palace.

“The old fox must have heard,” he mused as he mounted his horse and
turned his face toward Tann and the Old Forest.

When Count Zellerndorf of Austria entered the presence of Leopold of
Lutha he found that young ruler much disturbed. He had resumed his
restless pacing between desk and window, and as the Austrian entered he
scarce paused to receive his salutation. Count Zellerndorf was a
frequent visitor at the palace. There were few formalities between this
astute diplomat and the young king; those had passed gradually away as
their acquaintance and friendship ripened.

“Prince Ludwig appeared angry when he passed through the antechamber,”
ventured Zellerndorf. “Evidently your majesty found cause to rebuke
him.”

The king nodded and looked narrowly at the Austrian. “The Prince von
der Tann insinuated that Austria’s only wish in connection with Lutha
is to seize her,” he said.

Zellerndorf raised his hands in well-simulated horror.

“Your majesty!” he exclaimed. “It cannot be that the prince has gone to
such lengths to turn you against your best friend, my emperor. If he
has I can only attribute it to his own ambitions. I have hesitated to
speak to you of this matter, your majesty, but now that the honor of my
own ruler is questioned I must defend him.

“Bear with me then, should what I have to say wound you. I well know
the confidence which the house of Von der Tann has enjoyed for
centuries in Lutha; but I must brave your wrath in the interest of
right. I must tell you that it is common gossip in Vienna that Von der
Tann aspires to the throne of Lutha either for himself or for his
daughter through the American impostor who once sat upon your throne
for a few days. And let me tell you more.

“The American will never again menace you—he was arrested in Burgova as
a spy and executed. He is dead; but not so are Von der Tann’s
ambitions. When he learns that he no longer may rely upon the strain of
the Rubinroth blood that flowed in the veins of the American from his
royal mother, the runaway Princess Victoria, there will remain to him
only the other alternative of seizing the throne for himself. He is a
very ambitious man, your majesty. Already he has caused it to become
current gossip that he is the real power behind the throne of
Lutha—that your majesty is but a figure-head, the puppet of Von der
Tann.”

Zellerndorf paused. He saw the flush of shame and anger that suffused
the king’s face, and then he shot the bolt that he had come to fire,
but which he had not dared to hope would find its target so denuded of
defense.

“Your majesty,” he whispered, coming quite close to the king, “all
Lutha is inclined to believe that you fear Prince von der Tann. Only a
few of us know the truth to be the contrary. For the sake of your
prestige you must take some step to counteract this belief and stamp it
out for good and all. I have planned a way—hear it.

“Von der Tann’s hatred of Peter of Blentz is well known. No man in
Lutha believes that he would permit you to have any intercourse with
Peter. I have brought from Blentz an invitation to your majesty to
honor the Blentz prince with your presence as a guest for the ensuing
week. Accept it, your majesty.

“Nothing could more conclusively prove to the most skeptical that you
are still the king, and that Von der Tann, nor any other, may not dare
to dictate to you. It will be the most splendid stroke of statesmanship
that you could achieve at the present moment.”

For an instant the king stood in thought. He still feared Peter of
Blentz as the devil is reputed to fear holy water, though for converse
reasons. Yet he was very angry with Von der Tann. It would indeed be an
excellent way to teach the presumptuous chancellor his place.

Leopold almost smiled as he thought of the chagrin with which Prince
Ludwig would receive the news that he had gone to Blentz as the guest
of Peter. It was the last impetus that was required by his weak,
vindictive nature to press it to a decision.

“Very well,” he said, “I will go tomorrow.”

It was late the following day that Prince von der Tann received in his
castle in the Old Forest word that an Austrian army had crossed the
Luthanian frontier—the neutrality of Lutha had been violated. The old
chancellor set out immediately for Lustadt. At the palace he sought an
interview with the king only to learn that Leopold had departed earlier
in the day to visit Peter of Blentz.

There was but one thing to do and that was to follow the king to
Blentz. Some action must be taken immediately—it would never do to let
this breach of treaty pass unnoticed.

The Serbian minister who had sent word to the chancellor of the
invasion by the Austrian troops was closeted with him for an hour after
his arrival at the palace. It was clear to both these men that the hand
of Zellerndorf was plainly in evidence in both the important moves that
had occurred in Lutha within the past twenty-four hours—the luring of
the king to Blentz and the entrance of Austrian soldiery into Lutha.

Following his interview with the Serbian minister Von der Tann rode
toward Blentz with only his staff in attendance. It was long past
midnight when the lights of the town appeared directly ahead of the
little party. They rode at a trot along the road which passes through
the village to wind upward again toward the ancient feudal castle that
looks down from its hilltop upon the town.

At the edge of the village Von der Tann was thunderstruck by a
challenge from a sentry posted in the road, nor was his dismay lessened
when he discovered that the man was an Austrian.

“What is the meaning of this?” he cried angrily. “What are Austrian
soldiers doing barring the roads of Lutha to the chancellor of Lutha?”

The sentry called an officer. The latter was extremely suave. He
regretted the incident, but his orders were most positive—no one could
be permitted to pass through the lines without an order from the
general commanding. He would go at once to the general and see if he
could procure the necessary order. Would the prince be so good as to
await his return? Von der Tann turned on the young officer, his face
purpling with rage.

“I will pass nowhere within the boundaries of Lutha,” he said, “upon
the order of an Austrian. You may tell your general that my only regret
is that I have not with me tonight the necessary force to pass through
his lines to my king—another time I shall not be so handicapped,” and
Ludwig, Prince von der Tann, wheeled his mount and spurred away in the
direction of Lustadt, at his heels an extremely angry and revengeful
staff.




VI.
A TRAP IS SPRUNG


Long before Prince von der Tann reached Lustadt he had come to the
conclusion that Leopold was in virtue a prisoner in Blentz. To prove
his conclusion he directed one of his staff to return to Blentz and
attempt to have audience with the king.

“Risk anything,” he instructed the officer to whom he had entrusted the
mission. “Submit, if necessary, to the humiliation of seeking an
Austrian pass through the lines to the castle. See the king at any cost
and deliver this message to him and to him alone and secretly. Tell him
my fears, and that if I do not have word from him within twenty-four
hours I shall assume that he is indeed a prisoner.

“I shall then direct the mobilization of the army and take such steps
as seem fit to rescue him and drive the invaders from the soil of
Lutha. If you do not return I shall understand that you are held
prisoner by the Austrians and that my worst fears have been realized.”

But Prince Ludwig was one who believed in being forehanded and so it
happened that the orders for the mobilization of the army of Lutha were
issued within fifteen minutes of his return to Lustadt. It would do no
harm, thought the old man, with a grim smile, to get things well under
way a day ahead of time. This accomplished, he summoned the Serbian
minister, with what purpose and to what effect became historically
evident several days later. When, after twenty-four hours’ absence, his
aide had not returned from Blentz, the chancellor had no regrets for
his forehandedness.

In the castle of Peter of Blentz the king of Lutha was being
entertained royally. He was told nothing of the attempt of his
chancellor to see him, nor did he know that a messenger from Prince von
der Tann was being held a prisoner in the camp of the Austrians in the
village. He was surrounded by the creatures of Prince Peter and by
Peter’s staunch allies, the Austrian minister and the Austrian officers
attached to the expeditionary force occupying the town. They told him
that they had positive information that the Serbians already had
crossed the frontier into Lutha, and that the presence of the Austrian
troops was purely for the protection of Lutha.

It was not until the morning following the rebuff of Prince von der
Tann that Peter of Blentz, Count Zellerndorf and Maenck heard of the
occurrence. They were chagrined by the accident, for they were not
ready to deliver their final stroke. The young officer of the guard
had, of course, but followed his instructions—who would have thought
that old Von der Tann would come to Blentz! That he suspected their
motives seemed apparent, and now that his rebuff at the gates had
aroused his ire and, doubtless, crystallized his suspicions, they might
find in him a very ugly obstacle to the fruition of their plans.

With Von der Tann actively opposed to them, the value of having the
king upon their side would be greatly minimized. The people and the
army had every confidence in the old chancellor. Even if he opposed the
king there was reason to believe that they might still side with him.

“What is to be done?” asked Zellerndorf. “Is there no way either to win
or force Von der Tann to acquiescence?”

“I think we can accomplish it,” said Prince Peter, after a moment of
thought. “Let us see Leopold. His mind has been prepared to receive
almost gratefully any insinuations against the loyalty of Von der Tann.
With proper evidence the king may easily be persuaded to order the
chancellor’s arrest—possibly his execution as well.”

So they saw the king, only to meet a stubborn refusal upon the part of
Leopold to accede to their suggestions. He still was madly in love with
Von der Tann’s daughter, and he knew that a blow delivered at her
father would only tend to increase her bitterness toward him. The
conspirators were nonplussed.

They had looked for a comparatively easy road to the consummation of
their desires. What in the world could be the cause of the king’s
stubborn desire to protect the man they knew he feared, hated, and
mistrusted with all the energy of his suspicious nature? It was the
king himself who answered their unspoken question.

“I cannot believe in the disloyalty of Prince Ludwig,” he said, “nor
could I, even if I desired it, take such drastic steps as you suggest.
Some day the Princess Emma, his daughter, will be my queen.”

Count Zellerndorf was the first to grasp the possibilities that lay in
the suggestion the king’s words carried.

“Your majesty,” he cried, “there is a way to unite all factions in
Lutha. It would be better to insure the loyalty of Von der Tann through
bonds of kinship than to antagonize him. Marry the Princess Emma at
once.

“Wait, your majesty,” he added, as Leopold raised an objecting hand. “I
am well informed as to the strange obstinacy of the princess, but for
the welfare of the state—yes, for the sake of your very throne,
sire—you should exert your royal prerogatives and command the Princess
Emma to carry out the terms of your betrothal.”

“What do you mean, Zellerndorf?” asked the king.

“I mean, sire, that we should bring the princess here and compel her to
marry you.”

Leopold shook his head. “You do not know her,” he said. “You do not
know the Von der Tann nature—one cannot force a Von der Tann.”

“Pardon, sire,” urged Zellerndorf, “but I think it can be accomplished.
If the Princess Emma knew that your majesty believed her father to be a
traitor—that the order for his arrest and execution but awaited your
signature—I doubt not that she would gladly become queen of Lutha, with
her father’s life and liberty as a wedding gift.”

For several minutes no one spoke after Count Zellerndorf had ceased.
Leopold sat looking at the toe of his boot. Peter of Blentz, Maenck,
and the Austrian watched him intently. The possibilities of the plan
were sinking deep into the minds of all four. At last the king rose. He
was mumbling to himself as though unconscious of the presence of the
others.

“She is a stubborn jade,” he mumbled. “It would be an excellent lesson
for her. She needs to be taught that I am her king,” and then as though
his conscience required a sop, “I shall be very good to her. Afterward
she will be happy.” He turned toward Zellerndorf. “You think it can be
done?”

“Most assuredly, your majesty. We shall take immediate steps to fetch
the Princess Emma to Blentz,” and the Austrian rose and backed from the
apartment lest the king change his mind. Prince Peter and Maenck
followed him.

Princess Emma von der Tann sat in her boudoir in her father’s castle in
the Old Forest. Except for servants, she was alone in the fortress, for
Prince von der Tann was in Lustadt. Her mind was occupied with memories
of the young American who had entered her life under such strange
circumstances two years before—memories that had been awakened by the
return of Lieutenant Otto Butzow to Lutha. He had come directly to her
father and had been attached to the prince’s personal staff.

From him she had heard a great deal about Barney Custer, and the old
interest, never a moment forgotten during these two years, was
reawakened to all its former intensity.

Butzow had accompanied Prince Ludwig to Lustadt, but Princess Emma
would not go with them. For two years she had not entered the capital,
and much of that period had been spent in Paris. Only within the past
fortnight had she returned to Lutha.

In the middle of the morning her reveries were interrupted by the
entrance of a servant bearing a message. She had to read it twice
before she could realize its purport; though it was plainly worded—the
shock of it had stunned her. It was dated at Lustadt and signed by one
of the palace functionaries:

Prince von der Tann has suffered a slight stroke. Do not be alarmed,
but come at once. The two troopers who bear this message will act as
your escort.

It required but a few minutes for the girl to change to her riding
clothes, and when she ran down into the court she found her horse
awaiting her in the hands of her groom, while close by two mounted
troopers raised their hands to their helmets in salute.

A moment later the three clattered over the drawbridge and along the
road that leads toward Lustadt. The escort rode a short distance behind
the girl, and they were hard put to it to hold the mad pace which she
set them.

A few miles from Tann the road forks. One branch leads toward the
capital and the other winds over the hills in the direction of Blentz.
The fork occurs within the boundaries of the Old Forest. Great trees
overhang the winding road, casting a twilight shade even at high noon.
It is a lonely spot, far from any habitation.

As the Princess Emma approached the fork she reined in her mount, for
across the road to Lustadt a dozen horsemen barred her way. At first
she thought nothing of it, turning her horse’s head to the righthand
side of the road to pass the party, all of whom were in uniform; but as
she did so one of the men reined directly in her path. The act was
obviously intentional.

The girl looked quickly up into the man’s face, and her own went white.
He who stopped her way was Captain Ernst Maenck. She had not seen the
man for two years, but she had good cause to remember him as the
governor of the castle of Blentz and the man who had attempted to take
advantage of her helplessness when she had been a prisoner in Prince
Peter’s fortress. Now she looked straight into the fellow’s eyes.

“Let me pass, please,” she said coldly.

“I am sorry,” replied Maenck with an evil smile; “but the king’s orders
are that you accompany me to Blentz—the king is there.”

For answer the girl drove her spur into her mount’s side. The animal
leaped forward, striking Maenck’s horse on the shoulder and half
turning him aside, but the man clutched at the girl’s bridle-rein, and,
seizing it, brought her to a stop.

“You may as well come voluntarily, for come you must,” he said. “It
will be easier for you.”

“I shall not come voluntarily,” she replied. “If you take me to Blentz
you will have to take me by force, and if my king is not sufficiently a
gentleman to demand an accounting of you, I am at least more fortunate
in the possession of a father who will.”

“Your father will scarce wish to question the acts of his king,” said
Maenck—“his king and the husband of his daughter.”

“What do you mean?” she cried.

“That before you are many hours older, your highness, you will be queen
of Lutha.”

The Princess Emma turned toward her tardy escort that had just arrived
upon the scene.

“This person has stopped me,” she said, “and will not permit me to
continue toward Lustadt. Make a way for me; you are armed!”

Maenck smiled. “Both of them are my men,” he explained.

The girl saw it all now—the whole scheme to lure her to Blentz. Even
then, though, she could not believe the king had been one of the
conspirators of the plot.

Weak as he was he was still a Rubinroth, and it was difficult for a Von
der Tann to believe in the duplicity of a member of the house they had
served so loyally for centuries. With bowed head the princess turned
her horse into the road that led toward Blentz. Half the troopers
preceded her, the balance following behind.

Maenck wondered at the promptness of her surrender.

“To be a queen—ah! that was the great temptation,” he thought but he
did not know what was passing in the girl’s mind. She had seen that
escape for the moment was impossible, and so had decided to bide her
time until a more propitious chance should come. In silence she rode
among her captors. The thought of being brought to Blentz alive was
unbearable.

Somewhere along the road there would be an opportunity to escape. Her
horse was fleet; with a short start he could easily outdistance these
heavier cavalry animals and as a last resort she could—she must—find
some way to end her life, rather than to be dragged to the altar beside
Leopold of Lutha.

Since childhood Emma von der Tann had ridden these hilly roads. She
knew every lane and bypath for miles around. She knew the short cuts,
the gullies and ravines. She knew where one might, with a good jumper,
save a wide detour, and as she rode toward Blentz she passed in review
through her mind each of the many spots where a sudden break for
liberty might have the best chance to succeed.

And at last she hit upon the place where a quick turn would take her
from the main road into the roughest sort of going for one not familiar
with the trail. Maenck and his soldiers had already partially relaxed
their vigilance. The officer had come to the conclusion that his
prisoner was resigned to her fate and that, after all, the fate of
being forced to be queen did not appear so dark to her.

They had wound up a wooded hill and were half way up to the summit. The
princess was riding close to the right-hand side of the road. Quite
suddenly, and before a hand could be raised to stay her, she wheeled
her mount between two trees, struck home her spur, and was gone into
the wood upon the steep hillside.

With an oath, Maenck cried to his men to be after her. He himself
spurred into the forest at the point where the girl had disappeared. So
sudden had been her break for liberty and so quickly had the foliage
swallowed her that there was something almost uncanny in it.

A hundred yards from the road the trees were further apart, and through
them the pursuers caught a glimpse of their quarry. The girl was riding
like mad along the rough, uneven hillside. Her mount, surefooted as a
chamois, seemed in his element. But two of the horses of her pursuers
were as swift, and under the cruel spurs of their riders were closing
up on their fugitive. The girl urged her horse to greater speed, yet
still the two behind closed in.

A hundred yards ahead lay a deep and narrow gully, hid by bushes that
grew rankly along its verge. Straight toward this the Princess Emma von
der Tann rode. Behind her came her pursuers—two quite close and the
others trailing farther in the rear. The girl reined in a trifle,
letting the troopers that were closest to her gain until they were but
a few strides behind, then she put spur to her horse and drove him at
topmost speed straight toward the gully. At the bushes she spoke a low
word in his backlaid ears, raised him quickly with the bit, leaning
forward as he rose in air. Like a bird that animal took the bushes and
the gully beyond, while close behind him crashed the two luckless
troopers.

Emma von der Tann cast a single backward glance over her shoulder, as
her horse regained his stride upon the opposite side of the gully, to
see her two foremost pursuers plunging headlong into it. Then she shook
free her reins and gave her mount his head along a narrow trail that
both had followed many times before.

Behind her, Maenck and the balance of his men came to a sudden stop at
the edge of the gully. Below them one of the troopers was struggling to
his feet. The other lay very still beneath his motionless horse. With
an angry oath Maenck directed one of his men to remain and help the two
who had plunged over the brink, then with the others he rode along the
gully searching for a crossing.

Before they found one their captive was a mile ahead of them, and,
barring accident, quite beyond recapture. She was making for a highway
that would lead her to Lustadt. Ordinarily she had been wont to bear a
little to the north-east at this point and strike back into the road
that she had just left; but today she feared to do so lest she be cut
off before she gained the north and south highroad which the other road
crossed a little farther on.

To her right was a small farm across which she had never ridden, for
she always had made it a point never to trespass upon fenced grounds.
On the opposite side of the farm was a wood, and somewhere beyond that
a small stream which the highroad crossed upon a little bridge. It was
all new country to her, but it must be ventured.

She took the fence at the edge of the clearing and then reined in a
moment to look behind her. A mile away she saw the head and shoulders
of a horseman above some low bushes—the pursuers had found a way
through the gully.

Turning once more to her flight the girl rode rapidly across the fields
toward the wood. Here she found a high wire fence so close to thickly
growing trees upon the opposite side that she dared not attempt to jump
it—there was no point at which she would not have been raked from the
saddle by overhanging boughs. Slipping to the ground she attacked the
barrier with her bare hands, attempting to tear away the staples that
held the wire in place. For several minutes she surged and tugged upon
the unyielding metal strand. An occasional backward glance revealed to
her horrified eyes the rapid approach of her enemies. One of them was
far in advance of the others—in another moment he would be upon her.

With redoubled fury she turned again to the fence. A superhuman effort
brought away a staple. One wire was down and an instant later two more.
Standing with one foot upon the wires to keep them from tangling about
her horse’s legs, she pulled her mount across into the wood. The
foremost horseman was close upon her as she finally succeeded in urging
the animal across the fallen wires.

The girl sprang to her horse’s side just as the man reached the fence.
The wires, released from her weight, sprang up breast high against his
horse. He leaped from the saddle the instant that the girl was swinging
into her own. Then the fellow jumped the fence and caught her bridle.

She struck at him with her whip, lashing him across the head and face,
but he clung tightly, dragged hither and thither by the frightened
horse, until at last he managed to reach the girl’s arm and drag her to
the ground.

Almost at the same instant a man, unkempt and disheveled, sprang from
behind a tree and with a single blow stretched the trooper unconscious
upon the ground.




VII.
BARNEY TO THE RESCUE


As Barney Custer raced along the Austrian highroad toward the frontier
and Lutha, his spirits rose to a pitch of buoyancy to which they had
been strangers for the past several days. For the first time in many
hours it seemed possible to Barney to entertain reasonable hopes of
escape from the extremely dangerous predicament into which he had
gotten himself.

He was even humming a gay little tune as he drove into a tiny hamlet
through which the road wound. No sign of military appeared to fill him
with apprehension. He was very hungry and the odor of cooking fell
gratefully upon his nostrils. He drew up before the single inn, and
presently, washed and brushed, was sitting before the first meal he had
seen for two days. In the enjoyment of the food he almost forgot the
dangers he had passed through, or that other dangers might be lying in
wait for him at his elbow.

From the landlord he learned that the frontier lay but three miles to
the south of the hamlet. Three miles! Three miles to Lutha! What if
there was a price upon his head in that kingdom? It was HER home. It
had been his mother’s birthplace. He loved it.

Further, he must enter there and reach the ear of old Prince von der
Tann. Once more he must save the king who had shown such scant
gratitude upon another occasion.

For Leopold, Barney Custer did not give the snap of his fingers; but
what Leopold, the king, stood for in the lives and sentiments of the
Luthanians—of the Von der Tanns—was very dear to the American because
it was dear to a trim, young girl and to a rugged, leonine, old man, of
both of whom Barney was inordinately fond. And possibly, too, it was
dear to him because of the royal blood his mother had bequeathed him.

His meal disposed of to the last morsel, and paid for, Barney entered
the stolen car and resumed his journey toward Lutha. That he could
remain there he knew to be impossible, but in delivering his news to
Prince Ludwig he might have an opportunity to see the Princess Emma
once again—it would be worth risking his life for, of that he was
perfectly satisfied. And then he could go across into Serbia with the
new credentials that he had no doubt Prince von der Tann would furnish
him for the asking to replace those the Austrians had confiscated.

At the frontier Barney was halted by an Austrian customs officer; but
when the latter recognized the military car and the Austrian uniform of
the driver he waved him through without comment. Upon the other side
the American expected possible difficulty with the Luthanian customs
officer, but to his surprise he found the little building deserted, and
none to bar his way. At last he was in Lutha—by noon on the following
day he should be at Tann.

To reach the Old Forest by the best roads it was necessary to bear a
little to the southeast, passing through Tafelberg and striking the
north and south highway between that point and Lustadt, to which he
could hold until reaching the east and west road that runs through both
Tann and Blentz on its way across the kingdom.

The temptation to stop for a few minutes in Tafelberg for a visit with
his old friend Herr Kramer was strong, but fear that he might be
recognized by others, who would not guard his secret so well as the
shopkeeper of Tafelberg would, decided him to keep on his way. So he
flew through the familiar main street of the quaint old village at a
speed that was little, if any less, than fifty miles an hour.

On he raced toward the south, his speed often necessarily diminished
upon the winding mountain roads, but for the most part clinging to a
reckless mileage that caused the few natives he encountered to flee to
the safety of the bordering fields, there to stand in open-mouthed awe.

Halfway between Tafelberg and the crossroad into which he purposed
turning to the west toward Tann there is an S-curve where the bases of
two small hills meet. The road here is narrow and treacherous—fifteen
miles an hour is almost a reckless speed at which to travel around the
curves of the S. Beyond are open fields upon either side of the road.

Barney took the turns carefully and had just emerged into the last leg
of the S when he saw, to his consternation, a half-dozen Austrian
infantrymen lolling beside the road. An officer stood near them talking
with a sergeant. To turn back in that narrow road was impossible. He
could only go ahead and trust to his uniform and the military car to
carry him safely through. Before he reached the group of soldiers the
fields upon either hand came into view. They were dotted with tents,
wagons, motor-vans and artillery. What did it mean? What was this
Austrian army doing in Lutha?

Already the officer had seen him. This was doubtless an outpost,
however clumsily placed it might be for strategic purposes. To pass it
was Barney’s only hope. He had passed through one Austrian army—why not
another? He approached the outpost at a moderate rate of speed—to tear
toward it at the rate his heart desired would be to awaken not
suspicion only but positive conviction that his purposes and motives
were ulterior.

The officer stepped toward the road as though to halt him. Barney
pretended to be fussing with some refractory piece of controlling
mechanism beneath the cowl—apparently he did not see the officer. He
was just opposite him when the latter shouted to him. Barney
straightened up quickly and saluted, but did not stop.

“Halt!” cried the officer.

Barney pointed down the road in the direction in which he was headed.

“Halt!” repeated the officer, running to the car.

Barney glanced ahead. Two hundred yards farther on was another
post—beyond that he saw no soldiers. He turned and shouted a volley of
intentionally unintelligible jargon at the officer, continuing to point
ahead of him.

He hoped to confuse the man for the few seconds necessary for him to
reach the last post. If the soldiers there saw that he had been
permitted to pass through the first they doubtless would not hinder his
further passage. That they were watching him Barney could see.

He had passed the officer now. There was no necessity for dalliance. He
pressed the accelerator down a trifle. The car moved forward at
increased speed. A final angry shout broke from the officer behind him,
followed by a quick command. Barney did not have to wait long to learn
the tenor of the order, for almost immediately a shot sounded from
behind and a bullet whirred above his head. Another shot and another
followed.

Barney was pressing the accelerator downward to the limit. The car
responded nobly—there was no sputtering, no choking. Just a rapid rush
of increasing momentum as the machine gained headway by leaps and
bounds.

The bullets were ripping the air all about him. Just ahead the second
outpost stood directly in the center of the road. There were three
soldiers and they were taking deliberate aim, as carefully as though
upon the rifle range. It seemed to Barney that they couldn’t miss him.
He swerved the car suddenly from one side of the road to the other. At
the rate that it was going the move was fraught with but little less
danger than the supine facing of the leveled guns ahead.

The three rifles spoke almost simultaneously. The glass of the
windshield shattered in Barney’s face. There was a hole in the
left-hand front fender that had not been there before.

“Rotten shooting,” commented Barney Custer, of Beatrice.

The soldiers still stood in the center of the road firing at the
swaying car as, lurching from side to side, it bore down upon them.
Barney sounded the raucous military horn; but the soldiers seemed
unconscious of their danger—they still stood there pumping lead toward
the onrushing Juggernaut. At the last instant they attempted to rush
from its path; but they were too late.

At over sixty miles an hour the huge, gray monster bore down upon them.
One of them fell beneath the wheels—the two others were thrown high in
air as the bumper struck them. The body of the man who had fallen
beneath the wheels threw the car half way across the road—only iron
nerve and strong arms held it from the ditch upon the opposite side.

Barney Custer had never been nearer death than at that moment—not even
when he faced the firing squad before the factory wall in Burgova. He
had done that without a tremor—he had heard the bullets of the outpost
whistling about his head a moment before, with a smile upon his lips—he
had faced the leveled rifles of the three he had ridden down and he had
not quailed. But now, his machine in the center of the road again, he
shook like a leaf, still in the grip of the sickening nausea of that
awful moment when the mighty, insensate monster beneath him had reeled
drunkenly in its mad flight, swerving toward the ditch and destruction.

For a few minutes he held to his rapid pace before he looked around,
and then it was to see two cars climbing into the road from the
encampment in the field and heading toward him in pursuit. Barney
grinned. Once more he was master of his nerves. They’d have a merry
chase, he thought, and again he accelerated the speed of the car. Once
before he had had it up to seventy-five miles, and for a moment, when
he had had no opportunity to even glance at the speedometer, much
higher. Now he was to find the maximum limit of the possibilities of
the brave car he had come to look upon with real affection.

The road ahead was comparatively straight and level. Behind him came
the enemy. Barney watched the road rushing rapidly out of sight beneath
the gray fenders. He glanced occasionally at the speedometer.
Seventy-five miles an hour. Seventy-seven! “Going some,” murmured
Barney as he saw the needle vibrate up to eighty. Gradually he nursed
her up and up to greater speed.

Eighty-five! The trees were racing by him in an indistinct blur of
green. The fences were thin, wavering lines—the road a white-gray
ribbon, ironed by the terrific speed to smooth unwrinkledness. He could
not take his eyes from the business of steering to glance behind; but
presently there broke faintly through the whir of the wind beating
against his ears the faint report of a gun. He was being fired upon
again. He pressed down still further upon the accelerator. The car
answered to the pressure. The needle rose steadily until it reached
ninety miles an hour—and topped it.

Then from somewhere in the radiator hose a hissing and a spurt of
steam. Barney was dumbfounded. He had filled the cooling system at the
inn where he had eaten. It had been working perfectly before and since.
What could have happened? There could be but a single explanation. A
bullet from the gun of one of the three men who had attempted to stop
him at the second outpost had penetrated the radiator, and had slowly
drained it.

Barney knew that the end was near, since the usefulness of the car in
furthering his escape was over. At the speed he was going it would be
but a short time before the superheated pistons expanding in their
cylinders would tear the motor to pieces. Barney felt that he would be
lucky if he himself were not killed when it happened.

He reduced his speed and glanced behind. His pursuers had not gained
upon him, but they still were coming. A bend in the road shut them from
his view. A little way ahead the road crossed over a river upon a
wooden bridge. On the opposite side and to the right of the road was a
wood. It seemed to offer the most likely possibilities of concealment
in the vicinity. If he could but throw his pursuers off the trail for a
while he might succeed in escaping through the wood, eventually
reaching Tann on foot. He had a rather hazy idea of the exact direction
of the town and castle, but that he could find them eventually he was
sure.

The sight of the river and the bridge he was nearing suggested a plan,
and the ominous grating of the overheated motor warned him that
whatever he was to do he must do at once. As he neared the bridge he
reduced the speed of the car to fifteen miles an hour, and set the hand
throttle to hold it there. Still gripping the steering wheel with one
hand, he climbed over the left-hand door to the running board. As the
front wheels of the car ran up onto the bridge Barney gave the steering
wheel a sudden turn to the right, and jumped.

The car veered toward the wooden handrail, there was a splintering of
stanchions, as, with a crash, the big machine plunged through them
headforemost into the river. Without waiting to give even a glance at
his handiwork Barney Custer ran across the bridge, leaped the fence
upon the right-hand side and plunged into the shelter of the wood.

Then he turned to look back up the road in the direction from which his
pursuers were coming. They were not in sight—they had not seen his
ruse. The water in the river was of sufficient depth to completely
cover the car—no sign of it appeared above the surface.

Barney turned into the wood smiling. His scheme had worked well. The
occupants of the two cars following him might not note the broken
handrail, or, if they did, might not connect it with Barney in any way.
In this event they would continue in the direction of Lustadt,
wondering what in the world had become of their quarry. Or, if they
guessed that his car had gone over into the river, they would doubtless
believe that its driver had gone with it. In either event Barney would
be given ample time to find his way to Tann.

He wished that he might find other clothes, since if he were dressed
otherwise there would be no reason to imagine that his pursuers would
recognize him should they come upon him. None of them could possibly
have gained a sufficiently good look at his features to recognize them
again.

The Austrian uniform, however, would convict him, or at least lay him
under suspicion, and in Barney’s present case, suspicion was as good as
conviction were he to fall into the hands of the Austrians. The garb
had served its purpose well in aiding in his escape from Austria, but
now it was more of a menace than an asset.

For a week Barney Custer wandered through the woods and mountains of
Lutha. He did not dare approach or question any human being. Several
times he had seen Austrian cavalry that seemed to be scouring the
country for some purpose that the American could easily believe was
closely connected with himself. At least he did not feel disposed to
stop them, as they cantered past his hiding place, to inquire the
nature of their business.

Such farmhouses as he came upon he gave a wide berth except at night,
and then he only approached them stealthily for such provender as he
might filch. Before the week was up he had become an expert chicken
thief, being able to rob a roost as quietly as the most finished
carpetbagger on the sunny side of Mason and Dixon’s line.

A careless housewife, leaving her lord and master’s rough shirt and
trousers hanging upon the line overnight, had made possible for Barney
the coveted change in raiment. Now he was barged as a Luthanian
peasant. He was hatless, since the lady had failed to hang out her
mate’s woolen cap, and Barney had not dared retain a single vestige of
the damning Austrian uniform.

What the peasant woman thought when she discovered the empty line the
following morning Barney could only guess, but he was morally certain
that her grief was more than tempered by the gold piece he had wrapped
in a bit of cloth torn from the soldier’s coat he had worn, which he
pinned on the line where the shirt and pants had been.

It was somewhere near noon upon the seventh day that Barney skirting a
little stream, followed through the concealing shade of a forest toward
the west. In his peasant dress he now felt safer to approach a
farmhouse and inquire his way to Tann, for he had come a sufficient
distance from the spot where he had stolen his new clothes to hope that
they would not be recognized or that the news of their theft had not
preceded him.

As he walked he heard the sound of the feet of a horse galloping over a
dry field—muffled, rapid thud approaching closer upon his right hand.
Barney remained motionless. He was sure that the rider would not enter
the wood which, with its low-hanging boughs and thick underbrush, was
ill adapted to equestrianism.

Closer and closer came the sound until it ceased suddenly scarce a
hundred yards from where the American hid. He waited in silence to
discover what would happen next. Would the rider enter the wood on
foot? What was his purpose? Was it another Austrian who had by some
miracle discovered the whereabouts of the fugitive? Barney could scarce
believe it possible.

Presently he heard another horse approaching at the same mad gallop. He
heard the sound of rapid, almost frantic efforts of some nature where
the first horse had come to a stop. He heard a voice urging the animal
forward—pleading, threatening. A woman’s voice. Barney’s excitement
became intense in sympathy with the subdued excitement of the woman
whom he could not as yet see.

A moment later the second rider came to a stop at the same point at
which the first had reined in. A man’s voice rose roughly. “Halt!” it
cried. “In the name of the king, halt!” The American could no longer
resist the temptation to see what was going on so close to him “in the
name of the king.”

He advanced from behind his tree until he saw the two figures—a man’s
and a woman’s. Some bushes intervened—he could not get a clear view of
them, yet there was something about the figure of the woman, whose back
was toward him as she struggled to mount her frightened horse, that
caused him to leap rapidly toward her. He rounded a tree a few paces
from her just as the man—a trooper in the uniform of the house of
Blentz—caught her arm and dragged her from the saddle. At the same
instant Barney recognized the girl—it was Princess Emma.

Before either the trooper or the princess were aware of his presence he
had leaped to the man’s side and dealt him a blow that stretched him at
full length upon the ground—stunned.




VIII.
AN ADVENTUROUS DAY


For an instant the two stood looking at one another. The girl’s eyes
were wide with incredulity, with hope, with fear. She was the first to
break the silence.

“Who are you?” she breathed in a half whisper.

“I don’t wonder that you ask,” returned the man. “I must look like a
scarecrow. I’m Barney Custer. Don’t you remember me now? Who did you
think I was?”

The girl took a step toward him. Her eyes lighted with relief.

“Captain Maenck told me that you were dead,” she said, “that you had
been shot as a spy in Austria, and then there is that uncanny
resemblance to the king—since he has shaved his beard it is infinitely
more remarkable. I thought you might be he. He has been at Blentz and I
knew that it was quite possible that he had discovered treachery upon
the part of Prince Peter. In which case he might have escaped in
disguise. I really wasn’t sure that you were not he until you spoke.”

Barney stooped and removed the bandoleer of cartridges from the fallen
trooper, as well as his revolver and carbine. Then he took the girl’s
hand and together they turned into the wood. Behind them came the sound
of pursuit. They heard the loud words of Maenck as he ordered his three
remaining men into the wood on foot. As he advanced, Barney looked to
the magazine of his carbine and the cylinder of his revolver.

“Why were they pursuing you?” he asked.

“They were taking me to Blentz to force me to wed Leopold,” she
replied. “They told me that my father’s life depended upon my
consenting; but I should not have done so. The honor of my house is
more precious than the life of any of its members. I escaped them a few
miles back, and they were following to overtake me.”

A noise behind them caused Barney to turn. One of the troopers had come
into view. He carried his carbine in his hands and at sight of the man
with the fugitive girl he raised it to his shoulder; but as the
American turned toward him his eyes went wide and his jaw dropped.

Instantly Barney knew that the fellow had noted his resemblance to the
king. Barney’s body was concealed from the view of the other by a bush
which grew between them, so the man saw only the face of the American.
The fellow turned and shouted to Maenck: “The king is with her.”

“Nonsense,” came the reply from farther back in the wood. “If there is
a man with her and he will not surrender, shoot him.” At the words
Barney and the girl turned once more to their flight. From behind came
the command to halt—“Halt! or I fire.” Just ahead Barney saw the river.

They were sure to be taken there if he was unable to gain the time
necessary to make good a crossing. Upon the opposite side was a
continuation of the wood. Behind them the leading trooper was crashing
through the underbrush in renewed pursuit. He came in sight of them
again, just as they reached the river bank. Once more his carbine was
leveled. Barney pushed the girl to her knees behind a bush. Then he
wheeled and fired, so quickly that the man with the already leveled gun
had no time to anticipate his act.

With a cry the fellow threw his hands above his head, staggered forward
and plunged full length upon his face. Barney gathered the princess in
his arms and plunged into the shallow stream. The girl held his carbine
as he stumbled over the rocky bottom. The water deepened rapidly—the
opposite shore seemed a long way off and behind there were three more
enemies in hot pursuit.

Under ordinary circumstances Barney could have found it in his heart to
wish the little Luthanian river as broad as the Mississippi, for only
under such circumstances as these could he ever hope to hold the
Princess Emma in his arms. Two years before she had told him that she
loved him; but at the same time she had given him to understand that
their love was hopeless. She might refuse to wed the king; but that she
should ever wed another while the king lived was impossible, unless
Leopold saw fit to release her from her betrothal to him and sanction
her marriage to another. That he ever would do this was to those who
knew him not even remotely possible.

He loved Emma von der Tann and he hated Barney Custer—hated him with a
jealous hatred that was almost fanatic in its intensity. And even that
the Princess Emma von der Tann would wed him were she free to wed was a
question that was not at all clear in the mind of Barney Custer. He
knew something of the traditions of this noble family—of the pride of
caste, of the fetish of blood that inexorably dictated the ordering of
their lives.

The girl had just said that the honor of her house was more precious
than the life of any of its members. How much more precious would it be
to her than her own material happiness! Barney Custer sighed and
struggled through the swirling waters that were now above his hips. If
he pressed the lithe form closer to him than necessity demanded, who
may blame him?

The girl, whose face was toward the bank they had just quitted, gave no
evidence of displeasure if she noted the fierce pressure of his
muscles. Her eyes were riveted upon the wood behind. Presently a man
emerged. He called to them in a loud and threatening tone.

Barney redoubled his Herculean efforts to gain the opposite bank. He
was in midstream now and the water had risen to his waist. The girl saw
Maenck and the other trooper emerge from the underbrush beside the
first. Maenck was crazed with anger. He shook his fist and screamed
aloud his threatening commands to halt, and then, of a sudden, gave an
order to one of the men at his side. Immediately the fellow raised his
carbine and fired at the escaping couple.

The bullet struck the water behind them. At the sound of the report the
girl raised the gun she held and leveled it at the group behind her.
She pulled the trigger. There was a sharp report, and one of the
troopers fell. Then she fired again, quickly, and again and again. She
did not score another hit, but she had the satisfaction of seeing
Maenck and the last of his troopers dodge back to the safety of
protecting trees.

“The cowards!” muttered Barney as the enemy’s shot announced his
sinister intention; “they might have hit your highness.”

The girl did not reply until she had ceased firing.

“Captain Maenck is notoriously a coward,” she said. “He is hiding
behind a tree now with one of his men—I hit the other.”

“You hit one of them!” exclaimed Barney enthusiastically.

“Yes,” said the girl. “I have shot a man. I often wondered what the
sensation must be to have done such a thing. I should feel terribly,
but I don’t. They were firing at you, trying to shoot you in the back
while you were defenseless. I am not sorry—I cannot be; but I only wish
that it had been Captain Maenck.”

In a short time Barney reached the bank and, helping the girl up,
climbed to her side. A couple of shots followed them as they left the
river, but did not fall dangerously near. Barney took the carbine and
replied, then both of them disappeared into the wood.

For the balance of the day they tramped on in the direction of Lustadt,
making but little progress owing to the fear of apprehension. They did
not dare utilize the high road, for they were still too close to
Blentz. Their only hope lay in reaching the protection of Prince von
der Tann before they should be recaptured by the king’s emissaries. At
dusk they came to the outskirts of a town. Here they hid until darkness
settled, for Barney had determined to enter the place after dark and
hire horses.

The American marveled at the bravery and endurance of the girl. He had
always supposed that a princess was so carefully guarded from fatigue
and privation all her life that the least exertion would prove her
undoing; but no hardy peasant girl could have endured more bravely the
hardships and dangers through which the Princess Emma had passed since
the sun rose that morning.

At last darkness came, and with it they approached and entered the
village. They kept to unlighted side streets until they met a villager,
of whom they inquired their way to some private house where they might
obtain refreshments. The fellow scrutinized them with evident
suspicion.

“There is an inn yonder,” he said, pointing toward the main street.
“You can obtain food there. Why should respectable folk want to go
elsewhere than to the public inn? And if you are afraid to go there you
must have very good reasons for not wanting to be seen, and—” he
stopped short as though assailed by an idea. “Wait,” he cried,
excitedly, “I will go and see if I can find a place for you. Wait right
here,” and off he ran toward the inn.

“I don’t like the looks of that,” said Barney, after the man had left
them. “He’s gone to report us to someone. Come, we’d better get out of
here before he comes back.”

The two turned up a side street away from the inn. They had gone but a
short distance when they heard the sound of voices and the thud of
horses’ feet behind them. The horses were coming at a walk and with
them were several men on foot. Barney took the princess’ hand and drew
her up a hedge bordered driveway that led into private grounds. In the
shadows of the hedge they waited for the party behind them to pass. It
might be no one searching for them, but it was just as well to be on
the safe side—they were still near Blentz. Before the men reached their
hiding place a motor car followed and caught up with them, and as the
party came opposite the driveway Barney and the princess overheard a
portion of their conversation.

“Some of you go back and search the street behind the inn—they may not
have come this way.” The speaker was in the motor car. “We will follow
along this road for a bit and then turn into the Lustadt highway. If
you don’t find them go back along the road toward Tann.”

In her excitement the Princess Emma had not noticed that Barney Custer
still held her hand in his. Now he pressed it. “It is Maenck’s voice,”
he whispered. “Every road will be guarded.”

For a moment he was silent, thinking. The searching party had passed
on. They could still hear the purring of the motor as Maenck’s car
moved slowly up the street.

“This is a driveway,” murmured Barney. “People who build driveways into
their grounds usually have something to drive. Whatever it is it should
be at the other end of the driveway. Let’s see if it will carry two.”

Still in the shadow of the hedge they moved cautiously toward the upper
end of the private road until presently they saw a building looming in
their path.

“A garage?” whispered Barney.

“Or a barn,” suggested the princess.

“In either event it should contain something that can go,” returned the
American. “Let us hope that it can go like—like—ah—the wind.”

“And carry two,” supplemented the princess.

“Wait here,” said Barney. “If I get caught, run. Whatever happens you
mustn’t be caught.”

Princess Emma dropped back close to the hedge and Barney approached the
building, which proved to be a private garage. The doors were locked,
as also were the three windows. Barney passed entirely around the
structure halting at last upon the darkest side. Here was a window.
Barney tried to loosen the catch with the blade of his pocket knife,
but it wouldn’t unfasten. His endeavors resulted only in snapping short
the blade of his knife. For a moment he stood contemplating the
baffling window. He dared not break the glass for fear of arousing the
inmates of the house which, though he could not see it, might be close
at hand.

Presently he recalled a scene he had witnessed on State Street in
Chicago several years before—a crowd standing before the window of a
jeweler’s shop inspecting a neat little hole that a thief had cut in
the glass with a diamond and through which he had inserted his hand and
brought forth several hundred dollars worth of loot. But Barney Custer
wore no diamond—he would as soon have worn a celluloid collar. But
women wore diamonds. Doubtless the Princess Emma had one. He ran
quickly to her side.

“Have you a diamond ring?” he whispered.

“Gracious!” she exclaimed, “you are progressing rapidly,” and slipped a
solitaire from her finger to his hand.

“Thanks,” said Barney. “I need the practice; but wait and you’ll see
that a diamond may be infinitely more valuable than even the broker
claims,” and he was gone again into the shadows of the garage. Here
upon the window pane he scratched a rough deep circle, close to the
catch. A quick blow sent the glass clattering to the floor within. For
a minute Barney stood listening for any sign that the noise had
attracted attention, but hearing nothing he ran his hand through the
hole that he had made and unlatched the frame. A moment later he had
crawled within.

Before him, in the darkness, stood a roadster. He ran his hand over the
pedals and levers, breathing a sigh of relief as his touch revealed the
familiar control of a standard make. Then he went to the double doors.
They opened easily and silently.

Once outside he hastened to the side of the waiting girl.

“It’s a machine,” he whispered. “We must both be in it when it leaves
the garage—it’s the through express for Lustadt and makes no stops for
passengers or freight.”

He led her back to the garage and helped her into the seat beside him.
As silently as possible he ran the machine into the driveway. A hundred
yards to the left, half hidden by intervening trees and shrubbery, rose
the dark bulk of a house. A subdued light shone through the drawn
blinds of several windows—the only sign of life about the premises
until the car had cleared the garage and was moving slowly down the
driveway. Then a door opened in the house letting out a flood of light
in which the figure of a man was silhouetted. A voice broke the
silence.

“Who are you? What are you doing there? Come back!”

The man in the doorway called excitedly, “Friedrich! Come! Come
quickly! Someone is stealing the automobile,” and the speaker came
running toward the driveway at top speed. Behind him came Friedrich.
Both were shouting, waving their arms and threatening. Their combined
din might have aroused the dead.

Barney sought speed—silence now was useless. He turned to the left into
the street away from the center of the town. In this direction had gone
the automobile with Maenck, but by taking the first righthand turn
Barney hoped to elude the captain. In a moment Friedrich and the other
were hopelessly distanced. It was with a sigh of relief that the
American turned the car into the dark shadows beneath the overarching
trees of the first cross street.

He was running without lights along an unknown way; and beside him was
the most precious burden that Barney Custer might ever expect to carry.
Under these circumstances his speed was greatly reduced from what he
would have wished, but at that he was forced to accept grave risks. The
road might end abruptly at the brink of a ravine—it might swerve
perilously close to a stone quarry—or plunge headlong into a pond or
river. Barney shuddered at the possibilities; but nothing of the sort
happened. The street ran straight out of the town into a country road,
rather heavy with sand. In the open the possibilities of speed were
increased, for the night, though moonless, was clear, and the road
visible for some distance ahead.

The fugitives were congratulating themselves upon the excellent chance
they now had to reach Lustadt. There was only Maenck and his companion
ahead of them in the other car, and as there were several roads by
which one might reach the main highway the chances were fair that
Prince Peter’s aide would miss them completely.

Already escape seemed assured when the pounding of horses’ hoofs upon
the roadway behind them arose to blast their new found hope. Barney
increased the speed of the car. It leaped ahead in response to his
foot; but the road was heavy, and the sides of the ruts gripping the
tires retarded the speed. For a mile they held the lead of the
galloping horsemen. The shouts of their pursuers fell clearly upon
their ears, and the Princess Emma, turning in her seat, could easily
see the four who followed. At last the car began to draw away—the
distance between it and the riders grew gradually greater.

“I believe we are going to make it,” whispered the girl, her voice
tense with excitement. “If you could only go a little faster, Mr.
Custer, I’m sure that we will.”

“She’s reached her limit in this sand,” replied the man, “and there’s a
grade just ahead—we may find better going beyond, but they’re bound to
gain on us before we reach the top.”

The girl strained her eyes into the night before them. On the right of
the road stood an ancient ruin—grim and forbidding. As her eyes rested
upon it she gave a little exclamation of relief.

“I know where we are now,” she cried. “The hill ahead is sandy, and
there is a quarter of a mile of sand beyond, but then we strike the
Lustadt highway, and if we can reach it ahead of them their horses will
have to go ninety miles an hour to catch us—provided this car possesses
any such speed possibilities.”

“If it can go forty we are safe enough,” replied Barney; “but we’ll
give it a chance to go as fast as it can—the farther we are from the
vicinity of Blentz the safer I shall feel for the welfare of your
highness.”

A shot rang behind them, and a bullet whistled high above their heads.
The princess seized the carbine that rested on the seat between them.

“Shall I?” she asked, turning its muzzle back over the lowered top.

“Better not,” answered the man. “They are only trying to frighten us
into surrendering—that shot was much too high to have been aimed at
us—they are shooting over our heads purposely. If they deliberately
attempt to pot us later, then go for them, but to do it now would only
draw their fire upon us. I doubt if they wish to harm your highness,
but they certainly would fire to hit in self-defense.”

The girl lowered the firearm. “I am becoming perfectly bloodthirsty,”
she said, “but it makes me furious to be hunted like a wild animal in
my native land, and by the command of my king, at that. And to think
that you who placed him upon his throne, you who have risked your life
many times for him, will find no protection at his hands should you be
captured is maddening. Ach, Gott, if I were a man!”

“I thank God that you are not, your highness,” returned Barney
fervently.

Gently she laid her hand upon his where it gripped the steering wheel.

“No,” she said, “I was wrong—I do not need to be a man while there
still be such men as you, my friend; but I would that I were not the
unhappy woman whom Fate had bound to an ingrate king—to a miserable
coward!”

They had reached the grade at last, and the motor was straining to the
Herculean task imposed upon it.

Grinding and grating in second speed the car toiled upward through the
clinging sand. The pace was snail-like. Behind, the horsemen were
gaining rapidly. The labored breathing of their mounts was audible even
above the noise of the motor, so close were they. The top of the ascent
lay but a few yards ahead, and the pursuers were but a few yards
behind.

“Halt!” came from behind, and then a shot. The ping of the bullet and
the scream of the ricochet warned the man and the girl that those
behind them were becoming desperate—the bullet had struck one of the
rear fenders. Without again asking assent the princess turned and,
kneeling upon the cushion of the seat, fired at the nearest horseman.
The horse stumbled and plunged to his knees. Another, just behind, ran
upon him, and the two rolled over together with their riders. Two more
shots were fired by the remaining horsemen and answered by the girl in
the automobile, and then the car topped the hill, shot into high, and
with renewed speed forged into the last quarter-mile of heavy going
toward the good road ahead; but now the grade was slightly downward and
all the advantage was upon the side of the fugitives.

However, their margin would be but scant when they reached the highway,
for behind them the remaining troopers were spurring their jaded horses
to a final spurt of speed. At last the white ribbon of the main road
became visible. To the right they saw the headlights of a machine. It
was Maenck probably, doubtless attracted their way by the shooting.

But the machine was a mile away and could not possibly reach the
intersection of the two roads before they had turned to the left toward
Lustadt. Then the incident would resolve itself into a simple test of
speed between the two cars—and the ability and nerve of the drivers.
Barney hadn’t the slightest doubt now as to the outcome. His borrowed
car was a good one, in good condition. And in the matter of driving he
rather prided himself that he needn’t take his hat off to anyone when
it came to ability and nerve.

They were only about fifty feet from the highway. The girl touched his
hand again. “We’re safe,” she cried, her voice vibrant with excitement,
“we’re safe at last.” From beneath the bonnet, as though in answer to
her statement, came a sickly, sucking sputter. The momentum of the car
diminished. The throbbing of the engine ceased. They sat in silence as
the machine coasted toward the highway and came to a dead stop, with
its front wheels upon the road to safety. The girl turned toward Barney
with an exclamation of surprise and interrogation.

“The jig’s up,” he groaned; “we’re out of gasoline!”




IX.
THE CAPTURE


The capture of Princess Emma von der Tann and Barney Custer was a
relatively simple matter. Open fields spread in all directions about
the crossroads at which their car had come to its humiliating stop.
There was no cover. To have sought escape by flight, thus in the open,
would have been to expose the princess to the fire of the troopers.
Barney could not do this. He preferred to surrender and trust to chance
to open the way to escape later.

When Captain Ernst Maenck drove up he found the prisoners disarmed,
standing beside the now-useless car. He alighted from his own machine
and with a low bow saluted the princess, an ironical smile upon his
thin lips. Then he turned his attention toward her companion.

“Who are you?” he demanded gruffly. In the darkness he failed to
recognize the American whom he thought dead in Austria.

“A servant of the house of Von der Tann,” replied Barney.

“You deserve shooting,” growled the officer, “but we’ll leave that to
Prince Peter and the king. When I tell them the trouble you have caused
us—well, God help you.”

The journey to Blentz was a short one. They had been much nearer that
grim fortress than either had guessed. At the outskirts of the town
they were challenged by Austrian sentries, through which Maenck passed
with ease after the sentinel had summoned an officer. From this man
Maenck received the password that would carry them through the line of
outposts between the town and the castle—“Slankamen.” Barney, who
overheard the word, made a mental note of it.

At last they reached the dreary castle of Peter of Blentz. In the
courtyard Austrian soldiers mingled with the men of the bodyguard of
the king of Lutha. Within, the king’s officers fraternized with the
officers of the emperor. Maenck led his prisoners to the great hall
which was filled with officers and officials of both Austria and Lutha.

The king was not there. Maenck learned that he had retired to his
apartments a few minutes earlier in company with Prince Peter of Blentz
and Von Coblich. He sent a servant to announce his return with the
Princess von der Tann and a man who had attempted to prevent her being
brought to Blentz.

Barney had, as far as possible, kept his face averted from Maenck since
they had entered the lighted castle. He hoped to escape recognition,
for he knew that if his identity were guessed it might go hard with the
princess. As for himself, it might go even harder, but of that he gave
scarcely a thought—the safety of the princess was paramount.

After a few minutes of waiting the servant returned with the king’s
command to fetch the prisoners to his apartments. The face of the
Princess Emma was haggard. For the first time Barney saw signs of fear
upon her countenance. With leaden steps they accompanied their guard up
the winding stairway to the tower rooms that had been furnished for the
king. They were the same in which Emma von der Tann had been imprisoned
two years before.

On either side of the doorway stood a soldier of the king’s bodyguard.
As Captain Maenck approached they saluted. A servant opened the door
and they passed into the room. Before them were Peter of Blentz and Von
Coblich standing beside a table at which Leopold of Lutha was sitting.
The eyes of the three men were upon the doorway as the little party
entered. The king’s face was flushed with wine. He rose as his eyes
rested upon the face of the princess.

“Greetings, your highness,” he cried with an attempt at cordiality.

The girl looked straight into his eyes, coldly, and then bent her knee
in formal curtsy. The king was about to speak again when his eyes
wandered to the face of the American. Instantly his own went white and
then scarlet. The eyes of Peter of Blentz followed those of the king,
widening in astonishment as they rested upon the features of Barney
Custer.

“You told me he was dead,” shouted the king. “What is the meaning of
this, Captain Maenck?”

Maenck looked at his male prisoner and staggered back as though struck
between the eyes.

“Mein Gott,” he exclaimed, “the impostor!”

“You told me he was dead,” repeated the king accusingly.

“As God is my judge, your majesty,” cried Peter of Blentz, “this man
was shot by an Austrian firing squad in Burgova over a week ago.”

“Sire,” exclaimed Maenck, “this is the first sight I have had of the
prisoners except in the darkness of the night; until this instant I had
not the remotest suspicion of his identity. He told me that he was a
servant of the house of Von der Tann.”

“I told you the truth, then,” interjected Barney.

“Silence, you ingrate!” cried the king.

“Ingrate?” repeated Barney. “You have the effrontery to call me an
ingrate? You miserable puppy.”

A silence, menacing in its intensity, fell upon the little assemblage.
The king trembled. His rage choked him. The others looked as though
they scarce could believe the testimony of their own ears. All there,
with the possible exception of the king, knew that he deserved even
more degrading appellations; but they were Europeans, and to Europeans
a king is a king—that they can never forget. It had been the inherent
suggestion of kingship that had bent the knee of the Princess Emma
before the man she despised.

But to the American a king was only what he made himself. In this
instance he was not even a man in the estimation of Barney Custer.
Maenck took a step toward the prisoner—a menacing step, for his hand
had gone to his sword. Barney met him with a level look from between
narrowed lids. Maenck hesitated, for he was a great coward. Peter of
Blentz spoke:

“Sire,” he said, “the fellow knows that he is already as good as dead,
and so in his bravado he dares affront you. He has been convicted of
spying by the Austrians. He is still a spy. It is unnecessary to repeat
the formality of a trial.”

Leopold at last found his voice, though it trembled and broke as he
spoke.

“Carry out the sentence of the Austrian court in the morning,” he said.
“A volley now might arouse the garrison in the town and be
misconstrued.”

Maenck ordered Barney escorted from the apartment, then he turned
toward the king.

“And the other prisoner, sire?” he inquired.

“There is no other prisoner,” he said. “Her highness, the Princess von
der Tann, is a guest of Prince Peter. She will be escorted to her
apartment at once.”

“Her highness, the Princess von der Tann, is not a guest of Prince
Peter.” The girl’s voice was low and cold. “If Mr. Custer is a
prisoner, her highness, too, is a prisoner. If he is to be shot, she
demands a like fate. To die by the side of a MAN would be infinitely
preferable to living by the side of your majesty.”

Once again Leopold of Lutha reddened. For a moment he paced the room
angrily to hide his emotion. Then he turned once to Maenck.

“Escort the prisoner to the north tower,” he commanded, “and this
insolent girl to the chambers next to ours. Tomorrow we shall talk with
her again.”

Outside the room Barney turned for a last look at the princess as he
was being led in one direction and she in another. A smile of
encouragement was on his lips and cold hopelessness in his heart. She
answered the smile and her lips formed a silent “good-bye.” They formed
something else, too—three words which he was sure he could not have
mistaken, and then they parted, he for the death chamber and she for
what fate she could but guess.

As his guard halted before a door at the far end of a long corridor
Barney Custer sensed a sudden familiarity in his surroundings. He was
conscious of that sensation which is common to all of us—of having
lived through a scene at some former time, to each minutest detail.

As the door opened and he was pushed into the room he realized that
there was excellent foundation for the impression—he immediately
recognized the apartment as the same in which he had once before been
imprisoned. At that time he had been mistaken for the mad king who had
escaped from the clutches of Peter of Blentz. The same king was now
visiting as a guest the fortress in which he had spent ten bitter years
as a prisoner.

“Say your prayers, my friend,” admonished Maenck, as he was about to
leave him alone, “for at dawn you die—and this time the firing squad
will make a better job of it.”

Barney did not answer him, and the captain departed, locking the door
after him and leaving two men on guard in the corridor. Alone, Barney
looked about the room. It was in no wise changed since his former visit
to it. He recalled the incidents of the hour of his imprisonment here,
thought of old Joseph who had aided his escape, looked at the paneled
fireplace, whose secret, it was evident, not even the master of Blentz
was familiar with—and grinned.

“‘For at dawn you die!’” he repeated to himself, still smiling broadly.
Then he crossed quickly to the fireplace, running his fingers along the
edge of one of the large tiled panels that hid the entrance to the
well-like shaft that rose from the cellars beneath to the towers above
and which opened through similar concealed exits upon each floor. If
the floor above should be untenanted he might be able to reach it as he
and Joseph had done two years ago when they opened the secret panel in
the fireplace and climbed a hidden ladder to the room overhead; and
then by vacant corridors reached the far end of the castle above the
suite in which the princess had been confined and near which Barney had
every reason to believe she was now imprisoned.

Carefully Barney’s fingers traversed the edges of the panel. No hidden
latch rewarded his search. Again and again he examined the perfectly
fitted joints until he was convinced either that there was no latch
there or that it was hid beyond possibility of discovery. With each
succeeding minute the American’s heart and hopes sank lower and lower.
Two years had elapsed since he had seen the secret portal swing to the
touch of Joseph’s fingers. One may forget much in two years; but that
he was at work upon the right panel Barney was positive. However, it
would do no harm to examine its mate which resembled it in minutest
detail.

Almost indifferently Barney turned his attention to the other panel. He
ran his fingers over it, his eyes following them. What was that? A
finger-print? Upon the left side half way up a tiny smudge was visible.
Barney examined it more carefully. A round, white figure of the
conventional design that was burned into the tile bore the telltale
smudge.

Otherwise it differed apparently in no way from the numerous other
round, white figures that were repeated many times in the scheme of
decoration. Barney placed his thumb exactly over the mark that another
thumb had left there and pushed. The figure sank into the panel beneath
the pressure. Barney pushed harder, breathless with suspense. The panel
swung in at his effort. The American could have whooped with delight.

A moment more and he stood upon the opposite side of the secret door in
utter darkness, for he had quickly closed it after him. To strike a
match was but the matter of a moment. The wavering light revealed the
top of the ladder that led downward and the foot of another leading
aloft. He struck still more matches in search of the rope. It was not
there, but his quest revealed the fact that the well at this point was
much larger than he had imagined—it broadened into a small chamber.

The light of many matches finally led him to the discovery of a
passageway directly behind the fireplace. It was narrow, and after
spanning the chimney descended by a few rough steps to a slightly lower
level. It led toward the opposite end of the castle. Could it be
possible that it connected directly with the apartments in the farther
tower—in the tower where the king was and the Princess Emma? Barney
could scarce hope for any such good luck, but at least it was worth
investigating—it must lead somewhere.

He followed it warily, feeling his way with hands and feet and
occasionally striking a match. It was evident that the corridor lay in
the thick wall of the castle, midway between the bottoms of the windows
of the second floor and the tops of those upon the first—this would
account for the slightly lower level of the passage from the floor of
the second story.

Barney had traversed some distance in the darkness along the forgotten
corridor when the sound of voices came to him from beyond the wall at
his right. He stopped, motionless, pressing his ear against the side
wall. As he did so he became aware of the fact that at this point the
wall was of wood—a large panel of hardwood. Now he could hear even the
words of the speaker upon the opposite side.

“Fetch her here, captain, and I will talk with her alone.” The voice
was the king’s. “And, captain, you might remove the guard from before
the door temporarily. I shall not require them, nor do I wish them to
overhear my conversation with the princess.”

Barney could hear the officer acknowledge the commands of the king, and
then he heard a door close. The man had gone to fetch the princess. The
American struck a match and examined the panel before him. It reached
to the top of the passageway and was some three feet in width.

At one side were three hinges, and at the other an ancient spring lock.
For an instant Barney stood in indecision. What should he do? His entry
into the apartments of the king would result in alarming the entire
fortress. Were he sure the king was alone it might be accomplished.
Should he enter now or wait until the Princess Emma had been brought to
the king?

With the question came the answer—a bold and daring scheme. His fingers
sought the lock. Very gently, he unlatched it and pushed outward upon
the panel. Suddenly the great doorway gave beneath his touch. It opened
a crack letting a flood of light into his dark cell that almost blinded
him.

For a moment he could see nothing, and then out of the glaring blur
grew the figure of a man sitting at a table—with his back toward the
panel.

It was the king, and he was alone. Noiselessly Barney Custer entered
the apartment, closing the panel after him. At his back now was the
great oil painting of the Blentz princess that had hid the secret
entrance to the room. He crossed the thick rugs until he stood behind
the king. Then he clapped one hand over the mouth of the monarch of
Lutha and threw the other arm about his neck.

“Make the slightest outcry and I shall kill you,” he whispered in the
ear of the terrified man.

Across the room Barney saw a revolver lying upon a small table. He
raised the king to his feet and, turning his back toward the weapon
dragged him across the apartment until the table was within easy reach.
Then he snatched up the revolver and swung the king around into a chair
facing him, the muzzle of the gun pressed against his face.

“Silence,” he whispered.

The king, white and trembling, gasped as his eyes fell upon the face of
the American.

“You?” His voice was barely audible.

“Take off your clothes—every stitch of them—and if any one asks for
admittance, deny them. Quick, now,” as the king hesitated. “My life is
forfeited unless I can escape. If I am apprehended I shall see that you
pay for my recapture with your life—if any one enters this room without
my sanction they will enter it to find a dead king upon the floor; do
you understand?”

The king made no reply other than to commence divesting himself of his
clothing. Barney followed his example, but not before he had crossed to
the door that opened into the main corridor and shot the bolt upon the
inside. When both men had removed their clothing Barney pointed to the
little pile of soiled peasant garb that he had worn.

“Put those on,” he commanded.

The king hesitated, drawing back in disgust. Barney paused, half-way
into the royal union suit, and leveled the revolver at Leopold. The
king picked up one of the garments gingerly between the tips of his
thumb and finger.

“Hurry!” admonished the American, drawing the silk half-hose of the
ruler of Lutha over his foot. “If you don’t hurry,” he added, “someone
may interrupt us, and you know what the result would be—to you.”

Scowling, Leopold donned the rough garments. Barney, fully clothed in
the uniform the king had been wearing, stepped across the apartment to
where the king’s sword and helmet lay upon the side table that had also
borne the revolver. He placed the helmet upon his head and buckled the
sword-belt about his waist, then he faced the king, behind whom was a
cheval glass. In it Barney saw his image. The king was looking at the
American, his eyes wide and his jaw dropped. Barney did not wonder at
his consternation. He himself was dumbfounded by the likeness which he
bore to the king. It was positively uncanny. He approached Leopold.

“Remove your rings,” he said, holding out his hand. The king did as he
was bid, and Barney slipped the two baubles upon his fingers. One of
them was the royal ring of the kings of Lutha.

The American now blindfolded the king and led him toward the panel
which had given him ingress to the room. Through it the two men passed,
Barney closing the panel after them. Then he conducted the king back
along the dark passageway to the room which the American had but
recently quitted. At the back of the panel which led into his former
prison Barney halted and listened. No sound came from beyond the
partition. Gently Barney opened the secret door a trifle—just enough to
permit him a quick survey of the interior of the apartment. It was
empty. A smile crossed his face as he thought of the difficulty Leopold
might encounter the following morning in convincing his jailers that he
was not the American.

Then he recalled his reflection in the cheval glass and frowned. Could
Leopold convince them? He doubted it—and what then? The American was
sentenced to be shot at dawn. They would shoot the king instead. Then
there would be none to whom to return the kingship. What would he do
with it? The temptation was great. Again a throne lay within his
grasp—a throne and the woman he loved. None might ever know unless he
chose to tell—his resemblance to Leopold was too perfect. It defied
detection.

With an exclamation of impatience he wheeled about and dragged the
frightened monarch back to the room from which he had stolen him. As he
entered he heard a knock at the door.

“Do not disturb me now,” he called. “Come again in half an hour.”

“But it is Her Highness, Princess Emma, sire,” came a voice from beyond
the door. “You summoned her.”

“She may return to her apartments,” replied Barney.

All the time he kept his revolver leveled at the king, from his eyes he
had removed the blind after they had entered the apartment. He crossed
to the table where the king had been sitting when he surprised him,
motioning the ragged ruler to follow and be seated.

“Take that pen,” he said, “and write a full pardon for Mr. Bernard
Custer, and an order requiring that he be furnished with money and set
at liberty at dawn.”

The king did as he was bid. For a moment the American stood looking at
him before he spoke again.

“You do not deserve what I am going to do for you,” he said. “And Lutha
deserves a better king than the one my act will give her; but I am
neither a thief nor a murderer, and so I must forbear leaving you to
your just deserts and return your throne to you. I shall do so after I
have insured my own safety and done what I can for Lutha—what you are
too little a man and king to do yourself.

“So soon as they liberate you in the morning, make the best of your way
to Brosnov, on the Serbian frontier. Await me there. When I can, I
shall come. Again we may exchange clothing and you can return to
Lustadt. I shall cross over into Siberia out of your reach, for I know
you too well to believe that any sense of honor or gratitude would
prevent you signing my death-warrant at the first opportunity. Now,
come!”

Once again Barney led the blindfolded king through the dark corridor to
the room in the opposite tower—to the prison of the American. At the
open panel he shoved him into the apartment. Then he drew the door
quietly to, leaving the king upon the inside, and retraced his steps to
the royal apartments. Crossing to the center table, he touched an
electric button. A moment later an officer knocked at the door, which,
in the meantime, Barney had unbolted.

“Enter!” said the American. He stood with his back toward the door
until he heard it close behind the officer. When he turned he was
apparently examining his revolver. If the officer suspected his
identity, it was just as well to be prepared. Slowly he raised his eyes
to the newcomer, who stood stiffly at salute. The officer looked him
full in the face.

“I answered your majesty’s summons,” said the man.

“Oh, yes!” returned the American. “You may fetch the Princess Emma.”

The officer saluted once more and backed out of the apartment. Barney
walked to the table and sat down. A tin box of cigarettes lay beside
the lamp. Barney lighted one of them. The king had good taste in the
selection of tobacco, he thought. Well, a man must need have some
redeeming characteristics.

Outside, in the corridor, he heard voices, and again the knock at the
door. He bade them enter. As the door opened Emma von der Tann, her
head thrown back and a flush of anger on her face, entered the room.
Behind her was the officer who had been despatched to bring her. Barney
nodded to the latter.

“You may go,” he said. He drew a chair from the table and asked the
princess to be seated. She ignored his request.

“What do you wish of me?” she asked. She was looking straight into his
eyes. The officer had withdrawn and closed the door after him. They
were alone, with nothing to fear; yet she did not recognize him.

“You are the king,” she continued in cold, level tones, “but if you are
also a gentleman, you will at once order me returned to my father at
Lustadt, and with me the man to whom you owe so much. I do not expect
it of you, but I wish to give you the chance.

“I shall not go without him. I am betrothed to you; but until tonight I
should rather have died than wed you. Now I am ready to compromise. If
you will set Mr. Custer at liberty in Serbia and return me unharmed to
my father, I will fulfill my part of our betrothal.”

Barney Custer looked straight into the girl’s face for a long moment. A
half smile played upon his lips at the thought of her surprise when she
learned the truth, when suddenly it dawned upon him that she and he
were both much safer if no one, not even her loyal self, guessed that
he was other than the king. It is not difficult to live a part, but
often it is difficult to act one. Some little word or look, were she to
know that he was Barney Custer, might betray them; no, it was better to
leave her in ignorance, though his conscience pricked him for the
disloyalty that his act implied.

It seemed a poor return for her courage and loyalty to him that her
statement to the man she thought king had revealed. He marveled that a
Von der Tann could have spoken those words—a Von der Tann who but the
day before had refused to save her father’s life at the loss of the
family honor. It seemed incredible to the American that he had won such
love from such a woman. Again came the mighty temptation to keep the
crown and the girl both; but with a straightening of his broad
shoulders he threw it from him.

She was promised to the king, and while he masqueraded in the king’s
clothes, he at least would act the part that a king should. He drew a
folded paper from his inside pocket and handed it to the girl.

“Here is the American’s pardon,” he said, “drawn up and signed by the
king’s own hand.”

She opened it and, glancing through it hurriedly, looked up at the man
before her with a questioning expression in her eyes.

“You came, then,” she said, “to a realization of the enormity of your
ingratitude?”

The man shrugged.

“He will never die at my command,” he said.

“I thank your majesty,” she said simply. “As a Von der Tann, I have
tried to believe that a Rubinroth could not be guilty of such baseness.
And now, tell me what your answer is to my proposition.”

“We shall return to Lustadt tonight,” he replied. “I fear the purpose
of Prince Peter. In fact, it may be difficult—even impossible—for us to
leave Blentz; but we can at least make the attempt.”

“Can we not take Mr. Custer with us?” she asked. “Prince Peter may
disregard your majesty’s commands and, after you are gone, have him
shot. Do not forget that he kept the crown from Peter of Blentz—it is
certain that Prince Peter will never forget it.”

“I give you my word, your highness, that I know positively that if I
leave Blentz tonight Prince Peter will not have Mr. Custer shot in the
morning, and it will so greatly jeopardize his own plans if we attempt
to release the prisoner that in all probability we ourselves will be
unable to escape.”

She looked at him thoughtfully for a moment.

“You give me your word that he will be safe?” she asked.

“My royal word,” he replied.

“Very well, let us leave at once.”

Barney touched the bell once more, and presently an officer of the
Blentz faction answered the summons. As the man closed the door and
approached, saluting, Barney stepped close to him.

“We are leaving for Tann tonight,” he said, “at once. You will conduct
us from the castle and procure horses for us. All the time I shall walk
at your elbow, and in my hand I shall carry this,” and he displayed the
king’s revolver. “At the first indication of defection upon your part I
shall kill you. Do you perfectly understand me?”

“But, your majesty,” exclaimed the officer, “why is it necessary that
you leave thus surreptitiously? May not the king go and come in his own
kingdom as he desires? Let me announce your wishes to Prince Peter that
he may furnish you with a proper escort. Doubtless he will wish to
accompany you himself, sire.”

“You will do precisely what I say without further comment,” snapped
Barney. “Now get a—” He had been about to say: “Now get a move on you,”
when it occurred to him that this was not precisely the sort of
language that kings were supposed to use to their inferiors. So he
changed it. “Now get a couple of horses for her highness and myself, as
well as your own, for you will accompany us to Tann.”

The officer looked at the weapon in the king’s hand. He measured the
distance between himself and the king. He well knew the reputed
cowardice of Leopold. Could he make the leap and strike up the king’s
hand before the timorous monarch found even the courage of the cornered
rat to fire at him? Then his eyes sought the face of the king,
searching for the signs of nervous terror that would make his conquest
an easy one; but what he saw in the eyes that bored straight into his
brought his own to the floor at the king’s feet.

What new force animated Leopold of Lutha? Those were not the eyes of a
coward. No fear was reflected in their steely glitter. The officer
mumbled an apology, saluted, and turned toward the door. At his elbow
walked the impostor; a cavalry cape that had belonged to the king now
covered his shoulders and hid the weapon that pressed its hard warning
now and again into the short-ribs of the Blentz officer. Just behind
the American came the Princess Emma von der Tann.

The three passed through the deserted corridors of the sleeping castle,
taking a route at Barney’s suggestion that led them to the stable
courtyard without necessitating traversing the main corridors or the
great hall or the guardroom, in all of which there still were Austrian
and Blentz soldiers, whose duties or pleasures had kept them from their
blankets.

At the stables a sleepy groom answered the summons of the officer, whom
Barney had warned not to divulge the identity of himself or the
princess. He left the princess in the shadows outside the building.
After what seemed an eternity to the American, three horses were led
into the courtyard, saddled, and bridled. The party mounted and
approached the gates. Here, Barney knew, might be encountered the most
serious obstacle in their path. He rode close to the side of their
unwilling conductor. Leaning forward in his saddle, he whispered in the
man’s ear.

“Failure to pass us through the gates,” he said, “will be the signal
for your death.”

The man reined in his mount and turned toward the American.

“I doubt if they will pass even me without a written order from Prince
Peter,” he said. “If they refuse, you must reveal your identity. The
guard is composed of Luthanians—I doubt if they will dare refuse your
majesty.”

Then they rode on up to the gates. A soldier stepped from the sentry
box and challenged them.

“Lower the drawbridge,” ordered the officer. “It is Captain Krantzwort
on a mission for the king.”

The soldier approached, raising a lantern, which he had brought from
the sentry box, and inspected the captain’s face. He seemed ill at
ease. In the light of the lantern, the American saw that he was scarce
more than a boy—doubtless a recruit. He saw the expression of fear and
awe with which he regarded the officer, and it occurred to him that the
effect of the king’s presence upon him would be absolutely
overpowering. Still the soldier hesitated.

“My orders are very strict, sir,” he said. “I am to let no one leave
without a written order from Prince Peter. If the sergeant or the
lieutenant were here they would know what to do; but they are both at
the castle—only two other soldiers are at the gates with me. Wait, and
I will send one of them for the lieutenant.”

“No,” interposed the American. “You will send for no one, my man. Come
closer—look at my face.”

The soldier approached, holding his lantern above his head. As its
feeble rays fell upon the face and uniform of the man on horseback, the
sentry gave a little gasp of astonishment.

“Now, lower the drawbridge,” said Barney Custer, “it is your king’s
command.”

Quickly the fellow hastened to obey the order. The chains creaked and
the windlass groaned as the heavy planking sank to place across the
moat.

As Barney passed the soldier he handed him the pardon Leopold had
written for the American.

“Give this to your lieutenant,” he said, “and tell him to hand it to
Prince Peter before dawn tomorrow. Do not fail.”

A moment later the three were riding down the winding road toward
Blentz. Barney had no further need of the officer who rode with them.
He would be glad to be rid of him, for he anticipated that the fellow
might find ample opportunity to betray them as they passed through the
Austrian lines, which they must do to reach Lustadt.

He had told the captain that they were going to Tann in order that,
should the man find opportunity to institute pursuit, he might be
thrown off the track. The Austrian sentries were no great distance
ahead when Barney ordered a halt.

“Dismount,” he directed the captain, leaping to the ground himself at
the same time. “Put your hands behind your back.”

The officer did as he was bid, and Barney bound his wrists securely
with a strap and buckle that he had removed from the cantle of his
saddle as he rode. Then he led him off the road among some weeds and
compelled him to lie down, after which he bound his ankles together and
stuffed a gag in his mouth, securing it in place with a bit of stick
and the chinstrap from the man’s helmet. The threat of the revolver
kept Captain Krantzwort silent and obedient throughout the hasty
operations.

“Good-bye, captain,” whispered Barney, “and let me suggest that you
devote the time until your discovery and release in pondering the value
of winning your king’s confidence in the future. Had you chosen your
associates more carefully in the past, this need not have occurred.”

Barney unsaddled the captain’s horse and turned him loose, then he
remounted and, with the princess at his side, rode down toward Blentz.




X.
A NEW KING IN LUTHA


As the two riders approached the edge of the village of Blentz a sentry
barred their way. To his challenge the American replied that they were
“friends from the castle.”

“Advance,” directed the sentry, “and give the countersign.”

Barney rode to the fellow’s side, and leaning from the saddle whispered
in his ear the word “Slankamen.”

Would it pass them out as it had passed Maenck in? Barney scarcely
breathed as he awaited the result of his experiment. The soldier
brought his rifle to present and directed them to pass. With a sigh of
relief that was almost audible the two rode into the village and the
Austrian lines.

Once within they met with no further obstacle until they reached the
last line of sentries upon the far side of the town. It was with more
confidence that Barney gave the countersign here, nor was he surprised
that the soldier passed them readily; and now they were upon the
highroad to Lustadt, with nothing more to bar their way.

For hours they rode on in silence. Barney wanted to talk with his
companion, but as king he found nothing to say to her. The girl’s mind
was filled with morbid reflections of the past few hours and dumb
terror for the future. She would keep her promise to the king; but
after—life would not be worth the living; why should she live? She
glanced at the man beside her in the light of the coming dawn. Ah, why
was he so like her American in outward appearances only? Their own
mothers could scarce have distinguished them, and yet in character no
two men could have differed more widely. The man turned to her.

“We are almost there,” he said. “You must be very tired.”

The words reflected a consideration that had never been a
characteristic of Leopold. The girl began to wonder if there might not
possibly be a vein of nobility in the man, after all, that she had
never discovered. Since she had entered his apartments at Blentz he had
been in every way a different man from the Leopold she had known of
old. The boldness of his escape from Blentz supposed a courage that the
king had never given the slightest indication of in the past. Could it
be that he was making a genuine effort to become a man—to win her
respect?

They were approaching Lustadt as the sun rose. A troop of horse was
just emerging from the north gate. As it neared them they saw that the
cavalrymen wore the uniforms of the Royal Horse Guard. At their head
rode a lieutenant. As his eyes fell upon the face of the princess and
her companion, he brought his troopers to a halt, and, with incredulity
plain upon his countenance, advanced to meet them, his hand raised in
salute to the king. It was Butzow.

Now Barney was sure that he would be recognized. For two years he and
the Luthanian officer had been inseparable. Surely Butzow would
penetrate his disguise. He returned his friend’s salute, looked him
full in the eyes, and asked where he was riding.

“To Blentz, your majesty,” replied Butzow, “to demand an audience. I
bear important word from Prince von der Tann. He has learned the
Austrians are moving an entire army corps into Lutha, together with
siege howitzers. Serbia has demanded that all Austrian troops be
withdrawn from Luthanian territory at once, and has offered to assist
your majesty in maintaining your neutrality by force, if necessary.”

As Butzow spoke his eyes were often upon the Princess Emma, and it was
quite evident that he was much puzzled to account for her presence with
the king. She was supposed to be at Tann, and Butzow knew well enough
her estimate of Leopold to know that she would not be in his company of
her own volition. His expression as he addressed the man he supposed to
be his king was far from deferential. Barney could scarce repress a
smile.

“We will ride at once to the palace,” he said. “At the gate you may
instruct one of your sergeants to telephone to Prince von der Tann that
the king is returning and will grant him audience immediately. You and
your detachment will act as our escort.”

Butzow saluted and turned to his troopers, giving the necessary
commands that brought them about in the wake of the pseudo-king. Once
again Barney Custer, of Beatrice, rode into Lustadt as king of Lutha.
The few people upon the streets turned to look at him as he passed, but
there was little demonstration of love or enthusiasm.

Leopold had awakened no emotions of this sort in the hearts of his
subjects. Some there were who still remembered the gallant actions of
their ruler on the field of battle when his forces had defeated those
of the regent, upon that other occasion when this same American had sat
upon the throne of Lutha for two days and had led the little army to
victory; but since then the true king had been with them daily in his
true colors. Arrogance, haughtiness, and petty tyranny had marked his
reign. Taxes had gone even higher than under the corrupt influence of
the Blentz regime. The king’s days were spent in bed; his nights in
dissipation. Old Ludwig von der Tann seemed Lutha’s only friend at
court. Him the people loved and trusted.

It was the old chancellor who met them as they entered the palace—the
Princess Emma, Lieutenant Butzow, and the false king. As the old man’s
eyes fell upon his daughter, he gave an exclamation of surprise and of
incredulity. He looked from her to the American.

“What is the meaning of this, your majesty?” he cried in a voice hoarse
with emotion. “What does her highness in your company?”

There was neither fear nor respect in Prince Ludwig’s tone—only anger.
He was demanding an accounting from Leopold, the man; not from Leopold,
the king. Barney raised his hand.

“Wait,” he said, “before you judge. The princess was brought to Blentz
by Prince Peter. She will tell you that I have aided her to escape and
that I have accorded her only such treatment as a woman has a right to
expect from a king.”

The girl inclined her head.

“His majesty has been most kind,” she said. “He has treated me with
every consideration and respect, and I am convinced that he was not a
willing party to my arrest and forcible detention at Blentz; or,” she
added, “if he was, he regretted his action later and has made full
reparation by bringing me to Lustadt.”

Prince von der Tann found difficulty in hiding his surprise at this
evidence of chivalry in the cowardly king. But for his daughter’s
testimony he could not have believed it possible that it lay within the
nature of Leopold of Lutha to have done what he had done within the
past few hours.

He bowed low before the man who wore the king’s uniform. The American
extended his hand, and Von der Tann, taking it in his own, raised it to
his lips.

“And now,” said Barney briskly, “let us go to my apartments and get to
work. Your highness”—and he turned toward the Princess Emma—“must be
greatly fatigued. Lieutenant Butzow, you will see that a suite is
prepared for her highness. Afterward you may call upon Count
Zellerndorf, whom I understand returned to Lustadt yesterday, and
notify him that I will receive him in an hour. Inform the Serbian
minister that I desire his presence at the palace immediately. Lose no
time, lieutenant, and be sure to impress upon the Serbian minister that
immediately means immediately.”

Butzow saluted and the Princess Emma curtsied, as the king turned and,
slipping his arm through that of Prince Ludwig, walked away in the
direction of the royal apartments. Once at the king’s desk Barney
turned toward the chancellor. In his mind was the determination to save
Lutha if Lutha could be saved. He had been forced to place the king in
a position where he would be helpless, though that he would have been
equally as helpless upon his throne the American did not doubt for an
instant. However, the course of events had placed within his hands the
power to serve not only Lutha but the house of Von der Tann as well. He
would do in the king’s place what the king should have done if the king
had been a man.

“Now, Prince Ludwig,” he said, “tell me just what conditions we must
face. Remember that I have been at Blentz and that there the King of
Lutha is not apt to learn all that transpires in Lustadt.”

“Sire,” replied the chancellor, “we face a grave crisis. Not only is
there within Lutha the small force of Austrian troops that surround
Blentz, but now an entire army corps has crossed the border.
Unquestionably they are marching on Lustadt. The emperor is going to
take no chances. He sent the first force into Lutha to compel Serbian
intervention and draw Serbian troops from the Austro-Serbian battle
line. Serbia has withheld her forces at my request, but she will not
withhold them for long. We must make a declaration at once. If we
declare against Austria we are faced by the menace of the Austrian
troops already within our boundaries, but we shall have Serbia to help
us.

“A Serbian army corps is on the frontier at this moment awaiting word
from Lutha. If it is adverse to Austria that army corps will cross the
border and march to our assistance. If it is favorable to Austria it
will none the less cross into Lutha, but as enemies instead of allies.
Serbia has acted honorably toward Lutha. She has not violated our
neutrality. She has no desire to increase her possessions in this
direction.

“On the other hand, Austria has violated her treaty with us. She has
marched troops into our country and occupied the town of Blentz.
Constantly in the past she has incited internal discord. She is openly
championing the Blentz cause, which at last I trust your majesty has
discovered is inimical to your interests.

“If Austria is victorious in her war with Serbia, she will find some
pretext to hold Lutha whether Lutha takes her stand either for or
against her. And most certainly is this true if it occurs that Austrian
troops are still within the boundaries of Lutha when peace is
negotiated. Not only our honor but our very existence demands that
there be no Austrian troops in Lutha at the close of this war. If we
cannot force them across the border we can at least make such an effort
as will win us the respect of the world and a voice in the peace
negotiations.

“If we must bow to the surrender of our national integrity, let us do
so only after we have exhausted every resource of the country in our
country’s defense. In the past your majesty has not appeared to realize
the menace of your most powerful neighbor. I beg of you, sire, to trust
me. Believe that I have only the interests of Lutha at heart, and let
us work together for the salvation of our country and your majesty’s
throne.”

Barney laid his hand upon the old man’s shoulder. It seemed a shame to
carry the deception further, but the American well knew that only so
could he accomplish aught for Lutha or the Von der Tanns. Once the old
chancellor suspected the truth as to his identity he would be the first
to denounce him.

“I think that you and I can work together, Prince Ludwig,” he said. “I
have sent for the Serbian and Austrian ministers. The former should be
here immediately.”

Nor did they have long to wait before the tall Slav was announced.
Barney lost no time in getting down to business. He asked no questions.
What Von der Tann had told him, what he had seen with his own eyes
since he had entered Lutha, and what he had overheard in the inn at
Burgova was sufficient evidence that the fate of Lutha hung upon the
prompt and energetic decisions of the man who sat upon Lutha’s throne
for the next few days.

Had Leopold been the present incumbent Lutha would have been lost, for
that he would play directly into the hands of Austria was not to be
questioned. Were Von der Tann to seize the reins of government a state
of revolution would exist that would divide the state into two bitter
factions, weaken its defense, and give Austria what she most desired—a
plausible pretext for intervention.

Lutha’s only hope lay in united defense of her liberties under the
leadership of the one man whom all acknowledged king—Leopold. Very
well, Barney Custer, of Beatrice, would be Leopold for a few days,
since the real Leopold had proven himself incompetent to meet the
emergency.

General Petko, the Serbian minister to Lutha, brought to the audience
the memory of a series of unpleasant encounters with the king. Leopold
had never exerted himself to hide his pro-Austrian sentiments. Austria
was a powerful country—Serbia, a relatively weak neighbor. Leopold,
being a royal snob, had courted the favor of the emperor and turned up
his nose at Serbia. The general was prepared for a repetition of the
veiled affronts that Leopold delighted in according him; but this time
he brought with him a reply that for two years he had been living in
the hope of some day being able to deliver to the young monarch he so
cordially despised.

It was an ultimatum from his government—an ultimatum couched in terms
from which all diplomatic suavity had been stripped. If Barney Custer,
of Beatrice, could have read it he would have smiled, for in plain
American it might have been described as announcing to Leopold
precisely “where he got off.” But Barney did not have the opportunity
to read it, since that ultimatum was never delivered.

Barney took the wind all out of it by his first words. “Your excellency
may wonder why it is that we have summoned you at such an early hour,”
he said.

General Petko inclined his head in deferential acknowledgment of the
truth of the inference.

“It is because we have learned from our chancellor,” continued the
American, “that Serbia has mobilized an entire army corps upon the
Luthanian frontier. Am I correctly informed?”

General Petko squared his shoulders and bowed in assent. At the same
time he reached into his breast-pocket for the ultimatum.

“Good!” exclaimed Barney, and then he leaned close to the ear of the
Serbian. “How long will it take to move that army corps to Lustadt?”

General Petko gasped and returned the ultimatum to his pocket.

“Sire!” he cried, his face lighting with incredulity. “You mean—”

“I mean,” said the American, “that if Serbia will loan Lutha an army
corps until the Austrians have evacuated Luthanian territory, Lutha
will loan Serbia an army corps until such time as peace is declared
between Serbia and Austria. Other than this neither government will
incur any obligations to the other.

“We may not need your help, but it will do us no harm to have them well
on the way toward Lustadt as quickly as possible. Count Zellerndorf
will be here in a few minutes. We shall, through him, give Austria
twenty-four hours to withdraw all her troops beyond our frontiers. The
army of Lutha is mobilized before Lustadt. It is not a large army, but
with the help of Serbia it should be able to drive the Austrians from
the country, provided they do not leave of their own accord.”

General Petko smiled. So did the American and the chancellor. Each knew
that Austria would not withdraw her army from Lutha.

“With your majesty’s permission I will withdraw,” said the Serbian,
“and transmit Lutha’s proposition to my government; but I may say that
your majesty need have no apprehension but that a Serbian army corps
will be crossing into Lutha before noon today.”

“And now, Prince Ludwig,” said the American after the Serbian had bowed
himself out of the apartment, “I suggest that you take immediate steps
to entrench a strong force north of Lustadt along the road to Blentz.”

Von der Tann smiled as he replied. “It is already done, sire,” he said.

“But I passed in along the road this morning,” said Barney, “and saw
nothing of such preparations.”

“The trenches and the soldiers were there, nevertheless, sire,” replied
the old man, “only a little gap was left on either side of the highway
that those who came and went might not suspect our plans and carry word
of them to the Austrians. A few hours will complete the link across the
road.”

“Good! Let it be completed at once. Here is Count Zellerndorf now,” as
the minister was announced.

Von der Tann bowed himself out as the Austrian entered the king’s
presence. For the first time in two years the chancellor felt that the
destiny of Lutha was safe in the hands of her king. What had caused the
metamorphosis in Leopold he could not guess. He did not seem to be the
same man that had whined and growled at their last audience a week
before.

The Austrian minister entered the king’s presence with an expression of
ill-concealed surprise upon his face. Two days before he had left
Leopold safely ensconced at Blentz, where he was to have remained
indefinitely. He glanced hurriedly about the room in search of Prince
Peter or another of the conspirators who should have been with the
king. He saw no one. The king was speaking. The Austrian’s eyes went
wider, not only at the words, but at the tone of voice.

“Count Zellerndorf,” said the American, “you were doubtless aware of
the embarrassment under which the king of Lutha was compelled at Blentz
to witness the entry of a foreign army within his domain. But we are
not now at Blentz. We have summoned you that you may receive from us,
and transmit to your emperor, the expression of our surprise and dismay
at the unwarranted violation of Luthanian neutrality.”

“But, your majesty—” interrupted the Austrian.

“But nothing, your excellency,” snapped the American. “The moment for
diplomacy is passed; the time for action has come. You will oblige us
by transmitting to your government at once a request that every
Austrian soldier now in Lutha be withdrawn by noon tomorrow.”

Zellerndorf looked his astonishment.

“Are you mad, sire?” he cried. “It will mean war!”

“It is what Austria has been looking for,” snapped the American, “and
what people look for they usually get, especially if they chance to be
looking for trouble. When can you expect a reply from Vienna?”

“By noon, your majesty,” replied the Austrian, “but are you
irretrievably bound to your present policy? Remember the power of
Austria, sire. Think of your throne. Think—”

“We have thought of everything,” interrupted Barney. “A throne means
less to us than you may imagine, count; but the honor of Lutha means a
great deal.”




XI.
THE BATTLE


At five o’clock that afternoon the sidewalks bordering Margaretha
Street were crowded with promenaders. The little tables before the
cafes were filled. Nearly everyone spoke of the great war and of the
peril which menaced Lutha. Upon many a lip was open disgust at the
supine attitude of Leopold of Lutha in the face of an Austrian invasion
of his country. Discontent was open. It was ripening to something worse
for Leopold than an Austrian invasion.

Presently a sergeant of the Royal Horse Guards cantered down the street
from the palace. He stopped here and there, and, dismounting, tacked
placards in conspicuous places. At the notice, and in each instance
cheers and shouting followed the sergeant as he rode on to the next
stop.

Now, at each point men and women were gathered, eagerly awaiting an
explanation of the jubilation farther up the street. Those whom the
sergeant passed called to him for an explanation, and not receiving it,
followed in a quickly growing mob that filled Margaretha Street from
wall to wall. When he dismounted he had almost to fight his way to the
post or door upon which he was to tack the next placard. The crowd
surged about him in its anxiety to read what the placard bore, and
then, between the cheering and yelling, those in the front passed back
to the crowd the tidings that filled them with so great rejoicing.

“Leopold has declared war on Austria!” “The king calls for volunteers!”
“Long live the king!”

The battle of Lustadt has passed into history. Outside of the little
kingdom of Lutha it received but passing notice by the world at large,
whose attention was riveted upon the great conflicts along the banks of
the Meuse, the Marne, and the Aisne. But in Lutha! Ah, it will be told
and retold, handed down from mouth to mouth and from generation to
generation to the end of time.

How the cavalry that the king sent north toward Blentz met the
advancing Austrian army. How, fighting, they fell back upon the
infantry which lay, a thin line that stretched east and west across the
north of Lustadt, in its first line of trenches. A pitifully weak line
it was, numerically, in comparison with the forces of the invaders; but
it stood its ground heroically, and from the heights to the north of
the city the fire from the forts helped to hold the enemy in check for
many hours.

And then the enemy succeeded in bringing up their heavy artillery to
the ridge that lies three miles north of the forts. Shells were
bursting in the trenches, the forts, and the city. To the south a
stream of terror-stricken refugees was pouring out of Lustadt along the
King’s Road. Rich and poor, animated by a common impulse, filled the
narrow street that led to the city’s southern gate. Carts drawn by
dogs, laden donkeys, French limousines, victorias, wheelbarrows—every
conceivable wheeled vehicle and beast of burden—were jammed in a
seemingly inextricable tangle in the mad rush for safety.

Rumor passed back and forth through the fleeing thousands. Now came
word that Fort No. 2 had been silenced by the Austrian guns.
Immediately followed news that the Luthanian line was falling back upon
the city. Fear turned to panic. Men fought to outdistance their
neighbors.

A shell burst upon a roof-top in an adjoining square.

Women fainted and were trampled. Hoarse shouts of anger mingled with
screams of terror, and then into the midst of it from Margaretha Street
rode a man on horseback. Behind him were a score of officers. A
trumpeter raised his instrument to his lips, and above the din of the
fleeing multitude rose the sharp, triple call that announces the coming
of the king. The mob halted and turned.

Looking down upon them from his saddle was Leopold of Lutha. His palm
was raised for silence and there was a smile upon his lips. Quite
suddenly, and as by a miracle, fear left them. They made a line for him
and his staff to ride through. One of the officers turned in his saddle
to address a civilian friend in an automobile.

“His majesty is riding to the firing line,” he said and he raised his
voice that many might hear. Quickly the word passed from mouth to
mouth, and as Barney Custer, of Beatrice, passed along Margaretha
Street he was followed by a mad din of cheering that drowned the
booming of the distant cannon and the bursting of the shells above the
city.

The balance of the day the pseudo-king rode back and forth along his
lines. Three of his staff were killed and two horses were shot from
beneath him, but from the moment that he appeared the Luthanian line
ceased to waver or fall back. The advanced trenches that they had
abandoned to the Austrians they took again at the point of the bayonet.
Charge after charge they repulsed, and all the time there hovered above
the enemy Lutha’s sole aeroplane, watching, watching, ever watching for
the coming of the allies. Somewhere to the northeast the Serbians were
advancing toward Lustadt. Would they come in time?

It was five o’clock in the morning of the second day, and though the
Luthanian line still held, Barney Custer knew that it could not hold
for long. The Austrian artillery fire, which had been rather wild the
preceding day, had now become of deadly accuracy. Each bursting shell
filled some part of the trenches with dead and wounded, and though
their places were taken by fresh men from the reserve, there would soon
be no reserve left to call upon.

At his left, in the rear, the American had massed the bulk of his
reserves, and at the foot of the heights north of the city and just
below the forts the major portion of the cavalry was drawn up in the
shelter of a little ravine. Barney’s eyes were fixed upon the soaring
aeroplane.

In his hand was his watch. He would wait another fifteen minutes, and
if by then the signal had not come that the Serbians were approaching,
he would strike the blow that he had decided upon. From time to time he
glanced at his watch.

The fifteen minutes had almost elapsed when there fluttered from the
tiny monoplane a paper parachute. It dropped for several hundred feet
before it spread to the air pressure and floated more gently toward the
earth and a moment later there burst from its basket a puff of white
smoke. Two more parachutes followed the first and two more puffs of
smoke. Then the machine darted rapidly off toward the northeast.

Barney turned to Prince von der Tann with a smile. “They are none too
soon,” he said.

The old prince bowed in acquiescence. He had been very happy for two
days. Lutha might be defeated now, but she could never be subdued. She
had a king at last—a real king. Gott! How he had changed. It reminded
Prince von der Tann of the day he had ridden beside the impostor two
years before in the battle with the forces of Peter of Blentz. Many
times he had caught himself scrutinizing the face of the monarch,
searching for some proof that after all he was not Leopold.

“Direct the commanders of forts three and four to concentrate their
fire on the enemy’s guns directly north of Fort No. 3,” Barney directed
an aide. “Simultaneously let the cavalry and Colonel Kazov’s infantry
make a determined assault on the Austrian trenches.”

Then he turned his horse toward the left of his line, where, a little
to the rear, lay the fresh troops that he had been holding in readiness
against this very moment. As he galloped across the plain, his staff at
his heels, shrapnel burst about them. Von der Tann spurred to his side.

“Sire,” he cried, “it is unnecessary that you take such grave risks.
Your staff is ready and willing to perform such service that you may be
preserved to your people and your throne.”

“I believe the men fight better when they think their king is watching
them,” said the American simply.

“I know it, sire,” replied Von der Tann, “but even so, Lutha could ill
afford to lose you now. I thank God, your majesty, that I have lived to
see this day—to see the last of the Rubinroths upholding the glorious
traditions of the Rubinroth blood.”

Barney led the reserves slowly through the wood to the rear of the
extreme left of his line. The attack upon the Austrian right center
appeared to be meeting with much greater success than the American
dared to hope for. Already, through his glasses, he could see
indications that the enemy was concentrating a larger force at this
point to repulse the vicious assaults of the Luthanians. To do this
they must be drawing from their reserves back of other portions of
their line.

It was what Barney had desired. The three bombs from the aeroplane had
told him that the Serbians had been sighted three miles away. Already
they were engaging the Austrians. He could hear the rattle of rifles
and quick-firers and the roar of cannon far to the northeast. And now
he gave the word to the commander of the reserve.

At a rapid trot the men moved forward behind the extreme left end of
the Luthanian left wing. They were almost upon the Austrians before
they emerged from the shelter of the wood, and then with hoarse shouts
and leveled bayonets they charged the enemy’s position. The fight there
was the bloodiest of the two long days. Back and forth the tide of
battle surged. In the thick of it rode the false king encouraging his
men to greater effort. Slowly at last they bore the Austrians from
their trenches. Back and back they bore them until retreat became a
rout. The Austrian right was crumpled back upon its center!

Here the enemy made a determined stand; but just before dark a great
shouting arose from the heights to their left, where the bulk of their
artillery was stationed. Both the Luthanian and Austrian troops engaged
in the plain saw Austrian infantry and artillery running down the
slopes in disorderly rout. Upon their heads came a cheering line of
soldiers firing as they ran, and above them waved the battleflag of
Serbia.

A mighty shout rose from the Luthanian ranks—an answering groan from
the throats of the Austrians. Hemmed in between the two lines of
allies, the Austrians were helpless. Their artillery was captured,
retreat cut off. There was but a single alternative to massacre—the
white flag.

A few regiments between Lustadt and Blentz, but nearer the latter town,
escaped back into Austria, the balance Barney arranged with the Serbian
minister to have taken back to Serbia as prisoners of war. The
Luthanian army corps that the American had promised the Serbs was to be
utilized along the Austrian frontier to prevent the passage of Austrian
troops into Serbia through Lutha.

The return to Lustadt after the battle was made through cheering troops
and along streets choked with joy-mad citizenry. The name of the
soldier-king was upon every tongue. Men went wild with enthusiasm as
the tall figure rode slowly through the crowd toward the palace.

Von der Tann, grim and martial, found his lids damp with the moisture
of a great happiness. Even now with all the proofs of reality about
him, it seemed impossible that this scene could be aught but the
ephemeral vapors of a dream—that Leopold of Lutha, the coward, the
craven, could have become in a single day the heroic figure that had
loomed so large upon the battlefield of Lustadt—the simple, modest
gentleman who received the plaudits of his subjects with bowed head and
humble mien.

As Barney Custer rode up Margaretha Street toward the royal palace of
the kings of Lutha, a dust-covered horseman in the uniform of an
officer of the Horse Guards entered Lustadt from the south. It was the
young aide of Prince von der Tann’s staff, who had been sent to Blentz
nearly a week earlier with a message for the king, and who had been
captured and held by the Austrians.

During the battle before Lustadt all the Austrian troops had been
withdrawn from Blentz and hurried to the front. It was then that the
aide had been transferred to the castle, from which he had escaped
early that morning. To reach Lustadt he had been compelled to circle
the Austrian position, coming to Lustadt from the south.

Once within the city he rode straight to the palace, flung himself from
his jaded mount, and entered the left wing of the building—the wing in
which the private apartments of the chancellor were located.

Here he inquired for the Princess Emma, learning with evident relief
that she was there. A moment later, white with dust, his face streamed
with sweat, he was ushered into her presence.

“Your highness,” he blurted, “the king’s commands have been
disregarded—the American is to be shot tomorrow. I have just escaped
from Blentz. Peter is furious. He realizes that whether the Austrians
win or lose, his standing with the king is gone forever.

“In a fit of rage he has ordered that Mr. Custer be sacrificed to his
desire for revenge, in the hope that it will insure for him the favor
of the Austrians. Something must be done at once if he is to be saved.”

For a moment the girl swayed as though about to fall. The young officer
stepped quickly to support her, but before he reached her side she had
regained complete mastery of herself. From the street without there
rose the blare of trumpets and the cheering of the populace.

Through senses numb with the cold of anguish the meaning of the tumult
slowly filtered to her brain—the king had come. He was returning from
the battlefield, covered with honors and flushed with glory—the man who
was to be her husband; but there was no rejoicing in the heart of the
Princess Emma.

Instead, there was a dull ache and impotent rebellion at the injustice
of the thing—that Leopold should be reaping these great rewards, while
he who had made it possible for him to be a king at all was to die on
the morrow because of what he had done to place the Rubinroth upon his
throne.

“Perhaps Lieutenant Butzow might find a way,” suggested the officer.
“He or your father; they are both fond of Mr. Custer.”

“Yes,” said the girl dully, “see Lieutenant Butzow—he would do the
most.”

The officer bowed and hastened from the apartment in search of Butzow.
The girl approached the window and stood there for a long time, looking
out at the surging multitude that pressed around the palace gates,
filling Margaretha Street with a solid mass of happy faces.

They cheered the king, the chancellor, the army; but most often they
cheered the king. From a despised monarch Leopold had risen in a single
bound to the position of a national idol.

Repeatedly he was called to the balcony over the grand entrance that
the people might feast their eyes on him. The princess wondered how
long it was before she herself would be forced to offer her
congratulations and, perchance, suffer his caresses. She shivered and
cringed at the thought, and then there came a knock upon the door, and
in answer to her permission it opened, and the king stood upon the
threshold alone.

At a glance the man took in the pain and sorrow mirrored upon the
girl’s face. He stepped quickly across the room toward her.

“What is it?” he asked. “What is the matter?”

For a moment he had forgotten the part that he had been playing—forgot
that the Princess Emma was ignorant of his identity. He had come to her
to share with her the happiness of the hour—the glory of the victorious
arms of Lutha. For a time he had almost forgotten that he was not the
king, and now he was forgetting that he was not Barney Custer to the
girl who stood before him with misery and hopelessness writ so large
upon her countenance.

For a brief instant the girl did not reply. She was weighing the
problematical value of an attempt to enlist the king in the cause of
the American. Leopold had shown a spark of magnanimity when he had
written a pardon for Mr. Custer; might he not rise again above his
petty jealousy and save the American’s life? It was a forlorn hope to
the woman who knew the true Leopold so well; but it was a hope.

“What is the matter?” the king repeated.

“I have just received word that Prince Peter has ignored your commands,
sire,” replied the girl, “and that Mr. Custer is to be shot tomorrow.”

Barney’s eyes went wide with incredulity. Here was a pretty pass,
indeed! The princess came close to him and seized his arm.

“You promised, sire,” she said, “that he would not be harmed—you gave
your royal word. You can save him. You have an army at your command. Do
not forget that he once saved you.”

The note of appeal in her voice and the sorrow in her eyes gave Barney
Custer a twinge of compunction. The necessity for longer concealing his
identity in so far as the salvation of Lutha was concerned seemed past;
but the American had intended to carry the deception to the end.

He had given the matter much thought, but he could find no grounds for
belief that Emma von der Tann would be any happier in the knowledge
that her future husband had had nothing to do with the victory of his
army. If she was doomed to a life at his side, why not permit her the
grain of comfort that she might derive from the memory of her husband’s
achievements upon the battlefield of Lustadt? Why rob her of that
little?

But now, face to face with her, and with the evidence of her suffering
so plain before him, Barney’s intentions wavered. Like most fighting
men, he was tender in his dealings with women. And now the last straw
came in the form of a single tiny tear that trickled down the girl’s
cheek. He seized the hand that lay upon his arm.

“Your highness,” he said, “do not grieve for the American. He is not
worth it. He has deceived you. He is not at Blentz.”

The girl drew her hand from his and straightened to her full height.

“What do you mean, sire?” she exclaimed. “Mr. Custer would not deceive
me even if he had an opportunity—which he has not had. But if he is not
at Blentz, where is he?”

Barney bowed his head and looked at the floor.

“He is here, your highness, asking your forgiveness,” he said.

There was a puzzled expression upon the girl’s face as she looked at
the man before her. She did not understand. Why should she? Barney drew
a diamond ring from his little finger and held it out to her.

“You gave it to me to cut a hole in the window of the garage where I
stole the automobile,” he said. “I forgot to return it. Now do you know
who I am?”

Emma von der Tann’s eyes showed her incredulity; then, act by act, she
recalled all that this man had said and done since they had escaped
from Blentz that had been so unlike the king she knew.

“When did you assume the king’s identity?” she asked.

Barney told her all that had transpired in the king’s apartments at
Blentz before she had been conducted to the king’s presence.

“And Leopold is there now?” she asked.

“He is there,” replied Barney, “and he is to be shot in the morning.”

“Gott!” exclaimed the girl. “What are we to do?”

“There is but one thing to do,” replied the American, “and that is for
Butzow and me to ride to Blentz as fast as horses will carry us and
rescue the king.”

“And then?” asked the girl, a shadow crossing her face.

“And then Barney Custer will have to beat it for the boundary,” he
replied with a sorry smile.

She came quite close to him, laying her hands upon his shoulders.

“I cannot give you up now,” she said simply. “I have tried to be loyal
to Leopold and the promise that my father made his king when I was only
a little girl; but since I thought that you were to be shot, I have
wished a thousand times that I had gone with you to America two years
ago. Take me with you now, Barney. We can send Lieutenant Butzow to
rescue the king, and before he has returned we can be safe across the
Serbian frontier.”

The American shook his head.

“I got the king into this mess and I must get him out,” he said. “He
may deserve to be shot, but it is up to me to prevent it, if I can. And
there is your father to consider. If Butzow rides to Blentz and rescues
the king, it may be difficult to get him back to Lustadt without the
truth of his identity and mine becoming known. With me there, the
change can be effected easily, and not even Butzow need know what has
happened.

“If the people should guess that it was not Leopold who won the battle
of Lustadt there might be the devil to pay, and your father would go
down along with the throne. No, I must stay until Leopold is safe in
Lustadt. But there is a hope for us. I may be able to wrest from
Leopold his sanction of our marriage. I shall not hesitate to use
threats to get it, and I rather imagine that he will be in such a
terror-stricken condition that he will assent to any terms for his
release from Blentz. If he gives me such a paper, Emma, will you marry
me?”

Perhaps there never had been a stranger proposal than this; but to
neither did it seem strange. For two years each had known the love of
the other. The girl’s betrothal to the king had prevented an avowal of
their love while Barney posed in his own identity. Now they merely
accepted the conditions that had existed for two years as though a
matter of fact which had been often discussed between them.

“Of course I’ll marry you,” said the princess. “Why in the world would
I want you to take me to America otherwise?”

As Barney Custer took her in his arms he was happier than he had ever
before been in all his life, and so, too, was the Princess Emma von der
Tann.




XII.
LEOPOLD WAITS FOR DAWN


After the American had shoved him through the secret doorway into the
tower room of the castle of Blentz, Leopold had stood for several
minutes waiting for the next command from his captor. Presently,
hearing no sound other than that of his own breathing, the king
ventured to speak. He asked the American what he purposed doing with
him next.

There was no reply. For another minute the king listened intently; then
he raised his hands and removed the bandage from his eyes. He looked
about him. The room was vacant except for himself. He recognized it as
the one in which he had spent ten years of his life as a prisoner. He
shuddered. What had become of the American? He approached the door and
listened. Beyond the panels he could hear the two soldiers on guard
there conversing. He called to them.

“What do you want?” shouted one of the men through the closed door.

“I want Prince Peter!” yelled the king. “Send him at once!”

The soldiers laughed.

“He wants Prince Peter,” they mocked. “Wouldn’t you rather have us send
the king to you?” they asked.

“I am the king!” yelled Leopold. “I am the king! Open the door, pigs,
or it will go hard with you! I shall have you both shot in the morning
if you do not open the door and fetch Prince Peter.”

“Ah!” exclaimed one of the soldiers. “Then there will be three of us
shot together.”

Leopold went white. He had not connected the sentence of the American
with himself; but now, quite vividly, he realized what it might mean to
him if he failed before dawn to convince someone that he was not the
American. Peter would not be awake at so early an hour, and if he had
no better success with others than he was having with these soldiers,
it was possible that he might be led out and shot before his identity
was discovered. The thing was preposterous. The king’s knees became
suddenly quite weak. They shook, and his legs gave beneath his weight
so that he had to lean against the back of a chair to keep from
falling.

Once more he turned to the soldiers. This time he pleaded with them,
begging them to carry word to Prince Peter that a terrible mistake had
been made, and that it was the king and not the American who was
confined in the death chamber. But the soldiers only laughed at him,
and finally threatened to come in and beat him if he again interrupted
their conversation.

It was a white and shaken prisoner that the officer of the guard found
when he entered the room at dawn. The man before him, his face streaked
with tears of terror and self-pity, fell upon his knees before him,
beseeching him to carry word to Peter of Blentz, that he was the king.
The officer drew away with a gesture of disgust.

“I might well believe from your actions that you are Leopold,” he said;
“for, by Heaven, you do not act as I have always imagined the American
would act in the face of danger. He has a reputation for bravery that
would suffer could his admirers see him now.”

“But I am not the American,” pleaded the king. “I tell you that the
American came to my apartments last night, overpowered me, forced me to
change clothing with him, and then led me back here.”

A sudden inspiration came to the king with the memory of all that had
transpired during that humiliating encounter with the American.

“I signed a pardon for him!” he cried. “He forced me to do so. If you
think I am the American, you cannot kill me now, for there is a pardon
signed by the king, and an order for the American’s immediate release.
Where is it? Do not tell me that Prince Peter did not receive it.”

“He received it,” replied the officer, “and I am here to acquaint you
with the fact, but Prince Peter said nothing about your release. All he
told me was that you were not to be shot this morning,” and the man
emphasized the last two words.

Leopold of Lutha spent two awful days a prisoner at Blentz, not knowing
at what moment Prince Peter might see fit to carry out the verdict of
the Austrian court martial. He could convince no one that he was the
king. Peter would not even grant him an audience. Upon the evening of
the third day, word came that the Austrians had been defeated before
Lustadt, and those that were not prisoners were retreating through
Blentz toward the Austrian frontier.

The news filtered to Leopold’s prison room through the servant who
brought him his scant and rough fare. The king was utterly disheartened
before this word reached him. For the moment he seemed to see a ray of
hope, for, since the impostor had been victorious, he would be in a
position to force Peter of Blentz to give up the true king.

There was the chance that the American, flushed with success and power,
might elect to hold the crown he had seized. Who would guess the
transfer that had been effected, or, guessing, would dare voice his
suspicions in the face of the power and popularity that Leopold knew
such a victory as the impostor had won must have given him in the
hearts and minds of the people of Lutha? Still, there was a bare
possibility that the American would be as good as his word, and return
the crown as he had promised. Though he hated to admit it, the king had
every reason to believe that the impostor was a man of honor, whose
bare word was as good as another’s bond.

He was commencing, under this line of reasoning, to achieve a certain
hopeful content when the door to his prison opened and Peter of Blentz,
black and scowling, entered. At his elbow was Captain Ernst Maenck.

“Leopold has defeated the Austrians,” announced the former. “Until you
returned to Lutha he considered the Austrians his best friends. I do
not know how you could have reached or influenced him. It is to learn
how you accomplished it that I am here. The fact that he signed your
pardon indicates that his attitude toward you changed suddenly—almost
within an hour. There is something at the bottom of it all, and that
something I must know.”

“I am Leopold!” cried the king. “Don’t you recognize me, Prince Peter?
Look at me! Maenck must know me. It was I who wrote and signed the
American’s pardon—at the point of the American’s revolver. He forced me
to exchange clothing with him, and then he brought me here to this room
and left me.”

The two men looked at the speaker and smiled.

“You bank too strongly, my friend,” said Peter of Blentz, “upon your
resemblance to the king of Lutha. I will admit that it is strong, but
not so strong as to convince me of the truth of so improbable a story.
How in the world could the American have brought you through the
castle, from one end to the other, unseen? There was a guard before the
king’s door and another before this. No, Herr Custer, you will have to
concoct a more plausible tale.

“No,” and Peter of Blentz scowled savagely, as though to impress upon
his listener the importance of his next utterance, “there were more
than you and the king involved in his sudden departure from Blentz and
in his hasty change of policy toward Austria. To be quite candid, it
seems to me that it may be necessary to my future welfare—vitally
necessary, I may say—to know precisely how all this occurred, and just
what influence you have over Leopold of Lutha. Who was it that acted as
the go-between in the king’s negotiations with you, or rather, yours
with the king? And what argument did you bring to bear to force Leopold
to the action he took?”

“I have told you all that I know about the matter,” whined the king.
“The American appeared suddenly in my apartment. When he brought me
here he first blindfolded me. I have no idea by what route we traveled
through the castle, and unless your guards outside this door were
bribed they can tell you more about how we got in here than I
can—provided we entered through that doorway,” and the king pointed to
the door which had just opened to admit his two visitors.

“Oh, pshaw!” exclaimed Maenck. “There is but one door to this room—if
the king came in here at all, he came through that door.”

“Enough!” cried Peter of Blentz. “I shall not be trifled with longer. I
shall give you until tomorrow morning to make a full explanation of the
truth and to form some plan whereby you may utilize once more whatever
influence you had over Leopold to the end that he grant to myself and
my associates his royal assurance that our lives and property will be
safe in Lutha.”

“But I tell you it is impossible,” wailed the king.

“I think not,” sneered Prince Peter, “especially when I tell you that
if you do not accede to my wishes the order of the Austrian military
court that sentenced you to death at Burgova will be carried out in the
morning.”

With his final words the two men turned and left the room. Behind them,
upon the floor, inarticulate with terror, knelt Leopold of Lutha, his
hands outstretched in supplication.

The long night wore its weary way to dawn at last. The sleepless man,
alternately tossing upon his bed and pacing the floor, looked fearfully
from time to time at the window through which the lightening of the sky
would proclaim the coming day and his last hour on earth. His windows
faced the west. At the foot of the hill beneath the castle nestled the
village of Blentz, once more enveloped in peaceful silence since the
Austrians were gone.

An unmistakable lessening of the darkness in the east had just
announced the proximity of day, when the king heard a clatter of
horses’ hoofs upon the road before the castle. The sound ceased at the
gates and a loud voice broke out upon the stillness of the dying night
demanding entrance “in the name of the king.”

New hope burst aflame in the breast of the condemned man. The impostor
had not forsaken him. Leopold ran to the window, leaning far out. He
heard the voices of the sentries in the barbican as they conversed with
the newcomers. Then silence came, broken only by the rapid footsteps of
a soldier hastening from the gate to the castle. His hobnail shoes
pounding upon the cobbles of the courtyard echoed among the angles of
the lofty walls. When he had entered the castle the silence became
oppressive. For five minutes there was no sound other than the pawing
of the horses outside the barbican and the subdued conversation of
their riders.

Presently the soldier emerged from the castle. With him was an officer.
The two went to the barbican. Again there was a parley between the
horsemen and the guard. Leopold could hear the officer demanding terms.
He would lower the drawbridge and admit them upon conditions.

One of these the king overheard—it concerned an assurance of full
pardon for Peter of Blentz and the garrison; and again Leopold heard
the officer addressing someone as “your majesty.”

Ah, the impostor was there in person. Ach, Gott! How Leopold of Lutha
hated him, and yet, in the hands of this American lay not only his
throne but his very life as well.

Evidently the negotiations proved unsuccessful for after a time the
party wheeled their horses from the gate and rode back toward Blentz.
As the sound of the iron-shod hoofs diminished in the distance, with
them diminished the hopes of the king.

When they ceased entirely his hopes were at an end, to be supplanted by
renewed terror at the turning of the knob of his prison door as it
swung open to admit Maenck and a squad of soldiers.

“Come!” ordered the captain. “The king has refused to intercede in your
behalf. When he returns with his army he will find your body at the
foot of the west wall in the courtyard.”

With an ear-piercing shriek that rang through the grim old castle,
Leopold of Lutha flung his arms above his head and lunged forward upon
his face. Roughly the soldiers seized the unconscious man and dragged
him from the room.

Along the corridor they hauled him and down the winding stairs within
the north tower to the narrow slit of a door that opened upon the
courtyard. To the foot of the west wall they brought him, tossing him
brutally to the stone flagging. Here one of the soldiers brought a
flagon of water and dashed it in the face of the king. The cold douche
returned Leopold to a consciousness of the nearness of his impending
fate.

He saw the little squad of soldiers before him. He saw the cold, gray
wall behind, and, above, the cold, gray sky of early dawn. The dismal
men leaning upon their shadowy guns seemed unearthly specters in the
weird light of the hour that is neither God’s day nor devil’s night.
With difficulty two of them dragged Leopold to his feet.

Then the dismal men formed in line before him at the opposite side of
the courtyard. Maenck stood to the left of them. He was giving
commands. They fell upon the doomed man’s ears with all the cruelty of
physical blows. Tears coursed down his white cheeks. With incoherent
mumblings he begged for his life. Leopold, King of Lutha, trembling in
the face of death!




XIII.
THE TWO KINGS


Twenty troopers had ridden with Lieutenant Butzow and the false king
from Lustadt to Blentz. During the long, hard ride there had been
little or no conversation between the American and his friend, for
Butzow was still unsuspicious of the true identity of the man who posed
as the ruler of Lutha. The lieutenant was all anxiety to reach Blentz
and rescue the American he thought imprisoned there and in danger of
being shot.

At the gate they were refused admittance unless the king would accept
conditions. Barney refused—there was another way to gain entrance to
Blentz that not even the master of Blentz knew. Butzow urged him to
accede to anything to save the life of the American. He recalled all
that the latter had done in the service of Lutha and Leopold. Barney
leaned close to the other’s ear.

“If they have not already shot him,” he whispered, “we shall save the
prisoner yet. Let them think that we give up and are returning to
Lustadt. Then follow me.”

Slowly the little cavalcade rode down from the castle of Blentz toward
the village. Just out of sight of the grim pile where the road wound
down into a ravine Barney turned his horse’s head up the narrow defile.
In single file Butzow and the troopers followed until the rank
undergrowth precluded farther advance. Here the American directed that
they dismount, and, leaving the horses in charge of three troopers, set
out once more with the balance of the company on foot.

It was with difficulty that the men forced their way through the
bushes, but they had not gone far when their leader stopped before a
sheer wall of earth and stone, covered with densely growing shrubbery.
Here he groped in the dim light, feeling his way with his hands before
him, while at his heels came his followers. At last he separated a wall
of bushes and disappeared within the aperture his hands had made. One
by one his men followed, finding themselves in inky darkness, but upon
a smooth stone floor and with stone walls close upon either hand. Those
who lifted their hands above their heads discovered an arched stone
ceiling close above them.

Along this buried corridor the “king” led them, for though he had never
traversed it himself the Princess Emma had, and from her he had
received minute directions. Occasionally he struck a match, and
presently in the fitful glare of one of these he and those directly
behind him saw the foot of a ladder that disappeared in the Stygian
darkness above.

“Follow me up this, very quietly,” he said to those behind him. “Up to
the third landing.”

They did as he bid them. At the third landing Barney felt for the latch
he knew was there—he was on familiar ground now. Finding it he pushed
open the door it held in place, and through a tiny crack surveyed the
room beyond. It was vacant. The American threw the door wide and
stepped within. Directly behind him was Butzow, his eyes wide in
wonderment. After him filed the troopers until seventeen of them stood
behind their lieutenant and the “king.”

Through the window overlooking the courtyard came a piteous wailing.
Barney ran to the casement and looked out. Butzow was at his side.

“_Himmel!_” ejaculated the Luthanian. “They are about to shoot him.
Quick, your majesty,” and without waiting to see if he were followed
the lieutenant raced for the door of the apartment. Close behind him
came the American and the seventeen.

It took but a moment to reach the stairway down which the rescuers
tumbled pell-mell.

Maenck was giving his commands to the firing squad with fiendish
deliberation and delay. He seemed to enjoy dragging out the agony that
the condemned man suffered. But it was this very cruelty that caused
Maenck’s undoing and saved the life of Leopold of Lutha. Just before he
gave the word to fire Maenck paused and laughed aloud at the pitiable
figure trembling and whining against the stone wall before him, and
during that pause a commotion arose at the tower doorway behind the
firing squad.

Maenck turned to discover the cause of the interruption, and as he
turned he saw the figure of the king leaping toward him with leveled
revolver. At the king’s back a company of troopers of the Royal Horse
Guard was pouring into the courtyard.

Maenck snatched his own revolver from his hip and fired point-blank at
the “king.” The firing squad had turned at the sound of assault from
the rear. Some of them discharged their pieces at the advancing
troopers. Butzow gave a command and seventeen carbines poured their
deadly hail into the ranks of the Blentz retainers. At Maenck’s shot
the “king” staggered and fell to the pavement.

Maenck leaped across his prostrate form, yelling to his men “Shoot the
American.” Then he was lost to Barney’s sight in the hand-to-hand
scrimmage that was taking place. The American tried to regain his feet,
but the shock of the wound in his breast had apparently paralyzed him
for the moment. A Blentz soldier was running toward the prisoner
standing open-mouthed against the wall. The fellow’s rifle was raised
to his hip—his intention was only too obvious.

Barney drew himself painfully and slowly to one elbow. The man was
rapidly nearing the true Leopold. In another moment he would shoot. The
American raised his revolver and, taking careful aim, fired. The
soldier shrieked, covered his face with his hands, spun around once,
and dropped at the king’s feet.

The troopers under Butzow were forcing the men of Blentz toward the far
end of the courtyard. Two of the Blentz faction were standing a little
apart, backing slowly away and at the same time deliberately firing at
the king. Barney seemed the only one who noticed them. Once again he
raised his revolver and fired. One of the men sat down suddenly, looked
vacantly about him, and then rolled over upon his side. The other fired
once more at the king and the same instant Barney fired at the soldier.
Soldier and king—would-be assassin and his victim—fell simultaneously.
Barney grimaced. The wound in his breast was painful. He had done his
best to save the king. It was no fault of his that he had failed. It
was a long way to Beatrice. He wondered if Emma von der Tann would be
on the station platform, awaiting him—then he swooned.

Butzow and his seventeen had it all their own way in the courtyard and
castle of Blentz. After the first resistance the soldiery of Peter fled
to the guardroom. Butzow followed them, and there they laid down their
arms. Then the lieutenant returned to the courtyard to look for the
king and Barney Custer. He found them both, and both were wounded. He
had them carried to the royal apartments in the north tower. When
Barney regained consciousness he found the scowling portrait of the
Blentz princess frowning down upon him. He lay upon a great bed where
the soldiers, thinking him king, had placed him. Opposite him, against
the farther wall, the real king lay upon a cot. Butzow was working over
him.

“Not so bad, after all, Barney,” the lieutenant was saying. “Only a
flesh wound in the calf of the leg.”

The king made no reply. He was afraid to declare his identity. First he
must learn the intentions of the impostor. He only closed his eyes
wearily. Presently he asked a question.

“Is he badly wounded?” and he indicated the figure upon the great bed.

Butzow turned and crossed to where the American lay. He saw that the
latter’s eyes were open and that he was conscious.

“How does your majesty feel?” he asked. There was more respect in his
tone than ever before. One of the Blentz soldiers had told him how the
“king,” after being wounded by Maenck, had raised himself upon his
elbow and saved the prisoner’s life by shooting three of his
assailants.

“I thought I was done for,” answered Barney Custer, “but I rather guess
the bullet struck only a glancing blow. It couldn’t have entered my
lungs, for I neither cough nor spit blood. To tell you the truth, I
feel surprisingly fit. How’s the prisoner?”

“Only a flesh wound in the calf of his left leg, sire,” replied Butzow.

“I am glad,” was Barney’s only comment. He didn’t want to be king of
Lutha; but he had foreseen that with the death of the king his
imposture might be forced upon him for life.

After Butzow and one of the troopers had washed and dressed the wounds
of both men Barney asked them to leave the room.

“I wish to sleep,” he said. “If I require you I will ring.”

Saluting, the two backed from the apartment. Just as they were passing
through the doorway the American called out to Butzow.

“You have Peter of Blentz and Maenck in custody?” he asked.

“I regret having to report to your majesty,” replied the officer, “that
both must have escaped. A thorough search of the entire castle has
failed to reveal them.”

Barney scowled. He had hoped to place these two conspirators once and
for all where they would never again threaten the peace of the throne
of Lutha—in hell. For a moment he lay in thought. Then he addressed the
officer again.

“Leave your force here,” he said, “to guard us. Ride, yourself, to
Lustadt and inform Prince von der Tann that it is the king’s desire
that every effort be made to capture these two men. Have them brought
to Lustadt immediately they are apprehended. Bring them dead or alive.”

Again Butzow saluted and prepared to leave the room.

“Wait,” said Barney. “Convey our greetings to the Princess von der
Tann, and inform her that my wound is of small importance, as is also
that of the—Mr. Custer. You may go, lieutenant.”

When they were alone Barney turned toward the king. The other lay upon
his side glaring at the American. When he caught the latter’s eyes upon
him he spoke.

“What do you intend doing with me?” he said. “Are you going to keep
your word and return my identity?”

“I have promised,” replied Barney, “and what I promise I always
perform.”

“Then exchange clothing with me at once,” cried the king, half rising
from his cot.

“Not so fast, my friend,” rejoined the American. “There are a few
trifling details to be arranged before we resume our proper
personalities.”

“Do you realize that you should be hanged for what you have done?”
snarled the king. “You assaulted me, stole my clothing, left me here to
be shot by Peter, and sat upon my throne in Lustadt while I lay a
prisoner condemned to death.”

“And do you realize,” replied Barney, “that by so doing I saved your
foolish little throne for you; that I drove the invaders from your
dominions; that I have unmasked your enemies, and that I have once
again proven to you that the Prince von der Tann is your best friend
and most loyal supporter?”

“You laid your plebeian hands upon me,” cried the king, raising his
voice. “You humiliated me, and you shall suffer for it.”

Barney Custer eyed the king for a long moment before he spoke again. It
was difficult to believe that the man was so devoid of gratitude, and
so blind as not to see that even the rough treatment that he had
received at the American’s hands was as nothing by comparison with the
service that the American had done him. Apparently Leopold had already
forgotten that three times Barney Custer had saved his life in the
courtyard below. From the man’s demeanor, now that his life was no
longer at stake, Barney caught an inkling of what his attitude might be
when once again he was returned to the despotic power of his kingship.

“It is futile to reason with you,” he said. “There is only one way to
handle such as you. At present I hold the power to coerce you, and I
shall continue to hold that power until I am safely out of your
two-by-four kingdom. If you do as I say you shall have your throne back
again. If you refuse, why by Heaven you shall never have it. I’ll stay
king of Lutha myself.”

“What are your terms?” asked the king.

“That Prince Peter of Blentz, Captain Ernst Maenck, and old Von Coblich
be tried, convicted, and hanged for high treason,” replied the
American.

“That is easy,” said the king. “I should do so anyway immediately I
resumed my throne. Now get up and give me my clothes. Take this cot and
I will take the bed. None will know of the exchange.”

“Again you are too fast,” answered Barney. “There is another
condition.”

“Well?”

“You must promise upon your royal honor that Ludwig, Prince von der
Tann, remain chancellor of Lutha during your life or his.”

“Very well,” assented the king. “I promise,” and again he half rose
from his cot.

“Hold on a minute,” admonished the American; “there is yet one more
condition of which I have not made mention.”

“What, another?” exclaimed Leopold testily. “How much do you want for
returning to me what you have stolen?”

“So far I have asked for nothing for myself,” replied Barney. “Now I am
coming to that part of the agreement. The Princess Emma von der Tann is
betrothed to you. She does not love you. She has honored me with her
affection, but she will not wed until she has been formally released
from her promise to wed Leopold of Lutha. The king must sign such a
release and also a sanction of her marriage to Barney Custer, of
Beatrice. Do you understand what I want?”

The king went livid. He came to his feet beside the cot. For the
moment, his wound was forgotten. He tottered toward the impostor.

“You scoundrel!” he screamed. “You scoundrel! You have stolen my
identity and my throne and now you wish to steal the woman who loves
me.”

“Don’t get excited, Leo,” warned the American, “and don’t talk so loud.
The Princess doesn’t love you, and you know it as well as I. She will
never marry you. If you want your dinky throne back you’ll have to do
as I desire; that is, sign the release and the sanction.

“Now let’s don’t have any heroics about it. You have the proposition.
Now I am going to sleep. In the meantime you may think it over. If the
papers are not ready when it comes time for us to leave, and from the
way I feel now I rather think I shall be ready to mount a horse by
morning, I shall ride back to Lustadt as king of Lutha, and I shall
marry her highness into the bargain, and you may go hang!

“How the devil you will earn a living with that king job taken away
from you I don’t know. You’re a long way from New York, and in the
present state of carnage in Europe I rather doubt that there are many
headwaiters jobs open this side of the American metropolis, and I can’t
for the moment think of anything else at which you would shine—with all
due respect to some excellent headwaiters I have known.”

For some time the king remained silent. He was thinking. He realized
that it lay in the power of the American to do precisely what he had
threatened to do. No one would doubt his identity. Even Peter of Blentz
had not recognized the real king despite Leopold’s repeated and
hysterical claims.

Lieutenant Butzow, the American’s best friend, had no more suspected
the exchange of identities. Von der Tann, too, must have been deceived.
Everyone had been deceived. There was no hope that the people, who
really saw so little of their king, would guess the deception that was
being played upon them. Leopold groaned. Barney opened his eyes and
turned toward him.

“What’s the matter?” he asked.

“I will sign the release and the sanction of her highness’ marriage to
you,” said the king.

“Good!” exclaimed the American. “You will then go at once to Brosnov as
originally planned. I will return to Lustadt and get her highness, and
we will immediately leave Lutha via Brosnov. There you and I will
effect a change of raiment, and you will ride back to Lustadt with the
small guard that accompanies her highness and me to the frontier.”

“Why do you not remain in Lustadt?” asked the king. “You could as well
be married there as elsewhere.”

“Because I don’t trust your majesty,” replied the American. “It must be
done precisely as I say or not at all. Are you agreeable?”

The king assented with a grumpy nod.

“Then get up and write as I dictate,” said Barney. Leopold of Lutha did
as he was bid. The result was two short, crisply worded documents. At
the bottom of each was the signature of Leopold of Lutha. Barney took
the two papers and carefully tucked them beneath his pillow.

“Now let’s sleep,” he said. “It is getting late and we both need the
rest. In the morning we have long rides ahead of us. Good night.”

The king did not respond. In a short time Barney was fast asleep. The
light still burned.




XIV.
“THE KING’S WILL IS LAW”


The Blentz princess frowned down upon the king and impostor impartially
from her great gilt frame. It must have been close to midnight that the
painting moved—just a fraction of an inch. Then it remained motionless
for a time. Again it moved. This time it revealed a narrow crack at its
edge. In the crack an eye shone.

One of the sleepers moved. He opened his eyes. Stealthily he raised
himself on his elbow and gazed at the other across the apartment. He
listened intently. The regular breathing of the sleeper proclaimed the
soundness of his slumber. Gingerly the man placed one foot upon the
floor. The eye glued to the crack at the edge of the great, gilt frame
of the Blentz princess remained fastened upon him. He let his other
foot slip to the floor beside the first. Carefully he raised himself
until he stood erect upon the floor. Then, on tiptoe he started across
the room.

The eye in the dark followed him. The man reached the side of the
sleeper. Bending over he listened intently to the other’s breathing.
Satisfied that slumber was profound he stepped quickly to a wardrobe in
which a soldier had hung the clothing of both the king and the
American. He took down the uniform of the former, casting from time to
time apprehensive glances toward the sleeper. The latter did not stir,
and the other passed to the little dressing-room adjoining.

A few minutes later he reentered the apartment fully clothed and
wearing the accouterments of Leopold of Lutha. In his hand was a drawn
sword. Silently and swiftly he crossed to the side of the sleeping man.
The eye at the crack beside the gilded frame pressed closer to the
aperture. The sword was raised above the body of the slumberer—its
point hovered above his heart. The face of the man who wielded it was
hard with firm resolve.

His muscles tensed to drive home the blade, but something held his
hand. His face paled. His shoulders contracted with a little shudder,
and he turned toward the door of the apartment, almost running across
the floor in his anxiety to escape. The eye in the dark maintained its
unblinking vigilance.

With his hand upon the knob a sudden thought stayed the fugitive’s
flight. He glanced quickly back at the sleeper—he had not moved. Then
the man who wore the uniform of the king of Lutha recrossed the
apartment to the bed, reached beneath one of the pillows and withdrew
two neatly folded official-looking documents. These he placed in the
breastpocket of his uniform. A moment later he was walking down the
spiral stairway to the main floor of the castle.

In the guardroom the troopers of the Royal Horse who were not on guard
were stretched in slumber. Only a corporal remained awake. As the man
entered the guardroom the corporal glanced up, and as his eyes fell
upon the newcomer, he sprang to his feet, saluting.

“Turn out the guard!” he cried. “Turn out the guard for his majesty,
the king!”

The sleeping soldiers, but half awake, scrambled to their feet, their
muscles reacting to the command that their brains but half perceived.
They snatched their guns from the racks and formed a line behind the
corporal. The king raised his fingers to the vizor of his helmet in
acknowledgment of their salute.

“Saddle up quietly, corporal,” he said. “We shall ride to Lustadt
tonight.”

The non-commissioned officer saluted. “And an extra horse for Herr
Custer?” he said.

The king shook his head. “The man died of his wound about an hour ago,”
he said. “While you are saddling up I shall arrange with some of the
Blentz servants for his burial—now hurry!”

The corporal marched his troopers from the guardroom toward the
stables. The man in the king’s clothes touched a bell which was
obviously a servant call. He waited impatiently a reply to his summons,
tapping his finger-tips against the sword-scabbard that was belted to
his side. At last a sleepy-eyed man responded—a man who had grown gray
in the service of Peter of Blentz. At sight of the king he opened his
eyes in astonishment, pulled his foretop, and bowed uneasily.

“Come closer,” whispered the king. The man did so, and the king spoke
in his ear earnestly, but in scarce audible tones. The eyes of the
listener narrowed to mere slits—of avarice and cunning, cruelly cold
and calculating. The speaker searched through the pockets of the king’s
clothes that covered him. At last he withdrew a roll of bills. The
amount must have been a large one, but he did not stop to count it. He
held the money under the eyes of the servant. The fellow’s claw-like
fingers reached for the tempting wealth. He nodded his head
affirmatively.

“You may trust me, sire,” he whispered.

The king slipped the money into the other’s palm. “And as much more,”
he said, “when I receive proof that my wishes have been fulfilled.”

“Thank you, sire,” said the servant.

The king looked steadily into the other’s face before he spoke again.

“And if you fail me,” he said, “may God have mercy on your soul.” Then
he wheeled and left the guardroom, walking out into the courtyard where
the soldiers were busy saddling their mounts.

A few minutes later the party clattered over the drawbridge and down
the road toward Blentz and Lustadt. From a window of the apartments of
Peter of Blentz a man watched them depart. When they passed across a
strip of moonlit road, and he had counted them, he smiled with relief.

A moment later he entered a panel beside the huge fireplace in the west
wall and disappeared. There he struck a match, found a candle and
lighted it. Walking a few steps he came to a figure sleeping upon a
pile of clothing. He stooped and shook the sleeper by the shoulder.

“Wake up!” he cried in a subdued voice. “Wake up, Prince Peter; I have
good news for you.”

The other opened his eyes, stretched, and at last sat up.

“What is it, Maenck?” he asked querulously.

“Great news, my prince,” replied the other.

“While you have been sleeping many things have transpired within the
walls of your castle. The king’s troopers have departed; but that is a
small matter compared with the other. Here, behind the portrait of your
great-grandmother, I have listened and watched all night. I opened the
secret door a fraction of an inch—just enough to permit me to look into
the apartment where the king and the American lay wounded. They had
been talking as I opened the door, but after that they ceased—the king
falling asleep at once—the American feigning slumber. For a long time I
watched, but nothing happened until near midnight. Then the American
arose and donned the king’s clothes.

“He approached Leopold with drawn sword, but when he would have thrust
it through the heart of the sleeping man his nerve failed him. Then he
stole some papers from the room and left. Just now he has ridden out
toward Lustadt with the men of the Royal Horse who captured the castle
yesterday.”

Before Maenck was half-way through his narrative, Peter of Blentz was
wide awake and all attention. His eyes glowed with suddenly aroused
interest.

“Somewhere in this, prince,” concluded Maenck, “there must lie the seed
of fortune for you and me.”

Peter nodded. “Yes,” he mused, “there must.”

For a time both men were buried in thought. Suddenly Maenck snapped his
fingers. “I have it!” he cried. He bent toward Prince Peter’s ear and
whispered his plan. When he was done the Blentz prince grasped his
hand.

“Just the thing, Maenck!” he cried. “Just the thing. Leopold will never
again listen to idle gossip directed against our loyalty. If I know
him—and who should know him better—he will heap honors upon you, my
Maenck; and as for me, he will at least forgive me and take me back
into his confidence. Lose no time now, my friend. We are free now to go
and come, since the king’s soldiers have been withdrawn.”

In the garden back of the castle an old man was busy digging a hole. It
was a long, narrow hole, and, when it was completed, nearly four feet
deep. It looked like a grave. When he had finished the old man hobbled
to a shed that leaned against the south wall. Here were boards, tools,
and a bench. It was the castle workshop. The old man selected a number
of rough pine boards. These he measured and sawed, fitted and nailed,
working all the balance of the night. By dawn, he had a long, narrow
box, just a trifle smaller than the hole he had dug in the garden. The
box resembled a crude coffin. When it was quite finished, including a
cover, he dragged it out into the garden and set it upon two boards
that spanned the hole, so that it rested precisely over the excavation.

All these precautions methodically made, he returned to the castle. In
a little storeroom he searched for and found an ax. With his thumb he
felt of the edge—for an ax it was marvelously sharp. The old fellow
grinned and shook his head, as one who appreciates in anticipation the
consummation of a good joke. Then he crept noiselessly through the
castle’s corridors and up the spiral stairway in the north tower. In
one hand was the sharp ax.

The moment Lieutenant Butzow had reached Lustadt he had gone directly
to Prince von der Tann; but the moment his message had been delivered
to the chancellor he sought out the chancellor’s daughter, to tell her
all that had occurred at Blentz.

“I saw but little of Mr. Custer,” he said. “He was very quiet. I think
all that he has been through has unnerved him. He was slightly wounded
in the left leg. The king was wounded in the breast. His majesty
conducted himself in a most valiant and generous manner. Wounded, he
lay upon his stomach in the courtyard of the castle and defended Mr.
Custer, who was, of course, unarmed. The king shot three of Prince
Peter’s soldiers who were attempting to assassinate Mr. Custer.”

Emma von der Tann smiled. It was evident that Lieutenant Butzow had not
discovered the deception that had been practiced upon him in common
with all Lutha—she being the only exception. It seemed incredible that
this good friend of the American had not seen in the heroism of the man
who wore the king’s clothes the attributes and ear-marks of Barney
Custer. She glowed with pride at the narration of his heroism, though
she suffered with him because of his wound.

It was not yet noon when the detachment of the Royal Horse arrived in
Lustadt from Blentz. At their head rode one whom all upon the streets
of the capital greeted enthusiastically as king. The party rode
directly to the royal palace, and the king retired immediately to his
apartments. A half hour later an officer of the king’s household
knocked upon the door of the Princess Emma von der Tann’s boudoir. In
accord with her summons he entered, saluted respectfully, and handed
her a note.

It was written upon the personal stationery of Leopold of Lutha. The
girl read and reread it. For some time she could not seem to grasp the
enormity of the thing that had overwhelmed her—the daring of the action
that the message explained. The note was short and to the point, and
was signed only with initials.

DEAREST EMMA:


The king died of his wounds just before midnight. I shall keep the
throne. There is no other way. None knows and none must ever know the
truth. Your father alone may suspect; but if we are married at once our
alliance will cement him and his faction to us. Send word by the bearer
that you agree with the wisdom of my plan, and that we may be wed at
once—this afternoon, in fact.
    The people may wonder for a few days at the strange haste, but my
    answer shall be that I am going to the front with my troops. The
    son and many of the high officials of the Kaiser have already
    established the precedent, marrying hurriedly upon the eve of their
    departure for the front.
    With every assurance of my undying love, believe me,


Yours,
B. C.


The girl walked slowly across the room to her writing table. The
officer stood in respectful silence awaiting the answer that the king
had told him to bring. The princess sat down before the carved bit of
furniture. Mechanically she drew a piece of note paper from a drawer.
Many times she dipped her pen in the ink before she could determine
what reply to send. Ages of ingrained royalistic principles were
shocked and shattered by the enormity of the thing the man she loved
had asked of her, and yet cold reason told her that it was the only
way.

Lutha would be lost should the truth be known—that the king was dead,
for there was no heir of closer blood connection with the royal house
than Prince Peter of Blentz, whose great-grandmother had been a
Rubinroth princess. Slowly, at last, she wrote as follows:

SIRE:


The king’s will is law.


EMMA.


That was all. Placing the note in an envelope she sealed it and handed
it to the officer, who bowed and left the room.

A half hour later officers of the Royal Horse were riding through the
streets of Lustadt. Some announced to the people upon the streets the
coming marriage of the king and princess. Others rode to the houses of
the nobility with the king’s command that they be present at the
ceremony in the old cathedral at four o’clock that afternoon.

Never had there been such bustling about the royal palace or in the
palaces of the nobles of Lutha. The buzz and hum of excited
conversation filled the whole town. That the choice of the king met the
approval of his subjects was more than evident. Upon every lip was
praise and love of the Princess Emma von der Tann. The future of Lutha
seemed assured with a king who could fight joined in marriage to a
daughter of the warrior line of Von der Tann.

The princess was busy up to the last minute. She had not seen her
future husband since his return from Blentz, for he, too, had been
busy. Twice he had sent word to her, but on both occasions had
regretted that he could not come personally because of the pressure of
state matters and the preparations for the ceremony that was to take
place in the cathedral in so short a time.

At last the hour arrived. The cathedral was filled to overflowing.
After the custom of Lutha, the bride had walked alone up the broad
center aisle to the foot of the chancel. Guardsmen lining the way on
either hand stood rigidly at salute until she stopped at the end of the
soft, rose-strewn carpet and turned to await the coming of the king.

Presently the doors at the opposite end of the cathedral opened. There
was a fanfare of trumpets, and up the center aisle toward the waiting
girl walked the royal groom. It seemed ages to the princess since she
had seen her lover. Her eyes devoured him as he approached her. She
noticed that he limped, and wondered; but for a moment the fact carried
no special suggestion to her brain.

The people had risen as the king entered. Again, the pieces of the
guardsmen had snapped to present; but silence, intense and utter,
reigned over the vast assembly. The only movement was the measured
stride of the king as he advanced to claim his bride.

At the head of each line of guardsmen, nearest the chancel and upon
either side of the bridal party, the ranks were formed of commissioned
officers. Butzow was among them. He, too, out of the corner of his eye
watched the advancing figure. Suddenly he noted the limp, and gave a
little involuntary gasp. He looked at the Princess Emma, and saw her
eyes suddenly widen with consternation.

Slowly at first, and then in a sudden tidal wave of memory, Butzow’s
story of the fight in the courtyard at Blentz came back to her.

“I saw but little of Mr. Custer,” he had said. “He was slightly wounded
in the left leg. The king was wounded in the breast.” But Lieutenant
Butzow had not known the true identity of either.

The real Leopold it was who had been wounded in the left leg, and the
man who was approaching her up the broad cathedral aisle was limping
noticeably—and favoring his left leg. The man to whom she was to be
married was not Barney Custer—he was Leopold of Lutha!

A hundred mad schemes rioted through her brain. The wedding must not go
on! But how was she to avert it? The king was within a few paces of her
now. There was a smile upon his lips, and in that smile she saw the
final confirmation of her fears. When Leopold of Lutha smiled his upper
lip curved just a trifle into a shadow of a sneer. It was a trivial
characteristic that Barney Custer did not share in common with the
king.

Half mad with terror, the girl seized upon the only subterfuge which
seemed at all likely to succeed. It would, at least, give her a slight
reprieve—a little time in which to think, and possibly find an avenue
from her predicament.

She staggered forward a step, clapped her two hands above her heart,
and reeled as though to fall. Butzow, who had been watching her
narrowly, sprang forward and caught her in his arms, where she lay limp
with closed eyes as though in a dead faint. The king ran forward. The
people craned their necks. A sudden burst of exclamations rose
throughout the cathedral, and then Lieutenant Butzow, shouldering his
way past the chancel, carried the Princess Emma to a little anteroom
off the east transept. Behind him walked the king, the bishop, and
Prince Ludwig.




XV.
MAENCK BLUNDERS


After a hurried breakfast Peter of Blentz and Captain Ernst Maenck left
the castle of Blentz. Prince Peter rode north toward the frontier,
Austria, and safety, Captain Maenck rode south toward Lustadt. Neither
knew that general orders had been issued to soldiery and gendarmerie of
Lutha to capture them dead or alive. So Prince Peter rode carelessly;
but Captain Maenck, because of the nature of his business and the
proximity of enemies about Lustadt, proceeded with circumspection.

Prince Peter was arrested at Tafelberg, and, though he stormed and
raged and threatened, he was immediately packed off under heavy guard
back toward Lustadt.

Captain Ernst Maenck was more fortunate. He reached the capital of
Lutha in safety, though he had to hide on several occasions from
detachments of troops moving toward the north. Once within the city he
rode rapidly to the house of a friend. Here he learned that which set
him into a fine state of excitement and profanity. The king and the
Princess Emma von der Tann were to be wed that very afternoon! It
lacked but half an hour to four o’clock.

Maenck grabbed his cap and dashed from the house before his astonished
friend could ask a single question. He hurried straight toward the
cathedral. The king had just arrived, and entered when Maenck came up,
breathless. The guard at the doorway did not recognize him. If they had
they would have arrested him. Instead they contented themselves with
refusing him admission, and when he insisted they threatened him with
arrest.

To be arrested now would be to ruin his fine plan, so he turned and
walked away. At the first cross street he turned up the side of the
cathedral. The grounds were walled up on this side, and he sought in
vain for entrance. At the rear he discovered a limousine standing in
the alley where its chauffeur had left it after depositing his
passengers at the front door of the cathedral. The top of the limousine
was but a foot or two below the top of the wall.

Maenck clambered to the hood of the machine, and from there to the top.
A moment later he dropped to the earth inside the cathedral grounds.
Before him were many windows. Most of them were too high for him to
reach, and the others that he tried at first were securely fastened.
Passing around the end of the building, he at last discovered one that
was open—it led into the east transept.

Maenck crawled through. He was within the building that held the man he
sought. He found himself in a small room—evidently a dressing-room.
There were two doors leading from it. He approached one and listened.
He heard the tones of subdued conversation beyond.

Very cautiously he opened the door a crack. He could not believe the
good fortune that was revealed before him. On a couch lay the Princess
Emma von der Tann. Beside her her father. At the door was Lieutenant
Butzow. The bishop and a doctor were talking at the head of the couch.
Pacing up and down the room, resplendent in the marriage robes of a
king of Lutha, was the man he sought.

Maenck drew his revolver. He broke the barrel, and saw that there was a
good cartridge in each chamber of the cylinder. He closed it quietly.
Then he threw open the door, stepped into the room, took deliberate
aim, and fired.

The old man with the ax moved cautiously along the corridor upon the
second floor of the Castle of Blentz until he came to a certain door.
Gently he turned the knob and pushed the door inward. Holding the ax
behind his back, he entered. In his pocket was a great roll of money,
and there was to be an equal amount waiting him at Lustadt when his
mission had been fulfilled.

Once within the room, he looked quickly about him. Upon a great bed lay
the figure of a man asleep. His face was turned toward the opposite
wall away from the side of the bed nearer the menacing figure of the
old servant. On tiptoe the man with the ax approached. The neck of his
victim lay uncovered before him. He swung the ax behind him. A single
blow, as mighty as his ancient muscles could deliver, would suffice.

Barney Custer opened his eyes. Directly opposite him upon the wall was
a dark-toned photogravure of a hunting scene. It tilted slightly
forward upon its wire support. As Barney’s eyes opened it chanced that
they were directed straight upon the shiny glass of the picture. The
light from the window struck the glass in such a way as to transform it
into a mirror. The American’s eyes were glued with horror upon the
reflection that he saw there—an old man swinging a huge ax down upon
his head.

It is an open question as to which of the two was the most surprised at
the cat-like swiftness of the movement that carried Barney Custer out
of that bed and landed him in temporary safety upon the opposite side.

With a snarl the old man ran around the foot of the bed to corner his
prey between the bed and the wall. He was swinging the ax as though to
hurl it. So close was he that Barney guessed it would be difficult for
him to miss his mark. The least he could expect would be a frightful
wound. To have attempted to escape would have necessitated turning his
back to his adversary, inviting instant death. To grapple with a man
thus armed appeared an equally hopeless alternative.

Shoulder-high beside him hung the photogravure that had already saved
his life once. Why not again? He snatched it from its hangings, lifted
it above his head in both hands, and hurled it at the head of the old
man. The glass shattered full upon the ancient’s crown, the man’s head
went through the picture, and the frame settled over his shoulders. At
the same instant Barney Custer leaped across the bed, seized a light
chair, and turned to face his foe upon more even terms.

The old man did not pause to remove the frame from about his neck.
Blood trickled down his forehead and cheeks from deep gashes that the
broken glass had made. Now he was in a berserker rage.

As he charged again he uttered a peculiar whistling noise from between
his set teeth. To the American it sounded like the hissing of a snake,
and as he would have met a snake he met the venomous attack of the old
man.

When the short battle was over the Blentz servitor lay unconscious upon
the floor, while above him leaned the American, uninjured, ripping long
strips from a sheet torn from the bed, twisting them into rope-like
strands and, with them, binding the wrists and ankles of his defeated
foe. Finally he stuffed a gag between the toothless gums.

Running to the wardrobe, he discovered that the king’s uniform was
gone. That, with the witness of the empty bed, told him the whole
story. The American smiled. “More nerve than I gave him credit for,” he
mused, as he walked back to his bed and reached under the pillow for
the two papers he had forced the king to sign. They, too, were gone.
Slowly Barney Custer realized his plight, as there filtered through his
mind a suggestion of the possibilities of the trick that had been
played upon him.

Why should Leopold wish these papers? Of course, he might merely have
taken them that he might destroy them; but something told Barney Custer
that such was not the case. And something, too, told him whither the
king had ridden and what he would do there when he arrived.

He ran back to the wardrobe. In it hung the peasant attire that he had
stolen from the line of the careless house frau, and later wished upon
his majesty the king. Barney grinned as he recalled the royal disgust
with which Leopold had fingered the soiled garments. He scarce blamed
him. Looking further toward the back of the wardrobe, the American
discovered other clothing.

He dragged it all out upon the floor. There was an old shooting jacket,
several pairs of trousers and breeches, and a hunting coat. In a drawer
at the bottom of the wardrobe he found many old shoes, puttees, and
boots.

From this miscellany he selected riding breeches, a pair of boots, and
the red hunting coat as the only articles that fitted his rather large
frame. Hastily he dressed, and, taking the ax the old man had brought
to the room as the only weapon available, he walked boldly into the
corridor, down the spiral stairway and into the guardroom.

Barney Custer was prepared to fight. He was desperate. He could have
slunk from the Castle of Blentz as he had entered it—through the secret
passageway to the ravine; but to attempt to reach Lustadt on foot was
not at all compatible with the urgent haste that he felt necessary. He
must have a horse, and a horse he would have if he had to fight his way
through a Blentz army.

But there were no armed retainers left at Blentz. The guardroom was
vacant; but there were arms there and ammunition. Barney commandeered a
sword and a revolver, then he walked into the courtyard and crossed to
the stables. The way took him by the garden. In it he saw a coffin-like
box resting upon planks above a grave-like excavation. Barney
investigated. The box was empty. Once again he grinned. “It is not
always wise,” he mused, “to count your corpses before they’re dead.
What a lot of work the old man might have spared himself if he’d only
caught his cadaver first—or at least tried to.”

Passing on by his own grave, he came to the stables. A groom was
currying a strong, clean-limbed hunter haltered in the doorway. The man
looked up as Barney approached him. A puzzled expression entered the
fellow’s eyes. He was a young man—a stupid-looking lout. It was evident
that he half recognized the face of the newcomer as one he had seen
before. Barney nodded to him.

“Never mind finishing,” he said. “I am in a hurry. You may saddle him
at once.” The voice was authoritative—it brooked no demur. The groom
touched his forehead, dropped the currycomb and brush, and turned back
into the stable to fetch saddle and bridle.

Five minutes later Barney was riding toward the gate. The portcullis
was raised—the drawbridge spanned the moat—no guard was there to bar
his way. The sunlight flooded the green valley, stretching lazily below
him in the soft warmth of a mellow autumn morning. Behind him he had
left the brooding shadows of the grim old fortress—the cold, cruel,
depressing stronghold of intrigue, treason, and sudden death.

He threw back his shoulders and filled his lungs with the sweet, pure
air of freedom. He was a new man. The wound in his breast was
forgotten. Lightly he touched his spurs to the hunter’s sides. Tossing
his head and curveting, the animal broke into a long, easy trot. Where
the road dipped into the ravine and down through the village to the
valley the rider drew his restless mount into a walk; but, once in the
valley, he let him out. Barney took the short road to Lustadt. It would
cut ten miles off the distance that the main wagonroad covered, and it
was a good road for a horseman. It should bring him to Lustadt by one
o’clock or a little after. The road wound through the hills to the east
of the main highway, and was scarcely more than a trail where it
crossed the Ru River upon a narrow bridge that spanned the deep
mountain gorge that walls the Ru for ten miles through the hills.

When Barney reached the river his hopes sank. The bridge was
gone—dynamited by the Austrians in their retreat. The nearest bridge
was at the crossing of the main highway over ten miles to the
southwest. There, too, the river might be forded even if the Austrians
had destroyed that bridge also; but here or elsewhere in the hills
there could be no fording—the banks of the Ru were perpendicular
cliffs.

The misfortune would add nearly twenty miles to his journey—he could
not now hope to reach Lustadt before late in the afternoon. Turning his
horse back along the trail he had come, he retraced his way until he
reached a narrow bridle path that led toward the southwest. The trail
was rough and indistinct, yet he pushed forward, even more rapidly than
safety might have suggested. The noble beast beneath him was all
loyalty and ambition.

“Take it easy, old boy,” whispered Barney into the slim, pointed ears
that moved ceaselessly backward and forward, “you’ll get your chance
when we strike the highway, never fear.”

And he did.

So unexpected had been Maenck’s entrance into the room in the east
transept, so sudden his attack, that it was all over before a hand
could be raised to stay him. At the report of his revolver the king
sank to the floor. At almost the same instant Lieutenant Butzow whipped
a revolver from beneath his tunic and fired at the assassin. Maenck
staggered forward and stumbled across the body of the king. Butzow was
upon him instantly, wresting the revolver from his fingers. Prince
Ludwig ran to the king’s side and, kneeling there, raised Leopold’s
head in his arms. The bishop and the doctor bent over the limp form.
The Princess Emma stood a little apart. She had leaped from the couch
where she had been lying. Her eyes were wide in horror. Her palms
pressed to her cheeks.

It was upon this scene that a hatless, dust-covered man in a red
hunting coat burst through the door that had admitted Maenck. The man
had seen and recognized the conspirator as he climbed to the top of the
limousine and dropped within the cathedral grounds, and he had followed
close upon his heels.

No one seemed to note his entrance. All ears were turned toward the
doctor, who was speaking.

“The king is dead,” he said.

Maenck raised himself upon an elbow. He spoke feebly.

“You fools,” he cried. “That man was not the king. I saw him steal the
king’s clothes at Blentz and I followed him here. He is the
American—the impostor.” Then his eyes, circling the faces about him to
note the results of his announcements, fell upon the face of the man in
the red hunting coat. Amazement and wonder were in his face. Slowly he
raised his finger and pointed.

“There is the king,” he said.

Every eye turned in the direction he indicated. Exclamations of
surprise and incredulity burst from every lip. The old chancellor
looked from the man in the red hunting coat to the still form of the
man upon the floor in the blood-spattered marriage garments of a king
of Lutha. He let the king’s head gently down upon the carpet, and then
he rose to his feet and faced the man in the red hunting coat.

“Who are you?” he demanded.

Before Barney could speak Lieutenant Butzow spoke.

“He is the king, your highness,” he said. “I rode with him to Blentz to
free Mr. Custer. Both were wounded in the courtyard in the fight that
took place there. I helped to dress their wounds. The king was wounded
in the breast—Mr. Custer in the left leg.”

Prince von der Tann looked puzzled. Again he turned his eyes
questioningly toward the newcomer.

“Is this the truth?” he asked.

Barney looked toward the Princess Emma. In her eyes he could read the
relief that the sight of him alive had brought her. Since she had
recognized the king she had believed that Barney was dead. The
temptation was great—he dreaded losing her, and he feared he would lose
her when her father learned the truth of the deception that had been
practiced upon him. He might lose even more—men had lost their heads
for tampering with the affairs of kings.

“Well?” persisted the chancellor.

“Lieutenant Butzow is partially correct—he honestly believes that he is
entirely so,” replied the American. “He did ride with me from Lustadt
to Blentz to save the man who lies dead here at your feet. The
lieutenant thought that he was riding with his king, just as your
highness thought that he was riding with his king during the battle of
Lustadt. You were both wrong—you were riding with Mr. Bernard Custer,
of Beatrice. I am he. I have no apologies to make. What I did I would
do again. I did it for Lutha and for the woman I love. She knows and
the king knew that I intended restoring his identity to him with no one
the wiser for the interchange that had taken place. The king upset my
plans by stealing back his identity while I slept, with the result that
you see before you upon the floor. He has died as he had
lived—futilely.”

As he spoke the Princess Emma had crossed the room toward him. Now she
stood at his side, her hand in his. Tense silence reigned in the
apartment. The old chancellor stood with bowed head, buried in thought.
All eyes were upon him except those of the doctor, who had turned his
attention from the dead king to the wounded assassin. Butzow stood
looking at Barney Custer in open relief and admiration. He had been
trying to vindicate his friend in his own mind ever since he had
discovered, as he believed, that Barney had tricked Leopold after the
latter had saved his life at Blentz and ridden to Lustadt in the king’s
guise. Now that he knew the whole truth he realized how stupid he had
been not to guess that the man who had led the victorious Luthanian
army before Lustadt could not have been the cowardly Leopold.

Presently the chancellor broke the silence.

“You say that Leopold of Lutha lived futilely. You are right; but when
you say that he has died futilely, you are, I believe, wrong. Living,
he gave us a poor weakling. Dying, he leaves the throne to a brave man,
in whose veins flows the blood of the Rubinroths, hereditary rulers of
Lutha.

“You are the only rightful successor to the throne of Lutha,” he
argued, “other than Peter of Blentz. Your mother’s marriage to a
foreigner did not bar the succession of her offspring. Aside from the
fact that Peter of Blentz is out of the question, is the more important
fact that your line is closer to the throne than his. He knew it, and
this knowledge was the real basis of his hatred of you.”

As the old chancellor ceased speaking he drew his sword and raised it
on high above his head.

“The king is dead,” he said. “Long live the king!”




XVI.
KING OF LUTHA


Barney Custer, of Beatrice, had no desire to be king of Lutha. He lost
no time in saying so. All that he wanted of Lutha was the girl he had
found there, as his father before him had found the girl of his choice.
Von der Tann pleaded with him.

“Twice have I fought under you, sire,” he urged. “Twice, and only twice
since the old king died, have I felt that the future of Lutha was safe
in the hands of her ruler, and both these times it was you who sat upon
the throne. Do not desert us now. Let me live to see Lutha once more
happy, with a true Rubinroth upon the throne and my daughter at his
side.”

Butzow added his pleas to those of the old chancellor. The American
hesitated.

“Let us leave it to the representatives of the people and to the house
of nobles,” he suggested.

The chancellor of Lutha explained the situation to both houses. Their
reply was unanimous. He carried it to the American, who awaited the
decision of Lutha in the royal apartments of the palace. With him was
the Princess Emma von der Tann.

“The people of Lutha will have no other king, sire,” said the old man.

Barney turned toward the girl.

“There is no other way, my lord king,” she said with grave dignity.
“With her blood your mother bequeathed you a duty which you may not
shirk. It is not for you or for me to choose. God chose for you when
you were born.”

Barney Custer took her hand in his and raised it to his lips.

“Let the King of Lutha,” he said, “be the first to salute Lutha’s
queen.”

And so Barney Custer, of Beatrice, was crowned King of Lutha, and Emma
became his queen. Maenck died of his wound on the floor of the little
room in the east transept of the cathedral of Lustadt beside the body
of the king he had slain. Prince Peter of Blentz was tried by the
highest court of Lutha on the charge of treason; he was found guilty
and hanged. Von Coblich committed suicide on the eve of his arrest.
Lieutenant Otto Butzow was ennobled and given the confiscated estates
of the Blentz prince. He became a general in the army of Lutha, and was
sent to the front in command of the army corps that guarded the
northern frontier of the little kingdom.




